THE
H I S T O R

Y

0 F
AME RICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D,

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGHA
AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND,

VOLUME THE SECOND.

DUBLIN:
PRINTED BY J. CHAMBERS

I797.

___

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK V.

THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

B o 1K V.

VW HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B OOK

the armament deflined to attempt the conqucfl of v.
that rich country which he had dilcovered, almost -r
complete. Not only ambition, but avarice, had 1518
urged Velasquez to haften his preparations; and onsofVlaf.
having such a prolpe&d of gratifying both, he had quezforin-
advanced considerable iurns out of his private for-spain.
tune towards defraying the expcncc. At the
fame time, he exerted his influence as governor,
in engaging the nmot distinguished persons in the
colony to undertake the service'. At a time when
the spirit of the Spanith nation was adventurous
to cxcefs, a numbcr of soldiers, eager to embark
in any daring cntcrprifc, soon appeared. But
it was not so ealy to find a peroln qualified to take
the command in an expedition of Io much im-
portance; and the charadcr of Velafqucz, who
had the right of nomination, greatly incrcafed the

VoL, I1. B difliculty

See NOTE I.
h L~·rsalll~· 3~·- -- ~ 1

B o o I difficulty of the choice. Though of most afpirind

v. ambition, and not destitute of talents for govern-

ment, he possessed neither such courage, nor such
1518. vigour and aivity of mind, as to undertake in

perlon the conduEt of the armament which he was
preparing. In this embarrassing situation he form-
ed the chimerical feheme lnot only of atchieving
great exploits by a deputy, but of securing to him-
self the glory of conquests which were to be made
by another. In the execution of this plan, he fond-
ly aimed at reconciling contradictions. He was so-
licitous to chufe a commander of intrepid refolu-
tion, and of superior abilities, becaute he knew
these to be requisite in order to ensure success; but,
at the fame time, from the jealousy natural to little
minds, he wilhed him to be of a spirit so tame
and obsequious, as to be entirely dependant on his
will. But when he came to apply those ideas in
forming an opinion concerning the several officers
who occurred to his thoughts as worthy of being
entrusted with the command, he soon perceived
that it was impossible to find such incompatible
qualities united in one charaer. Such as were
diltinguifhed for courage and talents, were too
high-piritcd to be passive instruments in his hand.
Those who appeared more gentle and tra6table,
were defcitute of capacity, and unequal to the
charge. This augmented his perplexity and his
fears. }ie delibcrated long, and with much folici-
tudc, and was still wavering in his choice, when
Amador de Lares, the royal treasurer in Cuba, and
Andres uero, his own secretary, the two persons
in whoim he chiefly confided, were encouraged by
this irresolution to propoic a new candidate, and
supported their recommendation with such afliduity
and addicts, that, no Icls fatally for Velalfjucz tlhan
happily for their country, it proved fuccclsful.

'The

* B. Diaz. c. 19. Gomara Cron. c. 7. I-Icrrra, dec. 2.
lib. iii. c. 11. ./

,.!t/

TEIE man whom they pointed out to him was BOO K
'crnando Cortes. He was born at Medcllin, a V.
1inall town in Estremadura, in the year one thou-
sand ibur hutndred and eighty-five, and descended Heapints
from a fanily of noble blood, but of very mo- cotescom.
derate fortune. Being originally destined by hism"and"
parents to the fludy of law, as the most likely
method of bettering his condition, he was tent
early to the university of Salamanca, where he im-
bibed some tintlure of learning. But he was fooh.
disgustcd with a academic life, which did not
suit his ardent and rcftlefs genius, and retired to
Medellin, where he gave himfelf'up entirely to
acrive sports and martial exercises. At this period
of life, he was so impetuous, so overhearing, and
'o dissipated, that his father was glad to comply
with his inclination, and fend him abroad as an
adventurer iii arms. There were in that age two
confpicuou, theatres, on which such of the Spanifl
youth as courted military glory might display teir
valour; one in Italy, under the command of the
Great Captain; the other in the New World.
Cortes preferred the former, bt was prevented
by idifpofition from cmbarking with a reinforce-
melnt of troops Ient to Naples. Upon this difap-
poiintmcnt he turned his views towards America,
iwhither he vas allured by the profped of the ad-
vantages which he might derive from the pa-
tronage of Ovando r, the governor of l-Iilfaniola,
who was his kinfian.l When he landed at St.
Domingo in one thousand five hundred and four,
his reception was lfch as equalled his noft fan-
gu;inc hopes, and ih was employed by the go-
vcrnor in several honourable and lucrative flations.
'I'llic, however, did not atisfy his ambition;
and in the year one thouland five hundred and
eleven, lie obtained pcrriiflion to accompany Diego

B 2 Vclafquez
* Sec NOTE II.

3

B O.O IKVelafquez in his expedition to Cuba. In this

V. ferviee he difinguifhed himself so much, that,
s-rv" notwithitanding ibtne violent contefis with Velaf-

"5s8 quez, occasioned by trivial events, unworthy of

remembrance, he was at length taken into favour,
and received an ample concession of lands and of
Indians, the recompence usually bestowed upon
adventurers in the New World t.

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto aed in high

.command, he had displayed such qualities in e-
veral scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised
univerlal expetation, and turned the eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per-
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objecs and occupations suited
to the ardour of his milind, gradually subsided, and
fettled into a habit of regular indefatigable ai-
vity. The impetuosity of his temper, when he
came to at with his equals, inflnfibly abated, by
being kept under restraint, and mellowed into a
.cordial soldierly frankness. These qualities were
acccompanicd with calm prudence in concerting
his fehemes, with persevering vigour in executing
them, and with what is peculiar to fperior genius,
the art of gaining the confidence and governing
the minds of men. To all which were added the
inferior accomplishments that firike the vulgar,
and command their rclpedt; a graceful perlbn, a
winning alpcet, extraordinary address in martial
cxcrcilcs, and a conflitution of such vigour as to
be capable of enduring any fatigue.a

As oon as Cortes was mentioned to Vclafqucz

by his two confidents, he flattered himl'clf that he
had at length found what lie had hitherto ought
'in vain, a man with talents for command, but
iot an objca of jcaloul'. Ncithcr the rank

nor

'1 Gomara Cron. c. i, 2, 3.
4

por the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were B O O K
such that he could aspire at independence. He -.
had reason to believe, that by his own readiness r'
to bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as 1518.
his liberality in conferring several recent favours,
he had already gained the good will of Cortes, and
hoped, by this new and unexpected mark of con-
fidence, that he might attach him for cver to his
interest.

CORTES receiving his commilion with thesoon e-

warmest exprefflons of refpe&t and gratitude to the Comesfja-
governor, immediately ereded his tandard before oaober z3.
his own house, appeared in a military drets, and'
aflumed all the ensigns of his new dignity. His
utmost influence and aivity were exerted in per-
fuading many of his friends to engage in the ser-
vice, and in urging forward the preparations for
the voyage. All his own funds, together with
what money he could raise by mortgaging his
lands and Indians, were expended in purchasing
military stores and provisions, or in supplying the
wants of such of his officers as were unable to
equip themselves in a manner suited to their rank.
Inoffensive, and even laudable as this condut was,
his disappointed competitors were malicious enough
to give it a turn to his disadvantage: They re-
presented him as aiming already, with little dif-
guise, at eflablifhing an independent authority
over his troops, and endeavouring to ccure their
reipet or love by his oflentatious and interested
liberality. They reminded Velasquez of his for-
mer diIlenfions with the man in whom he now
reposed so much confidence, and foretold that
Cortes would be more apt to avail himl'elf of the
power, which he was inconsiderately putting in

11is
* See NOTE II.

5

1 0 O.K his hands, to avenge past injuries, than to e-

-. quite late obligations. These infinuatious made
~^ ~ ifuch impreflion. upon the fupicious mind of Ve-

I5i8 lafquez, that Cortes soon oberved some lymptolns

of a growing alienation and distrust in his be-
haviour, and was advised by his friends, Lares
and Duero, to haften'his departure, before they
ihould become so confirmed, as to break out
with open violence. Fuliy sensible of this dan-
ger, he urged forward. his preparations with such
rapidity, that he fet'fail from St.' Jago. de Cuba
on the eighteenth of November, Velasquez ac-
companying him to the shore, and taking leave
of him with an appearance of perfeCt friendship
and confidence, though he had secretly given it
in charge to some of his officers, to keep a watch-
ful eye upon every part of their commander's
condu6t .

Endeavours COIKTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle-
himo'rf r mcnt on the fame fide of the lland, where he was
comniiffion joined by several adventurers, and received a

iipply of provisions and. military fIores, of which
his flock was still very icomplete. I-e had
hardly left St Jago, when; the jealouly which had
bcen working in the breall of Velalquez grew so
violent that it was impollible to suppress it. The
armanment was no longer under his own eye and
dclrc{ion; and he felt that as his power over it
ccafte, that of Cortes became more ablolute. Inma
gination now aggravated every circutmfancc, which
had formerly cxcited suspicion: the rivals of
Cortes indulirioufly threw in refletions which
incrcalcd his fears; and with no less art than malice
they called superstition to their aid, employing the
prcdicions of an arologer in order to complete
(hc alarm. All these, by their united operation,

produced
* Gomara Cron. c. 7 B. Diaz. c. 2o.

produced the desired effet. Velasquez repented B O 0 K
bitterly of his own imprudence, in having corn- v
mitted a trust of so much importance to a person V'-'
whofe.fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily 158'
dispatched infrtluions to Trinidad, empowering
Verdugo, the chief magistrate there, to deprive
Cortes of his commission. But Cortes had, already
made such progress in gaining the efteemi and con-
fidence of his troops, that, finding officers as well
as soldiers equally zealous to support his authority,
he soothed or intimidated Verdugo, and was per-
mitted to depart from Trinidad without molefta-
tion.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for Havanna, in or- and to lay

·, '.(-*~~ 'i-i~

i '

i i * him under

der to raise more sold-iers, and to complete the vic- arrest.
tualling of his fleet. There several persons of dif-
tintion entered into the service, and engaged to
supply what provisions were still wanting; but as
it was necessary to allow them some time for per-
forming what they had promised, Velasquez, fen-
fible that he ought no longer to rely on a man of
whom he had so openly discovered his diftrufr,
availed himself of the interval, which this unavoid-
able delay afforded, in order to make one attempt
more to wrest the command out of the hands of
Cortes. He loudly complained of Verdugo's con-
duct, accusing him either of childish facility, or of
manifest treachery, in suffering Cortes to escape
from Trinidad. Anxious to guard against a second
disappointment, he sent a perfoin of confidence to
the Havanna, with peremptory injunEtions to
Pedro Barba, his lieutenant-governor in that co-
lony, inflantly to arrest Cortes, to fend him pri-
soner to St. Jago under a strong guard, and to
countermand the departure of the armament until
he should receive farther orders: he wrote like-
wife to the principal officers, requiring them to

afift

7

B OO K assist Barba in executing what he had given him

V. in charge. But before the arrival of his messen-

^r-' ger, a Franciscan friar of St Jago. had secretly con-
15i8. veyed an account of this interefling tranfation to,

Bartholomew de Olmedo, a monk of the ame
order, who acted as chaplain to the expedition.

Cortes de- CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time
feats his RI
schemes, to take precautions for his own safety. His firit
andconti- flep was to find some pretext for removing from
nups hispre-
paratigpns. Havanna Diego de Ordaz, an officer of great merit,

but in whom, on account of his known attach-
ment to Velasquez, he could not confide in this
trying and delicate jun&cure. He gave him the
command of a vessel, destined to take on board
some provisions in a small harbour beyond Cape.
Antonio; and thus made sure of his absence,
without seeming to fufpee his fidelity. When he
was gone, Cortcs no longer concealed the inten-
tions of Vclafquez from his troops; and as officers
and soldiers were equally impatient to set out on
an expedition, in preparing for which moit of themn
had expended all their fortune, they cxprefled their
aftonifbment and indignation at that illiberal jea-
lousy, to which the governor was about to facri-
fice, not only the honour of their general, but all
their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth. With
one voice they entreated that he would not aban-
don the important station to which he had such a
good title. They conjured him not to deplrive
them of a leader whom they followed with lch
well-founded confidence, and offcrcd to shed the
lall drop of their blood in maintaining his autho-
rity. Cortes was easily induced to comply with
what hl tl ardently dcfired. He swore that he
never would dclfrt foldicrs who had given him
such a signal proof of' their attachment, and pro-
4rifqd inflantly to condu& them to that rich coun-

try,

try, which had been so long the obje& of their B O O 1
thoughts and wishes. This declaration was re- V.
ceived with tranfiorts of military applause, ac- '
companied with threats and inprecations against '518.
;11 who should presume to call in qeftion the
jurifdidion of their general, or to obftruEi the exc
cution of his designs.

EVERY thing was now ready for their depar-Thelamount.

tare: but though this expedition was the united.0oi""'c" '
effort of the Spanish power in Cuba; though every
Itttleinent had contributed its quota of men and
provisions; though the governor had laid out con-
fiderable ums, and each adventurer had exhausted
his stock, or strained his credit, the poverty of the
preparations was such as must astonish the present
age, and bore, indeed, no resemblance to an ar-
mament destined for the conquest of a great em-
pire. The fleet onfifted of eleven vessels, the
largest of a hundred tons, which was dignified with
the name of Admiral, three of seventy or eighty
tons, and the reft small open barks. On board of
there were fix hundred and seventeen men; of
which five hundred and eight belonged to the land
'crvice, and a hundred and nine were seamen or
artificers. The soldiers were divided into eleven
companies, according to the number of the filips;
to each of which Cortes ppointed a captain, and
committed to him the ommand of the vcflel while
at sea, and of the men when on fliore . As the
iul of fire-arms among the nations of Europe was
hitherto confined to a few battalions of regularly
xlifeiplincd infantry, only thirteen obldiers were
qrnmcd with mufkcts, thirty-two wvcrc cross-bow-
nien, and the rcfl had swords and spears. In-
lecad of the usual defcnfive armour, which mufl

have
Sec NOTE IV.

B 0-0 K have been eumberome in a hot climate, they wore

V. jackets, quilted with cotton, which experience had

"^~v~ taught the Spaniards to be a sufficient protedtion
'i18. againfi the weapons of the Americans. They had

only sixteen horses, ten small field-pieces, and four
falconets t

Feb. o. WITH this slender and ill-provided train did
e-s9." His Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch whose
departure
from Cuba. dominions were more extensive than all the king-

doms subjed to the Spanish crown. As religious
enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of ad-
venture in the New World, and, by a combina-
tion still more firange, united with avarice, in
prompting the Spaniards to all their enterprises,
a large crols was displayed in their andards, with
this inscription, L us follow the cross ; for under
this sign weJhall conquer.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers

animated, with both these passions that, no less
eager to plunder the opulent country whither they
were bound, than zealous to propagate the Chris-
tian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not
with the solicitude natural to men going upon dan-
gerous service, but with that confidence which
arises from security of success, and certainty of the
divine protection.

,roclhS; at As Cortes had determined to touch at every
Fozincli place which Grijalva had visited, he fleered di.

rcely towards the island of Cozumel; there he had
the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Aguilar, a
Spaniard, who had been eight years a prisoner
among the Indians. This man was perfecly ac-
quainted with a dialet of their language, undcr-
flood through a large extent of country, and pof-
fefling besides a confidcrablc share of prudence

andl
*j. B. Diaz. c. x9.

and. sagacity, proved extremely useful as an inter- B O 0O K
preter. From Cozumel Corte proceeded' to the V.
river of Tobafco, in hopes of a. reception as friend- ,-
ly as Grijalva had met with there, and' of find'ing 1519.
gold in the fame abundance; but the dilfpoit-ion,,and at 'i'a
of the natives, from some unknown cause, was to- bafco.
tally changed. After repeated endeavours to con-
ciliate their good-will, he was coinftrained to have
recourse to violence. Though the forces of the
enemy were numerous, and advanced with extra-
ordinary courage, they were routed, with great
laughter, in several successive aions. The loti
which they sustained, and fill more the astonish-
ment and terror excited by the defirudive effe&
of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance of
the horses, humbled their fierce spirit:, and in
uced them to sue for peace. They acknowledged
the king of Castile as their sovereign, and granted
Cortes a iupply of provisions, with a present of
otton garments, some gold; and twenty female
aves ".
CORTES continued! his course to the westward, Arrivesa;

m. juan rpi 1

* 1 st. Juae

eeping as near the shore as possible, in order to uua.
bfervc the country; but could discover no pro-
er place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
c Uluia.l As he entered this harlour, a large April 2.
tanoe full of people, among whom were two who
eerned to be persons of diftinUion, approached_
is ship, with signs of peace and amity. They
arne on board without fear or distrust, and ad-
rceied him in a most refpe&ful manner, but in a
anguage altogether unknown to Aguilar.-Cortes
vas in the utmost perplexity and di{ltres, at an
vcnt of which he instantly forelaw all the conie-

quencecs

" See NOTE V.
'' B. Diaz. c. 31-36. Gomara Cron. c. 18-23. Her-
'ra, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 1, &c.
i

1 0 0 K quences, and already felt the hesitation and uncer,

v. tainty with which he should carry on the. great
'v-'' schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranfations
1459. with the natives, he muf depend entirely upon

such an imperfeEt, ambiguous, and conjecural
mode of communication, as the use of signs. But
he did not remain long in this embarrassing fitua-
tion: a fortunate accident extricated him, when
his own sagacity could have contributed little to-
wards his relief, One of the female slaves, whom
he had received from the cazique of Tabasco, hap-
pened to be present at the first interview between
Cortes and his new guests. She perceived his dif-
trefs, as well as the confuion of Aguilar; and as
The perfectly understood the Mexican language,
The explained what they aid in the Yucatan tongue,
with which Aguilar was acquainted. This woman
known afterwards by the name of Donna Marina,
and who makes a conspicuous figure in the history
of the New World, where great revolutions were
brought about by small causes and inconsiderable
intruments, was born in one of the provinces of
the Mexican empire. Having been carried off a
captive by some hftile party, after a variety of
adventures she fell into the hands of the Tabaf-
cans, and had resided long enough among them
to acquire their language, without losing the use
of hr own. Though it was both tedious and
troublesome to converft by the intervention of two
different interpreters, Cortes was so highly plcafed
with having discovered this method of carrying
on some intercourlf with the people of a country
into which he was determined to penetrate, that
in the transports of his joy he confidered it as a
visible intcrpofition of Providence in his favour.'

HE

1. Diaz. c. 37, 38, 59. Gomara Cron. c. 25, 26. 1Ieor
'era, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

HE now earned, that the two persons whom B o o K

he had received on board his ship were deputies v.
from Pilpatoe and Teutile; the one governor of s-i-"
that province under a great monarch, whom they I?1-
called Montezuma, and the other the commander oo,.1'
of his forces there, and that they were sent to
inquire what his intentions were in visiting their
coast, and to offer him what afiftance he might
need, in order to continue his voyage. Cortes,
itruck with the appearance of those people, as
well as the tenor of the message, assured them,
in refpetful terms, that he approached their
country with moit friendly sentiments, and came
to propose matters of great importance to the
welfare of their prince and his kingdom, which
he would unfold more fully in person to the go.
vernor and the general. Next morning, without
waiting for any answer, he landed his troops, his
horses and artillery; and having cholfe proper
ground, began to ere& huts for his men, and to
fortify his camp. The natives, inflead of oppo-
sing the entrance of those fatal guests into their
country. aflifled them in all their operations, with
an alacrity of which they had ere long good rcafon
to repent.

NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Tcutile entered the Hi;fia i;n-

Spanish camp with a numerous retinue; and Cor- titw
tes confidering them as the miniecrs of a great Mexicans,
monarch, entitled to a degree of attention very dif;
ferent from that which the Spaniards were accut-
tomed to pay to the petty Caziqucs, with whom
Ithey had intercourfc, received them with much
formal ceremony. I-Ic informed them, that he
came as ambaflador from Don Carlos of Auflria,
king of Caflile, the grcatcft monarch of the call,
and was intrufetd with propositions o' luch mo-
mjent, that he could impart then to none but the
emperor Montezuma himliclf; and therefore re-

quired

B O quired them to condu& him, without loss of time

V. -into the presence of their .master. The Mexical
C'- officers could not conceal their uneasiness at. a re.
51'9* quest, which they knew to be disagreeable, ai

which, they foresaw, might prove extremely cm.
barraffing to their favereigii, whodf mind had been
filled with many disquieting apprehensions, evci
since the former.appearance of the Spaniards on
his coasts. -But before they attempted to dissuade
Cortes from insisting on this demand, they endea-
youred to conciliate his good will, by entrcatinl
him to accept of certain preients, which, as hunm-
ble slaves of Mdntezuma, they laid at his feet.
These were introduced with great parade, and con-
lifted of fine cotton cloth, of plumes of various
colours ; and of ornaments of gold and silver to a
confidcrable value; the workmanniip -of which
appeared to be as curious, as the materials were
rich.h The dilplay of these produced an effe&
very different from what the Mexicans intended.
Instead of satisfying, it increased the avidity of
the Spaniards, and rendered them so eager and
impatient to become mariers of a country which
abounded with such precious productions, that
Cortes could hardly liften with patience to the
arguments which Pilpatoe and Teutile employed
to difhade him from visiting the capital, and in a
haughty determined tone he insisted on his dc-
inand, of being admitted to a personal audience of
their sovereign. During this interview, Iorbe
painters, in the train of the Mexican chiefs, had
been diligently employed in delineating, upon
white cotton cloths, figures of the hips, the orlcs,
the artillery, the soldiers, aid whatever cife at-
traSed their eyes, as singular. When Cortes ob-
served this, and was informed that thece picurc
were to be sent to Montezunia, in order to con
vey to him a more lively idea of the ftralegc

alnd

and wonderful objecs now presented to their B 0
view, than any words could communicate, he re- v.
solved to render the representation flill more ani- --`"r
mated and interefling, by exhibiting such a spec- 15'9'
tacle as might give both them and their monarch
an awful impression of the extraordinary prowess
of his followers, and the irresistible force of their
arms. The trumpets, by his order, founded an
I alarm; the troops, in a moment, formed in order
of battle, the infantry performed such martial ex-
ercifes as were best suited to display the effe of
their different weapons; the horse, in various evo-
lutions, gave a specimen of their agility and
strength; theartillery, pointed towards the thick
woods which surrounded the camp, made dreadful
havock among the trees. The Mexicans looked on
with that silent amazement, which is natural when
the mind is struck with objects, which are both
awful and above its comprehension. But, at the
explosion of the cannon, many of them fled, forne
fell to the ground, and all were so much con-
founded at the fight of men whose power so nearly
resembled that of the Gods, that Cortes ound it
difficult tocompofe and re-aflure them. The painters
ad now many new subje&s on which to xercife
heir art, and they put their fancy on the stretch
in order to invent figures and characters to rcpre-
ent the extraordinary things which they had seen,
MESSENGERS were immediately dispatchcd to Negotiatios
ontczuma with those pi6Eures, and a full account Witi 01-
f every thing that had passed since the arrival
f the Spaniards, and by them Cortes ent a pre-
ent of fonie European curiosities to Montezuma,
hich though of no great value, he believed would
acceptable on account of their novelty. The

"cxican monarchs, in order to obtain early ilbor-
lation of every occurrence in all the corners of
heir vast empire, had introduced a refinement in

police
I

.S

B O O Kpolice, unknown, at that time, in Europe. T'I-'I

V. had couriers posed at proper flations alon.., r!:

principal roads, and as thcfc were trained to aili;:
5'19' by a regular education, and rclicvdcl one anui'tb

at moderate difances, thcy conveyed intcliC,ic:
with furprillng rapidity. Though the capital ii
which Montezuma rcfided was above a hndcd
and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulna, Cortes's
preftents were carrized thither, and an awer
his demands wa received in a fewr days. i :
fame officers who had hitlierto treated with lthi
Spaniards, were enpiiloyd to dcliver this anfswe,;
but as they knew how repugnant the deterniination
of their matser was to all the chcmct and wiihes
of the Spaniil commander, they would not vcn.
ture to make it known uutil they had prcvioufly ea.
dcavourcd to sooth and mollify him. For t;
.-isprcfirts. purpole, they renewed the negociaticn by intro.

ducing a train of an hundred Indians loaded with
presents sent to him by Montezuma. The magni.
ficence of thefc was such as became a great iiio.
narch, and far exceeded any idea which the Spa3
niards had hitherto formed of his wealth. Th"c
were plccd upon mats ipread on the ground, i
iuch order as ihcwcd them to the greatest advantna.
Cortcsand his oflicers viewed, with admiration, t!
various nanufaElurcs of the country, cotlop s'ti" .':
fine, and of such delicate texture as to rcfciiible il:;
piiturcs of animals, trees, and other natural o.
jces formed with feathers of different colours, db
p)oled clnd tmlilnglC(d w'itlh fucl skill and cleganc
as to rival the works of the pencil it! trutlih n!
bcnauty of imitation. But what chifclly a ;nit l
their eyes, were tIwo large plates ot a circular ilo
one o mailiive gold rclprclc uing thc lHnl, thi,: o,
of lilvci, an1 cblci oflthe muun ThetC w\CIC a

COlill pll i
s *ee NOTE \I.

companied with bracelets, collars, rings, and other B O 0 K
trinkets of gold; and that nothing might be want- v.
ing which could give the Spaniards a complete T''-
idea of what the country afforded, with some 1519'
boxes filled with pearls, precious stones, and
grains of gold unwrought, as they had been found
in the mines or rivers. Cortes received all these
with an -appearance of profound veneration for
the monarch by whom they were bestowed. ButF°rbids

lwhen the Mexicans, preiuming upon this, in-approacthhis
formed hinl that their mailer, though he defiredcaP'ita'
him to accept of what he had sent as a token
of his regard for the prince whom he represented,
would not give his consent that foreign troops
should approach nearer to his capital, or even
allow them to continue longer in his dominions,
Cortes declared, in a manner more resolute and
peremptory than formerly, that he must insist
on his first demand, as he could not without dif-
honour, return to his own sovereign, until he was
admitted into the pretence of the prince whom
he was appointed to visit in his name. The Mex-
icans, astonishcd at feeing any man dare to op-
polc that will, which they were accustomed to
confider as lupreme and irrefiflible, yet afraid of
precipitating their country into an open rupture
with such formidable enemies, prevailed with
Cortes to 5romrife, that he would not move from
his present camp, until the return of a mcffcngcr,
whom they lent to Montczuma for farthcr infiruc-
tions .

'rTHl firmness with which Cortes adhered to his State of thc

original propolal fiould, naturally, have broughtcim¢,,at
the ncgociation betwscc him and Moiitczuiia tot1 -' iod.
a fjiccdy i[uc, as. it flcmcd to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but citlcr to rcccivc him with

V L. 11. C confidence
A 1B )i. i.Z 9. C. G ira Cron. c. 27. Icloeira, dc.-2.
'lb. v. c 5, 6.

17

HISTORY OF AMERICA.
BO 0 Kconfidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly

v. as an enemy. The latter was what might have
sr'/ been expeEted from a haughty prince in poffeflion
'5~9. of extensive power. The Mexican empire, at

this period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which
no ociety ever attained in ib short a period.
Though it had subsisted only a hundred and thirty
years, its dominion extended from the North to
the South Sea, over territories, stretching about
five hundred leagues from east to weft, and more
than two hundred from north to south, compre-
hending provinces not inferior in fertility, popu-
lation, and opulence, to any in the torrid zone.
The people were warlike and enterprising; the
authority of the monarch unbounded, and his
revenues considerable. If, with the forces which
might have been suddenly assembled in such an
empire. Montezuma had fallen upon the Spa-
niards while encamped on a barren unhealthy
coast, unsupported by any ally,' without a place of
retreat, and deflitute of provisions, it is impossible,
even with all the advantages of their superior dif-
cipline and arms, that they could have stood the
shock, and they must either have perilhed in such
an unequal contest, or have abandoned the enter-
prise.

Charaaer of As the power of Montezuma enabled him to take
s°a' this spirited part, his own dispositions seemed nas.

turally to prompt him to it. Of all the princes
who had swayed the Mexican fccptre, he was the
most haughty, the most violent, and the most im-
patient of controul. His fubjets looked up tq
him with awe, and his enemies with terror. Thy
former he governed with unexampled rigour, but
they were impressed with such an opinion of his
capacity as commanded their refpe&; and by
many vi&ories over the latter, he had spread far
the dread of his arms, and had added fcveral con-
fiderable provinces to his dominions. But though

his

his talents might be suited to the tranfadions of B 0 0 K
a state so imperfetly polished as the Mexican em- V.
pire, and sufficient to condut them while in their 1r
accustomed course, they were altogether inadequate '5'9
to a conjuncture so extraordinary, a/nd did not qua-
lify him either to judge with the discernment, or to
aft with the decision, requisite in such a trying
emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared on His per-

....

* L r \s rplexity and

his coast, he discovered symptoms of timidity and Prror pon
embarrassment. Inftcad of taking such resolutions thearrivalof

the Spani-

as the consciousness of his own power, or the me-ards.
mory of his former exploits, might have infpiled,
he deliberated with an anxiety and hesitation which
did not escape the notice, of his meanest courtiers.
The perplexity and discomposure of Montezuma's
mind upon this oecafion, as well as the general dif-
may of his fubjefs, was not owing wholly to the
impreflion which the Spaniards had made by the
novelty of their appearance and the terror of their
arms, its origin may be traced up to a more remote
source. There was an opinion, if we may believe
the earliest and most authentic Spanish historians,
almost univcrlal among the Americans, that some
dreadful calamity was impending over their heads,
from a race of formidable invaders who should
come from regions towards the rising fun, to over-
run and deiblate their country. Whether this
difquicting apprchenfion flowed from the memory
of ome natural calamity, which had afflitcd that
part of the globe, and impressed the minds of
the inhabitants with uperflitious fears and fore-
bodings, or whether it was an imagination ac-
cidentally fuggcftcd by the astonishment which
the firfl fight of a new race of enc occasioncd,
it is ipofliblc to dctcrminc. But as the Mexicans
were more prone to flpcrlfitionl than any people
in the New World, they were more deeply as-

C 2 fcctcd

0 OO K'feaed with the appearance of the Spaniards,'whom

V. their credulity instantly reprelcnted as the inflru-

,-.-. ments deflined to bring about that fatal revolution
1519 which they dreaded. Under those circumstances,

it ceales to be incredible, that a handful of advcn
turers should alarm the monarch of a great em-
pire and all his fubjeats .
to negoiate. NOTWITHSTANDING the influence of this im-

preflion, when the meftenger arrived from the Spa-
nilh camp with an account, that Cortes, adhering
to his original demand, refused to obey the order
enjoining him to leave the country, Montezuma
assumed iobne degree of resolution, and in a tranf-
port of rage, natural to a fierce prince unaccuf-
tomed to meet with any opposition to his will, he
threatened to lacrifice those presumptuous firangers
to his gods. But his doubts and fears quickly
returned, and instead of issuing orders to carry his
threats into execution, he again called his ministers
to confer and offer their advice. Feeble and tem-
porifing measures will always be the relult, when
men alemble to deliberate in a situation where
they ought to at. The Mexican council took no
effctual measure for expelling such troublesome
intruders, and were satisfied with issuing a more
positive injunction, requiring them to leave the
country; but this they preposterously accompanied
with a present of such value, as proved a fresh in-
ducement to remain there.

Anxietyand MEANWHILE, the Spaniards were not without
apprehen-
f'onsof te solicitude or a variety of fcntiments, in dli-
Spaniards. berating concerning their own future condut.

From what they had already tecn, many of them
formed such extravagant ideas concerning the

opulence

* Cortes Relatione Secunda, ap Ramus. iii. 234, 235.

I-errera, dec. z. lib. iii. c. . lib. v. c. . lib. vii. c. 6. Go-
!nara Cron. c. 66. 92. 144.

opulence of the country, that despising danger or- o o K
hardships when they had in view trealures which v.
appeared to be inexhauftiblc, they were eager to
attempt the conquet. Others eflilm:titl dthe power 1519
of the Mexican empire by its wealth, and enume-
rating the various proofs which had occurrcd of its
being under a well-regulated adiniiftration, con-
tended that it would be an at of the wildest frenzy
to attack Ihch a slate with a small body of men,
in wvant of provisions, unconne&ed with any ally,
and already enfeebled by the dileafes peculiar to
the climate, and the lots of leveral of their nuin-
ber . Cortes secretly applauded the advocates
for bold measures, and chcrihcd their romantic
hopes, as such ideas corrceponded with his own,
and favoured the execution of the fchemcs which
he had formed. From the time that the uflpicions Schemce of
of Velasquez broke out with open violence in his Cortes.
attempt to deprive him of the authority which he
had conferred, he saw the necessity of dissolving a
conneetion, which would obftruEt and embarrass all
his operations, and watched for a proper opportu-
nity of coming to a final rupture with him. Having
this in view, he had laboured, by every art, to
secure the eftcem and affetion of his soldiers.
With his abilities for command, it was easy to
gain their eftcem ; and his followers were quickly
latisfied that they might rely, with perifct confi-
dence, on the conduce and courage of their leader.
Nor was it more difficult to acquire their affeeiion
Among adventurers, nearly of the fame rank,
and frving at their own expcnce, the dignity, of
command did not elevate a general above mingling
with those who acd under him. Cortcs availed
himfnclf of this frccdom of intcrcourfe, to infi-
nuatc hinifclf into their favour, and by his affable

nianners,
')l B. Diaz. c. 40.

21

BO 0 K manners, by well-timed ats of liberality to ome,

v. by inspiring all with vast hopes, and by allowing

^-1F'-' them to trade privately with the natives', he at-
1519. tached the greater part of his soldiers so firmly to

himself, that they alnoft forgot that the armament
had been fitted out by the authority, and at the ex-
pence of another.

;isaddrefs DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with
itheY on the present from Montezuma, and, together with

it, delivered the ultimate order of that monarch to
depart infiantly out of his dominions; and when
Cortes, instead of complying, renewed his request
of an audience, the Mexican turned from him ab-
ruptly, and quitted the camp with looks and gestures
which strongly expressed his lurprife and resent-
ment. Next morning none of the natives, who
used to frequent the camp in great numbers, in
order to barter with the soldiers, and bring in
provisions, appeared. All friendly correfpondcnce
seemed now to be at an end, and it was expected
every moment that hostilities would commence,
'Ihis, though an event that might have been forc-
seen, occasioned a sudden consternation among
the Spaniards, which emboldened the adherents of
Vclaqluez, not only to murmur and cabal againfi
their general, but to appoint one of their number
to rcmonllrate openly againfi his imprudence in,
attempting the conquest of a mighty empire with
fich inadequate force, and to urge the neccefity of
iclurning to Cuba, in order to relit the flect and
ugment the army. Dicgo de Ordaz, one of his
principal officers, whom the malcontents charged
with this cornmiflion, delivered it with a oldicrly
fireedom and bluntness, alluring him that iec fpokc
the Icntimcnts of the whole army. Cortes liftcned
to him without any appearance of emotion ; and

as

m See NOTE VII.
22

as he well knew the temper and withes of his fol- B O o K
diers, and foresaw how they would receive a pro- v.
position, fatal at once to all the fplcndid hopes and -r^
fchenes which they had been forming with such I59.
complacency, he carried his diflimulation so far as
to seem to relinquish his own measures in com-
pliance with the rcqueft of Ordaz, and issued or-
ders that the army hould be in readiness next day
to embark for Cuba. As soon as this was known,
the disappointed adventurers exclaimed and threat-
ened; the emissaries of Cortes mingling with
then, inflamed their rage; the ferment became
general; the whole camp was almost in open mu-
tiny; all demanding with eagerness to fe their
commander. Cortes was not flow in appearing;
when, with one voice, they exprcfled their afto-
nifhment and indignation at the orders which they
had received. It was unworthy, they cried, of
the Castilian courage to be daunted at the first asped
of danger, and infamous to fly before any enemy
appeared. For their parts, they were determined
not to relinquish an enterprise, that had hitherto
been successful, and which tended so visibly to
spread the knowledge of true religion, and to ad-
vance the glory and interest of their country. Hap-
py under his command, they would follow him
with alacrity through every danger, in quest of
those settlements and trcafurcs which he had o
long held out to their view; but if he chore rther
to return to Cuba, and tamely give up all his hopes
of diftinstion and opulence to an envious rival,
they would instantly chute another general to con,
dud them in that path of glory which he had not
spirit to enter,

CORTS, delighted with their ardour, took no

offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.
The fcntiments were what he himself had inspired,
and the armth of cxprcffion satisfied him that

his

23

B O O K his soldiers had imbibed them- thoroughly. He

v. affeced, however to be surprised at what he heard,

declaring that his orders to prepare for embarking
1519, were issued from a persuasion that this was agrce-

able to his troops; that, from deference to what
lie had been informed was their inclination, he
had sacrificed his own private opinion, which was
firmly bent on eflablilling imnmediatcly a fettlc-
ment on the sea-coast, and then on endeavouring
to penetrate into the interior part of the country;
that now he was convinced of his error; and as
he perceived that they were animated with the
generous spirit which breathed in every true
Spaniard, he would resume, with fresh ardour,
his original plan of operation, and doubted not
to conducO them, in the career of vitory, to such
independent fortunes as their valour merited,
Upon this declaration, shouts of applause tefrified
the exccls of their joy. The measure seemed to
be taken with unanimous consent; such as fccretly
condemned it, being obliged to join in the ac-
clamations, partly to conceal their difaficCtiou
from the general, and partly to avoid the im-
putation of cowardice from their fcllow-foldicrs *

E.tahllihesa WVITHIOUT allowing his nn time to cool or
gfocfcivl- to rcfledt, Cortes lct about carrying his design
ment. into execution. In order to give a beginning to

a colony, hc aficmblcd tlle principal prlbons ill
his army, and by their ffraigcs eleced a council
and magiflratcs, in whom the govcrnment was to
be vficed. As men naturally transplant the infti-
tutions and forms of the mlother-country into their
new lettlenlCnts, this was framed pon the nodel
of a Spainifh corporation. The ilingifiratcs were
diflinguifhcd by the lame names andl cnfigns of

oflicce
Br,. Diaz. c. 40, 41, 42. I-nrrera, dec. 2. lib. . c. 6, 7.

office, and were to exercise a fiinilar jurifdition. B O O K
All the persons chosen were most firmly devoted V.
to Cortes, and the instrument of their clection was -
tramed in the king's name, without any mention 15'9
of their dependence on Velafqucz. The two prin-
ciples of avarice and enthufiafrl, which prompted
tlhc Spaniards to all their cnterpriles in the New
Wor ld, emed to have concurred in fuggelling
i!he name which Cortes bestowed on his intended
lIcti clent. He called it, Villa rica de la vera Crztz,
;tilt is, The rich own of the lrue Cross.

Tlrz first mncctiug of the new council was dif- Reigns his
tinguifhcd by a transaction of great moment. Ascommiffiol.
ibon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave to
cntcr; and approaching with many marks of
profound refpetl, which added dignity to the
tiibunal, and set an example of reverence for its
*authority, he began a long harangue, in which,
with much art, and in terms extremely flattering
to persons jufi entering upon their new function,
[hc observed, that as the lupreme jurifdictioni over
;the colony which they had planted was now
vcfted in this court, he confidered them as clothed
*with the authority and representing the person of
ticir sovereign; that accordingly he would com-
:iiiuiicatc to-them what he deemed essential to the
)ublic ffety, with the fame dutiful fidelity as if he
.,iwcre addreing his royal mailer; that the fecu-
Irity of a colony fittled in a great empire, whole
ovcreign had already discovered his hostile inten-
i(ns, depended upon arms, and the efficacy of
lclc upon the subordination and dilcipline pre-
ervccd among thc troops; that his right to com-
:;3lniIl was derived from a commiflion granted by
:li governor of Cuba ; and as that had been long
icc revoked, the lawfulncfs of his ijurifdiion
li' hit well be quefcioned ; that he cciecd to aC
'l)oi1 a dcfcflivc, or even a dubious title; nor

t[~~~~~i'~ ~could
'i

25

BO K could they trust an army which might difput

V. the powers of its general, at a juncture when it
~Fs' ought implicitly to obey his orders; that, moved
1519. by there considerations, he now resigned all his

authority to them, that they, having both right to
chufe, and power to confer full jurifdition, might
appoint one, in the king's name, to command the
army in its future operations; and as for his own
part, such was his zeal for the service in which they
were engaged, that he would most cheerfully take
up a pike with the fame hand that laid down the
general's truncheon, and convince his fellow fol.
diers, that though accustomed to command, he
had not forgotten how to obey. Having finished
this discourse, he laid the commifilon from Velaf.
quez upon the table, and, after kissing his trun
cheon, delivered it to the chief magistrate, and
withdrew,

Alnd is cho- THE deliberations of the council were not long,
ticeandcap- as Cortes had concerted this important meafur
,ingcncal. with his confidents, and had prepared the other

members with great address, for the part which
he wished them to take. His resignation was ac
ccpted; and as the uninterrupted tenour of their
prosperity under his conduct afforded the ¢ol
satisfying evidence of his abilities for command,
they, by their unanimous suffrage, elcCted hii
chief juftic of the colony, and captain-general o
its army, and appointed his commission to be
made out in the king's name, with most ampl
powcrs, i which ere to continue in force until tl
royal plcailre ihould be farther known. T'hi
this deed might not be deemed the machinatio;
of a junto, the council called together the troops
and acquainted then with what had been rclolvcd
The foldicrs, with cager applaulc, ratified thei
lcoice; the air resoundcd with the name of Cortes

,,q11

{aud all vowed to sied their blood in support of his B 0 O K
authority. V.

CORTES, having now brought his intrigues to --
he desired issue, and shaken off his mortifying 1519.
dependence on the governor of Cuba, accepted Affertshis
kos the cornmifion, which veiled in him fupremeauthority

with vigour,

urifdiction, civil as well as military, over the co-
ony, with many profeflions of refpe& to the
council, and gratitude to the army. Together
vwith his new command, he assumed greater dig-
nity, and began to exercise more extenlive powers.
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the de-
puty of a subjed; now he ated as the reprefen-
tative of his sovereign. The adherents of Ve-
afquez, fully aware of what would be the effect of
his change in his situation, could no longer con-
tinue silent and passive fpe&ators of his aftions.
They exclaimed openly against the proceedings of
he council as illegal, and againfr those of the
rmy as mutinous. Cortes, instantly perceiving
he neceflity of giving a timely check to such fedi-
ious discourse by some vigorous measure, arrested
rdaz, Efcudero, and Velasquez de Leon, the
ingleaders of this faction, and ent them prisoners
board the fleet, loaded with chains. Their de-
endants, atonifhcd and overawed, remained
quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than
to punish his prisoners, who were officers of great
merit, courted their friendship with iuch assiduity
nd address, that the reconciliation was perfectly
cordial; and, on the nioft trying occasions, nei-
ther connecion with the governor of Cuba, nor
he memory of the indignity with which they had
ccn treated, tempted them to swerve from an
iviolable attachment to his intcrcft *. In this, as

well

* B. Diaz. c. 4, 43. Gomara Cron. c. 3o, 3. Herrera,
l , 2. lib. v. c. 7.

B O O K well as his other negociations at this critical cor

v. juncture, which decided with respect to his futur
-s-r' fame and fortune, Cortes owed much of his fuc
1519. cess to the Mexican gold, which he distribute

with a liberal hand both among his friends an,
his opponents t.

His friend- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be
by the Ze tween himself and his army indissoluble by thol
poallans. common as of disobedience, thought he migh

now venture to quit the camp in which he hac
hitherto remained, and advanced into the country
To this he was encouraged by an event no lefi
fortunate than seasonable. Some Indians, having
approached his camp in a mysterious manner,
were introduced into his pretence. He found that
they were ent with a proffer of friendship fionl
the cazique of Zenipoalla, a considerable town at
no great diflance; and from their answers to a
variety of i .:stions which he put to them, accord-
ing to his uual practice in every interview with
the people of the country, he gathered, that their
maftcr, though subjet to the Mexican empire,
was impatient of the yoke, and filled with such
dread and hatred of Montezuma, that nothing
could be more acceptable to him than any profpcdt
of deliverance from the oppreflion under which
he groaned. On hearing this, a ray of light and
hope broke in upon the mind of Cortes. He saw
that the great empire, which he intended to attack,
was not united, nor its ovcreign beloved. e
concluded, that the cauics of diiaffeion could
iot be confined to one province, but that in othler
corners there must be malcontents, lb weary ol
Jubjcdion, or lb desirous of change, as to be
ready to follow the standard of any protctor.
Full of those ideas, on which hc began to forlla;

flchcii,:'

-I B. Diaz. c. 4I
28

chcme, that time, and more perfect information B 00 K
onccrning the state of the country, enabled him V.
o mature, he gave a molt gracious reception to '-r
he Zempoallans, and promised soon to visit their 1519'
:azique i.
Ix order to perform this promise, it was not ne- Marchesto
:efary to vary the route which he had alreadyzc'npo°lla
ied for his march. Some officers, whom he had
mployed to survey the coast, having discovered a
;illage named Quiabiflan, about forty miles to
he northward, which, both on account of the
.ertility of the foil, and commodiousness of the
harbour, eemed to be a more proper flation for a
lettleinent than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempo-
illa lay in his way, where the cazique received
him in the manner which he had reason to expect;
with gifts and caresses, like a man solicitous to
gain his good will; with refpe& approaching al-
most to adoration, like one who looked up to him
as a deliverer. From him he learned many par-
iiculars with refpe& to the charaeter of Monte-
zunia, and the circumftanccs which rendered his
dominion odious. He was a tyrant, as the cazique
told him with tears, haughty, cruel, and suspicious;
\vho treated his own ubjecQs with arrogance,
suined the conquered provinces by exceflive ex-
aftions, and often tore their Ions and daughters
from them by violence; the former, to be oicred
as vicims to his gods; the latter, to be reserved as
koncubines for himfclf or favourites. Cortes, in

ply to him, artfully insinuated, that one great
ojecl of the Spaniards, in visiting a country ob re-
nlotc from their own, was to rcdrcfs grievances,
and to relieve the opprclcd ; and having encou-
raged him to hope for this interpOsition in due
lime, he continued his march to (kiabifan.

Tr'
' 13. Diaz. c. 4 C. oniara Cron. c. s.

29

BO O K THE spot which his officers had recommendec

v. as a proper situation, appeared to him to be f,

'r-' well chosen, that he immediately marked ou
I519- ground for a town. The houses to be erected wern

.Builds a only huts; but there were to be surrounded wit!
ort. fortifications, of sufficient firength to resist tt

assaults of an Indian army, As the finishing o
those fortifications was essential to the existence oj
a colony, and of no less importance in probe.
cuting the designs which the leader and his io!.
lowers meditated, both in order to secure a place
of retreat, and to preserve their communication
with the ea, every man in the army, officers as
well as soldiers, put his hand to the work, Cortes
himself setting them an example of ativity and
perfeverence in labour. The Indians of Zempoila
and Qijabiflan lent their aid; and this petty ila
lion, the parent of so many mighty fettlemcnts,
was soon in a slate of defence t.

Cornl a WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortcs
ancewith had several interviews with the caziques of Zemn.
iqueasl poalla and Q, iabiflan; and, availing himnelf of

their wonder and aflonifhment at the new object
which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired
them with such an high opinion of the Spaniards,
as beings of a luperior order, and irresistible in
arms, that, relying on their protection, they ven.
tured to insult the Mexican power, at the very
name of which they were accustomed to tremble.
Some of Montezunia's officers having appeared to
levy the usual tribute, and to demand a certain
number of human victims, as an expiation for
their guilt, in presuming to hold intercoure with
thofc firangers whom the emperor had commanded
to leave his dominions, inftcad of obeying the
order, they made them prifoncrs, treated thcil

with

't . BDi . . 45,.6, 48. Gomara Cron. c. 32, 33,

IHenrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 8, 9,
30

ith great indignity, and, as their superstition B o K
as no less barbarous than that of the Mexicans, v.
ey threatened to sacrifice them to their gods. r
rol this last danger they were delivered by the 1519-
tcrpofition of Cortes, who manifested the ut-
oft horror at the mention of such a deed. The
no caziques having now been pushed to an at
such open rebellion, as left them no hope of
sty but in attaching themselves inviolably to
Spaniards, they soon completed their union
ith them, by formally acknowledging themselves
be vaflals of the fame monarch. Their exam-
e was followed by the Totonaques, a fierce peo-
e who inhabited the mountainous part of the
untry. They willingly fubjeEted themselves to
e crown of Castile, and offered to accompany
ortes, with all their forces, in his march towards
exico ".
CORTES had now been above three months in Hsmea.
ew Spain; and though this period had not been Curs to pr
finguifhed by martial enterprises, every moment firmation of

-- · ·- 1

' T I 1 I1s autlho-

d been employed in operations, which, though rtybytl[i
's splendid, were more important. By his ad-king.
e's in conducting his intrigues with his own
my, as well as his sagacity in carrying on his
gociations with the natives, he had already laid
c foundations of his future success. But what-
cr confidence he might place in the plan which
had formed, he could not but perceive, that
his title to command was derived from a doubt-
lauthority, he held it by a precarious tenure.
he injuries which Vclalquez, had received, were
h as would naturally prompt him to apply for
dress to their common fbvcrcign; and such a rc-
fentation might be given of his conduct, that
had reaton to apprehend, not only that he
ighlt be degraded from his prcfcnt rank, but sub-

jeted

B'. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. H-errera, dc.

1 l! ,

I c. j, 1, 1 .
al

B O O K jc&ed to punishment. Before he began his march

v. it was neceflary to take the most effectual prc.
_-r'p-' cautions against this impending danger. With
i5i1. this view, he persuaded the magifirates of his

colony to address a letter to the king, containiin
a long account of their own services ; a pompous
defeription of the country which they had dilco-
vered; its riches, the number of its inhabitants,
their civilization and arts; a view of the prozrcls
which they had already made, in annexing flve.
ral extensive provinces of it to the crown of Ca.!
tile, and of the schemes which they had fornmcd
as well as the hopes which they entertained, of
reducing the whole to fubjeaion ; nd, last of all,
they gave a minute detail of the motives, wvhich
had induced them to renounce all conncEtion ith
Velasquez, to fettle a colony dependant upon te
crown alone, and to vest the supreme pomr,
civil, as well as military, in the hands of Corne;
humbly requesting their sovereign to ratify wha
they had done by his royal authority. Cores
himself wrote in a similar firain ; and as he kct
that the Spanish court accustomed to the aggravatec
representations of every new country by its dlco
verer, would give little credit to their splendid ac
counts of New Spain, if they were not accon!,pl
nied with such a pecimcn of what it contniuee
as would excite an high idea of its opulence,
solicitcd his soldiers to rclinquifh what they iig
claim as their part of the treauires which had li
thcrto been collctcld, in order that the shol
might be Icnt to the king. Such was the alccndla
which he had acquired over their minds, and uci
thcir own romantic xpec.ations of future wc;lt
that an a rmly o indigCent and rapacious advcinturc
was capable of this generous liot, and ofcrcdl
their lovcrcign the richest prcict that had hlilhcr
been tanllilittcd from the Ncov \\orld '.

Io 1< '1'( C' ki

'' Sc t'NOTE VI1I.
32

PORTOCARRERO and Montejo, the chief magif-B 00 K

trates of the colony, were appointed to carry this v.
prelent to Castile, with express orders not to touch '-y-
at Cuba in their passage thither . 1519.

WI - LE a vessel was preparing for their depar- AconfPira.

ture, an unexpected event occasioncd a general cortes
alarmn Some Lbldiers and sailors, secretly attached
to Velasquez, or intimidated at the profpet of
the dangers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate
into the heart of a great empire with such unequal
force, formed the design of seizing one of the bri-
gantines, and making their eape to Cuba, in
order to give the governor such intelligence as
might enable him to intercept the flip which was
to carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain. This
conspiracy, though formed by persons of low rank,
was conduced with. profound secrecy; but at
the moment when every thing was ready for
execution, they were betrayed by one of their as-
fociatcs.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He destroys

to ieafonably on this occasion, the detection of this his fleet.
conspiracy filled his mind with most disquieting
apprehentions, and prompted him to execute a
scheme which he had long revolved. He per-
ceived that the pirit of difaffeation still lurked
among his troops; that though hitherto checked
by the uniform fuccels of his schemes, or kept
down by the hand of authority, various events
might occur which would encourage and call it
forth. He obfcrved, that many of his men, weary
of the fatigue of service, longed to revisit their
fettlencnts in Cuba ; and that upon any appear-
ance of extraordinary danger, or any reverie of
fortune, it would be impolfible to rcltrain thcne
from returning thither. lie was lcnfible that his

VOL. II. D forces

* B. Diaz. c. 54. Gomara Cron. c. 40.

33

B o O K already too feeble, could bear no diminution, and

V. that a very small defection of his followers would
--, oblige him to abandon the enterprise. After ru-
5199 minating, often, and with much folicitudc, upon

thqfe particulars, he saw no hope of success, but
in cutting off all possibility of retreat, and reduc-
ing his men to the neccilty of adopting the fname
rel'olution with which he himself was animated
either to conqueror to perilh. With this view, he
determined to defiroy his fleet; but as he durfl
aot venture to execute such a bold resolution by
his ingle authority, he laboured to bring his fol-
diers to adopt his ideas with refped to the pro-
priety of this measure. His address in accom-
plifhing this was not inferior to the arduous occa-
lion in which it vas employed. He persuaded
some, that the ships had fuffcred so much by having
been long at ea, as to be altogether unfit for f1r-
vice; to others he pointed out what a feafonablc
reinforcement of strength they would derive from
the junaion of an hundred men, now unprofitably
employed as sailors: and to all he represented the
pecefiity of fixing their eyes and wishes upon what
was before them, without allowing the idea of a
retreat once to enter their thoughis. With uni
versal content the ships were drawn ahore, and
after firipping them of their fails, rigging, iron.
works, and whatever clfe might be of ue, they
were broke in pieces. Thus, from an effort of
magnanimity, to which there is nothing parallel
in hitfory, five hundred men voluntarily consented
to be shut up in a hostile country, filled with
powerful and unknown nations; and having pre-
cluded every means of clcape, left themselves with
out any rcfource but their own valour and perle-
verance h.

NOTHING

* Re!at. di Cortes. Ramul iii. 225 . . Diaz. c. 57, 58.
IIerrcra, d. 2. lib. v. c. 14.

| HISTORY OF AMERICA. 35

j NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity BO OK

of his troops; and the disposition of his allies, were V.
jequally favourable. All the advantages, however,

derived from the latter, though procured by much ;5'9
assiduity and address, were well-nigh loft in a mo-
ment by an indilcreet ially of religious zeal, which,
j on many occasions, pecipitated Cortes into actions

inconsistent with the prudence that distinguishes
his character. Though hitherto he had neither
; time nor opportunity to explain to the natives the
, errors of their own superstition, or to infirud them
iin the principles of the christian faith, he com-
manded his soldiers to overturn the altars and to
dcftroy the idols in the chief temple of Zempoalla,
and in their place to ercc a crucifix and an image
.of the Virgin Mary. The people beheld this
.with aftoniihment and horror; the priefis excited
them to arms; but uhch was the authority of Cortes,
land so great the ascendant which the Spaniards
.,had acquired, that the commotion was appealed
mwithout bloodhed, and concord perfe&ly re-efta,
Ablifhed .

CORTES began his march from Zempoalla on0AdvanCc

ithe sixteenth of August, with five hundred men,coun,i..
lifiteen horfc, and fix field-pieces. The reft of
his troops, conrifting chicfly of such as from age
lor ifirmity were less fit for ative service, he left
as a garrion in Villa Rica, under the command of
Elcalante, an officer of merit, and warmly at-
tached to his interest. The caziquc of Zompoalla
iupplicd him with provisions, and( with two hun-
dred of thole Indians called }ncmcs, whofle office,
iii a country where taine aniilals were unknown,
wa;s to carry burdens, and pcrform all Icrvile la-
Iour. They were a great relief to the Spaniifi lil-
dicrs, who hitherto had been obliged, not only to

D C2 arry

'*
. Diai.:. - , 4. 1 ITirrar, (Ide. 2. lib. v. c. 3, 4.

B O O K carry their own baggage, but to drag along the

V. artillery by main force. He offered likewise a

considerable body of his troops, but Cortes was
1519. satisfied with four hundred ; taking care, however,

to chufe persons of such note as might prove hosta-
ges for the fidelity of their mailer. Nothing me-
morable happened in his progress, until he arrived
on the confines of Tlafcala. The inhabitants oi
that province, a warlike people, were implacable
enemies of the Mexicans, and had been united in
an ancient alliance with the caziques of Zempoalla,
Though less civilized than the fubjeds of Mon-
tezuma, they were advanced in improvement far
beyond the rude nations of America, whose man-
ners we, have described. They had made confi.
derable progress in agriculture; they dwelt in
. large towns; they were not firangers to some fpe.
cies of commerce; and in the imperfed accountr
of their inflitutions and laws, transmitted to us by
the early Spanish writers, we difeern traces both i
distributive justice and of criminal jurifditio,
in their interior police. But still, as the degree of
their civilization was incomplete, and as they de-
pended for subsistence not on agriculture alone,
but trusted for it, in a great measure, to hunting,
they retained many of the qualities natural to men
in this slate. Like them, they were fierce and re-
vengeful; like them too, they were high-fpirited
and independent. In consequence of the former,
they were involved in perpetual hostilitics, and had
but a slender and occasional intercourse with neiglh
bouring states. The latter inspired them with i'cli
detestation of servitude, that they not only refuscd
to stoop to a foreign yoke, and maintained an oh.
ftinate and successful contcft in defence of their
liberty against the superior power of the Mexican
empire, but they guarded with equal foliciitud
against domnelic tyranny; and disdaining to ac

knowlckge
36

nowvledge any mafler, they lived under the mild B 0 O K
aad limited jurifdidion of a council elcted by V.
their several tribes.

-CORTES, though he had received information I519.
conerning the martial character of this people, with the
flattered himself, that his profeflious of delivering T'alc1an'
the opprefed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
thcir enmity to the Mcxicans, and the example of
ibcir ancient allies the Zempoallans, might induce
!hlne to grant him a friendly reception. In order
|o dispose them to this, four Zcmpoallans of great
minence were fen anbafladors, to request, in his
atie and in that of their cazique, that they would
ermit the Spaniards to pass through the territories
f Tlafcala in their way to Mexico, But inflead
of the favourable arinwcr which was expeted,
|he Tlafcalans seized the ambassadors, and, with-
lout any regard to their public charater, made
preparations for sacrificing them to their gods.
[Atthe fame time they aflmbled their troops, in
Order to oppose those unknown invaders, if they
!iould attempt to make their passage good by
krce of arms. Various motives concurred in pre-
pipitating the Tlafcalans into this relolution. A

rce people, shut up within its own narrow pre-
dints, and little accustomed to any intercourse
ith foreigners, is apt to confider every firanger
an enemy, and is easily excited to arms. They
included from Cortes's proposal of visiting Mon-
zuma in his capital, that, notwithstanding all his
ofeflions, he courted the fricndfhip of a monarch
horn they both hated and feared. The iapru-
nt zeal of Cortes, in violating the temples in
cnipoalla, filled the 'lafcalans with horror; and
they were no less attached to their fuperflition
an the other nations of New Spain, they were
Ipatient to avenge their injured gods, and to ac-
airc the merit of offering up to them as viutims

thoft

I

s
')
i,

37

B o O K those impious men, who had dared to profane tleir

v. altars.; the Spaniards from the finallnefs of theii
r-y-J number, were objects of their contempt; they
i519. had not yet measured their own flrength with theirs

and had no idea of the fupcriority which they de.
rived from their arms and dilcilpline.

CoRTEs, after waiting ome days in vain, Ibl

Aug. 3. te return of his ambassadors, advanced into he
Succefsofit. Tlafealan territories. As the refolntions of pcoplh

who delight in war arc executed with no Ics
promptitude than they are formed, he found troop
in the field ready to oppose him. They attacked
him with great intrepidity, and in the first encou,.
ter wounded foine of the Spaniards, and kiilec
two horses; a loss in their situation of great nmo
imnt, becaufle it was irreparable. From this li.,
cirien of the courage of his new enemies, Corlc
saw the neccffity of proceeding with caution. HI-
army marched in close order; he chose the ftationi
where he halted with attention, and tortified evcn
camllp with extraordinary care. During fourtcce
days he was expolfd to almost unintcrrukpted ai
faults; the Tlafcalans advancing with numerou
arnies, and rchecving the attack in various forms
with a degree of valour and perfeveranec to whic!
the Spaniards had een nothing parallel in the Ngci
World. The Spanish historians dclcribe thol
iticcfliv battles with great pomp, nd enter int!
a minute detail of particulars, mingling many cx
:iaecrated and incredible circuttlianlccs with tho!:
which arc real and imarvellou. ljut no powelri
words can render the recital of a combat intcrcel
ing, where there is no equality of danger; and

lwhen the narrative closes with an account ofthou
·linds fhain on the one fide, while not a single piF

· See NOTE IX.

ion falls on the other, the most laboured defcrip- B O O K
tions of the previous disposition of the troops, or v.
of the various vicillitudes in the engagechent, corn-
nand no attention. 15Il9

rTHRE are fomc circumflances, however, in So.e fingu-

Jair ciruin-

t-is war, which are memorable and merit notice, an,init.
as they throw light upon the charader both of the
people of Nw Spain, and of their conquerors.
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field such
vast armies as appear fuificient to have overwhelmed
the Spaniards, they vicrc never able to make any
iinprcflon upon their iiiall battalion. Singular
as this may fecm, it is not inexplicable. The
Tlaicalans, though addictcd to war, were, like all
unpolifhcd nations, firangers to military order
and discipline, and loft all the advantage which
they might have derived from their numbers, and
the inipetuofity of their attack, by their constant
solicitude to carry off the dead and wounded,
This point of honour, founded on a sentiment of
tenderness natural to the human mind, and
strengthened by anxiety to preserve the bodies of
their countrymen from being devoured by their
enemies, was universal among the people of New
Spain. Attention to this pious office occupied
them, even during the heat of combat :, broke
their union, and diminished the force of the im-
prefflon which they might have made by a joint
effort.

NOT only was their superiority in number of

little avail, but the imperfection of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great mcalure
inofltefive. After three battles, and many fkir-
mifhcs and afiaults, not one Spaniard was killed
in the field. Arrows and scars, headed with flint
or the bones of fifhcs, flakes hardened in the fire,

and

29
:r B. Dz. c. 6.

B 0 0 Kand wooden swords, though deftrudive weapons

V. among naked Indians, were etfily turned aside by
^V the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly penetrate
15g9. the efcaupiles, or quilted jackets which the soldiers

wore. The Tlafcalans advanced hiclly to the
charge, and often fought and to band. Many
of the Spaniards were wounded, though all slightly,
which cannot be imputed to any want of courage
in their enemies, but to the defeCt of the arms
with which they assailed them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they feci to
have conduced their hostilities with some degree
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniards
warning of their hostile intentions, and as they
knew that they wanted provisions, and imagined,
perhaps, like the other Americans, that they had
left their own country because it did not afford
them subsistence, they lent to their camp a large
supply of poultry and maize, desiring them to eat
plentifully, because they scorned to attack an ene-
my enfeebled by hunger, and it would be an as-
front to their gods to offer them famished vitims,
as well as difagrecable to themifelves to feed on such
emaciated prey *.

WHEN they were taught, by the first encounter

with their new enemies, that it was not easy to ex-
ecute this threat; when they perceived, in the sub-
fecquent engagements, that notwitlhfanding all the
eflorts of their own valour, of which they had a
very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was
slain or taken, they began to conceive them to be
a fupcrior order of beings, against whom human
power could not avail. In this axtrcmity, they
had rccourfe to their pricfis, requiring them to

reveal

* I-errera, dec. 2. ibl. vi. c. 6. Gomara Cron. c. 47,
40

j reveal the mysterious causes of such extraordinary B O K

events, and to declare what new means they should v-
t, employ in order to repul`e thole formidable in-
| vaders. The priests, after many sacrifices and $I9'

incantations, delivered this relponfe: That these
strangers were the offspring of the fun, pro-
. created by his animating energy in the regions

of the ea ; that, by day, while cherished with
the influence of his parental beams, they were
invincible; but by night, when his reviving
heat was withdrawn, their vigour declined and
faded like the herbs in the field, and they dwin-
dled down into mortal men i. Theories less plau-
fible have gained credit with more enlightened
nations, and have influenced their conduct. In
consequence of this, the Tlafcalans, with the im-
plicit confidence of men who fancy themselves
to be under the guidance of Heaven, acted in
contradiction to one of their molt stablished
maxims in war, and ventured to attack the enemy
in the night-time, in hopes of destroying them
when enfeebled and surprised. But Cortes had
more vigilance and dilcernment than to be de-
ceived by the rude stratagems of an Indian army.
1The centinels at his out-posts, oblerving tome
extraordinary movement among the Tlafcalans,
gave the alarm. In a moment the troops were un-
der arms, and sallying out, dispersed the party
with great slaughter, without allowing thnm to ap-
proach the camp. Convinced, by fad experience,
that their pricits had deluded them, and aItisficd
that they attempted in vain, cither to deceive, or
to vanquish their enemies, the fiercencfs of the
''lafcalans abated, ad they began to incline fcri-
oufly to peace.

TI'rYv were at a loss however, in what manner
to addrcfs the firangers, what idea to form of

their
* B. Diaz. c. 66.

B O O K their character, and whether to coifider them a

V. beings of a gentle or of a malevolent nature.
"-c-- There were circumiftances in their conduc' which
r5i9. feeled to favour each opinion. On the one hand,

TlI diTpfed as the Spaniards constantly difmniffed the prifoncis
to peace. whom they took, not only without injury, buL

often with prcfents of European toys, and r-
newed their offers of peace after every victory;
this lenity amazed people accuftorned to the ec-
terminating ifyfen of war known in Anierica,
and who iacrificed and devoured without mercy
all the captives taken in battle, and disposed theli!
to entertain favoutable Icntiments of their hu-
manity. But, on the other hand, as Cortes had
seizcd fifty of their countrymen who brought pro-
visions to his camp, and supposing them to be
Ipics, had cut off their heads *; this bloody pcc-
tacle, added to the terror occasioned by the fire-
arms and horlfs, filled them with dreadful im-
preflions of their ferocityt. Accordingly this
uncertainty was apparent in their mode of addref-
ling the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are di.
vinities of a cruel and savage nature, we present
to you five flavcs, that you may drink their blood
and cat their leih. If you are nild deities, accept
an offering of incense and variegated plumes. If
you arc imen here is meat, bread and fruit, to
iourifi yout." The peace, which both parties
now dclired with equal ardour, was loon con-
co,,uLi,. CI eluded. The i'afealcans yielded themlclvcs as

vails lto the crown of Caflilc, and engaged to
altifl Cortes in all his future operations. He took
the republic under his protction, and promiscd
to defCld Iheir peilbus and pofCllions from inju-
ry or violence.

'J' r Is

t ' ; PR lat. Raintf. iii. 22,. C. Coinnarn Cron. c. 48.

-i 'i !, ! 't

t !'t:,. . . I)iaz. c. 70. Goinara Cron. c. 7

i :r:'ril.1, Ic. . ib. vi. c . 7.
42

THIS treaty was concluded at a ealbnablejunc-

ture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of service BOO
among a ifmall body of men, surrounded by such -
a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the ir'.
army was on duty every night, and even they whose Advantage
turn it was to rcft, ilept always upon their arms, ofittothe
that they might be ready to run to their poRls on a Spaniard.
moment's warning. Maiy of them were wounded,
a good number, and among these Cortes himself,
laboured under the diftcmpcr peculiar to the climate,
and several had died since they fct out from Vera
Cruz. Notwithflanding the supplies which they
received from the Tlafealans, they were often in
want of provisions, and so deflitute of the neceffa,
ries most rcquiiite in dangerous service; that they
had no salve to drcfs their wounds, but what was
compoed with the fat of the Indians whom they
had slain '. Worn out with such intolerable toil
and hardfiips, many of the soldiers began tomur-
mur, and whcn they refleEted on the multitude
and boldncfs of their enemies, more were ready
to dcfpair. It required the utmost exertion of
Cortes's authority and add recs to check this pirit
of despondency in its progress, and to reanimate
]is folloswcrs with their wonted sense of their own
superiority over the enemies with whom they had
to contend t. The ubmiifion of the T'lalcalans,
and their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
whcre they were received with the reverence paid
to beings of a superior order, banishcd, at once,
from the minds of the Spaniards all memory of
pal liifferings, difliellcd every anxious thought with
rcfpct to their future operations, and fully atisficd
them that there was not now any power in America
able to withstand their arms .

CORTlS

* B. Diz. c. 62. 62 . - Cortes Rclal. ,aim. iii. 29. B.

Diaz. c. 69. Goimara Cron. c. 5 . I Cortes Relat. Ramnif. iii.
230. B. Diaz. c. 72.

44
B O O K CORTES remained twenty days in Tafcala, i;

v. order to allow his troops a hort interval of re-
s-r-' pose after such a hard service. During that tinc,
15I9. he was employed in tranfcations and inquiries of

Cortes soli.
citiousto great moment with refpcc to his future schemes.
gain their In his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs,
Confidence he received information concerning every particu-

lar relative to the fate of the Mexican rempire, or
to the qualities of its Ibvereign, which could be
of use in regulating his conduet, whether he should
be obliged to a& as a friend or as an enemy.
As he found that the antipathy of his new allies
to the Mexican nation was no less implacable than
had been represented, and perceived what benefit
he might derive from the aid of such powerful
confederates, he employed all his powers of in-
finuation in order to gain their confidence. Nor
was any extraordinary exertion of these necessary,
The Tlafcalans, with the levity of mind natural
to unpolifhed men, were, of their own accord,
disposed to run from the extreme of hatred to
that of fondness. Every thing in the appearance
and conduct of their guests, was to them matter of
wonder* . They gazed at whatever the Spaniards
did with admiration, and fancying them to be of
heavenly origin, were eager not only to comply
with their demands, but to anticipate their wishes.
Th'ey offered, accordingly, to accompany Cortes
in his march to Mexico, with all the forces of
the republic, under the conmand of their Imoft
experienced captains.

V'ii ie 131BT, after bcflowing so much pains on cement-

i,;I nillof} ing this union, all the heneficial fruits of it were
sI yLs on11 the point of being loft, by a new effusion of

that intcmperate zeal with which Cortes was ani-
nioted, no lets than the other advcturers of the

- agic.

A Ste NO'TEl XL

age. They all confidered themselves as inllru- B 0 O K
ments employed by Heaven to propagate the V.
Christian faith; and the lels they were qualified s
cither by their knowledge or morals for such a 519'
Iundion, they were more eager to difeharge it.
The profound veneration of the Tlafcalans for the
Spaniards having encouraged Cortes to explain
to Ibme of their chiefs the doctrines of the Chris-
tian religion, and to insist that they should abandon
their own iuperftitions, and embrace the faith
of their new friends, they, according to an idea
universal among barbarous nations, readily ac-
knowledged the truth and excellence, of what he
thought; but contended, that the Teules of Tla-
cala were divinities no less than the God in whom
the Spaniards believed ; and as that being was in-
titled to their homage, so they were bound to re-
vere the fame powvers which their ancestors had
worshippcd. Cortes continued, nevertheless, to
urge his demand in a tone of authority, mingling
threats with his arguments, until the Tlafealans
could bear it no longer, and conjured him never
to mention this again, left the gods flould avenge
on their heads the guilt of having listened to such
a proposition. Cortes, aflonifhed and enraged at
their obstinacy, prepared to execute by force what
he could not acconplifh by persuasion, and was
going to overturn their altars, and cal down their
idols with the fane violent hands as at Zempoalla,
if father Bartholomew de Olmedo, chaplain to the
expedition, had not checked his inconsiderate im-
petuofity. He rcprclcnted the imprudence of such
an attempt in a large city newly reconciled, and
filled with people no lcs uperftitious than war-
like; he declared that the proceedings at Zempo-
alla had always appeared to him precipitate and
unjut ; that religion was not to be propagated by
rhe :sword, or infidels to be converted by vio-

lence ;

45

B O O Kloeee; that other weapons were to be employed

v. in this ministry, patient inftrudion must enlighten
~'^r' the understanding, and pious example captivate

5'9 the heart, before men could be induced to aban-

don error, and embrace the truth *. Amidst fcencs,
where a narrow-minded bigotry appears in such
close union with opprefiion and cruelty, senti-
mcnts so liberal and humane sooth the mind with
unexpedted pleasure; and at a time, when the
rights of conicience were little understood in the
Christian world, and the idea of toleration un-
known, one is astonished to find a Spanilh monk
of the sixteenth century among the firit advocates
againit persecution, and in behalf of religious li-
berty. The remonstrances of an ecclesiastic, no
less refpeable for wisdom than virtue, had their
proper weight with Cortes. He left the Tlafcalans
in the undisturbed exercise of their own rites,
requiring only that they ihould desist from their
horrid practice of offering human vifiims in fa-
crifice.

Advances to CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for ser-
Ciolula. vice, resolved to continue his march towards

Mcxico, notwithstanding the earnest difiuafives
of the Tlafcalans, who rcrclcnted his deflrudion
as unavoidable, if he put hinifelf in the power of
a prince so faithless and cruel as Montezuma.
As lie was accompanlied by fix thousand Tlafca-
lans, he had now the command of forces which
o. 3,. rclnmblcd a regular army. They dirctedc their

courlc towards Cholula ; Montezuma, who had at
length contented to adit the Spaniards into his
pretence, having informcd Cortcs, that he had
givcn orders lor his friendly reception therc.
C'lholula was a confidcrable town, and though only
livce leagucs diliant from T'lalcala, was formerly an
inllicpedcnt state, but had been lately ubjcetcd

'. l)iz c.

'7. 1 c 3. 1. óito

' P. Diaz c. 77. p. 5.. c 83. p. 6.
46

to tle Miexican eipire. This was confidered by B O 0 K
all the people of New Spain as a holy place, the V.
,anduary and chief icat of their gods, to which ~
iilgrimns relorted from every province, and a 151'9
,lc;iter number of human victins were offered in
iis principal temple than even in that of' Mexico .,
Montezumna leems to have invited the Spaniards
ihither, either fronm ollie uperftitious hope that
ihe gods would not iuffer this sacrcd nanfiun to be
,lcfiled, without pouring down their wrath upon
;iuole impious firangers, who ventured to insult
'tihir power in te place of its peculiar refidencc,
or from a bclief that he himnfelf might there attempt
rio cut them off with more certain luccefs, under
hle immcncdiate protection of his divinities.
CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, Tlefevrrity
cbfore he let out on his march, to keep a watchful of his p'oc-

dure there.

eye over the Cholulans. He himself, though re-
ccived into the town with much teeming refped
Ind cordiality, observed several circumitances in
heir conduct which excited suspicion. Two of
he Tlacfalans, who were encamped at tomediflance
rom the town, as the Cholulans refused to admit
heir ancient enemies within its prccin&s, having
bund means to enter in ditguife, acquainted Cor-
es, that they oblcrved the women and children of
he principal citizens retiring in great hurry every
ight; and that ix children had been acerificcd in
he chief temple, a rite which indicated the execu-
ion of some warlike enterprie to be approaching.
At thee e time Marina the interpreter received
nformation from an Indian woman of diftintion,
vhofe confidence she had gained, that the dcltruc-
lion of her friends was concerted; that a body
Ds Mexican troops lay couccaled near the town;

that

' Torqtieiid(la Monar. Ind. i. 281, 282. ii. 291. Gornara

-rol c.

c .
61. errera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 2.

47

B O O K that ome of the streets were barricaded, and id

V. others pits or deep trenches were dug, and flightli

~-s'J' covered over, as traps into which the horse niighi;
r519. fall; that stones and missive weapons were col.

leted on the tops of the temples, with which to
overwhelm the infantry ; that the fatal hour wai
now at hand, and their ruin unavoidable. Corte
alarmed at this concurring evidence, secretly a.
refted three of the chief priests, and extorted froni
them a confession that confirmed the intellignce
which he had received. As not a moment va:
to be loft, he inflantly resolved to prevent his enc.
mies, and to inflict on them such dreadful ven
geance as might firike Montezuma and his subjet!
with terror, For this purpose, the Spaniards and
Zempoallans were drawn up in a large court, whic
had been allotted for their quarters near the centre
of the town ; the Tlafcalans had orders to ad
vance; the magistrates, and several of the chiei
citizens, were ent for under various pretexts, an
seized. On a signal given, the troops rulhed ou
and fellupon the multitude, destitute of leaders
and so much astonished, that the weapons dropped
from their hands, and they flood motionless, an!
incapable of defence. While the Spaniards prec
fed them in front, the Tlafcalans attacked thcnl
the rear. The fireets wcre-'filled with bloodihce
and death. The temples, which afbfrded a retrca
to the priests and some of the leading men, wer
ift on fire, and they pcrifhed in the flames. This
feenc of horror continued two days; during whic
the wretched inhabitants suffered all that the dc
tlrutive rage of the Spaniards, or the implacabl
revenge of their Indian allies, could infliEt. A
length the carnage ceascd, after the slaughter offi
thousand Cholulans, without the loss of a ingle Spa
niard. Cortes then rclcafcdthe magifirates, andre

proacliiii

then bitterly for their intended treachery, declared, B O O K
that as julbice was now appeased, he forgave the V.
ofIence, but required them to recall the citizens r
who had fled, and re-cflablifh order in the town. 15I9.
Such was the acendant which the Spaniards had
acquired over this fulerftitious race of men, and
ib deeply were they impreiffd with an opinion of
their superior dilcernnint, as well as power, that
in obedience to this command, the city was in a
ickw days filled again with the people, who, amidst
the ruins of their sacred buildings, yielded re-
ip)eiflul service to men whose hands were slained
with the blood of their relations and fellow-ci-
tizens .

FROM Cholula Cortes advanced direcly to- o. 9.

wards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues wardcs
distant. In every place through which he palled, Mexico.
he was received as a person possessed of iufficient
power to deliver the empire from the oppression
under which it groaned; and the caziques or go-
vernors, with the unreserved confidence reposed
in superior beings, communicated to him all the
grievances which they felt under the tyrannical
government of Montezuma. When Cortcs first
oblcived the feeds ofdifeontcnt in the remote pro-
vinces of the empire, a ray of hope broke in upon
his mind ; but when he diicovcred such symptoms
of alienation fror-i their monarch near tle feat of
govcrnment, lec concluded that the vital parts of
the constitution were assetcd, and conceived the
noflt anguine cxpetations of overturning a slate
whlo'c nlatural rength was thus divided and im-
paircd. While tole reflclions encouraged the
general to persis in his arduous undertaking, the
ioldicrs were no Icls ainimatcd by oblervations

\Vo x. 11. .' more

'* Cnrts Rclat. Railnlf. iii. ?, i1. B. Diaz. c. 83. Go-

nila Cr.i . c. 64. IlcItTret, dec. 2. lib. v .

vii .

c. . . ee
1'!O'1'1 XII.

B 0 0 K more obvious to their capacity. In descending

v. from the mountains of Chalco, across which the

'ó~' road lay, the vast plain of Mexico opened gradu,
FirfSv9' ally to their view. When they first beheld this
of it. profpet, one of the molt striking and beautiful

on the iace of the earth ; when they observed ser-
tile and cultivated fields, firetching farther than
the cye could reach;' when they aw a lake re-
fcmbling the lea in extent, cncompafled with
large towns, and dilcovered the capital city rising
upon an island in the middle, adorned with its
temples and turrets; the scene so far exceeded
their imagination, that some believed the fanciful
descriptions of romance were realized, and that
its' enchanted palaces and gilded domes were pre-
sented to their fight; others could hardly persuade
themselves that this wonderful spectacle was any
thing more than a dream n. As they advanced,
their doubts were removed, but their amazement
increaled. They were now fully satisfied that the
country was rich beyond any conception which
they had formed of it, and flattered themselves,
that at length they should obtain an ample recom-
pence for all their services and ufi'rings.

Thlirrero- No enemy had yet appeared to oppose their
lutionof progress, though several circumiftanccs occurred
zunm. which led them to fulfpeet. that forme dcfign was

formed to urprife and cut them offi Many mel-
fcngcrs arrived uccefiively from Montczuma, per-
initting themn one day to advance, requiring themr
on the next to retire, as his hopes or scars al-
ternately prevailed ; and 'o wondcrlul was this in-
fatuation, which iccis to be unaccountable on any
fippofition but that of a fuperflitious dread of
the Spaniards, as being of a upciior nature, that
Cortes was aliiot at the gates of the capital, before
the monarch had determined whether to receive
hilm as a friend, or to oppose him as an enemy.

Bu;
See NOTE XIII.

i Biut as no sign of open hofiility appeared, the B OO K

Spaniarcs, without regarding the fluctuations of v.
Montezuma's icntinents, continued their march r

i

along the cauFkway which led to Mexico through '159.
the lake, with great circunifpetion and the
firi&eft discipline, though without eeming to sus:
pec the prince whom they were about to visit.

Wt 1EN they drew near the city, about a thou- His first in-
:i nd pcrfons, who appeared to be of diftinion, terviewwith

the Spa-

came forth to meet them, adorned with plumes, irds.
and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each of these
in his order, passed by Cortes, and laluted him
according to the mode deemed most refpetful and
fubmiflive in their country. They announced the
approach of Montezuma himself, and soon after
his harbingers came in fight. There appeared
first two hundred persons in an uniform dress,
with large plumes of feathers, alike in fashion,
marching two and two, in deep silence, barefooted
w ith their eyes fixed on the ground. These were
X followed by a company of higher rank, in their
, most showy apparel, in the inidft of whom vwa
Montezuma, in a chair or litter richly ornamented
with gold, and feathers of various colours. Four
of his principal favourites carried him on their
fboulders, others supported a canopy of curious
workmarnfiip over his head. Before him marched
three officers with rods of gold in their hands,
which they lifted up on high at certain intervals,
and at that signal all the people bosved their heads,
and hid their faces, as unworthy to look on so
great a monarch. 'When ie drew near, Cortes
dilinountcd, advancing towards himl witihofficious
lhate, and in a refipctful p)ofurc. At the iale
time Montezuma alighted frout his chair, and lean-
ing on lthe arms of two of his near relations, ap-
proachcd with a flow and fcatcly pace, his atten-
dants covering, the firet wihll cotton cloths, that

1E z he

B O O K he might not touch the ground. Cortes acofied(

V. him with profound revercnce, after the European
-r-' fafhlion. He returned the salutation, according
1519. to the mode of his country, by touching the caril

,ith his hand, and then kifling it. This cere-
mony, the cuflomary exprcfliou of revercnce
from inferiors towards thole who were above them
in rank, appeared uch amazing condcfcenfion
in a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to
confider the retl of mankind as of the ame fpe-
cies with himself, that all his iubjc(ts firmly be-
lieved those persons, before whom he humbled
himself in this manner, to be fomethipg more than
human. Accordingly, as they marched through
the crowd, the Spaniards frequently, and ith
much fatisfation, heard themtelves denominatcd
Teules, or divinities. Nothing material pafled in
this first interview. Montezuma conduEted Cortes
to the quarters which he had prepared for his re-
ception, and immediately took leave of him, with
a politeness not unworthy of a court more refined.
" You are now," fays he, " with your brothers, in
your own house; refrelh yourselves after your fa-
tigue, and be happy until I return *." The
place allotted to the Spaniards for their lodging
was a house built by the father of Moltezuma.
It was surrounded by a flone wall, with towers an:
proper diflances, which fIrved for defence as well
as for ornament, and its apartments and couris
were io large as to accommodate both the Spaniarcid
and their Indian allies. The firlt care of Cones
was to take precautions for his ccurity, by plant-
ing the artillery so as to command the diffrcu
avenues which led to it, by appointing a large di-
vilion of his troops to be always on guard, and y
polling ccntincls at proper flations, with injillc-

tiol ;

* Cortes Relat. Ram ii. ii. 22-25. . . iaz. c. f,--t;
Goinara Cron. c. 64, 65. HIerrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 3, i.

tions to obfcrve the fame vigilant discipline as ifB O 0 K
they were within fight of an enemy's camp. v.

1; the eveni:g Montczuma returned to visit his 1

g.ucfts with the fatne pomp as in their firP intcr- 5d9of
view, and brought prefcots of such value, not only te spa-
to Cortes and to his otficers, but even to the private niard'
men, as proved the liberality of the monarch to
be suitable to the opulnce of his kingdom. A
loug conference ensucd, in which Cortes learned
what was the opinion of Montezunia with rcfpcd
to the Spaniards. It was an cftablifled tradition,
he told him, among the Mexicans, that their an-
ceftors came originally from a remote region,
and conquered the provinces now fubje4 to his do-
minion; that after they were fettled there, the
great captain who conduticd this colony returned
to his own country, promising-, that at some future
period his dcfccndants fliould visit them, affIune
the governmcnt, ad reform their constitution
and laws; that, from what he had heard and seen
of Cortes and his followers, he was convinced that
they were the very persons whose appearance their
tradition and prophecies taught them to expc ;
that accordingly he had received them, not as
firangers, but as relations of the fame blood and
parentage, and desircd that they might confider
themselves as masers in his dominions ; for both
hinmflf and his fubjedts should be ready to con-
ply with their will, and even to prevent their
wifhcs. Cortes made a reply in his usual stile,
with reflpet to the dignity and power of his so-
vereign, and his intention in fending him intothat
country; artfully endeavouring so to frame his
discourse, that it might coincide as much as poflible
with the idea which Montezuma had formed con-
cerning the origin of the Spaniards, Next morn-
ing, Cortes and some of his principal attendants
were admitted to a public audience of the crolic-r.
'he three fubfcqucnt days were cmploycd i v icw,

tlig

BO O K ing the city; the appearance of which, so far fu.

v. perior in the order of its buildings, and the num-

- ber of its inhabitants, to any place the Spaniards
'519- had beheld in America, and yet so little relembling

the firucture of an European city, filled them with
surprise and admiration.

MEXICO, Teinuchtitlan, as it was anciently called

by the natives, is situated in a large plain, envi-
roned by mountains of such height, that though
within the torrid zone, the temperature of its cli-
mate is mild and healthful. All the moiiture
which descends from the high grounds is collected
in everal lakes, the two largest of which, of about
ninety miles in circuit, communicate with each
other. The waters of the one are fresh, those of
the others brackish. On the banks of the latter,
and on some small islands adjoining to them, the
capital of Montezuma's empire was built. The
accels to the city was by artificial caufewavs or
streets, formed of stones and earth, about thirty
feet in breadth. As the waters of the lake, during
the rainy season, overflowed the flat country, theie
causeways were of considerable length. That of
Tacuba on the weft a mile and a half; that of Te-
zeuco on the nerthwcft three miles; that of Cuoy-
acan towards the south fix miles. On the east there
was no causeway, and the city could be approached
only by canoes"'. In each of there caulfways
werc openings, at proper intervals, through which
the waters flowed ; and over these beams of timber
were laid, which being covered with earth, thc
causeway orftreet had every where an uniform ap-
pearance. As the approaches to the city were fin-
gular, its confiruction was remarkable. Not only
the temple of their gods, but the houfcs belonging
to the monarch, and to perlons ofdifincion, were
olf such clinicnions, that, in coniparifon with any
i.l cr bui ldings whicll had bccn d(ilcovcrcd in A\ nc-

l ca,
; 1. 'l'rriiu ¢,[J

;ica, they might be termed nmanificent. The ha- E O K
bitations of the common people were mean, re- V.
fembling the huts of other Indians. But they were -r
all placed in a regular manner, on the oanksofthe '519'
canals which paflld through the city, in Ioime of
its diflri&s, or on the fidcsof the ficcts which in-
tcrfescd it in other quartcrs. In cveral places
were large openings or il!uarcs, one of which, al-
lotted for the great market, is laid to have been bi
ispacious, that forty or fifty thouiand pcrfons car-
ried on tralic there. In this city, the pride of the
New World, ad the noblell rmonuincnt of the i-
duftry and art of man, while unacquainted with
the uife of iron, and dftitute of aid from an do..
mesic animal, the Spaniards, who are moit mode-
rate in their computations, reckon that there were
at least sixty thouhand inhabitants "

BUT how much focvcr the novelty of thofc ob- Theird.n-

ilets might amuse or aflonifh the Spaniards, theygeloustua-
felt the utmost Iolicitudc with rcfpcCt to their own t
situation. From a concurrence of circunmtanccs
no less unexpeded than favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the
heart of a powerful kingdom, and were now lodged
in its capital, without having once met with open
opposition from its monarch. The Tlafcalans,
however, had carneftly difluaded them from plac-
ing such confidence in Montezuma as to enter a city
of such a peculiar situation as Mexico, where that
prince would have thcm at mercy, hut up as it
were in a ifare, from which it was impollible to
cfcapc. They affurcc him that the Mexican pricfis
had, in the name of the gods, counfclled their so-
vercign to admit the Spaniards into their capital,

thai

Corte5 Relat. R.am. iii. 239. D. Relat. della gra n cittrl d(

Mexico, par un (;entclhuoio ecl Cortcc. Ram. ibid. 34. 1I.
ilerrclr, dec. . 2.i . vii. c. 14, &c.

B O O K that he might cut them off there at one blow with

V. perfea lecurity . T'hey now perceived, too plainly,
^^T that the apprehensions of their allies cre not dcl-

519. titute of foundation; tha;, by breaking the bridges

placed at certain intervals on the caulcfwa s, or by
destroying part of the calfe\ways theclllvcs, their
retreat would be rendered Inipradcicable, and they
must remain cooped up in the centre of a hostile
city, surrounded by multi.u(ics iufhtient to over-
whelm them, and without a poftibilit) of receiving
aid from their allies. Moitezurna had, ind cld,
received them with distinguished refj- et. But
ought they to reckon upon this as real, or to con-
fider it as feigned ? Even if it wcre incere, could
they promile on its continuance ? 'I heir lately dc-
pcndcd upon the will of a monarch, in whole at-
tachment they had no reason to confidc; and an
order flowing from his caprice, or a ord uttered
by him in a passion, might decide irrevocably con-
cerning their fate t.

Soiliitude THESE refle&ions, so obvious as to occur to the
ydfeOrpltx- meanest soldier, did not escape the vigi'ant sagacity

of their general. Before hc let out from Cholula,
Cortes had received advice from Villa Rica , that
Oualpopoca, one of the Mexican generals on the
frontiers, having aifcmbled an army in order to at-
tack some of the people whom the Spaniards had
encouraged to throw of the Mexican yoke, Efca-
lante had marched out with part of the garrilo to
support his allies; that an engagement had cnfucd,
in which, though the Spaniards were vitorious,
Efcalante, with even of his men, had been mor-
tally wounded, his horsc killed, and one Spaniard
had been frroundcd by the enemy and taken alive;
that the ecad of this unfortunate captive, after bc-

ing

a B. Di.az. c. 85, 6. f Ibid. c. (4. Cortes Rclit.

R1,Lm. iii. 235. C.
56

i:g carried in triumph to different cities, in order B O o K
to convince the people that their invaders were v.
I ot immortal, had been fclt to Mexico -. Cortes r
thlough alarmed with this intelligcnce, as an indi- '5'9'
cation of Monteumra's hostile intentions, had con-
tinucd his march. Bui as soon as he entered
IVAexico, he became sensible, that, from an excels
o' confidence in the luperior valour and di'cipline
of his troops, as well as from the disadvantage of
taving nothing to guide him in an unknown coun-
try, but the defcetive intelligence which he re-
ceived from people with whom his mode of com-
!nuunicatioi was very imperfect, he had pushed for-
ward into a situation, where it was difficult to con-
tinue, and from which it was dangerous to retire.
Dillgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain con-
Icquencc of attempting the latter. The fucccfs
of his entcrprife depended upon supporting the
iigh opinion which the people of New Spain had
formed with refpet to the irresistible power of his
arms. Upon the firflt ymptom of timidity on his
part, their veneration would cease, and Montc-
zuma, whom fear alone restrained at present,
would let loose upon him the whole force of his
empire. At the fame time lie knew, that the coun-
tenance of his own fovercign was to be obtained
only by a series of victories, and that nothing
but the merit of extraordinary success could fcrccn
hisconduct from the censure of irregularity. From
all theft considerations, it was ncceflary to main-
tain his station, and to extricate himifelf out of the
difficulties in which one bold flep had involved
hiii, by venturing upon another fiill bolder. The
lituation was trying, but his mind was equal to it
and after revolving the matter with dccp attention,
he fixed upon a plan no lcls extraordinary than
cdaring. Ilc determined to Icize Montczunma i

hii
1. Diaz. c. 93, 94. HIcrrcr;l tcc. 2. llb. viii. :. I.

B OOK his palace, and to carry hin as a priifu:i

V. to the Spanish quarters. From the lpcrftitio;u
C- , veneration of the Mexicans for the pcr'on ot

Ref5vesto their monarch, as well as teir implicit sub.
fcizeMon. miflion to his will, he hoped, by having Moic-
tezuma. zuma in his power, to acquire the fuprcnic direc-

tion of their affairs ; or at least, with luch a sacrcd
pledge in his hands, he made no doubt of bcin;
secure from any effort of their violence.

His manner TriIS he immediately propoled to his officcrs,
thisXCC. " The timid fiartled at a measure ib audacious, and

raised objections. The more intelligent and rc-
solute, conscious that it was the only resource in
which there appeared any profpet of safety,
warmly approved of it, and brought over their colm-
panions so cordially to the fame opinion, that it
was agreed inflantly to make the attempt. At his
ufuai hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes went to
the palace, accompanied by Alvarado, Saudoval,
Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five of his
principal officers, and as many truly soldiers.
Thirty chosen men followed not in regular order,
but sauntering at ome distance, as if they had no
object but curiosity; small parties were polled at
proper intervals, in all the streets leading from the
Spanish quarters to the court; and the remainder
of his troops, with the Tlafealan allies, were un-
der arms, ready to sally out on the first alarm.
Cortes and his attendants were admitted without
lufpicion ; the Mexicans retiring, as usual, out of
refpcct. He addrcfecd the monarch in a tone very
(iff'clrct from that which he had employed in for-
rmer conferences, reproaching him bitterly as the
;uitlior of the violent aflault made upon the Spa-
niards by one of his officcrs, and demanded pub-
lic reparation lor the lols which he had fuflainc(l
l)y the dath of oiiic o' his coiiilanions, as well

;r.

.5

s for the inuit offered to the great prince whose B1 0 0 ;
lcrvarts they were. Montezuma, confounded at V.
tiis unex)pectcd accusation, and changing colour r^
ecithcr from the concioulhels of guilt, or fronm 15S'9
j ccl'ng the indignity with which he was treated,
alicrted his own innocence with great earnclincs,
and, as a proof of it, gave orders instantly to
brihg Gialpopoca and his accomplices prilbners
to Mexico. Cortes replied, with fecniing complai-
ianc, that a declaration so refpeclable left no
idoubt remaining in his own mind, but that some-
thling more was requisite to atisfy his follocrs,
wl'o would never be convinced that Montezuma
ddild not harbour hotlile intentions against them,
unlcls, as an evidence of his confidence and a-
[tachmcnt, he removed from his own palace, and

ktook up his residence in the Spanish quarters, wheri

'c l ihould be fcrvcd and honourcd as bceane a
grcat mlenarch. The first mention of so firange a
J,-ropolal bcreaved Montezuma of fpccch, and al-
nioll of motion. At length, indignation gave hin
itterancc, and he haughtily anwcered, " 'lhat pcr-
'tns of his rank were not accuflomed voluntarily
:to give up thcmfelves as prisoners, and were lie
alcan enough to do io, his lubjccts would not per-
mliit fuchl an aflfont to be offered to their fove-
frcign." Cortes, unwilling to employ force, endca-
jVourcd alternately to soothe and intiidlate him.
1. hc altercation became warm, and having conti-
Iucd above three hours, Velalcuez de Leon, an
lmlpetuous and gallant young man, cxclaimcd with
itpatienicc, "i Wly waste more time in vain ? Iet
s either icize him inflantly, or fab himl to the
cart." The threatening voice and fierce gcfiures
'itl which thele words were uttered, {truck Mon^
.zlluma. The Spaniards, he was fecnible, had
ovw proceeded ib iar, as left him no hope thai

they

1 O O K they would recede. His own danger was irriiiiicij

V. the nccefity unavoidable. He Iaw both, and ail.
~'-- doning himself to his fate, complied with tlhc
1519- requelf.

Montezuma
carriedto His officers were called. lIe connmunicatcd t;
tile Spanlir them his rlblution. Though aflonifhcd ad ai.

fliictd, they preftuned not to queflion the wil ci
their mafier, but carried him in silent pomilp, al!
bathed in tears, to the Spanish quarters. Wl'hli!
was known that the firangers were conveying away
the emperor, the people broke out into the \vilicll
transports of grief and rage, threatcning the Spa.
niards with immediate dcltrution, as the punif.
ment justly due to their impious audacity, Butas
Ibon as Montezuma appeared with a seeming gaicty
of countenance, and waved his hand, the tuniiul
was hushed; and upon his declaring it to be o his
own choice that he went to reside Ifr sonic tii
among his new friends, the multitude, taught t
revere every imitation of their fovcreign's plearu
quietly dilpcrfed .

Tilius was a powerful prince seized by a fe

firangers, in the ridft of his capital, at noon-daY
and carried off as a priioncr without oppofitiono
bloodshed. Hiflory contains nothing parallcl
this event, either with refpcft to the temerit)'
the attempt, or the success of the execution: an
were not all the circuimfianccs of this cxtraoil
nary tranfation authenticated by the most unqui
tionable evidence, they would appear lb wild an
extravagant, as to go far beyond the bounds ofthi
vcrifinilitude which nluft be prelrved even
ficAitious narrations.

MON T I M

* 1. Di:iz. c. 95. Goniara Cron. c. 83. Cornes

lat. Rain. iii. p. 235, 2(3. H-lrrlra, dec. 2. lib.
L. 2,3.
6o

MONTI' ZUMA was received in the Spanifl quar- B O O K
crs with all the ceremonious reft c& which Cortes v.
d promifid. Ile was attendcd by his own do- ~
nCfics, and served with his ual slate. His 1519.
rincipal officers had free access to him, and he witl appa-
,rlied on all the fundcions of government as if he rent reaCt.
ad been at perfect liberty. 'he Spaniards, how-
ever, watched him with all the scrupulous vigi-
lancenatural in guarding such an important prize *,
endcavouring, at the fame time, to sooth and re-

concile him to his situation, by every external de-

montlration of regard and attachment. But from
captive princes the hour of humiliation and fulfer-
ing is never far diflant. Qualpopoca, his obn, and Suhjeflcd .
five of the principal officers who ierved under him, cruel indig-

were brought prisoners to the capital, in confe- "its.,
qucnce of the orders which Montezuma had iflued.
The emperor gave them up to Cortcs, that he might
inquire into the nature of their crime, and dcter-
mine their puniihment. They were formally tried
by a Spanish court-martial ; and though they had
ated no other part than what became loyal fubjeats
and brave men, in obeying the orders of their law-
fil iovereign, and in opposing the invaders of their
country, they were condemned to be burnt alive.
The execution of uch atrocious deeds is tfldon
long luf'pended. The unhappy victims were in-
llantly led forth. The pile on which they were
laid, was comnpoled of the weapons collected in
the royal magazine for the public defence. An in-
numerable multitudle of' Mexicans beheld, in filcut
altouiflilcnt, the double inflilt offered to the ma-
jelly of their empire; all olice oi difliin oion con..
mItied to the fla;lmnce by the authority of firangers,
lr lhavillng (tld c whli:t lhe owcd in duty to his na-
iral fovcleign.; and tli arluni lrovided by the

brcfig lit
:c. O I'1. NX V.

1 O 0 K foresight of their ancestors for avenging fud

v. wrongs, confunied before their eyes.
'-s^ BUT these were not the most fiocking indig
I'519 nitics which they had to bear. Cortes, convinced

that Qualpopoca would not have ventured to ai
tack Ecalante without orders from his rnailcer,
was not satisfied with inflisling vengeance on the
inlfrument employed in committing that crime,

Iwhile the author of it clcaped with irmpunit.

Juss before alppoca was led out to fifler,
Cortcs entered the apartment of Mointezuma, fol-
lbwed by ome of his officers, and a soldier car-
rying a pair of fetters; and approaching the mo.
iarch with a flern countenance, told him, that as
the persons who were now to undergo the punish.
mcnt which they merited, had charged him as the
caule of the outrage committed, it was neccffary
that he likcwife should make atonement for that
(uilt; then turning away abruptly, without wait-
ing for a reply, commanded the soldiers to clap
the fcLters on his legs. The orders were inflantlv
executed. The diflonfolate monarch, trained up
with all idea that his pcrfon was sacred and in.
:iolablc, and confidering this profanation of it as
;hc prelude of immediate death, broke out into loud
liamlcntationis and complaints. His attendants,
fI'echcli fs wit horror, fell at his feet, bathiln
lihcni with tca -s; and bearing up the fettcis in
'hcir hands, cndcavoured with officious tendlcrnils
to lighten their pressure. Nor did their gricl alnd
(clpJoidcncy abate, until Cortes returned fiom the
execution with a chccrful countenance, and ordcrcd
lihe iftt!rs to e takcn off. As Montezunia's
fplilits h;d funk with unmanly dcjcdtion, thec
now role into iidcccnt joy, and, with an tnic
cornlng tallitionl, lie ;patcd at once fromll ili
atiiguiili of dcl'sair to tranlporls of gratitude an1(
ildnec. lo tards hIis dclivcrc:..

I:.

f: those tranfadions, as represented by tle B 0 0 K
'panih historians, we search in vain for the qua- v.
itcs which distinguish other parts of Cortes's r '
orduct. To usurp a jurifdidion which could 1519.

Reasons of

ot belong to a firanger, who alumed no higher cortes's b°
halraer than that of an ambassador from a a/iour.
reign prince, and, under colour of it, to in-
idt a capital punifiment on men whose conduct
ictlcd them to esteem, appears an a of bar-
arous cruelty. To put the monarch- of a great
ingdom in irons, and, after such ignminious
catmcnnt, suddenly to retcafe him, seems to be
difpiay of power no less inconsiderate than
anton. According to their representation, no
count can be given either of the one ation
the other, but that Cortes, intoxicated with
ccefs, and prclurning on the ascendant which
had acquired over the minds of the Mexi-
us, thought nothing too bold for him to un-
rtake, or too dangerous to execute. But, in
e view, these proceedings, however repugnant
justice and humanity, may have flowed from·
atartful policy which regulated every part of
rtes's behaviour. The Mexicans had con-
ivcd the Spaniards to be an order of beings fu-
rior to men. It was of the utioft confequencc
chcrifh this illusion, and to keep up the ve-
ration it inpircd. Cortcs wished that shed-
ng tlh blood of a Spaniard hould be deemed
cmoft heinous of all crimens; and nothing ap-
ared better calculated to cablifi this opinion,
n to condemn the fiill Mexicans who had ven-
ed to commit it, to a cruel death, and to oblige
cir lmonarch himllclf to Iiibmit to . mortifying
ignilt, a aan expiation for being acccflary to
r11 guill. T trTu,

Su N OTC XV.

6S

B O O K Tre rigour with which Cortes punishcd tie u::

v. happy perlons who first prefuned to lay violc;
t'--r hands upon his followers, eemns accordingly

51'9. have made all the imprcfiion that he had dciirc(
The power

'wcicor-1 The spirit of Montezuma was not only ovcrawc:
ttsacquired. but subdued. During fix months that Cores r

I'20' mained in Mexico, the monarch continued i :

Spanish quarters, with an appearance of as ct
satisfaction and tranquillity, as if he had rcfild
there not from confiraint, but through choic
His ministers and officers attended him as ua
He took cognizance of all affairs; every order \;
issued in his name. The external al'pcc of ?
vernmcnt appearing the fame, and all its ancic
forms being ferupuloufly observed, the pcop
were so little sensible of any change, that th(
obeyed the mandates of their monarch withi
fame submissive reverence as ever. Such wasti
dread which both Montezuma and his fuhjc
had of the Spaniards, or such the veneration
which they held them, that no attempt was n:a
to deliver their sovereign from confinement;
though Cortes, relying on this afeendant wii
he had acquired over their minds, permitted h
not only to visit his temples, but to make huut
cxcurfions beyond the lake, a guard of a
Spaniards carried with it such terror as to i;
midate the multitude, and fccure the captivci
narch "

Ttis, by the fortunate temerity of (ors

fcizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once ictl
to thcintelvcs more extcnlive authority in the Mi
ican empire than it was poiible to have acei!i
in a long course of time by open orce ; a t
exercifd more abbllute lfay in the naime of:
ic1 lr than they could hlavc done in their owni.

' Cortes Rlelt. p). 236. F. B. V)':". C. 97, H, A

arts of polished nations in fubjeding such as are B O O I
less improved, have been nearly the iame in every v.
period. The yfiem of fcrcening a foreign ufurpa- s
tion, under the ansion of authority derived from 1520-
the natural rulers of a country, the device of em-
ploying the magiltrates and forms already efta-
blifhed as instruments to introduce a new domi-
nion, of which we are apt to boast as lublime re-
finements in policy peculiar to the present age,
werc inventions of a more early period, and had
been tried with success in the Weft, long before
they were pradtifed in the East.

CORTES availed himself to the utmost of theurcwhlich

power which he poffIffed by this means. He fcnt lie akesof
lome Spaniards, whom he judged best qualifiedit
for such commiflions, into different parts of the
empire, accompanied by persons of diftindtion,
whom Montezuma appointed to attend them both
as guides and protectors. They visited most of the
provinces, viewed their foil and produstions, fur-
veyed with particular care the difirids which
yielded gold or iilver, pitched upon several places
as proper fations for future colonies, and endea-
voured to prepr re the minds of the people for sub-
mitting to the Spanifl yoke. While they were
thus employed, Cortes, in the name and by the au-
thority of Montezunima, degraded iome of the prin.
cipal olfiecrs in the empire, whol abilities or in-
dependent fplirit excited hisjeaioufy, and fubfli
tuted in their place perlobs lets capable or mire
obfcqluioiis.

ONI thing fill was wantilng to conllllete hlis f[-

curity. Hlc wifhcld to have Iuc coioih rnmi l of thel
lake as might enlure a sreireat i; cileicr lrir m lvity
or dlil'rutlf, llt Mcxic ians ihould take arms a;ainit
hii, iandc break dowin ihe I},'i.lcs r 2 caul'(:.vays.
'i lis oo, his owin iaddtilcs, ani tliiilitv of' Mon-
tc.ziji.l , cn11l)l(:d limii to accoml 'lifit. [-avii.' fre-

\') 1. II. }" c!|>/l l>

65

B 0 0 Kquently entertained his prisoner with pompous ac-

V. counts of the European marine and art of naviga-
s don tion, he awakened his curiosity to fee thole moving,
1520. palaces that made their way through the water

without oars. Under pretext of gratifying his
desire, Cortes persuaded lhim to appoint iome of
his fubjc s to fetch part of the naval stores depo-
fited at Vera Cruz to Mexico, and to cmploy others
in cutting down and preparing timbcr. WNith
their affifance the Spanith carpenters oon com-
pleted two brigantines, which afforded a frivolous
arnufement to the monarch, and were confidered
by Cortes as a certain resource, if he should be
obliged to retire.

Montezuma ENCOURAGED by so many instances of the mo-
Iedges Imi -narch's tame fubmifiion to his will, Cortes ven-
feifa vatal tured to put it to a proof still more trying. He

of . urged Montezuma to acknowledge himnielf a va{fat

of the king of Castile, to hold his crown of him
as superior, and to iubjcCt his dominions to the
payment of an annual tribute. With this requiii-
tion, the last and most humbling that can be made
to one possessed of lovcrcign authority, Montezuma
was so obsequious as to comply. IHe called toge-
ther the chief men of his empire, and in a olein
harangue, reminded them of the traditions and
prophecies which led them to expet the arrival of
a people sprung from the fame flock with thcim-
selves, in order to take poffeilion of the uprenil
power, he declared his belief that the Spaniards
were this promised race; that therefore he recog.
nizcd the right of their monarch to govern tlic
Mexican empire, would lay his crown at his fcct.
and obey him as a tributary. While ultering thclc
words, Montezuma difcovcrcd how deeply lie was
.anflctcd in making such a facrificc. Tears and
groans frequently interrupted his dilcourlc. Ovcr-
awed and broken as his lpirit was, it still rctaincd

fu ll
66

iifch a sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which B O O K
pierces the heart of princes when confrained to V.
resign independent power. The firil mention of -a
Cuch a rcfolution ffluck the aembly dumb with 1520.
afonihment. This was followed by a fullen mur-.
nlur of' borrow mingled with indignation, which
indicatcd bonic violent eruption of rage to be near
at hand. This Cortes forclaw, and seasonably in-
tcrpolcd to prevent it, by declaring that his master
had no intention to deprive Montczuma of the
royal dignity, or to make any innovation upon the
couflitution and laws of the Mexican empire. This
assurance, added to their dread of the Spanish power,
and to the authority of' their monarch's example,
extorted a reludlant content from the aflcmbly*.
'lTec at of fubnillion and homage was executed
with all the formalitics which the Spaniards were
plcafed to prescribe t.

MONTEZU.MA, at the dcfire of Cortes, accom-lTheamount

of the trea-

panied this profeflion of fealty and homage with ures co-
a magnificent present to his new sovereign ; and, laedbythe
after his example, his fubjcCts brought in very li- s
beral contributions. The Spaniards now collected
all the treasure which had been either voluntarily
bestowed upon them at different times by Monte-
zunia, or had been extorted from his people under
various prctcxts; and having melted the gold and
lilver, the value of thelc, without including jewels
and ornamecnts of various kinds, which were pre-
ferred on account of their curious worknanfhip,
ainountccd to fix hundred thoufind pes/s. The Division of
Ilcldicrs were illmpatient to h1ave it divided, and i,' :,1,"h'
Cortes complied with their dlirc. A fifth of theoairune, .
wholc was {ft apart s the tax due to tlic king.
Altlicr filh was allotted to Cortes, as coIm-

1'F 2. Ilnder

SPe , (OTE XVI. 1 Cotes Rllt. 2 . ). B. Di:z.
iI. oC't i;.ra Cron. c. 9... J 1rcr, dec. . . X:. c. 4.

67

B O O K mandcr in chief. The funs advanced by Velaf-

V. quez, by Cortes, and by Ibme of the officers, to-
'.T~ wards defraying the expcncc of fitting out the ar-

1520- manicnt, were then deducted. The remainder was

divided among the army, including the garrison of
Vera Cruz, in proportion to their different ranks.
After so many defalcations, the share of a private
man did not exceed a hundred pesos. This un:
fell so far below their langui-ne expcetations, that
some soldiers rejected it with scorn, and others
murmured so loudly at this cruel disappointment oi
their hopes, that it required all the address of Cor-
tes, and no small exertion of his liberality, to ap-
pease them. The complaints of the army were
not altogether deflitute of foundation. As the
crown had contributed nothing towards the equip-
ment or success of the armament, it was not without
regret that the soldiers beheld it sweep away o
great a proportion of the treasure purchased by their
blood and toil. What fell to the fllare of their
general appeared, according to the ideas of wealth
in the fixtecnth century, an enormous funi. Sonic
of Cortes's favourites had secretly appropriated to
their own use several ornaments of gold, which
neither paid the royal fifth, nor were brought ito
account as part of the common flock. It was,
however, so manifeflly the interefl of Cortes at
this period to make a large remittance to the king,
that it is lhighly probable those concealments wcre
not of great conlcqucnee.

Realt';ns Tnl total unm analecl by the Spaniards bt'ils
vwhy gold no proportion to the ideas which might be sor,ncd
Wahs found
i,(cii fnicll, either by refleting on thlle delcriptions given b)'
quantity. historians of the ancient Iplcndour of Mexico, or

by confidering the produCtions of its lmines in mo-
dern times. But, among the ancient VMexican',
gold and filvcr were not the flandards by wlich
the worth of other commodities was c!imlatcd;

; I J
68

(nd destitute of the artificial value derived from B O O K

tlls circumRfance, were no farther in request than V.
as they furnished materials for ornaments and -
trinkets. T'hele were either consecrated to the 15so.
g ods in their temples, or wcre worn as marks of
difincion by their princes and ome of their molt
cminent chiefs. As the con 'fuption of the preci-
ous metals was inconfidcrable, the demand for
them was not iuch as to put either the ingenuity or
indufrry of the Mexicans on the firctch, in order to
augment their store. They wcre altogether unac-
quainted with the art of' worL ing the rich mines
with which the conntry abounded. What gold
they had was gathered in the beds of rivers, na-
tive, and ripened into a pure metallic state s The
utmost effort of their labour in fcarch of it was to
wash the earth carried down by torrents from the
mnouniains, and to pick out the grains of gold
which subsided; and even this finple operation,
according to the report of the pcrfons whom Cortes
appointed to furvcy the provinces where there
was a profpee of finding mines, they performed
very unfkilfullyt. From all those caufcs, the
whole mats of gold in poffeflion of the Mexicans
was not so great. As silver is rarely found pure,
and their art was too rude to conduct the process
for rcfining it in a proper manner, the quantity of
this metal was still less confidcrablec . Thus,
though the Spaniards had cxertcd all the power
which they poftiflcd in Mexico, and often with in-
decent rapacity, in order to gratify their predomi-
nant paflion, and though Montezuma had fondly
cxhaufted his florcs, in hopes of latiating their thirIt
for gold, the produa of both, which probably in-
cluded a great part of the bullion in the empire, did
not rife in value above what has been mcntioqed §.

BUT

* Cortes Rclat. p. 236. F. B. Diaz. c. o10, 103. Gomara

Cron. c. o9. ' B. Diaz. . c 1. 10 1. IlCr r, tlec. 2. lib. ix,
:4. § Sec NOTE XVII.

BO K BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in

V. other matters, with refpcdct to one point he was i.

r'^~v' flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, with
1520. the importunate zeal of a millionary, to renounce

Montezumra
inflexible his falle gods, and to embrace the chrifian faith,
with refpea he always rejeted the proposition with horror.

reigouperfition, among the Mexicans, was formed

into iuch a regular and complete fyftcm, that its
institutions naturally took fast hold of the mind;
and while the rude tribes in othcrpartsof America
were easily induced to reliuquifh a few notions and
rites, so loose and arbitrary as hardly to merit the
name of a public religion, the Mexicans adhcred
tenaciously to their mode of worship, which, how-
ever barbarous, was accompanied with such order
and folcmnity as to render it the objcc of vencra-
tion. Cortes, finding all his attempts incftcchual
to fiake the conflancy of Montezuma, was so mucil
enraged at his obflinacy, that in a trallport ot
zeal he led out his !oldiers to throw dlown the idols
in the great tenlle by force. But the pricfis
taking arms in detcnce of their altars, and the pco-
ple crowding with great ardour to support them;,
Cortcs's prudence overruled his zeal, and induced
him to dcfil from his rafni attempt, afier diflodgil
the idols from one of the flrilnes, and placing ill
thelir si ad an image of the 'virgin Mary '-.

srlni, o a o:s tl -.,t iionlent tie Mexicans, who had pci,
....1 t, in mittcd tle inipriliunncnt of their fovcrei,, an
Ilov til lfuffercrl the exactions of' frangcrs wilhout a iriug.

srg.le g, :gnn to icditale how tliy mlight expel 01

(dcftiroy the Spani;ds, an l tllought tllcnllclvc
cailt d upon'to avenge li cir illlltccl deitics. '11
pricf s and leading inc held

l cl(lu cIllt Con'ulltionlj

xvitl Montezuma Itr lliis putrpofc. But as iti llil
ni ovc atal to the captive Inlolarcll to attempt citli

tlli

* See NOTE XVIII.
70

ihe one or the other by violence, he was willing B o o K
to try more gentle means. Having called Cortes v.
into his pretence, he observed that now, as all '~
the purposes of his cmbairy were fully accom- 1520-
pllfhcd, the gods had declared their will, and the
people signified their dcfirc, that he and his fol-
lowers fioulc instantly depart out of the empire.
With this he required theni to comply, or unavoid-
able deftru6tion would iall luddcnly ou their heads.
The telor of this uuexl)pcded requisition, as well
as the determined tone in which it was uttered,
left Cortcs no rooin to doubt that it was the rclult
of some deep fl:chic concerted between Mon-
tezuma and his lubjccts. He quickly perceived
that he might derive nmore advantage from a cem-
ing compliance with the imioina!chI's inclination,
than from an ill-timed attempt to change or to
oppose it, and replied, with great comlpofurc,
that he had already begun to prepare for returning
to his own country; but as he had destroyed the
veilels in which lie arrived, some time was requi-
site for building other ships. This appeared rea-
fonable. A number of Mexicans were ent to
Vcra Cruz to ct down timber, and onme Spanilh
carpenters were appointed to superintend the work.
Cortes flattered hinlfelfthat, during this interval,
he might either find means to avert the threatened
danger, or receive such reinforcements as would
enable him to delfile it.

A .MOST nine months were clapscd since Por- Anxictyand

tocarrero and Montco had ailed with is dil-co:rt °f
patchcs to Spainl; and he daily cxpcftcd their re-
turn with a confirmation of his authority from the
king. Without this, his condition was insecure
and precarious, and after all the great things which
he had done, it might be his doom to bear tile
;!amc and fuffcr the punilnichnt of a traitor. Ra-

pid

7I

B O O pid and extensive as his progress had been, he could

v. not hope to complete the reduction of a great eni-
'-r-' pire with io inall a body of men, which by this
1520. time the diseases of the climate had considerably

thinned; nor could he apply for recruits to the
Spanish settlements in the islands until he received
the royal approbation of his proceedings.

Tiiearrival WHIILE he remained in this cruel situation,
of a new
imaimcnt, anxious about what was past, uncertain with c-

fpe& to the iuture, and, by the late declaration of
MIontezuma, opprcfled with a new addition of
cares, a Mexican courier arrived with an account
of ome ships having appeared on the coast. Corte,
with fond credulity, imagining th:t hlis nleflen
gers were returned from Spain, and that the con!
plction of all his ifilics and hopes wvas at hand,
imparted the glad tidings to his companions, x !.>
receivcd them with transports of mutual gratula-
tion. Thicir joy was not of long continuance. A
courier from Sandcval, whom Coitcs had ap-
pointed to succeed Eflcalantc in conmmand at V'era
Cruz, broughlt ccrtain infirmation that the arma-
nicnt was fitted out by Velasquez, governor of Cubl,
and, inilcal of bringingf the aid vwhich they
cxpc&tcd, threatcned thmc with immediate dc.
firulion.

fitted out y rtI Ii: motives which prolpted Vclafclucz to this
\lJfjucz. violeit- ncalulre arc obvious. From the circui-

flanccs of Cortes's departure, it was inpofliblc not
to fultjct Iis intention of throwingoff all tcipcnl-
cncc upon hliin. Ilis ncglctiing to tranliniti any
'icccounn of ilis opcrations to Cul',a irengthcncd
tii ui tuipicion, v,,lich was at lao confilrilcdl, beyoll
loubt, by the inlifcicetion of the officcrs \hlroi
Cortes sent lo :'pain. 'i'hey fromi f{obic niotive, which
is not clearly xpliaincd b)y the contcunporary ilf-
!orians, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary

to
72

to the peremptory orders of their general". ByB O O K
tiis means Velalquez not only learned that Cortes v.
and his followers, after formally renouncing all --
connuction with him, had eftabliihed an independ- 1520.
clt colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the
king to confirm their proceedings by his authority;
but he obtaincd particular information concerning
the opulence of the country, the valuable presents
1,'hich Cortcs had received, and the inviting pro:f
pccis of iucccfs that opened to his view. Every
paition which can agitate an ambitious mind;
hlamc, at having been lb grolsly over-reached ; in-
dignation at being betrayed by the man whom he
ihadt iclccicl as the objce of his favour and con-
fidence ; gril;, for having waifed his fortune to
agmianclize an cncmy ; and dellfair of recovering
', !:iir n oiportunity ofcftablifhing his fame, and
etendinig his power, now raged in the bosom of
Velalqucz. All thcfe, with united force, excited
hinm to make an extraordinary cfibrt in order to
b)c avenged on the author of his wrongs, and to
reft from him his usurped authority and conquefis.
Yor did he want the appearance of' a good title to
jufiify fich an attclTipt. The agent whom he sent
to Spain with an account of Grijalva's voyage had
met with a most favcurable reception ; and from the
l'Iccimcnis which he produccd, such high cxpcda-
l inms v;crc frmcd concerning the opulence of New
' pain, that Vclalqucz was authorised to prolccute
tllc ifcovc:'y of the country, and applointed go-
vernorl ,

o it during lilc, with more cxtenfive power

and l)rivilegcs than had been granted to any advcn-
tircr froml tim tire o' Columnbus . Elated by this
liniii.;uilifhing i;i ;-k of' lavour, and warranted to
COrlfirlcr Cones not only as intruding upon his
jurlillitioli, but as dilobcdicnt to the royal man-

date,

* . Di;,z. c. 54, 55. I-crcri, dec. 2. lib. . . rT. Go-
nl;arti Cronl. c. 96. I lierrcra, tde -. 2. lib. iii. c. r

B o o K date, he determined to vindicate his own rihl:<

v. and the honour of his fovcrcign, by force o
"--'- arms *. His ardour in carrying on his prcpara

1520. tions was uch as might have been expectcd itrn

UnmllhdCr f
the violence of the paflions with which he was a.

.arvatz. matedt; and in a short time an armament was coI,.

pleted, coniifting of eighteen ships, which had oa
board fouricorc horl'mecn, eight hundred foot 'l!.
diers, of which eighty ere mulketcers, and a
hundred and twenty cross-bow men, together wiiii
a train of' twelve pieces of cannon. As Vcla;:
qucz's experience of the fatal consequence of corn.
mitting to another what he ought to have executed
himself, had not rendered him more cnterprifiii,
he veiled the command of this formidable body,
which, in the infancy of the Spanill power ii
America, merits the appellation of an army, ia
Pamphilo de Narvaez, with infructions to ifcz:
Cortcs and his principal officers, to iend tlhenc
priloners to him, and then to complete the
dilcovery and conqucfl of the country in llis

name.

The pro- AFTER a profpcrous voyage, Narvaez landed
cNri, of his men without opposition near St. Juan de IJllua,
April. 'Thrce foldicrs, whomi Cortes had lent to search

for mines in that district, immediately joined him.
By this accident, he not only received informa.
tion concerning the progrcfs and situation of Corcs,
but as thcfc oldicrs had made fomc progrels in
the knowlecge of the Mexican language, he ac-
quircd intcrpreters, by whole means he was cna-
lbled to hlolld omc intcrcourfc with the people oi
the country. But, according to the low cunnlli
of dclcrtcrs, they framed their intelligence with
more attention to what they thought woulll c
:i.!'ccablc, Ilhan to what they kncw to be tin:;

ail!
Sc OTE NIX.

and rcprcfented the situation of Cortes to be so B O O J
dclpcratc, and the disaffection of his followers to V.
be Ib general, as incrcaled the natural presumption '-,r-
and confidence of lNarvaez. His first operation, 1520.
however, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. Having lent to summon
the governor of Vera Cruz to iurrender Guevara,
a priest whom he employed in that ervicc, made
the requiiition with luch insolence, that Sandoval,
an ofliccr of high ilirit, and zealously attached to
Cortcs, inflead of cin3plying with his denands,
ILizcd him and his attendans, and sent them in
chains to Mex:ico.

CO R ?;S received them not like enemies, but as Cortesdeep*

friends, and condcnclinir g the fcvcrity of Sandoval, lyalarmeds
I'Lt them immediately at liberty. By this well-
ti lr.d clemency, seconded bv carafles and presents,
lic gaincd their confidence, and drew fom them
luch particulars concerning the force and intentions
of Narvaez, as gave him a viewv of the impending
danger in its full extent. He had not to contend
now with half-naked Indians, no match for him
in war, and still more inferior in the arts of po-
licy, but to take the field against an army in
number far uperior, aling under the fandion
of royal authority, and commanided by an ofliccr
of known bravery. He was informed that Nar-
vaiz, more olicitous to gratify the refentmcnt of
\ctlalluez, than attcntive to the honour or intcreft
of liis cotintry, had begun his intercourfc with
the n.tivcs, by reprclenting liiin and his followers
as ug itives and outlaws, guilty of rebellion against
thcir own lovcrcign, and of injuflice in invading
the Mexican emire, and had declarcd to thcm
tllit !his f le ob)jct in visiting the country was to
puniill the Spaniards, and to rclcuc them from op-
prclion. 1c loon plcrccivc(l, that the fame unfa-

vourable

B 0 0 K vourable reprcfcntations had been conve)yed ,

v. Montezuma, ad that Narvaez had found mn:an
'-- ' to aure him, that as the conduEt of those who
1520. kept him under restraint was highly difplcafig

to the king his master, he had it in charge unt
only to relcue an injured monarch from coi;fi!jc.
ment, but to reinatate him in the po{fcfion ofl l;
antient power and independence. Animated with
this proipeC of being et free from hubjection to
itrangers, the provinces began openly to revol
from Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as a deliverer
no less able than willing to save them. Monte.
zunla himself kept up a secret intercourse with the
new commander, and seemed to court him as s
person fupcrior in power and dignity to those
Spaniards whom he had hitherto revered as the firfi
of men .

i:;:cibe- SUCH were the various apeEls of danger ad
rationscon- difficulty which prclentcd themselves to the view
cerning his
O"^n,,lCo of Cortes. No ituation can be conceived more
;!;,t. trying to the capacity and firmness of a general,

or where the choice of a plan which ought to be
adopted was more difficult. If he should wait
the approach of ..arvaez in Mexico, dcflruEtion
cemed to be unavoidable ; for while the Spaniards
prcffcd him from without, the inhabitants, whose
turbulent fplirit he could hardly refirain with all
his authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold
n f luch a favourable opportunity of avenging all
t hirlwrongs. If he fiould abandon the capital,
lCt the cantive monarch at liberty, and march out
lo nicc tihe enemy, he must at once forego tlc
irniis of all his toils and. victorics, and rclinquifli
advantages wllich could not be recovered without
\:;rraord.linarv .ePforts, and infinite danger. Ii; in.
i'tcad of cnl sing force, he should have rccourlc

t!,
» Sec NOTE XX.

i, conciliating measures, and attempt an accom- B 0 0 K
Iinodation with Narvaez; the natural haughtiness v.
of that officer, augmented by confciouhnefs of 'a
his prclnt superiority, sorbad him to cherifl any 1520,
iinguine hopes of success. After revolving every
ichcme with deep attention. Cortes fixed upon that
viiich, in execution was most hazardous, but, if
!uccefsful, would prove most beneficial to his
country ; and with the deecifive intrepidity, suited
to defnerate situations, determined to make one
bold effort for vicory, under every disadvantage,
rather than sacrifice his own conquests, and the
Spanish interest in Mexico.

BUT though he foreCixw that the contest must His negoc.-
bc terminated finally by arms, it would have been th followers
not only indecent, but criminal, to have marched of Narvaez
against his countrymen, without attempting to ad-
iuftmatters by an amicable ncgociation. In this
lcrvice he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to
whose charater the function was well suited, and
who pofefled, besides, such prudence and addrels
as qualified him to carry on the iecret intrigues in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Nar-
vaez rejected, with scorn, every lcheme of accomu.
niodation that Olnedo propoted, and was witl
dilficulty refllraincd from laying violent hands on
him and his attendants. IIe met however with
a rore favourable reception among his followers,
0t many of whoii lie delivered letters, either from.
Cortes or his ol-icers, their ancient fiiends and
companions. Cortes artfully accompanied thcfe
with presents of rings, chains of gold, and other
rilikcts of value, whicll inllpired tlhole needy ad-
clntircrs with high ideas of the wealtl that lie
idl acquired, and with envy of thcir good Ibr-
unce who were engagcd in his fcrvice. Sollce, i'rcllu
ocpes of becoming harers in thole rich spoils, dc-
:ncd for a a mmlllciale acconimodation with

( r Cs.

77

BOO KCortes. Others, from public spirit, laboured to

v. prevent a civil war, which, whatever party filouid

.-T-,' prevail, must hake, and perhaps iubvcrt the Spa.
I5zo. nifh power, in a country where it was tb imper-

fectly eftabliihed. Narvaez difiegardcd both, and
by a public proclamation denounced Cortes, and
his adherents, rebels and enemies to their countr),
Cortes, it is probable, was not much surpriscd at
the untratable arrogance of Narvaez; and, after
having given fuich a proof of his own pacific difpo.
fition as might juftity his recourse to other means,
he determined to advance towards an enemy whom
he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marches HE left an hundred and fifty men in the capital,
againfthim. under the command of Pedro de Alvarado, a.

May officer of distinguished courage, for whom the

Mexicans had conceived a singular degree of re-
fpet. To the custody of this slender garrison he
committed a great city, with all the wealth he had
amafled, and, what was still of greater impor-
tance, the person of the imprisoned monarch.
His utmost art was employed in concealing from
Montezuma the real caulcs of his march. I-lc la
boured to pcrluade him, that the strangers who
had lately arrived were his friends and fellow-f-b-
jcts ; and that, after a filort interview witl thcim,
they would depart together, and return to their
own country. The captive prince, unable to com-
prehend thedcfigns of the Spaniards, or to rcoln
cile what he now heard with the declarations of
Narvacz, and afraid to dilcovcr any fynlptoi of
lutpicion or difiruil of Cortes, promicd to remainl
quietly in the Spanilh quarters, and to ultivate
the tamec friendship with Alvarado, which lie lad
uniformly maintained with him. Cortes, ilh
iferning confidence in tlis proiific, but. rcliii;
princip)ll upon the injunldtiis wxl ich he liad

2 i\'C!i

i:can Alvarado to guard his prifoncr with the B O 0 K
iAt crupulous vigilance, set out from Mexico. _s
Hisftrcngth, even after it was reinforced by 1520.
:hc jiuntion of Sandoval, and the garrison of Vera Number of

L'uz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty men. hls tloopS.

s he hoped for success chiefly from the rapidity
if his motions, his troops were not encumbered
either with baggage or artillery. But as he dreaded
extremely the impreflion which the enemy might
make with their cavalry, he had provided againit
lhis danger with the foresight and sagacity which
dilinguith a great commander. Having observed
that the Indians in the province of Chinantla used
l'cars of extraordinary length and force, he armed
bis 'oldiers with these, and accustomed them to
that deep and compact arrangement, which the use
,f this formidable weapon, the bell perhaps that
ever was invented for defence, enabled them to

inlf ic.
\VIT'H this small but firm battalion Cortes ad-Continuesto
anced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvacz" negciate
ad taken pofeflion. During his march he madevancd.
cpeated attempts towards tbme accommodation
vith his opponent. But Narvacz requiring that
ornes and his ollowers fliould instantly recog-
ize his title to be governor of New Spain, in
irtuc of the powers which he derived from Vc-
a[qucz, and Cortes rctufing to ubmit to any
uthority, which was not founded on a cominiiion
rom the emperor himllclif, undecr wholc immediate
rotcstion he and his adhcrcnts ad placed their
ntant colony, all thcle attemipts proved fruitlcfs.
lie intcrcourle liowcvcr, which this occalioncd
ctwccn the two parties, i)roved of no fliall ad-
'allage to Cortes, as it afforded hiii an oppor-
,nlity of gaining lboic of Narvacz's olliccrs by
bcUal prcitcnts, of l'O'tiiinig others by a lclnblancc
I 'i(odcrationi, and o dazzling all by the ap-

pearanice

79

BOO Kpearance of wealth among his troops, most

V. his soldiers having converted their share of the

I'-n Mexican gold into chains, bracelets, and othec
1520. ornaments, which they displayed with militar,

ostentation, Narvacz, and a little juito of hl;
creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards
an accommodation with their countrymen. This
discovery of their inclination irritated his violent
temper almost to madnet's. In a transport of rage
he set a price upon the head of Cortes, and of his
principal officers; and having learned, that he
was now advanced within a league of Zempoalla
with his small body of men, he confidered this as
an insult which merited immediate chaftifeent,
and marched out with all his troops to offer him
battle.

Attacks BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and
Narvat:in experience than to fight an enemy so far superior
te night.

in number, and ib much better appointed, on
equal ground. Having taken his station on the
opposite bank of the river de Canoas, where he
knew that he could not be attacked, he bcheli
the approach of the enemy without concern, anc
difrcgarded this vain bravade. It was then thl
beginning of the wet feafbn A, and the rain hac
poured down, during a great part of the day, wi!l
the violence peculiar to the torrid zone, The fol
lowers of Narvaez, unaccustomed to the harclfhip
of military fervicc, murmured o much at bcinl
thus fruitlelsly expolcd, that from their unfoldicr
like impatience, as well as his own contenmpt o
his advcrfary, their general permitted them to re
tire to Zempoalla. The very circuimlancc whicl
induced them to quit the field, engaged Cortes
form a scheme, by which he hoped at once to tcr
niinale the war. He oblcrvcd, that his hardly vc

icrnlls
', 1 ackluyl, vol. ii". 4ó';· D' Lact Desir. I~. Ocecil?:i

though ftalnding under the torrents, which con- B 0 0 K
tinued to fall, without a single tent or any helter V.
whatsoever to cover them, were so far from rc- -
pining at hardships that were become familiar to 1520.
them, that they were still fefl and alert for ser-
vice. He forelaw that the encmy would naturally
give thenifelves up to rcpolf after their fatigue,
and that, judging of the condut of others by
their own effeminacy, they would deem thcm-
selves perfetly ecure at a season so unfit for action.
He relblvcd therefore to fall upon them in the
dead of night, when the surprise and terror of this
unexpececd attack might more than compenlate
the inferiority of. his numbers. His loldicrs, fen-
fible that no resource remained but in Ione def-
perate effort of courage, approved of the mcafurc
with such warmth, that Cortes, in a military ora-
tion which he addrcefed to them before they began
their march, was more lolicitous to temper than to
inflame their ardour. He divided them into three
parties. At the head of the sirs he placed Sandoval;
entrusting this gallant officer with the lmop dange-
rous and important fcrvicc, that of seizing the
enemy's artillery, which was planted before the
principal tower of the temple, where Narvaez
had fixed his head-quarters. Chriftoval de Olid
commanded the second, with orders to aftault the
tower, and lay hold on the general. Cortes hini-
fclf conducted the third and smallest division,
which was to a as a body of rcfcrve, and to sup-
port the other two as there should be occasion.
Having pafWcd the river de Canoas, which was
much lvellcd with the rain, not withlout difficulty,
the water reaching alnioft to their chins, they ad-
vanced in profound filencc, without beat of'drum,
or fbund of any warlike inillruiiint ; each man
armcd with his lvord, his dagger, and his Chinant-
lan Ipjcar. Narvacz, remils in proportion to his
fccurity, had posted only two ccntinels to watch
VOL. II. G the

B O O K the motions of an enemy whom he had such good

v. caute to dread. One of there was beized by the
'-^r advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the other made
152o. his escape, and hurrying to the town with all the

precipitation of fear and zeal, gave such timely
notice of the enemy's approach, that there was
full leisure to have prepared for their reception.
But, through the arrogance and infatuation of
Narvaez, this important interval was loft. He
imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the centinel,
and treated with derilion the idea of being attacked
by forces so unequal to his own. The shouts of
Cortes's soldiers, ruliing on to the aflault, con-
vinced him at last, that the danger which he de.
spifed was real. The rapidity with which they ad-
vanced was such, that only one cannon could be
fired, before Sandoval's party closed with the
enemy, drove them from their guns, and began to
force their way up the steps of the tower. Nar-
vaez, no less brave in ation than presumptuous in
condut, armed himfelfin haste, and by his voice
and example animated his men to the combat.
Olid advanced to sustain his companions; and
Cortes himself, ruffling to the front, conduted

and over- and added new vigour to the attack. The corn
com:shlim, pad order in which this small body preflcd on,

and the impenetrable front which they presented
with their long fpcars, bore down all opposition
before it. They had now reached the gate, and
were struggling to burit it open, when a soldiel
having fct fire to the reeds with which the toweC
was covered, compelled Narvacz to sally out
In the first encounter he was wounded in the cy
with a pear, and falling to the ground, was drag
gcd down the ftcps, and in a moment clapt in lt
ters. The cry of vitory resounded among th
troops of Cortes. Thotc who had tallied out wit
their leader now maintained the confHit fccbl
or began to surrender. Among the remaindcr(

h;

his soldiers, stationed in two fmallpr towers of£B 0 .
the temple, terror and confusion prevailed. The V.
darkneis was si great that they could not diflin-
guifh between their friends and foes. Their own 'iS20.
artillery was pointed against them. Wherever
they turned their eyes, they beheld lights gleam-
ing through the oblcurity of night, which, though
proceeding only from a variety of shining intedts,
that abound in inoift and lultry climates, their as£
frighted imaginations rcprefcnted as numerous
bands of musketeers advancing with kindled
matches to the attack. After a (hort resistance, the
soldiers compelled their officers to capitulate, and
before morning all laid down their arms, and sub,
mitted quietly to their conquerors.

THIS complete vi&ory proved mare acceptable, The effeas
as it was gained almost without bloodshed, only oftbisvic
two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cortes, to
and two officers with fifteen private men of the
adverse fafion. Cortes treated the vanquished not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
;offered either to fend them back direly to Cuba,
or to take them into his fcrvice, as partners in his
fortune, on equal terms with his own soldiers.
iThis latter proposition, seconded by a seasonable
idiftribution of some prefcnts from Cortes, and
!liberal promises of more, opened profpeds so
Igreeable to the romantic expeftations which had
Induced them to engage in this service, that all, a
cv partizans of Narvacz cxcepted, closed with it,
md vied with each other in profdcions of fidelity
nd attachment to a general whofc recent fuccels
ad given them such a proof of his abilities bor
onimand. Thus, by a eries of events no less for-
natc than uncommon, Cortes not only escapcd
on perdition which elncmd inevitable, but, when
had least reason to cxpce it, was placed at the
ad of a thouland Spaniards, ready to follow
lcrcver he hould lead thenl. Whocver rcfledis

G upon

B O K upon the facility with which this victory was ob-

V. tained,. or confiders with what sudden and unani-
'rT'J mous transition the followers of Narvaez ranged
1520. themselves under the standard of his rival, will be

apt to afcribe.both events as much to the intrigues
as to the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fulpeft
that the ruin of Narvaez was occasioned, no less
by the treachery of his own followers, than by the
valour of his enemy

T'he cexi- But, in one.point, the prudent conduct and
armsagainagood fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous.
the Spai- If, by the rapidity of his operations after he be.

gan his march,. he had not brought matters to such
a speedy ifiue,. even this decisive victory would
have come too late to have saved his companions
> . whom he left in.Mexico. A few days after the

discomfiture of Narvaez, a courier arrived with an
account that the Mexicans had taken arms, and
having seized and deitroyed the two brigantines,
which he had built in order to secure the cons
mand of the lake, had attacked the Spaniards in
their quarters, had killed several of them and
wounded more, had reduced to ashes their maga-
zine of provisions, and carried on hofilitics itli
such fury, that, though Alvarado and his men de
fended themselves with undaunted resolution, the)
mufi either be oon cut,off by famine, or fink un
der the multitude of their enemies. This rvol
was excited by motives which rendered it ili
more alarming. On the departure of Cortesfc
Zempoalla, the Mexicans flattered themselves, tli
the long expeded opportunity of restoring the
sovereign to liberty, and of vindicating their coui
try from the odious dominion of firangers, as
length arrived; that while the forces of their o
pressors were divided, and the arms of one par

turn

* Cortes Relat. 42. D. B. Diaz. c. zlo.-rz. Tlerr

dec. . lib. i.. c. i8, &c, Gomara Cron. c. 97, &c.
i.
84

turned against the other, they might triumph with B 0o K-
greater facility over both. Consultations were v.
held, and chemes formed with this intention. "1
The Spaniards in Mexico, conscious of their own 1529.
feebleness, fufpe&ed and dreaded those machina-
tions. Alvarado, though a gallant officer, pof-
sesscd neither that extent of capacity, nor dignity
of manners, by which Cortes had acquired such
an ascendant over the minds of the Mexicans, as
never allowed them to form 'a just estimate of his
weakness or of their own firength. Alvarado knew
no mode of upporting his authority but force. In-
fRead of employing address to disconcert the plans
or to sooth the spirits of the Mexicans, he waited
the return of one of their solemn festivals, when
the principal persons in the empire were dancing,
according to cuflom, in the court of the great
temple; he seized all the avenues which led to it,
and, allured partly by the rich ornaments which
they wore in honour of their gods, and partly by
the facility of cutting off-at once the authors of that
conspiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them,
unarmed and unfufpicious of any danger, and maf-
sacred a great nnmber, none escaping but such as
made their way over the battlements of the temple.
An ation so cruel and treacherous filled not only
the city, but the whole empire with indignation
and rage. All called aloud for vengeance; and
regardlcfs of the safety of their monarch, whose
life was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their
own danger in aflaulting an enemy who had been
so long the object of their terror, they committed
all those aits of violence of which Cortes received
an account.

To him the danger appeared so imminent, as to He marches

admit neither of deliberation nor delay. He set alckt.lth
out instantly with all his forces, and returned from
Zcmpoalla with no less rapidity than he had ad,

vanccd

85

B QI K vanaeed thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by two

V. thousand chosen warriors. On entering the Mex-
'-~'v ican territories, he found that difaffetion to the

2e. Spaniards was not confined to the capital. The

principal inhabitants had deserted the towns
through which he passed; no person of note ap-
pearing to meet him with the usual refpec; no
p.ravifion was made for the iubfiftence of his
troops; and though he was permitted to advance
without opposition, the solitude and silence which
reigncd in every place, and the horror with which
tha people avoided all intercourse with him, dif-
covered a deep rooted antipathy, that excited the
nmoft just alarm. But, implacable as the enmity of
ihe Mexicans was, they were fa unacquainted with
the science of war, that they knew not how to take
the proper measures, either for their own safety, or
the defiruation of the Spaniards. ' UninftruAed by
iheir-former error in admitting a formidable ene-
mny into their capital, instead of breaking down
the causeways and bridges, by which they might
have inclosed Alvarado and his party, ad have es-
fectually fiopt the career of Cortes, they again sus.
June 24. sered him to march into the city without mnolefta-

tion, and to take quiet possession of his ancient
fiaion.

mproper The transports of joy with which Alvarado and
condut of his soldiers received their companions cannot be

epreffed. Both parties were so much elated, the
one with their seasonable deliverance, and the other
with the great exploits which they had atchieved,
that this intoxication of sccef seems to have so
far reached Cortes hirnfelf, that he behaved on
this occasion neither with his usual sagacity nor at-
tention. He not only neglected to visit Montezu-
ma, but ibittered the insult by expressions full
ofcoitenpt for that unfortunate prince and his
pople. The forces of which he had now the com-

1 >~~' 1~ mAnd

mand appeared to him so irresistible, that he might B o o K
assume an higher tone, and lay aside the mask of v.
moderation, under which he had hitherto con- -r
cealed his designs. Some Mexicans, who under- 1520.
tsood the Spanish language, heard the contemptu-
ous words which Cortes uttered, and reporting
them to their countrymen, kindled their rage anew.
They were now convinced, that the intentions of
the general were equally bloody with those of Al-
varado, and that his original purpose in visiting
their country, had not been, as he pretended, to
court the alliance of their sovereign, but to attempt
the conquest of his dominions. They resumed The violent
their arms with the additional fury which this dif- htoility of
covery inspired, attacked a considerable body of cant.
Spaniards who were marching towards the great
square in which the public market was held, and
compelled them to retire with some loss. Em-
boldeued by this success, and delighted to find
that their oppressors were not invincible, they ad-
vanced next day with extraordinary martial pomp
to assault the Spaniards in their quarters. Their
number was formidable, and their undaunted
courage still more lo, Though the artillery pointed
against their numerous battalions, crouded together
in narrow streets, swept off multitudes at every dif-
charge; though every blow of the Spauifl wea-
pons fell with mortal effec upon their naked bo-
dies, the impetuosity of the assault did not abate.
Fresh men rushcd forward to occupy the places of
theflain, and meeting with the fame fate, were
succeeded by others no less intrepid and cager on
vengeance. The utmost efforts of Cortes's abilities
and experience, 'econded by the cifciplined va-
lour of his troops, were hardly sufficient to de-
fend their fortifications, into which the enemy
were more than once on the point of forcing their
Way.

CO.K Tis

B 0 0 K CORTES beheld with wonder the implacable

v. ferocity of a people, who see.med at first to ubmit
''Trs' tamely to the yoke, and had continued so long pall

3Di2f five under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, who fondly

the Spani- imagined that they followed Cortes to share in the
"'ids. spoils of a conquered enpirc, were aftonitfied to

find that they were involved in a dangerous war,
with an enemy whose vigour was still unbroken,
and loudly execrated their own weak'ness, in giv-
ing such easy credit to the eluilve pronmifes of their
new leader ". But surprise and complaints were
of no avail. Some immediate and extraordinary
effort was requiite to extricate themselves oat of
their present situation. As loon as the approach
of evening induced the Mexicans to retire, in com-
pliance with their national cuRfom of ceasing from
hostilities with the setting fun, Cortes began to
prepare for a sally, with such a considerable force,
as might either drive the enemy out of the city, or
compel them to liften to ternms of accommo-
dation.

Cortes at- HE conduced, in person, the troops destined
tacks them for this important service. Every invention known
without fuc-
cess. in the European art of war, as well as every pre-

caution, fuggefled by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure uccefs. But he found an enemy prepared
and determined to oppose hinm. The force of the
Mexicans was greatly augmented by fresh troops,
which poured in continually from the country, and
their animosity was in no degree abated. They
were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhorta-
tions of their priefis, and fought in defence of their
temples and families, under the eye of their gods,
and in prefcnce of their wives and children. Not-

withstanding
88

'k B. Din. c. 26.

withstanding their numbers, and enthusiastic con- B 0 O K
tempt of danger and death, wherever the Spaniards V.
could close with them, the superiority of their dif- -p
cipline and arms obliged them to give way. But 1520.
in narrow fireets, and where many of the bridges
of communication were broken down, they could
seldom come to a fair rencounter, and the Spa-
niards, as they advanced, were exposed to howers
of arrows and stones from the tops of the houses.
After a day of incessant exertion, though vast num-
bers of the Mexicans fell, and part of the city was
burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the slaughter,
and harassed by multitudes which successively re-
lieved each other, were obliged at length to retire,
!with the mortification of having accomplished no-
thing so decisive as to compensate the unusual cala-
imity of twelve soldiers killed, and above sixty
wounded. Another sally, made with greater
force, was not more effetual, and in it the general
himself was wounded in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal Montezuma

error into which he had been betrayed by his lain.
own contempt of the Mexicans, and was satis-
sied that he could neither maintain his present
flation in the centre of an hofiile city, nor re-
tire from it without the motl imminent danger.
One resource fill remained, to try what effect
the interposition of Montezuma might have to
ifooth or overawe his subjects, When the Mex-
icans approached next morning to renew the
assault, that unfortunate prince, at the mercy
of the Spaniards, and reduced to the fad ne-
ccflity of becoming the infirument of his own
disgrace, and of the flavcry of his people", ad.
vanced to the battlements in his royal robes,
and with all the pomp in which he uscd to ap-

pear
;C See NOTE XI,

89

B0 O K pear on solemn occasions. At fight of their so,

V. vereign, whom they had long been accustomed to
rc' honour, and almost to revere as a god, the wea.
I520. pons dropped from their hands, every tongue was

silent, all bowed their heads, and many prostrated
themselves on the ground. Montezuma addressed
them with every argument that could mitigate
their rage, or persuade them to cease from hofti,
lities. When he ended his discourse, a ullen
murmur of disapprobation run through the crowd;
to this succeeded reproaches and threats; and their
fury rising in a moment above every restraint of
decency or refped, flights of arrows and volleys
offtones poured in so violently upon the ramparts,
that before the Spanish soldiers, appointed to cover
Montezuma with their bucklers, had time to lift
them in his defence, two arrows wounded the un.
happy monarch, and the blow of a stone on his
temple struck him to the ground. On feeing hit
fall, the Mexicans were so much astonished, that,
with a tranfiion not uncommon in popular tumults,
they passed in a moment from one extreme to the
other, remorse succeeded to insult, and they fled
with horror, as if the vengeance of Heaven were
pursuing the crime which they had committed.
The Spaniards without molestation carried Mon.
tezuma to his apartments, and Cortes haficncd
thither to copfole him under his misfortune. But
the unhappy monarch now perceived how low he
was funk; and the haughty spirit which seemcd to
have been so long extinat, returning, he cforned
to flrvive this last humiliation, and to protra an
ignominious life, not only as the prisoner and tool
of his enemies, but as the objc& of contempt or
detestation among his fubjets. In a transport of
rage he tore the bandages from his wounds, and
refuted, with such obstinacy, to take any nou-

ri fiment,
go

rifhment, that he soon ended his wretched days, B O O K
rcjeting with disdain all the solicitations of the V.
spaniards to embrace the Christian faith. B

UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes, having N52o
loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to any ac- siet.
commodation, saw no profpet of safety but in at-
tempting a retreat, apd began to prepare for it.
But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged him
in new confliis. They took poffcflion of a high
tower in the great temple, which overlooked the
Spanish quarters, and placing there a garrison of
their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could stir
without being expoied to their misfile weapons.
From this post it was neceftary to dislodge them
at any rif ; and Juan de Efcobar, with a nume-
rous detachment of chosen oldiers, was ordered
to make the attack. But Efcobar, though a gal-
lant officer, and at the head of troops accustomed
to conquer, and -ho now fought under the eyes
of their countrymen, was thrice repulsed. Cortes,
sensible that not only the reputation but the safety
of his army depended on the luccefs of this assault,
ordered abucklerto be tied to his arm, as hecould
not manage it with his wounded hand, and rushed
with his drawn word into the thickest of the
combatants. Encouraged by the pretence of their
general, the Spaniards returned to the charge with
such vigour, that they gradually forced their way
up the steps, ad drove the Mexicans to the plat-
form at the top of the tower. There a dreadful
carnage began, when two young Mexicans of high
rank, observing Cortes as he animated his foldicrs
by his voice and example, resolvcd to acrifice
their own lives in order to cut off the author of all
the calamities which deiolatcd their country. They
approached him in a supplicant posture, as if they
bad intended to lay down their arms, and seizing

him

B o o hK im in a moment, hurried him towards the bat.

V. tlements, over which they threw themelves head.
-'-'- ' long, in hopes of dragging him along to be dashed
1520. in pieces by the fame fall. But Cortes, by his

strength and agility, broke lose from thlcil gralp,
and the gallant youths perished in this gcncrotus,
though unsuccessful attempt to iavc their country.
As iboo as the Spaniards became malers of the
tower, they set fire to it, and, without farther mo.
leftation, continued the preparations for their
retreat.

Trle a.- TIIs became the more nccefiary, as the Mcx.
.ir't"l'ct- leans werc so much astonished at the last effort oi

the Spanifi valour, that they began to change their
whole system of hostility, and inflead of iuccf.
sant attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the
ttreets, and breaking down the causeways, to cuI
off the communication of the Spaniards with t)
continent, and thus to flarve an enemy whom the)
could not subdue. The first point to be deter
mined was, whether they should march outopenl)
in the face of day, when they could discern cvcrJ
dalnger, and fee how to regulate their own motions
as well as how to refiit the aflaults of the ecny
or whether they fiould endeavour to retire fccretlI
in the night. The latter was preferred, parl'
from hopes that their national fuperititon woule
rcfirain the Mexicans from venturing to attack then
in the night, and partly fiom thei' own fond be
lief in the predictions of a private oldicr, wht
having acquired univcrial credit by a fmnatteringc
learning, and his pretcnfions to arology, boldl
afiured them of success, if they made their rctrca
in this manner. They began to move toward
midnight, in three divisions. Sandoval led it
v;an ; Plcdro A lvarado, and Velafqucz de I.con, I
tli coIndui1 of the rear; and Cortes coiiniilldc
j the cntrc, where he placed theprifoncr, a.ini

\vi 'li
92

whom were a son and two daughters of Monte- B o o K
zurna, together with several Mexicans of diflinc- V.
tion, the artillery, the baggage, and a portable '--
bridge of timber, intended to be laid over the 5"-
breaches in the causeway. They marched in pro-
found silence along the causeway which led to 'Ta-
cuba, because it was horter than any of the ref-,
and, lying most remote from the road towards
Tlafcala and the sea coast, had been left more en-
tire by the Mexicans. They reached the firil
breach in it without molestation, hoping that their
retreat was undicovered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only Arac1-dby

watched all their motions with attention, but had a.'".-
made proper dispositions for a molft formidable at-
tack. While the Spaniards were intent upon plac-
ing their bridges in the breach, and occupied in
conducting their horses and artillery along it, they
were suddenly alarmed with the tremendous found
of warlike instruments, and a general shout fron
an innumerable multitude of enemies; the lake
was covered with canoes; flights of arrows, and
showers of ltones poured in upon them from every
quarter; the Mexicans rushing forward to the
charge with fcarlcfs impetuosity, as if they hoped
in that moment to be avenged for all their wrongs.
Unfortunately the wooden bridge, by the weight
of the artillery, was wedged so fast into the flones
and mud, that it was impoflible to remove it. Dif-
mayed at this accident, the Spaniards advanced
with precipitation towards the fccond breach.
'rhe Mexicans hemmed them in on every fide,
and though they defended thenifclves with their
usual courage, yet crouded as they were on a nar-
row causeway, their discipline and military fill
were of little avail, nor did the obscurity of the
night permit them to derive great advantage from
their fire arms, or the Jupcriority of their other

weapos,

94
B O O K weapons. All Mexico was now in arms; and so

v. eager were the people dn the deftfruion of their
c-s-g- oppressors, that they who were not near enough to

1520. annoy them in person, impatient of the delay,

pref'cd forward with such ardour, as drove on
their countrymen in front with irresistible violence.
Fresh warriors instantly filled the place of such as
fell. The Spaniards, weary with slaughter, and
unable to sustain the weight of the torrent that
poured in upon them, began to give way. In a
moment the confusion was univeral ; horse and
foot, officers and soldiers, friends and enemies,
were mingled together; and while all fought, and
many fell, they could hardly diftinguiih from what
hand the blow came.

Thcir difaf- CORTES, with about a hundred foot soldiers
tcrs. and a few horse, forced his way over the two re-

mainingbreaches in the causeway, the bodies of
the dead serving to fill up the chafns, and reached
the main land. Having formed them as soon as
they arrived, he returned with such as were yet
capable of service, to assist his friends in their re-
treat, and to encourage them, by his presence and
example, to persevere in the efforts requisite to es-
sect it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had
broke through the enemy, but found many more
overwhelmed by the multitude of their aggreflors,
or perifling in the lake; and heard the piteous la-
mentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having
taken alive, were carrying offin triumph to be fa-
crificcd to the god of war. Before day, all who
had cfcacpd aflenibled at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned, and discovercd to the view of
Cortes his shattered battalion, reduced to less than
half its number, the survivors dejcted, and most
of them covered with wounds, the thoughts of
what they had fuffcred, and the remembrance of
so many faithful friends and gallant followcrs, who

had

fallen in that night of sorrow , pierced his foulB 0 0 K
with such anguish, that while he was forming their V.
ranks, and ifuing some necessary orders, his fol- 'ó
diersobferved the tears trickling from his eyes, 52
and remarked, with much fatisfaaion, that while
attentive to the duties of a general, he was not in-
ienfible to the feelings of a man.

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diflintion and loss,
perilhed t, and among these Velalquez de Leon,
who having forsaken the party of his kinfinan, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his com-
panions, was, on that account, as well as for his
superior merit, refpe&ed by them as the second
person in the army. All the artillery, ammuni-
tion, and baggage, were loft ; the greater part of
the horses, and above two thousand Tlalcalans,
were killed, and only a very small portion of the
treasure which they had amassed was saved. This,
which had been always their chief objet, proved
now a great cause of their calamity; for many of
the soldiers, having so overloaded themselves with
bars of gold as rendered them unfit for ation, and
retarded their Light, fell ignominiously, the vic-
tims of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidst
so many disasters, it was some consolation to find
that Aguilar and Marina, whose function as i-
terpreters was of such eifential importance, had
made their escape 1I.

The first care of Cortes was to find some shelter for Diffictlt e-

his wearied troops; foras the Mexicans infested themtreat f 'l
on every fide, and the people of Tacuba began to take
arms, he could not continue in his present station.

lie

* Nocrh 7riie is the name by which it is still distinguished in
New Spain. t See NOTE XXII. 1 Cortes Relat. p.
248. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara Cron. c. 1og. Herrera, dec.
' lib, x. c. 11, 12.

B O O K He direced his march towards the rising ground

v. and having fortunately discovered a temple, situ.
s-a^ ated on an eminence, took poffeflion of it.

1520, There he found not only the shelter for which

he wished, but, what was no less wanted, Ibme
provisions to refrefl his men; and though the
enemy did not intermit their attacks through.
.out the day, they were with little difficulty pre.
vented from making any impression. During this
time Cortes was engaged in deep consultation with
his officers, concerning the route which they
ought to take in their retreat. They were now on
the weft fide of the lake. Tlafcala, the only place
where they could hope for a friendly reception,
lay about fixty-four miles to the east of Mexico *;
so that they were obliged to go round the north
end of the lake before they could fall into the road
which led thither. A Tlafcalan soldier under.
took to be their guide, and conduEted there
through a country in rome places marshy, in others
mountainous, in all ill-cultivated and thinly peo.
pled. They marched for fix days with little re.
spite, and under continual. alarms, numerous bo.
dies of the Mexicans hovering around theni, some.
times harassing them at a difiance with their Iniffli
weapons, and iometimes attacking them closely ir
front, in rear, in flank, with great boldness, a;
they now knew that they were not invincible
Nor were the fatigue and danger of those inceflan
confliEts the worst evils to which they were ex
posed. As the barren country through which the]
pafled afforded hardly any provisions, they wen
reduced to feed on berries, roots, and the ftalc
of green maize; and at the very time that falin
was deprefling their spirits and wafting thci
strength, their situation required the most vi
gorous and unremitting exertions of courag
and ativity. Amidst thoe complicated diftrcftc

011

Villa Scgnor Teatro Americano, lib. ii. c. .
96

97

one circumstance supported and animated the Spa- B O O K
niards. Their commander sustained this fad re- V.
verse of fortunc with unshaken magnanimity.
His prelencc of mind never iorfok him ; his fa- '5-Z
gacity foreiaw every event, and his vigilance pro-
vided for it. He- xwas forenoft in every danger,
and endured every hardship with chcerfulnef.
The difficulties with which he was surrounded
ieemed to call forth new talents; and his soldiers
though delpairing themselves, continued to follow
him with increaling confidence in his abilities.

ON the sixth day they reached Otumba, not Battl of

far from the road between Mexico and Tlafcala. otullba.
Early next morning they began to advance towards
it, fying parties of the enemy ifill hanging on their
rear, and amidst the insults with which they ac-
companied their holfilities, Marina remarked,
that they often cxclaimed with exultation, " Go
on robbers; go to t place where you {hall quickly
meet the vcngeance due to your criires. The
meaning of this thrcat the Spaniards did not com-
prehend, until they reached the iumniit of an cmi-
nence bcfore thein. There a spacious valley
opened to their view, covered with a vast army,
extending as far as the eye could reach. 'lihe
Mexicans, while with one body of their troops
they haraftid the Spaniards in their retreat, had
ailcmbled their principal force on the other fice
of the lake, and marching along the road which
led dircaly to Tlalcala, pofied it in the plain of
Otumba, through which they knew Cortes mutt
pals. At the light of this incredible multitude,

lwhich they could lirvcy at once from the rising

ground, the Spaniards were afloniflced, and evciL
the boldelt began to dclpair. But Cortes, without
allowing leilurec f)rthcir fars to acquire itrcngth
by rctlcClion, after warning them briefly that no
alternative now remained but to conquer or to die,

\VL. II. -1 led

B 0 O K led them instantly to the charge. The Mexicans

V. waited their approach with unutual fortitude.

''t- Such, however, was the superiority of the Spanish
1520. discipline and arms, that the impression of this

i'mall body was irrefiflible ; and whichever w\ay
its force was directed, it penetrated and dispersed
the most numerous battalions. But while thele
gave way in one quarter, new combatants advanced
from another, and the Spaniards, though fucccfs.
ful in every attack, were ready to fink under thole
repeated efforts, without feeing any end to their
toil, or any hope of victory. At that time Cortes
observed the great standard of the empire, which
was carried before the Mexican general, advanc-
ing; and fortunately recolleEting to have heard,
that on the fate of it depended the event of every
battle, he assembled a few of his bravest officers,
whose horses were fill capable of service, and
placing himself at their head, pushed forward to-
wards the flandard with an impetuosity which bore
down every thing before it. A chosen body of
nobles, who guarded the standard, made some re-
fiftance, but were oon broken. Cortes, with a
stroke of his lance, wounded the Mexican general,
and threw him to the ground. One of his fol-
lowers alighting, put an end to his 'life, and laid
hold of the imperial fiandard. The moment that
their leader fell, and the flandard, towards which
all directed their eyes, disappearcd, an univerlal
panic flruck the Mexicans, and, as if the bond
which held them together had been dissolvcd,
evory cnfign was lowered, each foldicr threw away
his weapons, and lied with precipitation to tlic
mountains. The Spaniards, unable to pursue them
far, returned to collect the spoils of the field,
which were so valuable as to be sonic com)penlltio
for the wealth which they had loft in Mexico; so
in the enemy's army were most of their principal
warriors, dresscd out in their richest ornament.
98

as if they had been marching to asured victory. B O O K
Next day, to their great joy they entered the Tlaf- V.
calan territories. _._

BUT, amidst their fatisfaftion in having got be- Is20.

yond the precin&s of an hofile country, they RJeeption
could not look forward without solicitude, as they o. spa-

niards in

were still uncertain what reception they might meet alfcala.
with from allies, to whom they returned in a con-
dition very different from that in which they had
lately et out from their dominions. Happily for
them, the enmity of the Tlafcalans to the Mexican
name was so inveterate, their desire to avenge the
death of their countrymen so vehement, and the
acendant which Cortes had acquired over the
chiefs of the republic lb complete, that, far from
entertaining a thought of taking any advantage of
the diftrefied situation in which they beheld the
Spaniards, they received them with a tenderncis
and cordiality which quickly dissipated all their
iufpicions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence was Neewdel;tc-

now absolutely necelary ; not only that the Spa- Corat,:'
niards might give attention to the cure of their
wounds, which had been too long neglected, but in
order to recruit their strength, exhautled by such a
long succession of fatigue and hardships. Duringthis,
Cortes learned that he and his companions were
not the only Spaniards who had felt the effects of
the Mexican enmity. A considerable detachment,
which was marching from Zempoalla towards the
capital, had been cut offby the people of Tcpcaca.
A finaller party, returning from Tlafcala to Vcra
Cruz, with the iharc of the Mexican gold allotted
to the garrilon, had been surpriscd and defiroyed

H 2 in

* Cortes Relat. p. 219. B. Diaz. c. 128. Gomara Cron.
c, 120. Herrera, dec. 2. 1i1. x. c. 12, 13.

.99

B 0 0 Kin the mountains. At a juncture when the life

v. of every Spaniard was of importance, Iuch losses

were deeply felt. The fchcmcs which Cortes
1520. was meditating rendered them peculiarly afflic-

tive to him. While his enemies, and even nlan
of his own followers, confidcred the dilaficls
which had befallen him as fatal to the progrc's
of his arms, and imagined that nothing now
remained but speedily to abandon a country which
he had invaded with unequal force, his mind, as
eminent for perseverance as for enterprise, was fill
bent on accomplishing his original purpose, of
subjeCting the Mexican empire to the crown of
Castile. Severe and unexpeccd as the check
was which he had received, it did not appear to
him sufficient reabon for relinquishing the con-
quefis which he had already made, or against re-
fuming his operations with better hopes of Iucccls.
The colony at Vera Cruz was not only safe, but
had remained unmolested. The people of Zem-
poalla and the adjacent diftrits had discovered no
fVmptoms of defection. The Tlafcalans continued
faithful to their alliance. On their martial firit,
easily routed to arms, and inflamed with implaca-
ble hatred of the Mexicans, he depended for pow-
erful aid. He had still the command of a body
of Spaniards, equal in number to that with which
he had opened his way into the centre of the cm-
pire, and had taken poffcffion of the capital; so
that with the benefit of greater experience, as well
as more pcrfict knowledge of the country, he
did not dlepair of quickly recovering all that lie
had been deprived of by untoward events.

Thl ma. Full of this idea, he courted the 'Tlafcal;
fures he
tnkc. L chiefs with uch attention, and distributcd amnongi

them Ib liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that
he was ficure of obtaining whatever he flould

requ ire
100

require of the republic. He drew a finall supply B o 0 K
of ammunition, and two or three field pieces, v.
from his stores at Vera Cruz. He dispatched 'x'
an officer of confidence with four hips of Nar- 520.
vaez's fleet to Hispaniola and Jamaica, to en-
gage adventurers, and to purchase horses, gun-
powder, and other military stores. As he knew
that it would be vain to attempt the reduction
of Mexico, unless he could secure the com-
mnand of the lake, he gave orders to prepare in
the mountains of T'lacala materials for building
twelve brigantines, so as they might be carried
thither in pieces ready to be put together, and
launched when he flood in need of their fcr-
vice .

BUT while, with provident attention, he wasMMutinous
taking those ncccffary fieps towards the execution spirit of his

troops.

of' his mealurcs, an obftacie arose in a quarter
where it was Icait fufpeadcd, but most formidable.
The spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in
his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were
planters rather than foldicrs, and had accompa-
nied him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of
obtaining fcttlements, and little inclination to en-
gage in the hardships and dangers of war. As the
iame motives had induced them to enter into their
new engagements with Cortes, they no sooner be-
came acquainted with the nature of the service,
than they bitterly repented of their choice. Such
of them as had the good fortune to survive the pc-
rilous adventures in which their own imprudence
had involved them, happy in having made their
clcapc, trembled at the thoughts of being cxpoled
a second time to iniilar calamities. As loon as
they dilcovcrcd the intention of Cortes, they began

Iccrctly
` Corles Rclat. p. 253, E. Gonira Cron. c. 1l 7.

IOI

B 0 K secretly to murmur and cabal, and waxing gra.

v. dually more audacious, they, in a body, offered,
s-y-- a remonstrance to their general against the impru.
1520. dence of attacking a powerful empire with his

shattered forces, and formally required him to
lead them back diredly to Cuba. Though Cortes,
long pratifed in the arts of command, employed
arguments, entreaties, and presents, to convince
or to sooth them; though his own soldiers, ani-
mated with the spirit of their leader, warmly fe-
conded his endeavours; he fund their fears too
violent and deep-rooted to be removed, and the
utrmoft he could effea was to prevail with them to
defer their departure for some time, on a promise
that he would, at a more proper juncture, dismiss
such as should desire it.

Means he That the malcontents might have no leisure to
revpithe brood over the causes of their difaffetion, he re-
confidence. solved inftaptly to call forth his troops into aion.

He proposed to chastise the people of Tepeaca for
the outrage which they had committed; and as
the detachment which they had cut off happened
to be composed mostly of soldiers who had served
under Narvaez, their companions, from the desire
of vengeance, engaged.more willingly in this war.
Augunf. He took the command in perton, accompanied

by a numerous body of Tlafcalans, and in the
space of a few weeks, after various encounters,
with great slaughter of the Tepeacans, reduced
that province to fubje&ion. During several months
while he waited for the supplies of men and au-
nition which he xp¢ced, and was carrying on his
preparations for conftrusing the brigantines, he
kept his troops constantly employed in various cx-
peditions against the adjacent provinces, all of
which were conducted with an uniform tenour of
success. By thefc, his men became again accuf-
tomed to vi&ory, and resumed their wontcd fcilln

'1~~~~~ . 0~~~~~of
I02

of superiority; the Mexican power was weak-B O O K
ened; the Tlafcalan warriors acquired the habit vT
of ating in conjunction with the Spaniards; and T
chiefs of the republic delighted to fee their country 1520.
enriched with the spoils of all the people around
them, and astonished every day with fresh disco-
veries of the irresistible prowess of their allies,
declined no effort requisite to support them.

ALL those preparatory arrangements, however, Strengthen;

though the most prudent and efficacious which edbyfeverai
the ituation of Cortes allowed him to make, mts.
would have been of little avail, without a rein-
forcement of Spanish soldiers. Of this he was
So deeply sensible, that it was the chief object
of his thoughts and withes; and yet his only
profpea of obtaining it, from the return of
the officer whom he had sent to the isles to
solicit aid, was both distant and uncertain. But
what neither his own sagacity nor power could
have procured, he owed to a series of fortunate
and unforeseen incidents. The governor of Cuba,
to whom the success of Narvaez appeared an
event of infallible certainty, having ent two
small ships after him with new inftru6tions and
a supply of men and military stores, the officer
whom Cortes had appointed to command on
the coast, artfully decoyed them into the har-
bour of Vera Cruz, seizcd the vessels, and easily
persuaded the soldiers to follow the standard
of a more able leader than him whom they were
destined to join *. Soon after, three hips of
more considerable force came into the harbour fe-
parately. These belonged to an armament fitted
out by Franciico de Gary, governor of Jamaica,
who being poffcffcd with the rage of difcovcry
and conquest which animated every Spaniard set-

tled
* B. Diaz. c. 131.

103

BO O K tled in America, had long aimed at itrudiu'

V. into some diftrit of New Spain, and dividing

with Cortes the glory and gain of annexing that
1520. empire to the crown of Castile. They unad-

vifedly made their attempt on the northern pro-
vinces, where the country was poor, and the peo-
ple fierce and warlike; and, afier a cruel fuccefiion
of disasters, famine compelled them to venture into
oaober z2. Vera Cruz and cafl themselves upon the mercy of

their countrymen. 'Their fidelity was not proof
againfI the splendid hopes and prornifes which had
ieduced other adventurers, and, as if the spirit
of revolt had been contagious in New Spain, they
likewise abandoned the master whom they were
bound to serve, and enlisted under Cortes .
IKnor was it America alone that furnished such un-
expectec aid. A fiip arrived from Spain, freightcd
by some private merchants with military flores,
in hopes of a profitable market in a country, the
fame of whose opulence began to Ipread over
Europe. Cortes eagerly purchased a cargo which
to him was invaluable, and the crew, following
the general example joined him at Tlafcala 1'.

FROM those various quarters, the army of Cortes

was augmented with an hundred and eighty men,
and twenty horses, a reinforcement too inconfi-
derable to produce any coniequence which would
intitle it to have been mentioned in the history of
other parts of the globe. But in that of America,
wlere great revolutions were brought about by
causes which teem to bear no proportion to their
cfkfcts, fucl small events rife into importance, be-
cause they were lufficicnt to decide with rcfpc&t
to the fatc of kingdomls. Nor is it the least rc-
markable inflance of the singular felicity'confpi-
cuous in any pafilages of Cortes's flory, that the

two
Cones Relat 3,. F . Diaz. c. 133. 1 Iid. c. 136.

tr'operfons chiefly instrumental in furnishing him B O O K
iththofe seasonable upplies should be an avowed v.
enciny who aimed at his defruction, and an el- - s
vious rival who xwiflled to iuipplant him. 1520.

TrE first ect of the juncion with his new Numberof
followers was to enable him to difriifs iuch oflhis frce"
'Iarvaez's ifodicrs as remained in reludance in
his lrvicc. After their departure, he ill muf-
tcrcd five hundred and fifty infantry, of which
fourlcoie were armed with iuflkets or crois-bows,
ibrtv horlemen, and a train of nine field pieces :.
At the head of thele, accompanied by ten thou-
sand T'lacalas andl other friendly Indians, Cortes
egan his march towards Mexico, on the twenty-
eighth of December, fix months after his fatal rc-
treat from that city -.

NoR did he advance to attack an enemy unpre- reparationm
parcd to receive him. Upon the death of Mon- ot ti Mcx-
tezuna, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the right ictir do
ot cleting the cmaperor was veled, had inflantly fncc.
aifed liis biother C-'ctlavaca to the throne. His
vowcd anld inveterate cnmity to the Spaniards,
Iould have been intlicient to gain their fuiiragcs,
alhoiglh ]e had bccn lcfs diftilguiflied for cou-
agc and capacity. l-ie had an ininediate oppor-
unity of fihewing Liat he was worthy of hlcir
hoice, by concluting, in pcrfon, thofc ficrce at-
acks which coniiellcel thc :,iiaid s o1 abandon
s capital; and as soon as their retreat afibrdcd
i anly repitc from aion, lhe ook nic.fi ri rs lor
reventing their return to Mcxico, witlh prudence
qual to the lipirit which lhe had dilflaved il diriv-
Igtlhci out of it. As fiomn thle vicinity of l'laf-
alaie could not be acquainteld withi tle )i i1ns
il intcitions of Cures, lie oblirvcd thrl] omii

tlat
'CoresiRclat. E. t Rchit. 2 0, A. B. Di iz. c. 37.

105

, 0 0 K that was gathering, and began early to provide

V. against it. He repaired what the Spaniards had

'y -''"' ruined in the city, and strengthened it with luch
I$20. new fortifications as the skill of his fubjccts was

capable of erecting. Beside filling his magazics
with the usual weapons of war, he gave diredtions
to make long spears, headed with the swords and
daggers taken from the Spaniards, in order to
annoy the cavalry. He summoned the people in
every province of the empire to take arms against
their oppressors; as an encouragement to exert
themselves with vigour, he promised them excmp.
tion from all the taxes which his predecefibrs had
imposed . But what he laboured with the greatef
earneftncfs was, to deprive the Spaniards of the
advantages which they derived from the friend.
ship of the Tlafcalans, by endeavouring to )cr.
Ifade that people to renounce all connetion with
men who were not only avowed enemies of the
gods whom they worshipped, but who would
not fail to flbjet them at last to the fame yoke,
which they were now inconsiderably lending their
aid to impose upon others. These reprefentatinns,
no less striking than well-founded, were urged
so forcibly by his ambassadors, that it required
all the address of Cortes to prevent their making/
dangerous impreflion t.

BUT while Quetlavaca was arranging his plan

of defence, with a degree of foresight uncoiinnor
in an American, his days were cut hort by thi
frmall-pox. This diflemper which raged at tha
time in New Spain with fatal malignity, was un
known in that quarter of the globe, until it 'a
introduced by the Europeans, and may be rec

ko;:c

* Cortes Relat. p. 253. E, 254, A. B. Diaz. c. 14`.
t B1. Diaz. c. 29. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 14. 1I.,
io6

107

koned among the greatest calamities brought upon B O O K
them by their invaders. In his flead the Mexicans V.
raised to the throne Gautirnozin, nephew and on- s
in-law of Montezuma, a young man of such high I520.
reputation for abilities and valour, that in this
dangerous crisis, his countrymen with one voice,
called him to the fuprceic command .

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's territo- 1521.
ries, he discovered various preparations to ob- Cortesad-
ftru his progress. But his troops forced their wardsMcx.
way with little difficulty, and took possession ofico.
Tezeuco, the second city of the empire, situated
on the banks of the lake, about twenty miles from
Mexico t. Here he determined to eflablihf his
head-quarters, as the molt proper station for
launching his brigantines, as well as for making
his approaches to the capital. In order to render
his residence there more secure, he deposed the
caziquc or chief, who was at the head of that com-
munity, under pretext of fbme defect in his title,
and Ihbftituted in his place a person whom a sac-
tion of the nobles pointed out as the right heir of
that dignity. Attached to him by this benefit, the
new cazique and his adherents served the Spa-
niards with inviolable fidelity .

As the construction of the brigantines advanced His operati-
slowly under the unskilful hands of Ioldiers and onSaa.nd
Indians, whom Cortes was obliged to employ in
assisting three or four carpenters who happened
ibrtunatcly to be in his service, and as he had not
yet received the reinforcement which he cxpcded
from Hispaniola, he was not in a condition to turn
his arms dircly against the capital. To have

attacked

B. Diaz. c. 130. l Villa Senor Theatro Americano,
156. :L Cortes Rclat. 256, &c. B. Diaz. c. 137. Go-
Sara Cron. c. 121. Hcrrera, dec. 3. c. ,

B O 0 K attacked a city so populous, so well prepared for

V. defence, and in a situation of such peculiar
-r itrength, mnuft have exposed his troops to iucvi.
iS21. table deitruc&ion. Three months clapcd bci!ei

the materials for confirucing the brigaiitncs cre
finished, and before he heard any thing with re.
ipect to the fluccets of his negociation in Hiflp.
niola. This, however, was not a lealin of in-
acion to Cortcs. lie attacked iucccffively fcvcral
of the towns fintated around the lake; aunl tiou,!;h
all th Mexican power was cxcrecd to obfi ru iiis
operations, he either compelled them to iuhnit
to the Spanifhl crown, or reduced them to luiin.
Other towns he endeavoured to conciliate by mlore
gentle means; and though he could not hold anr
intercourle with the inhabitants but bv the inter-
vention of interpreters, yet, under all the dii'i-
vantage of that tedious and impcrfct mode of
comlnunicn tion, he had acquired luch thoroud
knowledge of the state of the country, as "\cll as
of the dilf)ofitions of the people, that he conduLicd
his negociations and intrigues with afioui(liig
dexterity and fucecfs. Most of the cities adjacct
to Mexico were originally the capitals of fiin:ill in-
dependent states; and lonic of them havin-g ljb,
but lately annexed to tlie Mexican crmpiic, still
retained the rcnemenbrancc of their ancient lilbert,
and bore with impatience the rigorous yoni oi
their new maflcrs. (ortes lhaving early oli)ici-!cl
fyiptcnls of their cdifaffetion, availed himicllof
this knowledge to gain ticir confidence and iricil(i
ship. By oftring, with confidince, to idclivr
thCm from the odious dominion of the lMc-xc;]ii
and by libcral promilcs of more indulcent tr!citi
mncnt, if they would unite with him againl 1l;i'
ol)Prefolrs, he prevailed on the ipeople o I i:'.
confideralhc diillicts not only to acknowlc' Itilci
king of C'aflilc as their lovcrcign, but to Il'I}

the
a10

1 Ai In I r A l r . r 1 J A. Bsq!

the Spanish camp with provisions, and to strengthen E o o K
his army with auxiliary troops. Guainiozin, o V.
the firit appearance of defe6tion among his ubjecós, '- --'-
exerted hinifelf with vigour to prevent or punifli 5:
their revolt ; but in fpight of his cflorts the ipirir
continued to spread. The Spaniards gradually
acquired new allies; and with deep concern he
bcleld Cortes arming againfl his empire thole very
hands which ouglt to have been aivc i its dc-
ience, and ready to advance against tlh capital t
le head of a numerous body of his own sub-

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was
radually circumscribing the Mexican powlvcr vithinil
fch narrow limits that his prolpclt of overturning
tleemed neither to be uncertain nor remote, all
is Ichemes were well nigh defeatcd, by a confpi-
racy no less unexpeeted than dangerous. The
1diecrs of Narvaez had never united perfcctily
ith the original companions of Cortes, nor did
ev enter into his measures with the fame cordial
cal. Upon every occasion that required aily ex-
aordinary effort of courage or of patience, their
irils were apt to ink ; and now, on a near view
what they had to encounter, in attcmpting o
educe a city ib inacceclible as Mexico, ad d-
ncded by a numerous army, the rclblution cvc;
toliole among thelm who had adhered to Cortes,
ihen he was defcrtcd by their aflbciatcs, began tu
il. Their fears led them to prefulhptuous and
uIbldicr-lik l dilcullions concerning the propriety
thcir general's Ilealurcs, and tlc imlprobability
thleir lhcccls. From tlicl' tcey proceeded to
illure and invcClivcs, and at lail began to dcli-
ratc how they might provide for their own tiety,

of

Cortes Relat. 256-26o. B. Diaz. :. 13/--i.|.o. Go-
i C'ron. c. 12z , 123. c r . ra dlc. . lib. i. . , ..

B 0 O K of which they deemed their commander to be to.

V. tally negligent. Antonio Villeiagna, a private

~'-" ' Iobldlir, but bold, intriguing, and strongly attached
1521 to Velal'quez, artfully fomented this growing pirir

of difaffletion. His quarters became the rendez.
vous of the malcontents, where, after many con-
fultations, they could discover no method of
checking Cortes in his career, but by aflahfinating
him and his most considerable officers, and con-
ferring the command upon some person who would
relinquish his wild plans, and adopt measures more
confiflent with the general security. Despair in-
spired them with courage. The hour for perpe-
trating the crime, the persons whom they destined
as victims, the officers to succeed them in command,
were all named; and the conlpirators signed an
association, by which they bound themselves with
most solemn oaths to mutual fidelity. But on the
evening before the appointed day, one of Cortes's
ancient followers, who had been seduced into the
conpiracy, touched with compunction at the im-
minent danger of a man whom he had long ben
accustomed to revere, or struck with horror at }is
own treachery, went privately to his general, and
revealed to him all that he knew. Cortes, though
deeply alarmed, difccrned at once what condu(
was proper in a situation lo critical. He repaired
infiantly to Villefagna's quarters, accompanied by
foe of his nmoir trusty officers. The aftonifhien
and confusion of the man, at this lncxpc&cd ilif
anticipated thc conftflion of his guilt. Whille ii
attendants seized him Cortes liatched fromnl hi
bosom a paper containing tie association, igtcd
by the conspirators. Impatient to know how fa
the dcfction extended, ie retired to read it, and
fbund there names which filled him withll ulrri
and sorrow. But aware how dangerous a i1
scrutiny niight prove at ucll a junullrc, he coliiill

j ~~~~~~~~~~~~~;~~I
IIO

Ihis judicial inquiries to Villefagna alone. As the B o o K
proofs of his guilt were manifest, he was condemned V.
aier a ihort trial, and next morning he was een -v
hanging before the door of the houle in which he 5s:.
had lodged. Cortes called his troops together,
ad having explained to them the atrocious purpose
f the conlpirators, as well as the justice of the
uinifmaent inflidted on Villefagna, he added, with
i appearance of iatisfhaion, that he was iutirely
gnorant with reflpet to all the circumstances of
hisdark tiantlaaion, as the traitor, when arrestcd,
ad luddenly torn and iwallowed a paper, which
robably contained an account of it, and under
hc severest tortures pofefled such constancy as to
onceal the names of his accomplices. This artful
cclaration rellored tranquillity to many a brcait
hat was throbbing, while he spoke, with confci-
ulnes of guilt and dread of detection; and by
his prudent moderation, Cortes had the advantage
shaving diicovered and of being able to observe
chof his followers as were diHfaffeed ; while
e), flattering themselves that their past crirme
as uiknown, endeavoured to avert any iufpicion
fit, by redoubling their ativity and zeal in his
rice .
CoRTES did not allow them leilure to ruminate Ii; I:, i.i.
kwhat hlad happened; and as the moll efifeiual lt'lii]",:.
cans of preventing the return of a Imutinous pi- brianunlec

he detcrmlind to call forth his troops inuic-
atcly toaEtioi. Fortunately, a proper occasion
tllis occurred without his fecming to court it.
received intelligence, that the materials for
liding the brigantines were at length completely
iincd, and waited only for a body of Spaniard;
coiilduct tcli to T'ezeuco. The conmmandl of
convoy, conlifting of two hundred foot fol-

diers,

Crlcs R..;t. ;83, C. J3. Il.. . 146. Herrera,
: ,,,ib, i. c. I.

IIi

BO O K diers, fifteen horsemen, and two field pieces, he

v. gave to Sandoval, who, by the vigilance, and ai.

s~-r-/- vity, and courage, which he nianifefted on every
i52S. occasion, was growing daily in his confidencc, ani

in the estimation of his fellow-foldiers. The ser.
vice was no lcs singular than important ; the beams,
the planks, the masts, the cordage, the l;iils, the
iron-work, and all the infinite variety ot articles
requifitc for the conftrution of thirteen brigantines,
were to be carried fixty-miles over land, througha
mountainous country, by people who were unac.
quaintcd with the miniltry of doneftic anlirnals
or the aid of machines to facilitate ay wuork o
labour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight thoufan
TalImens, an inferior order of men destined for lcr
vile taiks, to carry the materials on their mhouldcer
and appointed fifteen thouflad warriors to accom
pany and defend them. Sandoval made the dil
position for their progrcfs with great proprie!
placing the Tamens in the centre, one body
warriors in the front, another in the rear, wit
considerable parties to cover the flanks. To eac
of thele he joined Ibme Spaniards, not only toR
fill them in danger, but to accustom them to re:
larity and subordination. A body so numcroi
and io much encumbered, advanced leifurcly,
in excellent order; and in stime places, \where
was confined by the woods or mountains, the lii
of march extended above lix miles. Parties
Mexicans frequently appeared hovering aroa'
them on the high grounds ; but perceiving no p
ipcCt of fucecls in attacking an cncmy ollt.itl
on his guard, and prepared to rceive then,
did not ventulre to molelt him ; and Sandovial
the glory of concluCiting safely to Tczeuco a c
voy on whchli all tile future operations of his coi
trynmcn ldepended ' .

" Cortes Rclat. 26o. C. E'. P, Diaz. c. 4Q.
II2

Ti-s was followed by another event of no less B O O K
moment. Four hlips arrived at Vera Cruz from V.
Hilipaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty VT
horses, two battering cannon, and a considerable 152.'
supply of ammunition and arms . Elevated with newrein-
obfcrving that all his preparatory schemes, eitherf°ement'
for recruiting his own army, or impairing the
force of the nenemy, had now produced their full
effect, Cortes, impatient to begin the siege in form,
haffened the launching of the brigantines. To
facilitate this, he had employed a vail number of
Indians, fortwo months, in deepening the small
rivulet which runs by Tczcuco into the lake, and
in forming it into a canal near two miles in
length t; and though the Mexicans, aware of his
intentions, as well as of the danger which threat-
encd them, endeavoured frequently to interrupt
the labourers, or to burn the brigantines, the work
was at last completed §. On the 8th of April,Tilebrigan-

.i '

*.n i . , . -., T tineslaunch-

all the Sparni troops, together with auxiliary In-,d.
dians, were drawn up on the banks of the canal;
and with extraordinary military pomp, heightened
and rendered more folern by the celebration of
the noft sacred rights of religion, the brigantines
were launched. As they fell down the canal in
order, Father Olmcdo blesed them, and gave each
its lnalc. Every eye followed them with wonder
and hope, until they entered the lake, when they
hoilted their fails, and bore away before the wind.
A general flout of joy was railed; all admiring
that bold inventive genius, which by means so ex-
traordinary that their fiucces alnioll exceeded be-
lie, had acquired the command of a fleet, without
the aid of which Mexico would have continued

Vo L. II. L to
Cortes Relat. 259, F. 2.02, D, Goinara Cron. c. 120.

I- Sce NO''I .XXII I. § . Dyiaz. c. A40.

1I3

B 0 0 Kto set the Spanish power and arms at deli-

V. ance .
'^Tv' CORTES determined to attack the city front

5Dir.on three different quarters ; from Teuzeco on the caFl
or the iege. fide of the lake, from Tacuba on the weft, and

from Cuyocan towards the south. Those town-
were situated on the principal caufevays which
led to the capital, and intended for their defence.
He appointed Sandoval to command in the firfi,
Pedro de Alvarado in the second, and Chrifio;.
de Olid in the third; allotting to each a numerous
body of Indian auxiliaries, together with an (c;u;,,
division of Spaniards, who, by the juntion of thr,
troops from Hispaniola, amounted now to eight -
fix horsemen, and eight hundred and eighteen fol
soldiers; of whom a hundred and eighteen wuer
armed with mufkcts or cross-bows. Their train oi
artillery consistcd of three battering cannon, and
fifteen field-pieces 1. He reserved for hifnlelf, as
the fiation of greatcfl importance and danger.
the condu&t of the brigantines, each armed with
one of his fnall cannon, and manned with twentv-
five Spaniards.
May o. As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the

pofls afiigned them, they broke down the aquc.
ducts which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had
crected for conveying water into the capital, and
by the distress to which this reduced the inhabi-
tants, gave a beginning to the calamities which
they were dcftined to susser . Alvarado and Olid
found the towns, of which they were ordered to
take poffcffion, dcfcrtcd by their inhabitants, who
had fled for 1afcty to the capital, where Guatinio-

ziil

*Cortes Relat. 266, C. IIerrera, (ic. 3. lib. . c. 5. Go-

mara Cron. c. 129. 1' Cortes Relat. 266, C. t Corte!
Relat. 267, B. B. Diaz. c. 150. Ilerrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. l'
I14

lIS

ein had collected the chief force of his empire, B O O K
as there alone he could hope to make a successful V.
tfand against the formidable enemies who were ap. '-r
proaching to assault him. 1521'

'THE first effort of the Mexicans was to destroy Mexicans

the fleet of brigantincs, the fatal effeEts of whoe attack the
operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though
the brigantines, after all the labour and merit of
Cortes in forming them, were of inconfidcrable
bulk, rudely conftruted, and manned chiefly with
landmen, hardly possessed of skill enough to con-
duet them, they must have been objects of terror
to a people unacquainted with any navigation but
that of their lake, and possesscd of no vessel larger
than a canoe. Necessity, however, urged Gua-
timozin to hazard the attack; and hoping to supply
by numbers what he wanted in force, he aem-
bled such a multitude of canoes as covered the
face of the lake. They rowed on boldly to the
charge, while the brigantines, retarded by a dead
calm, could scarcely advance to meet them. But
as the enemy drew near, a breeze suddenly fprungpu
up; in a moment the fails were spread, and the
brigantines with irresistible impetuosity broke
through their feeble opponents, overset many ca-
noes, and diflipated the whole armament with such
slaughter, as convinced the Mexicans, that the
progress of the Europeans in knowledge and
arts rendered their superiority greater on this
new element than they had hitherto found it by
land '.

FROM that time Cortes remained master of the Singular
lake; and the brigantines not only prelervcd a plan ofcon

dusing the

communication between the Spaniards in their ¢iege.
different flations, though at considerable distance

I 2 from

Cortcs Rclat. 267, C. . Diaz. c, o50. Gornara Cron.
c 13. Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c, 17.

B O O K from each other, but were employed to cover the

v. causeways on each fide, and keep off the canoes,
^-xrJ- when they attempted to annoy the troops as. they

152!. advanced towards the city. He formed the bri..

gantines in three divisions, allotting one to each
fiation, with orders to second the operations of the
officer who commanded there. From all the three
stations he pushed on the attack against the city
with equal vigour; but in a manner so very dif-
ferent from that whereby sieges are conducted in
regular war, that he himself seems afraid that it
would appear no less improper than singular, to
persons unacquainted with his situation . Each
morning his troops assaulted the barricades which
the enemy had erected on the causeways, forced
their way over the trenches which they had dug,
and through the canals where the bridges were
broken down, and endeavoured to penetrate into
the heart of the city, in hopes of obtaining some
decisive advantage, which might force the enemy
to surrender, and terminate the war at once; but
when the obstinate valour of the Mexicans ren-
dered the efforts of the day ineffectual, the Spani-
ards retired in the evening to their former quarters.
Thustheir toil and danger were, in some measure,
continually renewed; the Mexicans repairing in
the night what the Spaniards had destroyed through
the day, and recovering the polls from which they
had driven them. But necessity prescribed this
flow and untoward mode of operation. The num-
ber of his troops was to finall, that Cortes durst
not, with a handful of men, attempt to make a
lodgment in a city where he might be surrounded
and annoyed by such a multitude of enemies.
The remembrance of what he had already suffered
by the ill-judged confidence with which he had

ventured

* Cortes Relat. 270, F.
1I6

117

ventured into such a dangerous situation, was iill B O O K
fresh in his mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with v.
fatigue, were unable to guard the various posts 's
which they daily gained; and though their camp 521.
was filled with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not
devolve this charge upon them, because they were
so little accuflomed to discipline, that no confi-
dence could be placed in their vigilance. Besides
this, Cortes was extremely solicitous to preserve
the city as much as poflble from being destroyed,
both as he destined it to be the capital of his con-
quests, and wished that it might remain as a mo-
nument of his glory. From all there confidcrations,
he adhered obstinately, for a month after the siege
was opened, to the system which he had adopted.
The Mexicans, in their own defence, displayed
valour which was hardly inferior to that with which
the Spaniards attacked them. On land, on water,
by night and by day, one furious conflit fuc-
cccded to another. Several Spaniards were killed,
more wounded, and all were ready to fink under
the toils of unintermiLting service, which were
rendered more intolerable by the injuries of the
season, the periodical rains being now set in with
their usual violence .

ASTONISHED and difconccrted with the length Endeavours
and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined tot°tak'th'

city by

make one great effort to get poffetfion of the city torm.
before he rclinquifhed the plan which he had hi-
thcrto followed, and had recourfx to any other
mode of attack. With this view, he ent infiruc-
tions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with
their divisions to a general aflault, and took the
command in person of that potled on the causeway
of Cuyocan. Animated by his pretncc, and the
cxpeation of obme decisive event, the Spaniards ul
pulhcd forward with irrcfiftible ipetuofity. They

broke
* B, Diaz. c. 5 15,

B 0 K broke through one barricade after another, forced

V. their way over the ditches and canals, and having
~r-' entered the city, gained ground incessantly, in
x521. spite of the multitude and ferocity of their oppo-

nents. Cortes, though delighted with the rapidity
of his progress, did not forget that he might still
find it neceflary to retreat; and in order to secure
it, appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain of chief
note in the troops which he had received from
Hispaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in the
causeway as the main body advanced. That of-
sicer deemi:g it inglorious to be thus employed,
while his companions were in the heat of ation
and the career of vieory, negle&ted the important
charge committed to him, and hurried on inconfi-
derately to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and kill were
daily improving, no sooner obJerved this, than
they carried an account of it to their monarch.
Rcpuifcd. GUATIMOZIN inflantly discerned the confc-

quences of the error which the Spaniards had com-
mitted, and, with admirable pretence of mnid,
prepared to take advantage of it. He commanded
the troops posted in the front to flacken their es-
fcrts in order to allure the Spaniards to push for-
ward, while he ditpatched a large body of cholcn
warriors through differcnt fireets, obme by land,
and others by water, towards the great breach in
the causeway which had been left open. On a
signal which he gave, the pricfis in the great tem-
ple firuck the great drum conlccrated to the god of
war. No fooncr did the Mexicans hear its doleful
1olcnin found, calculated to inlpirc them with con-
tempt of death and cnthufiafiic ardour, than they
rufhlcd upon the enemy with frianic rage. '1 hc
Spaniards, unable to reffif men urged on no Icli
by religious fury than hope of fucccls, bcgan it

l-{ lil't;
li8

retire at firlt ieifurcly, and with a good counte- B o K
nance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their V.
own impatience to escape increaled, the terror and "r
confusion became so general, that when they ar- 152h'
rivcd at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards and
Tllafcalans, horfemeni and infantry, plunged in
promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed upon
them fiercely from every fide, their light canoes
carrying them through shoals which the brigantines
could not approach. In vain did Cortes attempt
to flop and rally his flying troops; fear rendered
them regardle's of his intrcatics or commands.
Finding all his cudeavours to renew the combat
fruitless, his next care was to ave fonle ofthofe
who had thrown themfelvcs into the water; but
while thus employed with more attention to their
situation than to his own, fix Mexican captains with confi
suddenly laid hold of him, and were hurrying him derable las,.
off in triumph; and though two of his officers
rescued him at the expcnce of their own lives, he
received several dangerous wounds before he could
break loose. Above sixty Spaniards perished in
the rout ; and what rendered the disaster more as-
fliting, forty of these fell alive into the hands of
an enemy never known to hew mercy to a cap-
tive *.

THE approach of night, though it delivered theThofewho

dcjeEted Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy, riwere tken
ufheredin what was hardly lelsgrievious, the noile thegodof
of their barbarous triumph, and of the horrid fcfti-wa"'
val with which they celebrated their victory.
Every quarter of the city was illuminated; the great
temple hone with such peculiar plendour, that
the Spaniards could plainly fee the people in
piotion, and the priests busy in haftcning the pre-

parations

X Cortes Relat. p. 73. . Diaz. c. 152. Gomata Cron.
(. 148. HIerrera, dec. 3. lib. . c. 20.

ig9

B 0 0 K parations for the death of the prisoners. Through

V. the gloom they fancied that they discerned their
"r companions by the whiteness of their skins, as
.521. they were stript naked and compelled to dance

before the image of the god to whom they were to
be offered. They heard the shrieks of those who
were sacrificed, and thought that they could dif-
tinguilh each unhappy vidim, by the well-known
found of his voice. Imagination added to what
they really saw or heard, and augmented its hor.
ror. The most unfeeling melted into tears of com-
paiflon, and the flouteft heart trembled at the
dreadful fpedacle which they beheld *

New CORTES, who, befidcs all that he felt in corp.
cfbrts of the mon with his fold iers, was opprefied with the ad-
Mcxicans. ditional load of anxious reflecions natural to a

general on such an unexpcted calamity, could
not, like them, relieve his mind by giving vent to
its anguish. He was obliged to aiume an airof
tranquillity, in order to rcvive the tpirits and hopes
of his followcrs. The juncure, indeed, requirld
an extraordinary exertion of fortitude, . Tle Mexi-
cans, elated with their viitory, sallied out next
morning to attack him in his quarters. But they
did not rely on the efforts of theirown arms alone.
Thcy lent the heads of the Spaniards whom ticy
had acrlificed to the leading men in the adja.
cent provinces, and aflured them hat the [!od
of war, appealed by the blood of their invaders,
which had been shed lo plentifilly on his altars,
had declared with an audible voice, that in eilii
days time thole hated enemies fiould be finally
dcfiroycd, and peace and prolperity rc-cflabllifcll
i.; tle cmpire.

A PRrF DICl IO

. ce NOTE XXIV,
120

A pREDICTION uttered with such confidence, B O 0 K
and in terms so void of ambiguity, gained univer- v.
fal credit among a people prone to Iuperftition.
The zeal of the provinces which had already de- 1521
clarec againfi the Spaniards augmented, and feve-cortes d
ral, which had hitherto remained inative, tookferted by
arms with enthufiailic ardour to execute the dc- ma"Y°flis
crees of the gods. The Indian auxiliaries who
had joined Cortes, accustomcd to venerate the
Imre deities with the Mexicans, and to receive the
rclponfes of their priests with the fame implicit
faith, abandoned the Spaniards as a race of men
devoted to certain defiruction. Even the fidelity
of the Tlafcalans was fhakcn, and the Spanish
troops were left almost alone in their flations,
Cortes finding that he attempted in vain to dispel
the superstitious fears of his confederates by argu-
ment, took advantage from the imprudence of
those who had framed the prophecy, in fixing its
accomplifhmcnt so near at hand, to give them a
striking demonfiration of its falsity. He fufpcndcd
all military operations during the period marked
out by the oracle. Under cover of the brigantines
which kept the enemy at a diflance, his troops lay
in safety, and the fatal term expired without any
disaster *.

His allies, afllamed of their own credulity, re- r- rgais
turned to their station. Other tribes, judging hirfiierd-
that the gods, who had now deceived the Mexi-
cans, had decreed finally to withdraw their pro-
cfltion from them, joined his fandard; and hfch
as the levity of a simple people, moved by every

ight iniprcflion, that, in a short time after such
general defct ion of his confederates, Cortes saw
imfelf, if we may believe his own account, at
tc head of an hundred and fifty thousand In-

dians,

" B. iaz. . I53. Gonara Cron. c. 138,
I

121

B 0 oo dians. Even with such a numerous army, ye

v. found it necessary to adopt a new and more .ary

- r y lfyllem of operation. Inficad of renewing his a.
I521. tempts to become mailer of the city at once, by

and 'adpt, a ch bold but dangerous efforts of valour as he
ofattck. had already tried, he made his advances gra(luall,

and with cvery possible precaution againfl exl:p.
ling his men to any calamity finilar to that which
they fiill bcwai!cd. As the Spaniards pushed for.
ward the Indians regularly repaired the caulcwavs
behind them. As soon as they got poflcion of
any part of the town, the houlfs were inlialuly
levelled with the ground. Day by day, the Mex.
leans, forced to retire as their enemies gained
ground, were hemmed in within more narrow
limits. Guatinozin, though unable to flop tie
career of the enemy, continued to defend his ca.
pital with obstinate reiolution, and dilputcd ever)
inch of ground. But the Spaniards having not
only varied their mode of attack, but, by order!
of Cortes, having changed the weapons with which
they fought, were again armed with the long
Chinantlan spears, which they had employed with
such huccels againfit Narvacz, and, by the firm arras
in which this enabled them to range thelielves
they repelled, with little danger, the loose afl'aul
of the Mexicans: incredible inumbers of them fel
in the conflicts which they renewed every day'
\7Whilc war wafled without, famine began to con
fuime thcnl within the city. 'he Spanish brigan
tines having the entire command of the lake, rcn
i -rcdl ii imnl)oflibic to receive any iupply of' proi.
lins by water. T'I'lc vai nunl bcr of his InJiar
auxiliaries enabled Cortcs to shut. up the avenue
io the cit by bland. 'he ores which Gualinmozii
):;!d laild u]) were clxhaultcd by tll multitudes whicI

cro iidc(.
122

1 Co s It c l t. , -, . /r . 13 . .Di a % c. i r, 3

rouded into the capital, to defend their sovereign B O O K
od the temples of their gods. Not only the peo- v.
le, but perlons of the highcft rank, felt the ut- -
oft diftrefics of want. What they suffered 152z.
rought on ifetious and mortal diftcmpers, the
al calamity that visits besieged cities, and which
lled up the meafurc of their woes-.
BuT, under the pref'ure of so many and such Courageand
arious evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained "ltalY°of
rm and unfubdued. He rejected witl feorn, every zin.
,verture of peace from Cortes, and disdaining the
dca of flubmitting to the opprcffors of his country,
ctermincd not to survive its ruin, 'he Spaniards
ontinued their progress. At length all the three
divisions penetrated into the great qiuarc in thc July 27.
centre of the city, and made a secure lodgment
there. Three-fourths of the city were now re-
duced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quarter
was so closely pressed, that it could not long with-
fiand assailants who attacked it from their new
flation with superior advantage, and more assured
expectation of success. The Mexican nobles, bo-
licitous to save the life of a monarch whom they
revered, prevailed on Guatimozin to retire from
a place where refiflance was now vain, that he
might route the more distant provinces of the em-
pire to arms, and maintain there a more fucccfsful
llruggle with the public enemy. In order to faci-
litate the execution of this mcafure, they cndca-
voured to amuie Cortcs with overturcs of' fubmiil-
flon, that, while his attention was employed in ad-
jufiing the articles of' pacification, Guatimozin
might cfcape unperceived. But they made this at-
tempt upon a leader o' greater sagacity and dif-
ccrnnent than to be dcccived by their arts. Cortes
fulpcting their intention, and aware of' what mo-

incnt

Cortes elnt. 276, . 277. F. B. Diaz. 155. (;oinra,
Cron. c. 141.

T23

3 o K ment it was to defeat it, appointcd Sandoval, t,

V. officer on whoc vigilance he could moss perfctly
,.--- rely, to take the commnand of tl-e brigantilucs, ith

(52I. ftridc injundtions to watch every motion of the cnc.

my. andoval, attentive to the ciharge, obfcrinx
tmoni large canoes croudcdcl ith people rowirg
acros the lake with extraordinary rapidity, i.
ftantly gave the signal to chacc. Garcia Ilu!uic,
who conimmanded the flecte brigantinc, iboO over.
took them, and was preparing to fire on the fo!e.
inoit canoe, which feemecd to carry lome pcrlbo!

i i taken whom all the reft followed and obeyed. At once
rifoner. the rowers dropped their oars, and all on board

throwing down their arms, conjured him with cries
and tears to forbear, as the empcror was there,
Holguin eagerly fcizcd his prize, and Guatinozin,
with a dignified conipolure, gave himself up into
his hands, requefring only that no ipfult might be
ofic;red to the einprefs or his children. When con.
duEtcd to Cortes, he appeared neither with the
flllen ficrcencfs of a barbarian, nor with the de.
jt ion of a supplicant. " I have done," said he,
addrcling himlclf to the Spanish general, " what
lccame a monarch. I have defended my people
to the last cetrcnity. Nothing now remains but
to die. 'ake tis (1agger," laying his hand on
(i;e which Cotns wore, " plant it in my brca,

(and pl:t an end to a lilfe which can no longer be of

A,;: ,. /As {ion as tl:c fate of their fovcrcign was known,
t,' ;>' ti!i rrcfil:;ille of' !he Mcxicalns ccalfcl ; and Cores

te'ol; )(' ollio of llat Iniall 1pilt of the capital

(l.icl x t't (rc.l in ti idcl lroy d(l. 'T'lhus tern li

Ti;ac t( e iltic gc o l'V M.xico, the mi(ln lecnlo able
("f,:: in t !i:c conlqucl of Anmel ic;. It coliliiiiicl

lcven ty-five

' ( 'l'r. 9

I;t. I.t), I .

. i . .

j om.lr.la Cr,
i ':. } i , ,:::, d . 1. i,. ii. . '

,.ct)T-finvc days, hardly one of which passed with- 1 O K
l luinc extraordinary efiort of one party in the v-
ttack, or of the other in the defence of a city, on "~ '
c ate of which both knew that the fortune of the 5'2'1
1ipire depcnded. As the firuggle here was more
bltinatc, it was likcwvilc ore equal, than any
ct.wcen the inhabitaints of the Old and New
Vorlds. The great abilities of Guatimnozin, the
umibcr of his troops, the peculiar ituation of his
pital, fb far counterbalanced the luperiority of
c Spaniards in arms and discipline, that they
ull have rclinquifced the enterprise, if they had
lied for fucccls to themillves alone. But Mex-
owas overturned by the jcaloufy of neighbours
0o dreaded its power, and by the revolt of iub-
ts impatient to hakc off' its yoke. By their cf-
Cual aid, Cortcs was enabled to acconiplifi what,
thout ich liupport he could hardly have ven-
red to attempt. How much focver this account
the reduction of Mexico may detract, on the one
nd, from the marvellous relations of ioime Spa-
1 writers, by ascribing that to imple and obvi-
scaules which they attribute to the romantic va-

of their countrymen, it adds, on the other,
hic merit and abilities of Cortes , u, under
ry difadvantagc, acquired such an alcndatii
r unknown nations, as to render them iii.
ts towards carrying his fchcne into exccu-.

THE exultation of the Spaniards, on acconplifll- sm.ainc .:
this arduous entcrprize, was at firli cxcciive. i'1,.
ttlliswas quickly damped by the cruel dilp- po'ltr"II.
nilent of' tholie Ifnguine hlopcs, whicih lhad ttd,..
late(l them amidfi l many hardflips and dani-

Inllicad of the incxhalufiile wealth wVhice
ycx'pcctcd rolm becomiiil, maflers of ]Vloitc-

':"ZcUI

NOTE XX:LV.
iegcCOTE, .XXV,

B O O K zuma's treasures, and the ornaments of so mar,

V. temples, their rapaciousness could collect only l

--'r-' inconsiderable booty amidfi ruins and defolatioa'
1521. Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate, ha,

ordered what remained of the riches amafned b
his ancestors to be thrown into the lake. The In
dian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were engage
in conflid with the enemy, had carried off the mioi
valuable part of the spoil, The iturnto be dividec
among the conquerors was so small, that many o
them disdained to accept of the pittance which fel
to their share, and all murmured and exclaimed
frme againit Cortes and his confidents, whom the
suspected of having secretly appropriated to thei
own use, a large portion of the riches which flhoui
have been brought into the common stock; other
against Guatimozin, whom they accused of obfti
ilacy, in refusing to difccver the place where h
had hidden his trcafure.

.uat';mozin ARGUMENTS, entreaties, and promises, were cm
tortured. ployed in order to sooth them, but with so littl

efect, that Cortes, from folicitudc to check thil
growing spirit of discontent, gave way to a dee
which slained the glory of all his great aions
WVithout regarding the former dignity of Guati
mozin, or fccling any reverence for those irtu,
which he had displaycd, he fubjeted the uiliapp
nionarch, together with his chief favourite to to
turc, in order to force from them a difcoverv oft
royal treasures, which it was uppolcd tl;hy
concealcrl. Guatimozin bore whatever the rcfinl
cruelty of his tormentors could infica, wilh the i
vincible fortitude of an A merican warrior. lis c
low- Ihffcrcr, oe rcome by the violcnce ofthc alruil

* Tle gold and fil vcr, nccordi;n gto Cortes, aioii: c iurr^

120, oo pesos, Rtieat, 20o, A. a ii lir inifcrior, 10 li.,t '!
hlie Spaniards lihad (t'rlerly di'ided in Mexico.
126

turned a dcjcclcd eye towards his master, which B O O K
ceined to implore his pcrmiilion to reveal all that v.
Ie knew. But the high-fpirited prince, darting oln --
hlii a look of authority mingled with scorn, 1521.
hiecked his weakness by afkiig, Am I now rc-
.oiii o a bed of flowcrs ?" Overawed by the

riIoach, he perlevered i his dutiful filcucc

and expired. Cortes, afhanied of a iccne ib hor-
riJ, reicued the royal victin frlom the hands of
his torturers, and prolonged a life refervel for
exw indignities and fuirings .
The fate of the capital, as both parties had Alltlltpio-

vinces of tlhe

Iorelcen, decided that of ihe empire. The pro-empire rub-
,inces ihbmittcd one after another to the con- mit.
iLacrors. Small detachments of Spaniards march-
ing through them without interruption, penetrated,
in dillcrent quarters, to the great Southern Ocean,
which, according to the ideas of Columbus, they
imagined would open a fiort as well as easy pas-
age to the East Indies, and ccure to the crown of
Callile all the envied wealth of those fertile re-
gions ; and the aivc mind of Cortes began al- Cortesforms

0

r r i r * i * * 1'clie nes of

ready to form fchcmcs for attempting this impor- newiico-
tant discovery t. veries,

HE did not know, that during the progrcfs ofhichare
his victorious arms in Mexico, the very fchcinc of'coml'tecd
wlich he began to form fomc idea, had been un- by agcla.
dertaken and accomplishcd. As this is one of the
nolt splendid events in the hiflory of the Spanish
difcovcries, and has been productive of effe&s pe-
culiarly intcrcfting to those extensive provinces
ihich Cortes had now fubjcled to the crown of
Catilc, the account of its rile and progrcls merits
aparticular detail.

FIRDINAND

1. Diaz. c. 157. Gomara Cron. c. 146. I[errera, dec.
ii. c.

. Tlorqur(m. M'n. Ind. i. 574. Cortes Re-

128o, D, &c. . c.

B.

iaz c. 17 errea, Iec. 3. lib.
'" '. 7- Gomara Cron. c. 14y.

BOO K FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a

V. Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth, havinD

~'^r served everal years in the Ealt Indies, with diftin.
I521. guilhed valour, under the famous Albuquerque,

demanded the recompence which he thought due
to his services, with the boldness natural to a high.
spirited soldier. But, for some reaibn which is
not explained, both his general and his overeiga
rejected his suit with a disdainful coldners, that
was intolerable to a man conscious of what he had
done, and of what he deserved. In a transport of
resentment, he formally renounced his allegiance
,517. to an ungrateful master, nd fled to the court of

Castile, in hopes that there his worth would be
more justly cftimated. He endeavoured to recom.
mend himself by proposing to execute a scheme,
the accomplishment of which, he knew, would
wound the monarch, against whom he was cx
afperated, in the most tender part. Hc revivcc
Columbus's original and favourite projct, of dif
covering a paflage to India by a westerly courlc
and without encroaching on that portion of tN
globe which was allotted to the Portuguese by ti
line of dcmarcation. He founded his hopcs
success on the ideas of that great navigator, con
firmed by many obfcrvations, the reiult of i
own naval experience, as well as that of hiscoun
try men, in their intcrcourfe with the Eall. 'lb
undertaking, he acknowledged, was both ar
duous and expenfivc, as it could not be atcui):c
but with a squadron of considerable force, t:
viótualled for at least two years. Fortunately,
applied to a miniflcr who was not apt to be cltel
red, either by the boldnes of a design, or tllc
pence of carrying it into execution. Carlin
Ximcnes, who at that time dirccd the aairs
Spain, difcclrning at once what an incrcal
wealth and glory would accrue to his coulitry 1
the lucccls of Magellau's propolnl, lifccd tI

,i'
128

with a moil favourable ear. Charles V. on his B O O K
arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered into the v.
measure with no less ardour, and orders were if- r
sued fr equipping a proper squadron at the public 152I.
charge, of which the command was given to Ma-
gellan, whom the king honoured with the habit of
St. Jago and the title of Captain General .

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hun- Hi voyage.

dred and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
with five ihips, which, according to the ideas of
the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largest did not exceed
one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the
whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-four
men, among whom were ome of the most skilful
pilots in Spain, and several Portuguese sailors, in
whose experience, as more extensive, Magellan
placed still greater confidence. After touching at
the Canaries, he flood direcly south towards the
equinoctial line along the coast of America, but
was so long retarded by tedious calms, and spent
so much time in searching every bay and inlet for
that communication with the Southern Ocean
which he wvifhed to difeover, that he did not reach
the river de la Plata till the twelfth of January. 15o.
That spacious opening, through which its vast body
of water pours into the Atlantic, allured him to
enter; but, after failing up it for some days, he
concluded, from the Ihallownefs of the stream and
the frcfhnefs of the water, that the wifhed-for strait
was not ituatcd there, and continued his course
towards the south. On the thirty-firfl of March he
arrived in the port of St. Julian, about forty-eight
degrees south of the line, where he rcbolved to
winter. In this uncomfortable station he loft one of
his filuadron, and the Spaniards lutfcred so much

VOL. II. K from

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomara Hist.
C. (9.

I29

B O O K from the excessive rigour of the climate, that tli

v. crews of three of his ships, headed by their officers,
Ad^ role in open mutiny, and insisted on relinquishing
1521. the visionary projed of a desperate adventurer, and

returning directly to Spain. This dangerous in-
furreftion Magellan suppressed, by an effort of
courage no less prompt than intrepid, and infliEted
exemplary punishment on the ringleaders. With
the remainder of his followers, overawed but not
reconciled to his scheme, he continued his voyage
towards the south, and at length discovered, near
the fifty-third degree of latitude, the mouth of a
strait, into which he entered, notwithstanding the
murmurs and remonstrances of the people under
his command. After failing twenty days in that
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave his
own name, and where one of his hips deserted
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his view,
and with tears of joy he returned thanks to Heaven
for having thus far crowned his endeavours with
success .

BUT he was flill at a greater dillance than lie

imagined from the objeat of his wishes. He failed
during three months and twenty days in an uniform
direction towards the north-west, without disco-
vering land. In this voyage, the longest that had
ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he sus-
sered incredible distress. His flock of provisions
was almnoft cxhaufted, the water became putrid,
the men were reduced to the shortest allowance with
which it was impofiblc to fufiain life, and the fcur-
vcy, the most dreadful of all the maladies with
which lea-faring people are afflicted, began to
fprcad among the crew. One circumflance alone
afforded them obme consolation; they enjoyed an

uninterrupted

, IIerrcra, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. o1. lib. ix. c. Io, &c. Gomara

Iil. c. 92. Pigafetta Viaggio ap. Ramutf. ii. p. 352, &c.
I3o

uninterrupted course of fair weather, with such fa- B O O K
.ourable winds, that Magellan beflowed on that v.
ocean the name of Pacific, which it still retains. '.n--
WVhcn reduced to such extremity that they must z121.
have funk under their fuffcrings, they fell in with
aclufter of mall but fertile islands, which afforded
tliei refre(hments in such abundance, that theirMarch6.
hcaith was soon re-eflablifned. From there isles,
to which he gave the name of De los Ladrones, he
procecded on his voyage, and soon made a more
imuportant discovery of the islands now known by
tlhe name of the Pilippines. In one of these he
got: into an unfortunate quarrel with the natives,
who attacked him with a numerous body of troops
well armed; and while he fought at the head of
his men with his usual valour, he fell by the hands
of those barbarians, together with several of his April 6,
principal officers.

THE expedition was prosecuted under other com-
imanders. After visiting many of the finaller isles
scattered in the eastern part of the Indian ocean
they touched at the .great island of Borneo, and at Nov. .
lcugth landed in Tidore, one of the Moluccas, to
hc astonishment of the Portuguese, who could not
comprehend how the Spaniards, by holding a well-
crly course had arrived at that sequestered feat of
their most valuable commerce, which they thcm-
fclvcs had difeovcred by failing in an opposite di-
rchion. There, and in the adjacent isles, they
found a people acquainted with the benefits of
Ctceifive trade, and willing to open an intercourse
w"ith a new nation. They took in a cargo of the
precious fpiccs, which are the diflinguilhcd pro-
dudion of those illands, and with that, as well as
'ith li)ccincns ofl tic richi commodities yielded
bt tlhc other countrics s 'hicli they had visited, the
li'tory, vwhich, oflthe twso sips that remained of
the I;l'adron, \'as niolt fit for a long voyage, set Jn. L5Z
iu! Jor Europe, under the command of Juan

1( 2 Scbafiian

I3r

B o 0 I Sebastian del Cano. He followed the course of the

V. Portuguese by the Cape of Good Hope, and, after
1Zs~ many disasters and sufferings, he arrived at St

J52t. Lucar on the seventh of September one thousand

five hundred and twenty-two, having failed round
the globe in the space of three years and twenty-
eight days .

THOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the satisfaction of accomplishing this great un-
dertaking, his contemporaries, just to his memory
and talents, ascribed to him not only the glory of
having formed the plan, but of having surmounted
almost every obstacle to the completion of it; and
in the present age his name is still ranked among
the highest in the roll of eminent and successful
navigators. The navalglory of Spain now eclipled
that of every other nation, and by a singular felicity
the had the merit, in the course of a few years, of
discovering a new continent as most as large as that
part of the earth which was formerly known, and
of ascertaining by experience the form and extent
of the whole terraqueous globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory

of having firt encompassed the earth; they ex.
peeted to derive great commercial advantages from
this new and boldest effort of their maritime kill.
The men of science among them contended, that
the spice of islands, and several of thericheft coun.
tries in the East, were so situated as to belong of
right to the crown of Caffile, in consequence of the
partition made by Alexander VI. The merchants,
without attending to this difeuflion, engaged eagerly
in that lucrative and alluring commerce, which
was now opened to them. The Portuguclc,

alarmed

*- Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 3. 9. lib. iv. c. . Gonmar

Cron. c. 93, &c. Pigafetta ap. Ramus. ii. p. 361, &c.
132

alarmed at the intrusion of such formidable ri-B 0 OK
vals, remonstrated and negociated in Europe, while v.
in Asia they obftruted the trade of the Spa- s-
niards by force of arms. Charles, not fuffi- i2I.
ciently inftruted with refpea to the importance
of this valuable branch of commerce, or diitraded
by the multiplicity of his schemes and opera-
tions, did not afford his fubjets proper protec-
tion. At last, the low slate of his finances, ex-
iaufted by the efforts of his arms in every part
of Europe, together with the dread of adding a
new war with Portugal to those in which he was
already engaged, induced him to make over his
claim of the Moluccas to the Portuguese for
three hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He
reserved, however, to the crown of Castile the
right of reviving its pretensions on repayment of
that frum; but other objeds engrossed his at-
tention ad that of his successors, and Spain was
finally excluded from a branch of commerce in
which it was engaging with sanguine expectations
of profit .

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was re-
linquifhed, the voyage of Magellan was followed
by commercial effeCts of great moment in Spain.
Philip II. in the year one thousand five hundred
and fixty-four, reduced those ilands which he dif-
covered in the Eastern Ocean to fubjetion, and
established settlements there ; between which and
the kingdom of New Spain a regular intercourse,
the matter of which shall be explained in its proper
place, is carried on, I return now to the tranfac-
tions in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such vast Anorderto
territories for his native country, and preparing the fuplrfdc
way for future conquets, it was his singular fate

not
* hlrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 5, &c. dec. iv. lib. v. 7. &c.

B O O K not only to be destitute of any commission or autho.
am-r- rity from the sovereign whom he was serving with

1521. such successful zeal, but to be regarded as an un-

dutiful and seditious subjet. By the influence of
Fonleca, bishop of Burgos, his conduct in afluim.
ing the government of New Spain was declared to
be an irregular usurpation, in contempt of the royal
authority ; and Chrifloval de Tapia received a con-
mifiion, impowering him to supersede Cortes, to
seize his person, to confilcate his effects, to make a
firit scrutiny into his proceedings, and to tranfnrit
the result of his inquiries to the council of the In-
dies, of which the bishop of Burgos was president.
A few weeks after the reduction of Mexico, apia
landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to
strip its conqueror of his power, and to treat himl
as a criminal. But Fonseca had chosen a very in-
proper infirument to wreak his vengeance on Cor-
tes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor the ta-

which he lents that suited the high command to which he
cludes. was appointed. Cortes, while he publicly ex-

presTed the mofi rcfpctful veneration for the empc.
ror's authority, secretly took measures to defeat tlhe
cffc& of his commiflion ; and having involved a.
pia and his followcrs in a multiplicity of ncgoci-
ations and conferences, in which he fomctincshad
recourfcto threats, but more frcqucntly emplo)ct
bribes and promifcs, he at lengthl prevailed on tlit
weak man to abandon a province which lhe as
unworthy of governing .

Applies BUT notwithfianding the fortunate dexterity
.':,i ,o tle with which hie had eluded this blow, Cortes was

522. sensible of the precarious tenure by which e he hld
'ly 15 his power, that he dilpatclicd deputies to Spain

wit It

le Hcrrera (dcc. 3. ]ib. ii. c. 16. dec. iv. c. . Cortes Relat,

:t!. E. B. l)i;z. c. J5s.
I34

with a pompous account of the success of his arms, B o OK
with farther specimens of the productions of the v.
country, and with rich presents to the emperor, as '-Ir-
the earnest of future contributions firom his new I522.
conquest; requefling in recompence for all his er-
vices, the approbation of his proceedings, and that
he might be entrusted with the government of thole
territories, which his conduct, and the valour of
his followers, had added to the crown of Castile.
Thejunure in which his deputies reached the
court was favourable. The internal commotions
in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of
Charles's reign were just appeased . The rini f-
ters had leisure to turn their attention towards so- /
reign affairs. The account of Cortcs's vitorics
filled his countrymen with admiration. The ex-
tent and value of his conquefis became the object
of vast and interesting hopes. Whatever slain he
might have contracted, by the irregularity of the
Iteps which he took in order to attain power, was
so fully effaced by the splendor and merit of the
great ations which this had enabled him to per-
form, thatevery heart revolted at the thought of
inflicting any censure on a man, whole erviccs
entitled him to the highefi marks of difiinction.
The public voice declared warmly in favour of his
pretensions, and Charles arriving in Spain about
this time, adopted the fcntiments of his fubjeas
with a youthful ardour. Notwithstanding the claims
of Velaiquez, and the partial reprcfentations of
the bishop of Burgos, he appointed Cortes captain- and is ap-
general and governor of New Spain, judging that poited
no pcrfon was so capable of maintaining the royal nalalnd
authority, orof flablifhing good order both among 'sen.or
his Spanish and Indian lubjets, as the corn- w '"
mlander whom the bormer would willingly obey,

and
* lifl, of Charles V. vol. ii. b. iii.

135

BO O K and the latter had been long accustomed to fear

V. and to refpedt .

'^~s' EVEN before his jurifdi&tion received this legal
Hisfchemes fantion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the powers
and arrange. of a governor, and, by various arrangements, en-
rments. deavoured to render his conquest a secure and be-

neficial acquisition to his country. He determined
to eflablifh the feat of government in its ancient
fiation, and to raise Mexico again from its ruins;
and having conceived high ideas concerning the
future grandeur of the slate of which he was laying
the foundation, he began to rebuild its capital on a
plan which had gradually formed the most mag-
nificent city in the New World. At the fame
time, he employed kilful persons to search for
mines in different parts of the country, and opened
some which were found to be richer than any
which the Spaniards had hitherto discovered in
America. He detached his principal officers into
the remote provinces, and encouraged them to set-
tie there, not only by bellowing upon them large
trats of land, but by granting them the fame do-
minion over the Indians, and the fame right to
their service which the Spaniards had aflumed in
the islands.

Infurrec- IT was not, however, without difficulty that the
tions of t Mexican empire could be entirely reduced into the
and cruelty form ofa Spanish colony. Enraged and rendered

dof the S delperate by oppreflion, the natives often forgot

the uperiority of their enemies, and run to arms in
defence of their liberties. In every contest, how-
ever, the European valour and discipline prevailed.
But fatally bfr the honour of their country, the
Spaniards sullicd the glory redounding from there
repeated victories by their mode of'treating the van-

qui fled

II Jrrcra Idec. ;. lib. iv. c. 3. Gomarn Cron. 164, 165.

.A. Diaz. 167, ,6ti.
136

quilhed people. After taking Guatimozin, and B 00 K
becoming matters of his capital, they supposed v.
that the king of Castile entered on pofleffion of all Rae
the rights of the captive monarch, and affected to I522.
confider every effort of the Mexicans to assert their
ow0l independence, as the rebellion of vassals
against their fovereig!l, or the mutiny of slaves
againit their master. Under the fandion of those
ill-founded maxims, they violated every right that
should be held sacred between hostile nations.
Afier every infurrefion, they reduced the com-
mol people in the provinces which they subdued,
to the most humiliating of all conditions, that of
perlonal servitude. Their chiefs, fuppoied to be
more criminal, were puniihed with greater severity,
and put to death in the most ignominious or the
most excruciating form, that the infblence or the
cruelty of their conquerors could devise. In al-
nmot every province of the Mexican emire, the
the progress of the Spanish arms is marked with
blood, and with deeds so atrocious as disgrace the
enterprising valour that conduEted them to success.
In the province of Panuco, sixty caziques, or lead-
ers, and four hundred nobles, were burnt at one
time. Nor was this hocking barbarity perpe-
trated in any sudden tally of rage, or by a com-
mander of inferior note. It was the a of Sando-
val, an officer whose name is entitled to the second
ank in the annals of New Spain, executed after a
olemn consultation with Cortes ; and to complete
the horror of the cfene, the children and relations
f the wretched victims were aflcmbled, and com-
clled to be fpestators of their dying agonies.''
t fccnis hardly poflible to exceed in horror this
rcadful cxample of severity ; but it was followed
) another, which affeflcd the Mexicans flill more

ibnfibly,
" Cortcs Rclat. :9i, C. Goinara Cron. C. 55.

137

B O Q K sensibly, as it gave them a most feeling proof

V. their own degradation, and of the s'mall regard
~'^~s that their haughty matters retained for the ancicri

1522- dignity and iplendor of their tfate. On a ilig

lulpicion, confirmed by very imperfeCt evidence
that Guationozin had formed a scheme to hake of
the yoke, and to excite his former subjects to take
arms, Cortes, without the formality of a trial, or.
dcred the unhappy monarch, together with the ca.
ziques of Tczcuco and Tacuba, the two peisons
of greatest eminence in the empire, to be aniged;
and the Mexicans, with aftoniflment and horror.
beheld this ignominious punishment inflidted upon
persons, to whom they were accuflomed to look
up with reverence, hardly inferior to that which
they paid to the gods thcmfelves . The cxanple
of Cortes and his principal oflicers, encouraged
and juflified persons of subordinate rank to ven.
ture upon committing greater exceffcs. Nunode
Guzman, in particular, stained an illuflrious name
by deeds of peculiar enormity and rigour, in vari,
ous expeditions which he condu&tedt.

ONE circumstance, however, saved the Mexi.

cans from farther conlumption, perhaps from one
as complete as that which had depopulatcd the
islands. The first conquerors did not attempt to
fcarch for the precious metals in the bowels of the
earth. They were neither lufliciently wealthy to
carry on the expensive works, which are requisite
for opening of thole deep reeeffes where Nature
has concealed the veins of gold and silver, nor sus-
licintly fkiilful to perlorm the ingenious opciatiois
b)y wvlich they arc leparated from their rcllipcic
ors. 'Thcy were fitisiicd with the more fiiuple

method,

* (oml'ara Cron. r. 170. B. I1i.z. c. 177. Ilrrera, dc
3. ih. viii.c. o. See NOTE XXVr.

} ] Icri cra, (e.:. 4 a id 5 pafillin.

method, pradifed by the Indians, of washing the B 0 0 I
earth carried down rivers and torrents from the v.
mountains, and collefting the grains of native me- r
tal deposited there. The rich mines of New Spain, I522.
whicn have poured forth their treasures with such
profusion on every quarter of the globe, were not
difeovered for several years after the conquest*. i55s, &c,
By that time, a more orderly government and po.
lice were introduced into the colony ; experience,
derivcd from former errors, had fuggeited many
ufsful and humane regulations for the protection
and preservation of the Indians; and though it
then became necefliry to increase the number of
those employed in the mines, and they were en-
gaged in a pccies of labour more pernicious to the
human constitution, they suffered less hardship or
diminution than from the ill-judged, but less ex,
tensive schemes of the first conquerors.

THIS extraordinrry mortality among the In-
dians disappointed the hopes of their new masters.
Few seem to have derived any considerable wealth
from their ill-conduCted researches. According to
the usual fate of first settlers in new colonies, it was
their lot to encounter danger and to struggle with
difficulties; the fruits of their victories and toils
were reserved for times of tranquillity, and reaped
by fucceflbrs of greater industry, but of inferior
merit. The early hiflorians of America abound
with accounts of the sufferings and of the poverty
of its conquerorst. In New Spain their condition
was rendered more grievous by a peculiar arrange-
ment. When Charles V. advanced Cortes to the
government of that country, he, at the anme tiie,
aplpoitccl certain conmmifiioncrs to receive and
adminiltcr the royal revenue there, with indc-

pendent

* Herrera, dec. 8. lib. c. 21. ) Cortes Rclat. 183. F,
BJ. Diaz. c. 209.

13 0 0 K pendent jurisdiction ". These men, chosen fror;r

v. inferior flations in various departments of public
^-r^ business at Madrid, were so mnuch elevated with
1522. their promotion, that they thought they were called

to a a part of the first consequence. .lut being
accustomed to the minute formalities of office, and
having contracled the narrow ideas suited to the
fpherc in which they had hitherto moved, they
were astonished, on arriving in Mexico, at the high
authority which Cortes exercised, and could inot
conceive that the mode of administration, in a
country recently subdued and fettled, must be dif-
ferent from that which took place in one where
tranquillity and regular government had been long
eflablifhed. In their letters, they represented
Cortes as an ambitious tyrant, who having usurped
ajurifdiction superior to law, aspired at independ.
ence, and by his exhorbitant wealth and extensive
influence, might accomplish thole disloyal schemes
which he apparently meditatedf. These infinua-
tions made such deep impression upon the Spanifl
mninifters, mofl of whom had been formed to bu-
finess under the jealous and rigid administration of
Ferdinand, that unmindful of all Cortes's past ser-
vices, gad regardless of what he was then suffering
in conduting that extraordinary expedition, in
which lie advanced from the lake of Mexico to the
wcfcern extremities of Hondurast, they infuted
the Ifae suspicions into the mind of their mafler,
and prevailed on him to order a solemn inqueit to
be made into his conduct, with powers to the licen-
,2,; riate Ponce de Lcon, cntrufted with thatcoinniffion

iC Ifcize his peron, if he should find that expedient,
and lend him prilbner to Spain§.

"1 Icrrcra, dec. 3. l.

I . . . ' Id. dec. 3. lib. v. c. 14.
I Sc NOTE XXVII, d H-lerrera, lec. 3. lib. viii. c. 14, 5

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few days B O OK
Ifter his arrival in New Spain, prevented the exe- V.
cution of this coinmillion, But as the objed of'his 'T~
appointment was known, the mind of Cortes was 152
deeply wounded with this unexpeded return for
Irvices which far exceeded whatever any subjed[
of Spain had rendered to his Ibvereign. He en-
deavoured, however, to maintain his fation, and
to recover the confidence of the court. But every
person in office, who had arrived from Spain fincc
the conquest, was a spy upon his condut, and with
malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable repre-
fetation of all his ations. The apprehensions of
Charles and his ministers increased. A new corn- 158.
nmiflion of inquiry was issued, with more extensive
powers, and various precautions were taken to pre-
vent or to punish him, if he ihould be Ib prefump-
tuous as to attempt what was inconsistent with the
fidelity of a subjed *. Cortes beheld the approach-
ing crisis of his fortune with all the violent emo-
tions natural to a haughty mind, conscious of high
delert, and receiving unworthy treatment. But
though some of his delperate followers urged him to
aflert his own rights against his ungrateful country,
and, with a bold hand, to seize that power which
the courtiers meanly accused him of coveting -, he
retained iuch lelf-command, or was auated with
such sentiments of loyalty, as to rejedt their dan-
gerouscounfels, and to chute the only course in
which he could secure his own dignity, without
departing from his duty. He resolved not to ex-
pofc himself to the ignominy of a trial, in that
country which had been the feene of his triumphs;
but, without waiting for the arrival of his judges,
torepair dircctly to Cafile, and commit himl'clf

and

ETcrrern, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. I. lib. iv.

9. o. B. Diaz. c. 172. 96. Gomara Cron. c. 66.
I . Diaz. c. 194

B O 0 K and his cause to the justice and generolity of his

v. sovereign .

b'__ CORTES appeared in his native country with
1528. the splendour that suited the conqueror of a mighty

kingdom. He brought with him a great part of
his wealth, many jewels and ornaments of reat
value, several curious producions of the country,
and was attended by ome Mexicans of the first
rank, as well as by the most considerable of his
own officers. His arrival in Spain removed at
once every suspicion and fear that had been enter-
tained with reipet to his intentions. The empe-
ror having now nothing to apprehend from the dc-
signs of Cortes, received him like a person whom
consciousness of his own innocence had brought
into the presence of his master, and who was in.
titled by the eminence of his services, to the high-
eft marks of diftinEtion and refpet. The order
of St. Jago, the title of Marquis del Valle de
Guaxaca, the grant of a vast territory in New Spain,
were fucceflively bellowed upon him; and as his
manners were corre& and elegant, although he had
pafled the greater part of his life among rough ad-
venturers, the emperor admitted him to the lame
familiar intercourle with himself, that was enjoy-
ed by noblemen of the first rank §.

BUT, anlidl those external proofs of regard,

fynptorns of remaining difitruft appeared. Though
Cortes earnestly olicited to be rcinftated in the
government of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious
to commit such an important charge to a man
whom he had once i'ufpcltcd, peremptorily rcfulcd
to invelt himl again wilh powers which he might

find

'* IlIcrr, (de. 3. lib. iv. c. 8. I Sec NOTE XXVIII
llerreri, dec. . ib. iv. c. i. lib. vi.c.4. B. Diaz. c. 1l9t
ouin. Cron. c. I2.
142

ilij it impossible to controul. Cortes, though dig- B O O K
:icd with new titles, returned to Mexico with V.
i!linifhled authority. The military departnent,
ith powers to attempt new discoverics was left in '530
his hands ; but the lupremc direction of civil as-
i.;rs was placed in a board called The Aludience of
\:: Spainl. At a fubfcqucnt period, when, upol
:;e increase of the colony, the exertion of autho-
,l; nire united and extcefivc became neccffary,
Antonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of high rank,
nasfent thither as Viceroy, to take the government
into his hands.

TnIS division of power in New Spain proved,
was unavoidable, the Iburce of perpetual diffen-
ion, which embittered the life of Cortes, and
vwarted all his schemes. As he had now no op-
ortunity to display his active talents but in at-
temptingnew dicfoverics, he formed various schemes
orthat purpose, all of which bear imprefiions of'
agenius that delighted in what was bold and fplcn-
did. He early entertained an idea, that, either
y lteering through the gulph of Florida along the
aft coast of North America, fomne firait would be
und that communicated with the ieftern ocean;
rtlhat, by examining the ifithius of Darien, some
affage would be dilcovcred betweenc the North
and South Seas f. But having ben dilappointed
his expectations with relpeCt to both, he now
onfined his views to luch voyages of dilcovery as
e could make from the ports of' New Spain in the
South Sea. ''There he fitted out luccellively fevcral
flall squadrons, which either pcrificd in the at-
tenpt, or returned without making any dilcovery
flofmnlo0le. Coles \wcary of cntrnlling the con-
duat of his operations to otlhrs, took the corn- 1536.

inland
.; Corn (. 1 iii. Rim. iii. 94, .

i43

B O K mand of a new armament in person, and, after

V. enduring incredible hardships, and encouutcriigj

I-_'^ dangers of every species, he discovered the large
A536. peninsula of California, and surveyed the greater

part of the gulf which separates it from New Spain,
The discovery of a country of such extent would
have refleced credit on a common adventurer; but
it could add little new honour to the name of Cor.
tes, nor satisfy the sanguine expe&tations which be
had formed . Disgusted with ill success, to whicl
he had not been accustomed, and weary of con.
testing with adversaries to whom he confidered it
as a disgrace to be opposed, he once more fought
io40. for redress in his native country.

B u T his reception there was very different fron

that which gratitude, and even decency, ought to
have secured for him. The merit of his ancient
exploits was already, in a great measure, forgotten,
or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more valuable
conquests, in another quarter of America. No ser.
vice of moment was now expected from a man oi
declining years, and who began to be unfortunate.
The emperor behaved to him with cold civility;
his ministers treated him, sometimes with neglei,
sometimes with insolence. His grievances received
no redress ; his claims were urged without eflcl;
and after several years spent in fruitless application
to ministers and judges, an occupation the mofi ir
tome and mortifying to a man of high spirit, whoI
had moved in a sphere where he was more accul
tomed to command than to oblicit. Cortes endcc
his days on the second of December one thou
land five hundred and forty-feven, in the sixty
'ccond year of his age. His fate was the fanI

wit l

* Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9. ro. dec. 8. lib. vi. c. 14. 'c

negas Hit. of Calitorn. i. 125. Lorenzana Hit. p. 322, ac.
144

with that of all the persons who distinguished them- B 0O K
selves in the discovery or conquest of the New V.
World. Envied by his contemporaries, and ill ^T^
requited by the court which he served, he has been I536-
admired and celebrated by succeeding ages. Which
has formed the most just eftinate of his charaer,
an impartial consideration of his acions mufl deter.
minc.
Vol. II.

145
L

THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

B 0 0 K VI.

FROM the time that Nugnez del Balboa disco- B 0 0 K
vered the great Southern Ocean, and received the VI.
first obscure hint concerning the opulent countries TY
with which it might open a communication, the Schemes for
wishes and schemes of every enterprising person discovering
in the colonies of Darien and Panama were turnud P"ru
towards the wealth of those unknown regions.
In an age when the spirit of adventure was so ar-
dous and vigorous, that large fortuneswere wafted,
and the most alarming dangers braved, in pur-
suit of discoveries merely poflible, the faintest
ray of hope was followed with eager expe&ation,
and the slightest information was sufficient to in.
spire such perfel confidence, as conduted men to
the most arduous undertakings .

L 2 ACCORDINGLY,

* See NOTE XXIX.
11_ 

___

B OOK ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted

VI. out in order to explore and take pofeflion of the
<ir- countries to the east of Panama, but under the

1523. conduct of leaders whose talents and relburces

fl fuorfom were unequal to the attempt A. As their excursions
time. did not extend beyond the limits of the province

to which the Spaniards have given the name of
Tierra Firme, a mountainous region covered with
woods, thinly inhabited, and extremely unheal-
thy, they returned with dil'mal accounts concern-
ing the diftrefles to which they had been exposcd,
and the uupromifing apec& of the places which
they had visited. Damped by there tidings, the
rage for dicfovery, in that direction abated; ad
it became the general opinion, that Balboa had
founded visionary hopes, on the tale of an igno-
rant Indian, ill underitood, or calculated to de-
ceive.

Undertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama,
by Pizarro,
Almagro, on whom the circumftanccs which deterred others
andLquc. niade lo little impreflion, that, at the very moment

when all confidcred Balboa's expectations of dil-
154. covering a rich country, by ficering towards the

east, as chimerical, they resolvcd to atcmpt the
:execution of his Ichcme. The names of those
extraordinary men were Francisco Pizarro, Diego
de Almagro, and Hernando Luquc. Pizarro was
the natural on of a gentlcman of an honourable
family by a very low woman, and according to the
cruel fate which often attends the offspring of un-
lawful love, had been so totally ncglctcd in his
youth by the author of his birth, that he f'ccis to
have defsined him never to rife beyond the condi-
tion of his mother. In confcqucnce of this un-
generous idea, he fct hilll, when bordering on
manhood, to keep hogs. But the aliiring mind

of
* Calancha Coronica, p. oo.

of young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupa- B O O K
tion, he abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as VI.
a. tldier, and after serving ome years in.Italy, '---
embarked for America, which, by opening such I524.
a boundless rage to ative talents, allured every ad-
venturer whole fortune was not equal to his ambi-
tious thoughts. There, Pizarro early distinguished
hiinlclf. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the conffitution of his body was robust, he
was foremost in every danger, patient under the
grcateft hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was oon confidered as a man formed to com-
mand. Every operation committed to his condut
proved fuccelsful, as, by a happy hut rare con-
junEtion, he united perfeverence with ardour, and
was as cautious in executing, as he was bold in
forming his plans. By engaging early into life,
without any resource but his own talents and in-
duftry, and by depending on himself alone in his
firuggles to emerge from obscurity, he acquired such
a thorough knowledge of affairs, and of men,
that he was fitted to atfume a superior part in con-
duLiing the one, and in governing the other .

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent
as Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other a
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any of soldierly
qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable aivity,
or infurniountable conflancy in enduring the hard-
flips inleparable from military service in the New
World. But in Almagro these virtues were accom-
panied with the openncls, gcnerofity, and can-

dour

* Hercra, dec. & 2, pafflin, dec. 4. lib. vi, c. 107. Go-
mara Hilt. c. 144. Z; rate, lib. iv. c. 9.

149

BO OK dour natural to men whose profession is armrn

VL. in Pizarro, they were united with the address, the

'^i ~ craft, and the dissimulation of a politician, with
1524. the art of concealing his own purposes and with

sagacity to penetrate into those of other men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclfiafiic,

who a6ted both as priest and fchoolmafler at Pan-
ama, and, by means which the contemporary
writers have not described, had amassed riches
that inspired him with thoughts of rising to greater
eminence.

Terms of SUCH were the men destined to overturn one
their afsocia- o
tion. of the most extensive empires on the face of the

earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was
authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in the
adventure. Pizarro, the least wealthy of the three,
as he could not throw so large a funm as his affoci-
ates into the common fock, engaged to take the
department of greatest fatigue and danger, and
to command in person the armament which was
to go first upon discovery. Almagro offered to con-
due the supplies of provisions and reinforcements
of troops, of which Pizarro might fiand in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to negociate with
the governor, and superintend whatever was car-
xying on for the general interest. As the spirit
of nthufiafm uniformly accompanied that of ad-
venture in the New World, and by that strange
union both acquired an increase of force, this
confederacy, formed by ambition and avarice,
was confirmed by the most solemn a of religion.
Luque celebrated mass, divided a consecrated host
into three, and reserving one part to himself,
gave the other two to his affbciates, of which
they partook; and thus in name of the Prince

of

of Peace, ratified a contra& of which plunder and B o o K
bloodshed were the objects y. VI.

THE attempt was begun with a force more suited "T'

to the humble condition of the three adventurers, .Th524-
than to the greatness of the enterprise in whichattempt.
they were engaged, Pizarro set fail from Pa- Nov 4'
nama with a single vessel, of small burthen, and
a hundred and twelve men. But in that age, so
little were the Spaniards acquainted with the pe-
culiarities of climate in America, that the time
which Pizarro chose for his departure was the most
improper in the whole year; the periodical winds,
which were then set in, being direaly adverse to
the course which he purposed to fleer-. After
beating about for seventy days, with much danger
and incessant fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards '5s,-
the south-east, was not greater than what a kil-
ful navigator will now make in as many hours.
He touched at several places on the coast of Tierra
Firme, but found every where the fame uninviting
country which former adventurers had described;
the low grounds converted into swamps by the
overflowing of rivers; the higher, covered with
impervious woods; few inhabitants, and thofc
fierce and hostile. Famine, fatigue, and frequent
rencounters with the natives, and above all, the
distempers of a moist, sultry climate, combined
in wafting his slender band of followers. TheAttended
undaunted resolution of their leader continued,wih little
however, for some time, to sustain their fpirits,fuc"'
although no sign had yet appeared of discovering
those golden regions to which he had promised
to condu&t them. At length, he was obliged to
abandon that inhospitable coast, and retire to

Chuchama,

a Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 13. Zarate, lib. i. c. r.
l' Herrcra, dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 8. Xerez. p. 179.

BOO K ChuChama, opposite to the pearl islands, where

VI. he hoped to receive a supply of provisions and
I-r troops from'Panama.
1525. BUT Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, flood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his as-
fociate. Not finding him there, he landed his fol-
diers, who, in searching for their companions,
underwent the fame distresses, and were exposed
to the fame dangers, which had driven them out
of the country. Repulsed at length by the In-
dians in a sharp confli&, in which their leader loft
one of his eyes by the wound of an arrrow, they
likewise were compelled to reimbark. Chance led
them to the place of Pizarro's retreat, where they
found some consolation in recounting their ad-
June 24. ventures, and comparing their sufferings. As Al-

magro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan,
in the province of Popayan, where both the country
and inhabitants appeared with a more promising
afpe&, that dawn of better fortune was sufficient
to determine such sanguine projectors not to aban-
don their scheme, notwithstanding all that they had
suffered in prosecuting it ".

They re- ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of re-
fume the
undertaking. cruiting their shattered troops. But what he and

Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen such an
unfavourable idea of the service, that it was with
difficulty he could levy fourscore men 1. Feeble
as this reinforcement was, they did not hesitate
about resuming their operations. After a long le-
ries of disasters and disappointments, not infe-
rior to those which they had already experi-
enced, part of the armament reached the bay of

St.

* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. , 12. See NOTE XXX.
'!. Zarate, lib. i. c. .

53

:, Matthew, on the coast of Q1Oto, and landed 3 00 K
at'facamez, to the bouth of the rivcr of Emeraulds, VI.
tiev beheld a country more champaign and ser- -
tile than any they had yet discovered in the Sou- 1526.
tcrn Ocean, the natives clad in garments of wool-
lel or cotton stuff; and adorned with several trin-
cts of gold and silver.
BUT notwithstanding those favourable appear-
alncC, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of those who brought the report from Ta-
canecz, and by the fond imagination of those who
litened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst not
venture to invade a country so populous, with a
handful of men enfeeblcd by fatigue and difcafes.
They retired to the finall iiland of Gallo, where
Pizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
afibciate returned to Panama, in hopes of bring-
ing such a rcinforcement as might enable them to
take poflcflion of the opulent territories, whole
existence eemed to be no longer doubtful.
BUT some of the adventurers, lels enterprising, Pizarrore-
or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly lednboy1f

governor of

conveyed lamentable accounts of their lufferings Panala.
and lofles to their friends at Panama, Almnagro
niet with an unfavourable reception fromn Pedro
de los Rios, who had Iucceeded Pcdrarias in the
government of that fettlcncnt. After weighing
ihe matter, with that cold oconomical prudence,
which appears the first of all virtues to persons
whole limited facultics arc incapable of conceiving
orexecuting great designs, he concluded an expe-
dition, attended with ifuch certain afte of men,
lobe lb detrimental to an ifant and feeble colo-
yr, that he not only prohibited the raising of
cew levies, but dili):tclled a vcflcl to brinsT home

Pizarro
-i1 Xcrd'. iSc. llerrci, dc. . lib v. c. I 3.

BO K Pizarro and his companions from the island of

VI. Gallo. Almagro and Luque, though deeply as.
~'-'"a feded with the'e measures, which they could not

'526. prevent and durst notoppofe, found means of com.

municating their sentiments privately to Pizarro
and exhorted him not to relinquilh an enterprise
which was the foundation of all their hopes, and
the only means of re-establishing their reputation
and fortune, that were both on the decline. Pi.
zarro's mind, bent with inflexible obstinacy on all
its purposes, needed no incentives to persist in the

Perfiftsin scheme. He peremptorily refused to obey the go.
,is design. vernor of Panama's orders, and employed all hi,

address and eloquence in persuading his men not
to abandon him. But the incredible calamities tc
which they had been exposed were Rill so recent
in their memories, and the thoughts of re-visiting
their families and friends after a long absence
ruffed with such joy into their minds, that whel
Pizarro drew a line upon the sand with his sword
permitting such as wiffed to return home to pal
over it, only thirteen of all the daring veterans ii
his service had resolution to remain with thei
commander .

THI s fall, but determined band, whose name

the Spanish hifiorians record with delerved praise
as the persons to whose persevering fortitude thci
country is indebted for the most valuable of all it
American possessions, fixed their residence in th
island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther n
moved from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabil
ed, they confidered as a more secure retreat, when
unmolested, they might wait for supplies from P,
naula, which they trusted that the aivity of thei

affociat

* IhnrrerT, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. 2. X
tcz. 1i. Gomara Ilift. . o109.
i54

r i 3 L1 i .

i. r il i' r\I tL A. is5

iiciates there would be able to procure. Alma- B 0 0 K
ro and Luque were not inattentive or cold folici- VI.
rs, and their incessant importunity was seconded -r-
y the general voice of the colony, which exclaim- 1526.
loudly againfi the infamy ofexpofing brave men,
;gaged in the public lfrvice, and chargeable with
oerror but what flowed from an excels of zeal
nd courage, to perish like the most odious crimi-
ils in a defart island. Overcome by those intrea-
iesand expostulations, the governor at last con-
cnted to fend a small vefiel tb their relief. But
hat he might not teem to encourage Pizarro to any
ewenterpriie, he would not permit one land-man
embark on board of it.
By this time, Pizarro and his companions had Hardfliip
mained five months in an island, infamous forlle endured.
hemoft unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
ica*. During all this period, their eves were
urned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from
heir countrymen ; but worn out at length with
uitlefs expetations, and dilpirited with luffering
ardhips of which they aw no end, they, in de-
pair, came to a resolution of committing them-
Ives to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
n that detestable abode. But, on the arrival of
he vessel from Panama, they were trairfported
ith such joy, that all their ffierings were forgot-
len. Their hopes revived, and, with a rapid
ranfition, not unnatural among men accustomed
by their mode of life to sudden viciffitudcs of for-
ne, high confidence luccecding to extreme de-
idion, Pizarro easily induced them to relune their
'ormer scheme with fresh ardour. Intlead of rc-
urning to Panama, they flood towards the fbuth-
aft, and, more fortuuate in this tha.n in any of

their
* See NOTE XXXI.

B O O K their past efforts, they, on the twentieth day after

VI. their departure from Gorgona, d ifcovcrcd the call
_-~r'- of Peru. After touching at some places of lces
1526. note, they landed at Tumbez, a place of obme note

Discvmrs they
Peru. above three degrees south of the line, difinguifhed

for its stately temple, and a palace of the Incas or
sovereigns of the country *. There the Spaniardsi
feasted their eyes with the first view of the opul
lence and civilization of the Peruvian empire.
They beheld a country fully peopled, and culti.
vated with an appearance of regular indufiry; the
natives decently clothed, and pofieffed of ingeiu.
ity so far furpafling the other inhabitants of the
New World, as to have the use of' tame domefic
animals. But what chiefly attracted their notice,
was such a show of gold and silver, not only in the
ornaments of their persons and temples, but in le.
veral vessels and utensils for common use, formed
of the fame precious metals, as left no room to
doubt that they abounded with profusion in the
tountry. Pizarro and his companions seemed
now to have attained to the completion of their
nmot sanguine hopes, and fancied that all their
wifhcs and dreams of rich domains, and inexhaul-
tible treasures, would soon be realized.

RLuIlun to BUT with the slender force then under his coi.
Panama, mand, Pizarro could only view the rich country

of which he hoped hereafter to obtain poflciion.
He ranged, however, for Ibme time along the coail,
157- maintaining every where a peaceable intcrcourl

with the natives, no less astonished at their new
visitants, than the Spaniards were with the uni-
form appearancc of opulence and cultivation whicll
they beheld. having explored the country as iar
as was requifitc to ascertain the importance of the

(dil fcovcr!,
t Cllaiclh, 10.

n I

o 1 % I - r

Y V1 L i. 1i I. I57

ilcovery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants B O O K
nie of their Llamas or tame cattle, to which the vI.
paniards gave the name of sheep, obme vessels of ---
dand silver, as well as some specimens of their 1527.
her works of ingenuity, and two young men,
ihom he proposed to instruct in the Castilian lan-
age, that they might erve as interpreters in the
pedition which he meditated. With these he
rived at Panama, towards the close of the third
'ear from the time of his departure thence . No
dventurer of the age suffered hardships or encoun-
red dangers which equal those to which he was
posed during this long period. The patience
ith which he endured the one, and the fortitude
ith which he surmounted the other, exceed what-
er is recorded in the history of the New World,
here io many romantic displays of those virtues
cur.
NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave tSZs,
the incredible opulence of the country which Nw
had dicfovered, nor his bitter complaints on theafboci-
count of that unseasonable recall of his forces,"'
hich had put it out of his power to attempt mak-
g any fettlerncnt there, could move the governor
Panama to swerve from his former purpole. He
11 contended, that the colony was not in a con-
tion to invade such a mighty cmpire, and refuscd
authorise an expedition which he foresaw would
lb alluring that it ight ruin the province ill
hich he presidcd, by an cffort beyond its
cngth. His coldncs, howcvcr, did ot in any
gcce abate the ardour of the three affociatcs;
t they perccived that they could not carry their

i'chenl

Ilerrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3- 0. dec. 4. ib. ii. c. 7, .
;, 2ih. i. c. 10--14. Zarate, lib. i. c. 2. Benzo Hfit
oi Orbis~ lib. iii. c. ,

B O O K scheme into execution without the countenanceo

VI. superior authority, and must solicit their sovereign

to grant that permiflion which they could not e.
1528. tort from his delegate. With this view, after ad.

justing among themselves that Pizarro should claiD
the flation of Governor, Almagro that of lieute
pant-governor, and Luque the dignity of bilhop
in the country which they propoled to conquer
they sent Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though
their fortunes were now so much exhaufled by
the repeated efforts which they had made, thai
they found some difficulty in borrowing the finali
fum requisite towards equipping him for the voyJ
age .

pizarrolent PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court,
tgo Spain to and, new as the scene might be to him, he ap.

peared before the emperor with the unembarraffd
dignity of a man, conscious of what his fervicel
merited; and he conduded his negociations witi
an insinuating dexterity of address, which could
not have been expeced either from his educatioi
or former habits of life. His feeling defcriptio
of his own sufferings, and his pompous accountol
the country which he had discovered, confined
by the fpecimiens of its producions which heex
hibited, made such an impreflion both on Charlo
and his rpinifters, that they not only approvedo
the intended expedition, but seemed to be inte

Neglcas his refled in the success of its leader, Prefumingi0
ianciatcs, those dispositions in his favour, Pizarro paid liltt

attention to the interest of his associates, Asth
pretensions of Luque did not interfere with hi
own, he obtained for him the ecclcfiaflical di
nity to which he aspircd. For Almagro, he claim
ed only the command of the fortrcls which fll0ol

b

Uerrcra, Ide . 4. lib. iii. c. 1, Vega, 2. lib. . c. I'
158

be ereted at Tumbez. To himself he secured B 0 0 K
whatever his boundless ambition could desire. He VI.
was appointed governor, captain general, and ade-
lantado of all the country which he had discover- 1J28
'd, and hoped to conquer, with supreme authority, andprocures
civil as well as military; and a full right to all the thefupredm
privileges and emoluments usually granted to ad-himfelf.
Iveaturers in the New World. His jurifdi&ion
ivas declared to extend two hundred leagues along
the coast to the south of the river St. Jago, to be
independent of the governor of Panama; and he
had power to nominate all the officers who were to
serve under him. In return for those concefiions,
which cost the court of Spain nothing, as the en-
joyment of them depended upon the success of his
wn efforts, Pizarro engaged to raise two hundred
and fifty men, and to provide the hips, arms, and
warlike stores requisite towards fubjeding, to the
rown of Castile, the country of which the go-
ernment was allotted him.
INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was, Slenderforce
which Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his fundso i.ablc
and credit were so low that he could hardly com-
plete half the number; and after obtaining his pa-
tents from the crown, he was obliged to steal pri- 159
vately out of the port of Seville, in order to elude
he cfrutiny of the officers who had it in charge to
xamine whether he had fulfilled the stipulations
inhis contra& *. Before his departure, however,
he received some supply of money from Cortes,
who having returned to Spain about this time, was
willing to contribute his aid towards enabling an
ancient companion, with whose talents and cou-
rage he was well acquainted, to begin a career of
glory similar to that which he himfclf had finished -1

HE
' Herrcra, dec. 4.. lib. vii. c. 9. '1' Ibid. lib. vii. c. oo

I59

BOO K HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marchi.

VI- across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by his

' -r ' three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo of
1529. whom the firfi was born in lawful wedlock, the

two latter, like hinfelf, were of illegitimate birth
and by Francilco de Alcantara, his mother's bro.
ther. They were all in the prime of life, and
of such abilities and courage as fitted them to
take a distinguished part in his fubfequcnt trailac,
tions.

H,530. ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Alma.

His rconci- gro so much exasperated at the manner in which he
Almagro. had conducted his negociation, than he not only

refused to at any longer in concert with a man by
whose perfidy he had been excluded from the power
and honours to which he had a just claim, but la.
boured to form a new association, in order to thwart
or to rival his former confederate in his discoveries,
Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and address
than to susser a rupture so fatal to all his fchemesto
become irreparable. By offering voluntary to re.
linquifh the office of adelantado, and promifingto
concur in soliciting that title, with an independent
government for Almagro, he gradually mitigated
the rage of an open-hearted soldier, which had
been violent, but was not implacable. Luque
highly satisfied with having been fucccesful in a
his own pretensions, cordially seconded Pizarro's
endcavours. A reconciliation was effeted; and
the confederacy renewed on its original termn
that the enterprise should be carried on at th
common expcnce of the associates, and the prof
accruing from it should be equally divided ao
them "

EVEN

I Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. l. 3
Vega, 2. lib. . c. 14.

EvEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts B O O K

of their interest, three flnall veflels, and a hun- VI.
drcd and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom were r
horfenlen, compoled the armament which they 1530.
were able to fit out. But the astonishing progress ment.
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them
\with such ideas of their own superiority, that Pi-
zarro did not hesitate to fail with this contemptible
force to invade a great empire. Almagro was left s531-
at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with what February.
reinforccment of men he should be able to muller.
As the feaobn for embarking was properly chosen,
and the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Pizarro completed
the voyage in thirteen days ; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried above
an hundred leagues to the north of Tumbez, the
place of his destination, and obliged to land his
troops in the bay of St. Matthew. Without losing Lands in
a moment, he began to advance towards the south, vcr
taking care, however, not to depart far from the
fea-ihore, both that he might easily effect a junc-
tion with the supplies which he expected from Pa-
nama, and fccure a retreat in cafe of any difafler,
by keeping as near as pofible to his ships. But as
the country in icveral parts on he coast of Peru is
barren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the
Spaniards had to pals all the rivers near their
mouth, where the body of water is grcatet ; and
as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na-
tives when he should have fludicd to gain their
confidence, ad forced them to abandon their ha-
bitations; famine, fatiguc, and dil'cacs of'various
kinds, brought upon him and his followers calaini-
tics hardly infcrior to holc which they lhad endur-
ed i their Iorlicr expldition. What they now
c:)pcriccJd codrrc pol lnu'; n lso ill with the allurinl
dclcrilpiion of the couniry given by Pizarro, that

VOL. II. M nany

i6I

13 0 K many. began to reproach him, and every soldier

VI. must have become cold to the service, if, even ill

'9T' this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met
'53.' with ome appearances of wealth and cultivation,

which feermed to justify the report of their leader.
April 14. At length they reached the province of Coaque;

and having surprised the principal settlement of
the natives, they seized there vessels and orna-
ments of gold and ilver, to the amount of thirty
thousand pesos, with other booty of such value as
dispelled all their doubts, and inspired the most
desponding with sanguine hopes*.
Hismea- PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with

tfuarg for b- this rich spoil, which he confidered as the first fruits.
inforcemcnt. of a land flowing. with treasure, that he inflantly

dispatched one of his hips to Panama, with a
large remittance to Almagro; and another to Ni-
caragua, with a considerable fum to ome persons
of influence in that province, in hopes of alluring
adventurers, by this early display of the wealth
which he had. acquired. Meanwhile, he conti-
nued his march along the coast, and disdaining to
employ any means of reducing the natives but
force, he attacked them with such violence in
their scattered habitations, as compelled them ei-
ther to retire into the interior country, or to ub.
mit to his yoke. This sudden appearance of in-
vaders, whole afpetl and manners were tb ftrangc,
and whose power seemed to be so irrcfifliblc, made
the fame dreadful imprefion as in other parts of
America. Pizarro hardly met with refitlanc until
he attacked the island of' Puna in the bay of Guay-
quil. As that was better peopled than the country
through which he had pafled, and its inhabitants
fiercer and less civilized than those of the conti-
nent, they defended themselves with such obfti-

nate
* Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. . Xcres, 182.

nate valour, that Pizarro spent fix months in re- B 6 0 K
ducing them to subjection. From Puna he pro- VI.
cceded to Tumbez, where the distempers that ''V~
ragcd among his men compelled him to remain I532.
for three months .

WHILE hc was thusemployed, he began to reap
advantage from his own attention, to spread the
faime of his first success at Coaque. Two different Receives
detachments arrived from Nicaragua, which, tho' ontinues to
neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered as aadvancc.
reinforcement of great confcquence to his feeble
band, cfpecially as the one was under the com-
mand of Sebastian Bcnalcazar, and the other of
Hcrnando Soto, officers not inferior in merit and
reputation to any who had served in America.
From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, Mas6.
and, in an advantageous fiation near the mouth
of it, he eftabliflied the firfi Spanish colony in
Peru; to which he gave the name of St. Michael.
As Pizarro continued to advance towards the
centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at
that juncture. Without some knowledge of these,
he could not have conducted his operations with
propriety; and without a suitable attention to these,
it is inipoflible to account for the progress which
the Spaniards had already made, or to unfold the
causes of their fubfequcnt success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invadcd Pcru, state of th
the dominions of its obvcreigns cxtended in length, prire^
Iron north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from cast to
weft, was much less confiderablc; being uniformly

M 2 bounded

. P.Sanchlo. als Ramtlt. iii. p. 71, F. Ilei'rerA, dec. 4. lib.

i c. 18. lib. ix. c: i. Z.irate, lib. ii. c. 2, 3; Xeres, p;
182, &c.

i63

B 0 O.K bounded by the vait ridge of the Andes, firetch.

VI. ing from its one extremity to the other. Peru,
'ó'4 like the reft of the New World, was originally
t532' possessed by small independent tribes, diffcriuln

from each other in manners, and in their forms of
rude policy. All, however, were so little civilized,
that, if the traditions concerning their mode of
life, preserved among their descendants, deserve
credit, they must be classed among the most unil-
proved savages of America. Strangers to every
species of cultivation or regular industry, without
any fixed residence, and unacquainted with thofc
sentiments and obligations which form the first
bonds of social union, they are said to have roamed
about naked in the forests, with which the country
was then covered, more like wild beasts than like
men. After they had struggled for several ages
with the hardships and calamities which are inevi-
table in this barbarous rfate, and when no circum-
fiance seemed to indicate the approach of any un-
common effort towards improvement, we are toid
that there appeared, on the banks of the lake T'iti.
aca, a man and woman of majestic form, ad
clothed indecent garments. They declared them-
selves to be the children of the Sun, ent by their
beneficent parent, who beheld with pity the misc.
ries of the human race, to infirud and to reclaim
them. At their persuasion, enfbrced by reverence
for the divinity in whose name they were luppol-d
to speak, several of the difperlfd savages united to-
gether, and receiving their commands as hcavenly
injuncaions, followed them to Cuzco, whcre tley
fettled, and began to lay the foundations of a city

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for uIch

were the names of those extraordinary perfollagcs
having thus collected fomc wandering tribes, lfrni
cd that social union, which, by multiplying the
desires, and uniting the efforts of the human Isc

Clt'
164

Cics, excites industry, and leads to improvement. B O O K
bIauco Capac inftruded the men in agriculture, VI.
and other uleful arts. Mama Ocollo taught the '·
women to spin and to weave. By the labour of 'S3
the one icx, subsistence became lels precarious;
by that of the other, life v;as rendered more com-
sortable. After securing the objects of irft necef-
fity in an infant state, by providing food, raiment,
and habitations for the rude people of whom he
took charge, Mauco Capac turned his attention
towards introducing such laws and policy as might
perpetuate their happiness. By his institutions,
which shall be more particularly explained hereaf-
ter, the various relations in private life were efta-
blifhed, and the duties resulting from them pre-
fcribed with such propriety, as gradually formed a
barbarous people to decency of manners. In pub-
lic adminifiration, the functions of persons in au-
thority were so precisely defined, and the fubordi-
nation of those under their jurifdidtion maintained
with such a steady hand, that the society in which
he presided soon assumed the afpeEt of a regular
and well-governed state.

THUS, according to the Indian tradition, was

:founded the empire of the Incas or Lords of Peru.
IAt fir't, its extent was small. The territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eight leagues
fronm Cuzco. But within its narrow precinEs, he
'cxerciled ablblute and uncontrolled authority.
His successors, as their dominions expanded, ar-
rogatcd a similar jurisdiCtion over their fubjeas:
the defpotifin of Asia was not more complete.
The Incas were not only obeyed as monarchs, but
revered as divinities. Their blood was held to be
lacrcd, and, by prohibiting intermarriages with
tlic people, was never contaminated by mixing
with that of any other race. The family, thus
fcparated from the rcft of the nation, was diftin-

guifhe4

I65

0 OK guifhed by peculiarities in dress and ornaments,
VI. which it was unlawful for others to assume. The
'^r ^i monarch himself appeared with ensigns of royalty

1532. reserved for him alone; and received from his ub-

je6ts marks of obsequious homagc and rclpect,
which approached almost to adoration.

B.uT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs is laid to have bccn uni-
formly accompanied with attention to thc good of
their iubjects. It was not the rage of conqucft, if
we may believe the accounts of their countrymcn,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions,
but the desire ofdiffufing the blefings of civiliza-
tion, and the knowledge of the arts which they
pofleked, among the barbarous people whom they
reduced. During afucccflion of twelve monarchs,
it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
chara&ter *.

WHI'N the Spaniards first visited the coaf of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, uana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the fouhder of the slate, was feated on the
throne. He is represented as a prince distinguish.
ed not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the
race, but eminent for his martial talents. B his
victorious arms the kingdom of Qpito was lub.
jcrted, a conqucft of such extent and iniportance
as almolt doubled the power of the Peruvian em-
pire. IHe was fond of residing in the capital of
that valuable province, which he had added to his
dominions; and, notwithflandinlg the ancient and
fundanlcntal law of the monarchy againfl pollut-
ing the royal blood by any foreign alliance, he
married the daughter of the vanq uiihcd mionarcl
of (gito. She bore him a on namcd Atahulpa,

whoml,

* Cieca de Lcon, Cllron. c. 44. IIerrcra, dec. 3. lib. x|
c. 4. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

whom, on his death at Quito, which seems to b o o
have happened about the year one thousand five VI.
hundred and twenty-nine, he appointed his fuc- r
ceflbr in that kingdom, leaving the reft of his do- 153.
minions to luafcar, his eldest son, by a mother
of the royal race. Greatly as the Peruvians re-
vered the memory of a monarch who had reigned
with more reputation and splendour than any of
his predecessors, the destination of Huana Capac
concerning the succession, appeared so repugnant
to a maxim coeval with the empire, and founded
on authority deemed sacred, that it was no sooner
known at Cuzco than it excited general disgust.
Encouraged by those sentiments of his subje&s,
Huafcar required his brother to renounce the go-
vernment of Qito, and to acknowledge him as
his lawful superior. But it had been the firit care
of Atahualpa to gain a large body of troops which
had accompanied his father to Quito. These were
the flower of the Peruvian warriors, to whose valour
Huana Capac had been indebted for all his victories,
Relying on their support, Atahualpa first eluded
his brother's demand, and then marched againit
him in hostile array.

THUS the ambition of two young men, the title
of the one founded on ancient usage, and that of
the other asserted by the veteran troops, involved
Peru in civil war, a calamity to which, under a
succession of virtuous princes, it had hitherto been
a itranger. In such a contest the issue was ob-
vious. The force of arms triumphed over the
authority of laws, Atahualpa remained victori,
ous, and made a cruel ue of his vi6tory. Con-
feious of the defe& in his own title to the crown,
he attempted to exterminate the royal race, by
putting to death all the Children of the Sun de-
fccndcd from Manco Capac, whom he could seize

either

I67

BOOK either by force or firatagem. From a political

vI. motive, the life of this unfortunate rival Huafcar,
'^~s~^ who had been taken prifoncr in the battle which

1532. decided the fate of the empire, was savcd for

some time, that, by issuing orders in his name,
the ulurper might more easily establish his owl\
authority .

to th pro- WHLN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat-
grcfsofPi- thew, this civil war raged between the two bro-
zaro. thers in its greatefi fury. Had he.made any hol

tile attempt in his former visit to Peru in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-levcn, he
must then have encountered the force of a powsr-
ful state, united under a monarch porfeled of ca-
pacity and courage, and unembarraffcd with any
care that could divert him from opposing his pro-
grefs. But at this time, the two competitors,
though they received early accounts of the arrival
and violent proceedings of the paniards, wcre io
intent upon the operations of a war, which they
deemed more intercfting, that they paid no atten-
tion to the motions of an enemy, too inconfidera-
ble in number to excite any great alarm, and to
whose career it would be ealy, as they imagined,
to give a check, when more at Icifure.

H4 avails BY this fortunate coincidence of events, whcre-
'ldfacldl of Pizarro could have no foi-cfight, and of which,
ees. fronm his defective mode of intercoure with the

people of the country, he remained long ignorant,
he was permitted to carry on his operations un-
molefled, and advanced to the centre of a grcat
cnmpirc before one cfl'irt of its power was cxertcd
to flop its progrecs. During their progrcls, the
Spaniards had acquired onic impcrfcdt kno\\lcclie
o' this firugglc between the two contending lac-

tiolis.

* Zarate, lib. i. c. 15. Vega, . lib. ix. c. 12. nd z-3

40. Ilcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 2. lib. iii. c. 7.
i68

tions. The firit complete information, with re- B 0 0 K
Ipct to it, they received from rome messengers VI.
whom Iluafcar sent to Pizarro, in order to solicit r
his aid against Atahualpa, whom he rcprelented as 1532
a rebel and an ufurpcr". Pizarro perceived at
once the importance of this intelligence, and fore-
saw so clearly all the advantages which might be
derived from this divided slate of the kingdom
whichl he had invaded, that, without waiting for
the reinforcement which he expeted from Pana-
ma, he determined to push forward, while intef-
tine discord put it out of the power of the Peruvians
to attack him with their lwhole force, and while,
by taking part, as circumstances should incline
him, with one of the competitors, he might he
enabled with greater ease to crush both. Entcr-
prifing as the Spaniards of that age were in all
thcir operations against Americans, and diftin-
g:ished as Pizarro was among his countrymen for
daring courage, we can hardly uppofc, that after
having proceeded hither slowly, and vith much
caution, he would have changed at once his sys-
tem of operation, and have ventured upon a mea-
Iure so hazardous, without onme new motive or
profpct to juflify it.

As he was obliged to divide his troops, in order Stateofhis
to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sufficient to f'cs.
defend a fiation of equal importance as a place of
retreat in cafe of any dilhflcr, and as a port for
receiving any lupplics which should come from
Panama, ihe began his march with a very flendcr
and ill-accoutred train of followers. They con-
filled of fixty-two horlcmcn 1', and a hundred and
two foot oldiers, of whom twenty were armed
with cross-bows, and three with muskics. He di-
rctcd his courl' towards Caxamalca, a finall town

al
1- See NOTE XXXII,

I69
' Zarate lib. ii. c. .

B 0 0 K at the distance of twelve days march from St. Mi.

VI. chad, where Atahualpa was encamped with a con,

'^~s' fidcrable body of troops. Before he had proceeded
;532' far, an officer dcifpatched by the Inca met him with.

a valuable present frqm that prince, accompani,
with a proritr of his alliance, and his afinUrancec
of a friendly reception at Caxamalca. Pizarro,
according to the usual artifice of his countrymen in
America, pretended to conie as the ambaflador of
a very powerfil monarch, and declared that he was
nowv advancing with intention to offcr Atahualpa
his aid against those encaics who dilputed his title
to the throne

Ideas of te As the object of the Spaliards on entering thci
cocain country was altogether incomprehcnfiblc to tl:'
thc;.defigns. Peruvians, they had formed various conjcEturc5

concerning it, without being able to decide whe-
ther they should confider their new gucfis as
beings of a superior nature, who had visited them
from folne beneficent motive, or as formidable
avengers of their crimes, and enemies to their re-
pose and liberty. The continual profeflions of
the Spaniards, that they came to enlighten them
with the knowledge of truth, and lead them in
lhe way of happiness, favoured the former opi.
nion; the outrages which they committed, their
rapacioufncfs and cruelty, were awful confirma-
tions of the latter. While in this tfate of uncer-
tainty, Pizarro's declaration of his pacific intcn-
tions lo far removed all the Inca's fears, that
he dcternin ed to give him a friendly recep
tion. In confequcnce of this relolution, the
Spaniards were allowed to march in traincuillity
acrol's the landy delert between St. Miclhael
and Mlotupc, where the of fceble cflorts ol
an enciy, added to the unavoidable difircffcs
which they fuffcrcd in palling through that

colln
' HIerrera, dec. v. lib. i. c. 3. Xcrec, p. t8y.

74

comfortless region, mutl have proved fatal to B 0 0 K
them :. From Montupe they advanced towards VI.
the mountains which encompass the low country -r
of Peru, and passed through a defile so narrow and I532z
inacceflible, that a few men might have defended
it against a numerous army. But here likewise,
from the fame inconsiderate credulity of the Inca,
the Spaniards miet with no opposition, and took
quiet poffelfion of a fort erected for the security of
that important flation. As they now approached
near to Caxaiialca, Atahualpa renewed his pro-
feflions of friendship; and as an evidence of
his sincerity, lent them presents of greater va-
lue than the former.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffeflion Arrive at

of a large court, ol one fide of which was a house Caxamalca
which the Spanish historians call a palace of the
Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun,
the whole surrounded with a strong rampart or
wall of earth. When he had polled his troops in
this advantageous station, he dispatched Hernando
Soto, and his brother Ferdinand, to the camp of
Atahualpa, which was about a league distant from
the town. He infiruded them to confirm the de-
claration which he had formerly made of his pa-
cific dilpofition, and to defirc an interview with
the Inca, that he might explain more fully the in-
tention of the Spaniards in visiting his country.
They were treated with all the refpedful hofpi-
tality ulual among the Peruvians in the reception
of their molt cordial friends, and Atahualpa pro-
miled to visit the Spani(h commander next day in
his quarters. The decent deportment of the Peru-
vian monarch, the order of his court, and the re-
vcrcncc with which his iubjcdts approached his

person
' See NOTE XXXIII.

ej o o I pcrforn and obeyed his commands, astonished t'o '

VI. aSpaniards, who had never met in America vith

any thing more dignified than the petty cazi(iuc
x532. of a barbarous tribe. But their eyes wcrc fiil|

more powcrfully attracted by the vast proulio i ni
wealth which they oblcrvcd in the Inca's cai!l,.
The rich ornaments worn by him and his attend.
ants, the veflels of gold and silver in which the rc-
past offered to themc was tfrved up, the multitude of
utenlils of every kind formed of thole precious
metals, opened profpeds far exceeding any idea of
opulence that a European of the sixteenth century
could form.

Pcrfid'ous On their return to Caxamalca, while their minds
fliencof were yet warm with admiration and desire of the

wealth which they had beheld, they gave luch a
dcfcription of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a reoblution which he had already
taken. From his own oblcrvation of Amcrican
nmanners during his long fervicc in the New World,
as well as from the advantages which Cortes ad
derived from seizing Montczuna, he knew of
what confcqucnce it was to have the Inca in his
Sower. For this purpose, he formed a plan as
cdaring as it was perfidious. Notwithfianding the
charadcr he had aflimced of an'ambaflador from a
powerful monarch, who courted an alliance wvith
the Inca, and in violation of the repeated oficrs
which he had made to him of his own fricnclfiip
and aflitlancc, hc dctermined to avail hinlfclf of
the unlhllpicio.s finnplicity with which Atalualpa
relied on his profilions, and to fcizc his pertloi
lduring the interview to which he hlad invited him.
I-c pleparcd for the execution of his lehenlc with
the shame deliberate arrangement, and with a.
itillc conplmlndion, as if it had rcfledicd no dil-
*gracc on himflclf or his country. He divided

hi,
12

I7

]lis cavalry into three small squadrons, under theB O O K
comnmand of his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and vI.
iBcnalcazar; his infantry was formed in one body, s
except twenty of most tried courage, whom he '532-
kept near his own perlbn to lupport hini in the dan-
gecous !ervice whicl hle rcfervcd for himlelf; the
artillery, confiiting of two field pieces®, and the
crols-bowmen, were placed opposite to the avenue
by which Atahualpa was to approach. All were
commanded to keep within the quare, and not to
move until the signal for aftion was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was Nov. 6.
all in motion. But as Atahualpa was iolicitous to Visited by
appear with the greatct plcndour and magnificence the J1ca.
in his first interview with the itrangers, the pre-
parations for this were ib tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his inarch.
Even then, left the order of the proccffion Ihould
be deranged, he movcd lb slowly, that the Spa-
niards became impatient and apprchenfive that
some suspicion of their intention might be the cauie
of this delay. In order to remove this, Pizarro
dilpatchcd one of his officcrs with frcfh airances
of his fiendly disposition. At length the Inca
approached. Firll of all appeared four hundred
men, in an uniform drcis, as harbingers to clear
the way before him. He hinmclf]t; titting on a
throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colours, and almost covered wilth pliaes of gold
and silver, enriched with precious lones, was
carried on the fliouldcrs of his principal attend-
ants. Behind him came lomie chief oliccrs of his
court, carried in the lame manner. Several bands
of fingers and dancers accompaniced this cavalcade ;
and the whole plain was covered with troops,
amounting to more than thirty tlioulhud men.

As
' Xcrcz, p. 194.

B O O I As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters, fa-

VI. ther Vincent Valverdc, chaplain to the expedi.

_r^^ tion, advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and

1532. a breviary in the other, and in a long difcourie
Strangeha- explained to him the doArine of the creation, the
ther alver- fall of Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and
dC" refurreaion of Jesus Christ, the appointment of

St. Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranf.
mission of his apostolic power by fucceflion to tle
popes, the donation made to the king of Cafile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Christian faith, to ac-
knowledge the supreme jurifdition of the pope,
and to submit to the king of Castile as his lawful
sovereign; promising, if he complied inflantly
with this requisition, that the Castilian monarch
would protect his dominions, and permit him
to continue in the excrcife of his royal autho-
rity; but if he should impiously refuie to obey
this summons, he denounced war against him
in his mailer's name, and threatened him with
the most dreadful effets of his vengeance.

Reply ofthe THIS ftrangc harangue, unfolding deep myfie-
inca. ries, and alluding to unknown facls, of which no

power of eloquence could have conveyed at once
a ditinct idea to an American, was `o lamely
translated by an unskilful interpreter, little ac-
quainted with the idiom of the Spanish tongue, and
incapable of exprefling himself with propriety in
the language of the Inca, that its general tenor
was altogether inconmprehenfible to Atahualpa.
Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him with aftonifhmcnt and indignation. is re-
ply, however, was temperate. He began with
oblerving, that he was lord of the dominions over
which he reigned by hereditary fucccflion ; andl
added, that he could not conceive how a orci),

priclt

rieft hould pretend to dispose of territories which B 0 0 K
id not belong to him; that if such a preposterous VI.
rant had been made, he, who was the rightful ---r-'
offeffor, refused to confirm it; that he had no in- 1532.
lination to renounce the religious institutions efta-
lifhed by his anceltors; nor would he forake the
rviceof the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he
nd his people revered, in order to worship the
,odof the Spaniards, who was subjet to death;..
at with refped to other matters contained in his
icourfe, as he had never heard of them before,
id did not now underitand their meaning, he de-
red to know where he had learned things so ex-
aordinary. " In this book," an fwvercd Valverde,
aching out to him his breviary. The Inca opened
eagerly, and turning over the leaves, lifted it to'
isear: " This," fays he, " is silent; it tells me
othing;" and threw it with dildain to the ground.
'he enraged monk, running towards his country-
en, cried out, "To arms, Christians, toarms;
ic word of God is insulted ; avenge this profana-
on on those impious dogs '."
PIZARRO, who, during this long conference, Pizairoat-
id with difficulty reitrained his soldiers, eager tolacksthe
!ze the rich poils of which they had now so near
iview, immediately gave the signal of assault.
Olnce the martial music struck up, the cannon and
fkcts began to fire, the horfc tallied out fiercely
the charge, the ifantry ruihed on sword in
d. The Peruvians, allonifhed at the hldden-
of an attack which they did not expect, and-
aycd with the defructive efle6ts of the fire-
s, and the irrefilliblc iprcllion of the cavalry,
with univcrfal onilcrnation on every fide,
hout attempting either to annoy tle enemy, or
efcnd themselves. Pizarro, at the head of lis

cholen
'1 Se N'ITE XXWIV.

B O O Kchofen band, advanced diretly towards the Inca

VI. and though his nobles crowded around him wit

s^^ officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while
153z2 they vied one with another in sacrificing their ow

lives, tlat they might cover the sacred pcrfon of
their sovereign, the Spaniards oon penetrated to
ahed nca. the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by thl

arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried hiil
as a priboner to his quarters. The fate of the mo.
narch increased the precipitate flight of his iso-
lowers. The Spaniards pursucd them towards
every quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting
barbarity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives,
who never once offered at resistance. The carnage
did not cease until the close of day. Above four
thousand Peruvians were killed. Not a single
Spaniard fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro
himself, whose hand was slightly hurt by one of
his own soldiers, while struggling eagerly to lay
hold on the Inca *.

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern.
ing the wealth of Peru; and they were so trani:
ported with the value of the acquilition, as well as
the greatness of their success, that they pafled tie!
night in the extravagant exultation natural to indi.
gent adventurers on luch an extraordinary change
of fortune.

Dcjeaion of AT firfl the captive monarch could hardly be.
the nca lieve a calamity which he so little expctcd tolbe

real. But he son felt all the misery of his lite,
and the dejec&ion into which he unk, was i )pro
portion to the height of grandeur fiom wvhich c
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid oflofing all the advan.
tages which le hoped to derive from the poffcilio0
of such a prisoner, laboured to coniblec liil

ii!l

1 Se NOTE XXXV.
176

with professions of kindness and refpet, that cor- B O O K
responded ill with his a&ions. By residing among VI.
the Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovered their Yr'
ruling passion, which, indeed, they were no-wise 53Z.
solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that, made
an attempt to recover his liberty. He offered as His fferof
a ransom what astonished the Spaniards, even af-aranfo" '
ter all they now knew concerning the opulence of
his kingdom. The apartment in which he was
confined was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen
in breadth; he undertook to fill it with veflels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed
eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a line
was drawn upon the walls of the chamber, to mark
the stipulated height to which the treasure was to
rife.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having obtained
some profpe6d of liberty, took measures instantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by fending
messengers to Cuzco, QGito, and other places,
where gold had been amassed in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of their gods, or
the houfcs of the Inca, to bring what was necessary
for completing his ransom direstly to Caxamalca.
Though Atahualpa was now in the custody of his
enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians accuf-
omed to refpe& every mandate issued by their so-
vcreign, that his orders were executed with the
greatcft alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recover-
ing his liberty by this means, the fubjecqs of the
Inca were afraid of endangering his life by form-
ing any other scheme for his relief; and though
the force of the empire was still entire, no pre-
parations were made, and no army affeiblcd, to
avenge their own wrongs or tholc of their mo-

Vo,. I. N 'rl

Xcrez, 205.

B O O K The Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil

vI. andunmolefted. Small detachments of their num.
rso ber marched into remote provinces of the empire,
Ta32 and instead of meeting with any opposition, were

The Spani- where
ardsvifit every where received with marks of the most sub-
different missive refpet *.
provinces.

INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and

Almagro t
arrives with desirous as Pizarro might be to obtain some know-
a reinforce- ledge of the interior state of the country, he could
"nent' not have ventured upon any dimunition of his main
December. body, if he had not about this time received an

account of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael
with such reinforcement as would almost double
the number of his followers . The arrival of this
long-expedted succour was not more agreeable to
the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca. He saw
the power of his enemies increase; and as he
knew neither the source whence they derived their
supplies, nor the means by which they were con-
veyed to Peru, he could not foresee to what a
height the inundation that poured in upon his do-

1533. minions might rife. While disquieted with such
tHudcaput apprehensions, he learned, that some Spaniards,

in their way to Cuzco, had visited his brother
Huafcar in the place where he kept him confined,
and that the captive prince had represented to them
thejufiice of his own cause, and as an inducement
to espouse it, had promised them a quantity of trca-
sure vastly exceeding what he had engaged to pay
for his ransom. If the Spaniards should liften to
this proposal, he perceived his own deftrudtion to
be inevitable; and fufpeting that their insatiable
thirfi for gold would tempt them to lend a favour-
able car to it, he determined to facrificc his bro-
ther's life, that he might favc his own; and his

orders

* See NOTE XXXVI. \ Xcrez, 2o+. Herrera, dec.

5 i. li ii.

ii . . , 2.
I78

orders for this purpose were executed, like all his B O 0 K
other commands, with scrupulous punctuality . VI.

MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa- '-r^

malca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded I533.
with treasure. A great part of the stipulated quan- arclll!,n a
tity was now amassed, and Atahualpa assured the divifi"nof
Spaniards, that the cnly thing which preventedthe fpo''
the whole from being brought in, was the re-
motenefs of the provinces where it was deposited.
But such vast piles of gold, presented continually
to the view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed their
avarice, that it was impoflible any longer to re-
strain their impatience to obtain poffeflion of this
rich booty. Orders were given for melting down
the whole, except some pieces of curious fabric,
reserved as a prefcnt for the emperor. After set-
ting apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred
thousand pesos as a donative to the soldiers which
arrived with Almagro, there remained one million
five hundred and twenty-eight thouland five hun-
dred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The fef-
tival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was
the day chosen for the partition of this vast fum;
and the manner of conduEting it strongly marks
that strange alliance of fanaticism with avarice,
which I have more than once had occasion to point
out as a firiking feature in the character of the
conquerors of the New World. Though aflfmbled
to divide the spoils of an innocent people, pro-
cured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty, the tranf-
adion began with a folcmn invocation of the name
of God, as if they could have cxpced the gui-
dance of I eaven in distributing tholf wages of
iniquity. In this division above eight thousand
pesos, at that time not interior in value to as many

N z pounds

'' Zir.ate, lib. ii. c. 6. Gomira llit. c. xI 5. Ilcrrera, de:.
5. lib.iii. c. 2. 1' l-errerd, dec, 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

179

B O O K pounds tferling in the present century, fell to the

VI. hare of each horseman, and half that fum to each
wzrJ foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his officers
'533- received dividends in proportion to the dignity of

their rank.

The effect THERE is no example in hitfory of such a fud-
of it. den acquisition of wealth by military service, nor

was ever a fum so great divided among so finall a
number of soldiers. Many of them having re-
ceived a recompence for their services far beyond
their most sanguine hopes, were so impatient to
retire from fatigue and danger in order to spend
the remainder of their days in their native coun-
try, in ease and opulence, that they demanded
their discharge with clamorous importunity. Pi-
zarro, sensible that from such men he could expeEt
neither enterprise in aion nor fortitude in susser-
ing, and persuaded that wherever they went, the
display of their riches would allure adventurers,
less opulent, but more hardy, to his standard,
granted their suit without reluctance, and permit-
ted above sixty of them to accompany his brother
Ferdinand, whom he sent to Spain with an account
of his success, and the present defiined for the em-
peror *.

The nca The Spaniards having divided among them te
demands his
liberty in treasure amassed for the Inca's ranobm, he insisted
vain. with them to fulfil their promise of setting him at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. During his long service in the New
World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of
his fcllow-foldiers, which led them to confider its
inhabitants as an inferior race, neither worthy of
the name, nor intitled to the rights of men. In
his compact with Atahualpa, he had no other ob-
jce than to amuse his captive with Luch a prof-

pc.
; IIerrcr;a, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. 2. lib. i. c. 38.

pce of recovering his liberty, as might induce him B O O K
to lend all the aid of his authority towards colled- VI.
ing the wealth of his kingdom. Having now ac- '-s
complifhcd this, he no longer regarded his faith; I533.
and at the very time when the credulous prince
hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had iecrer-
ly relblved to bereave him of life. Many cir-
curnftances seem to have concurred in prompting
him to this aftion, the most criminal and attrocious
that fiains the Spanish name, amidfl all the deeds
of violence committed in carrying on the conquest
of the New World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imita- and the

tion of Cortes's conduct towards the Mexican mo- Spaniards
arch, he did not possess talents for carrying on j"Mtuall
the fame artful plan of policy. Dcftitute of the
temper and address requisite for gaining the confi-
dence of his prisoner, he never reaped all the ad-
vantages which might have been derived from be-
ing mailer of his person and authority. Atahual-
pa, was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and
discernment than Montezuma, and seems to have
penetrated more thoroughly into the character and
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual suspicion and
distrust accordingly took place between them,
The ftrit attention with which it was necessary to
guard a captive of such importance, greatly increased
the fatigue of military duty. The utility of keep-
ing him appeared incolfiderable ; and Pizarro felt
him as an incumbrance, from which le wished to
be delivered '.

ALMA.GRo and his followers had made a de- Alag

mand of an equal hare in the Inca's ransom ; and ani, is tol-
though Pizarro had bellowed upon the private men lowers d-
the large gratuity which I have mentioned, andriit.
cndcavoured to sooth their leader by prcfcnts of

great
llerrcra, dec. 5' lib. 3. c. 4.

B O O K great value, they still continued dissatisfied. They

VI. were apprehensive, that as long as Atahualpa re-
'^s~^ mained a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply

1533. whatever treasure should be acquired, to make up

what was wanting of the quantity flipuiated for
his ransom, and under that pretext exclude them
from any part of it. They infifled eagerly on put-
ting the Inca to death, that all the adventurers in
Peru might thereafter be on an equal footing ".

Motives PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with ac-
which in-
duced p,- counts of forces afiembling in the remote provinces
zarrowooon. o' the empire and fufpeded Atahualpa of having

ifiiued orders for that purpose. These fears and
iufpitions weie artfully incrcafed by Philippillo,
one ol the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off
from Tunbcz in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty, and whom he employed as an inter-
preter. The funiflon which he performed ad-
mitting this man to familiar intercourse with the
captive monarch, he presumed, notw.ithflanding
the meanncfs of his birth, to aife is afleeions to
a Coya, or descendant of the Sun, one of Ata-
hualpa's wives; and feeing no prolpe& of grati-
fying that passion during the life of the monarch,
he endeavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards
with such accounts of his fccret designs and pre-
parations, as might awaken their jealousy and ex-
cite them to cut him off.

WtI Lii Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo la-
boured to ruin him by private machinations, that
unhappy prirnce inadvertently contributed to haften
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-
tached himfclf with peculiar alffction to Ferdinand

Pizarro

Znrate, lib. . c.

C 7. Vega, p. 2. ib. I. c. 7. IHcrrera,

dcC . 5 lib. 3. c. 4.
182

Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who, as they were B O O IK
persons ofbirth and education superior to the rough VI.
adventurers with whom they served, were accuf- r
tomed to behave with more decency and attention '533.
to the captive monarch. Soothed with this refpeEt
from persons of such high rank, he delighted in
their obciety; but in the pretence of the governor
he wasuneafy, and overawed. This dread soon
came to be mingled with contempt. Among all
the European arts, what he admired most was that
of reading and writing; and he long deliberated
with himlelf, whether he ihould regard it as a na-
tural or acquired talent. In order to determine
this, he desired one of the soldiers, who guarded
him, to write the name of God on the nail of his
thumb. This he hewed successively to several
Spaniards, asking its meaning; and to his amaze-
ment, they all, without hesitation, returned the
fame answer. At length Pizarro entered ; and on
presenting it to him, he bluffied, and with iome
confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno-
rance. From that moment, Atahualpa confidered
him as a mean person, less inftruaed than his own
foldicrs; and he had not address enough to con-
ceal the sentiments with which this discovery in-
fpirecJ him, To be the objea of a barbarian's scorn,
not only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited
such relentment in his brcaft, as added force to all
the other considerations which prompted him to put
the Inca to death '.

BUT in order to give some colour of justice toHis tria
this violent ation, and that he himself might be
exempted fromn fapding singly rcfponfible for the
cominiflion of it, Pizarro rcfolvcd to try the Inca
with all the formalities obfirvcd in the criminal

courts
llerrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4, Vega, p. . lib. i. c. 38.

I83

B 0 0 K courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagru,

VI. with two afliftants were appointed judges, with
"'~ full power to acquit or to condemn; an attornev-
J533. general was named to carry on the prosecution in

the king's name; counsellors were cholen to afli2
the prisoner in his defence; and clerks were or.
dained to record the proceedings of court. Bcfo c
this strange tribunal, a charge was exhibited fiill
more amazing. It consisted of various articles ; tha:
Atahualpa, though a bastard, had difpoffefied the
rightful owner of the throne, and usurped the re-
gal power; that he had put his brother and lawful
sovereign to death ; that he was an idolatar, and
had not only permitted, but commanded the offer.
ing of human sacrifices; that he had a great nun-
ber of concubines; that since his imprisonment he
had wafted and embezzled the royal treafurcs,
which now belonged of right to the conquerors;
that he had incited his fubjeets to take arms against
the Spaniards. On these heads ofaccufation, foinei
of which are so ludicrous, others so absurd, that
the effrontery of Pizarro, in making them the
foundation of a serious procedure, is not less ur-
prifing than his injustice, did the court go on to
try the sovereign of a great empire, over whom it
had nojurifdition. With refpet to each of the
articles, witneffcs were examined ; but as they de-
livered their evidence in their native tongue, Phi-
lippillo had it in his power to give their words
whatever turn beR suited his malevolent intentions.
To judges predeterinied in their opinion, this cvi-

-io s con- dence appeared sufficient. They pronounced Ata-
dIcmncd. hualpa guilty, and condemned him to be burnt

alive. Friar Valverde profiituted the authority of
his lacrcd fundion to confirm this lencnc, and by
his signature warranted itto bejull. Aftonilhcid at
his ate, Atahualpa cndeavoured to avert it by his
tears, by promises, and by entreaties, that ihc

1iiglit
184

might be sent to Spain, where a monarch would be B O o K
the arbiter of his lot. But pity never touched the VI.
unfeeling heart of Pizarro. He ordered him to be ~s
led instantly to execution ; and what added to the 1533
bitterness of his last moments, the fame monk who
had just ratified his doom, offered to console, and
attempted to convert him. The mot powcrful ar-
gument Valverdc employed to prevail with him to
embrace the Chrifian faith, was a promise of a
mitigation in his punifhmert. The dread of a
cruel death extorted from the trembling victim a
dcfire of receiving baptism. The ceremony was and xe,
performed ; and Atahualpa, instead of being burnt, cuted.
was firangled at the flake '.

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation, several s,.
even among the profligate adventurers which it niardspro-
ient forth to conquer and desolate the New World, t asain"f
there were persons who retained some tincture of
the Castilian generosity and honour. Though, be-
fore the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had
Let out for Spain, and Soto was sent on a separate
command at a distance from Caxamalca, thisodious
tranfation was not carried on without censure and
opposition. Several officers, and among those ome
of the greatest reputation and most refpetable fa-
miles in the service, not only remonstratcd, but
protested against this measure of their general, as
disgraceful to their country, as repugnant to every
maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith,
and an uurpation of jurifdidtion over an in-
dependent monarch, to which they had no title.
But their endcavours were vain. Numbcrs, and
the opinion of such as held every thing to be
lawful vwhich they deemed advantageous, prevailed.

Iifiory

Zartc, lil,. ii. c. 7. Xcecz, p. 233. Vega, p. 11. lib.
3c 36 37. Goniara 1Hill. c. 117. 1-rrera, dec. 5. lib,
:.b '. .

s8

3 0 0 K Hitlory, however, records even the unsuccessful

VI. exertions of virtue with applause; and the Spanish

'-i-" writers, in relating events where the valour of their
'53. nation is more conspicuous than its humanity, have

not failed to preserve the names of thole who made
this laudable effort to save their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated such a crime".

Dissolution ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invested
mentand one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping
order in that a young man without experience might prove
Vcru. a more paflive instrument in his hands, than an am-

bitious monarch, who had been accufiomed to in.
dependent command. The people of Cuzco, and
the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco Capac,
a brother of Huafcar, as Incat. But neither pof.
sessed the authority which belonged to a sovereign
of Peru. The violent convulsions into which the
empire had been thrown, first by the civil war be-
tween the two brothers, and then by the invasion
of the Spaniards, had not only deranged the order
of the Peruvian government, but almost difblved
its frame. When they beheld their monarch a
captive in the power of firangers, and at last sis.
fering an ignominious death, the people in fevcral
provinces, as if they had been (et free from every
restraint of law and decency, broke out into the
most licentious excesses I. So many descendants
of the Sun, after being treated with the utmost in.
dignity, had been cut off by Atahualpa, that not
only their influence in the slate diminished with
their number, but the accustomcd reverence for
that sacred race sensibly decrcafed. In conic
quencc of this slate of things, ambitious mcr

ir

*Vega, . 1 . lib. i. c. 37. Xerez, i. 235. Ilcrrera, l(c. 5

lib. iii. c. 5. ' Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 7. 4 1Herrcra, dec.
lib. ii. c. 12.lib. ii. . 5.
186

Idifferent parts of the empire aspired to in- B 0 O K
ependent authority, and ulurped jurifdi&ion to VI.
lich they had no title. The general who com-
panded :for Atahualpa in QGito, eized the brother 533.
nd children of his matter, put them to a cruel
ath, and difelaiming any connetion with either
5ca, endeavoured to eflablifh a eparate kingdom
ir himlelf. '
THL Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit Pizarro ad.
di'cord difiufing itleli, and the vigour of go- cance"to
Dnment relaxing among the Peruvians. They
onfidered thole ilbrders as symptoms of a state
alening towards its difiblution. Pizarro no long-
hcitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had
ceived such considerable reinforccments that he
uld venture, wilh little danger, to penetrate to
irinto the interior part of the country. The ac-
unt of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca, ope-
lted as he hai forefcen. No sooner did his bro-
ier Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers, to
horn he had given their discharge after the rrti-
on of the Inca's ranfoii, arrive at Panama, and
ifplay their riches i t!c view of their astonished
.uiitiypu, tan fame spread the account with
ich exageration through all the Spanish fettle-
icnts on tie "outh lea, that the governors of Gua-
nala, Panama, and Nicaragua, could hardly re-
rain tlIe people under their jurifdition, from
landoning their poflciiions, and crowding to that
ecxhauitible iource of wealth which seemcd to be
rened in Pcru t. In spite of every check and re-
ilation, such numbers resorted thither, that Pi-
irro began his march at the head of five hundred

men,

Z arate, lib. ii. c. 8. Vega, p. I. lih. ii. c. 3, 4.

t omara Hist. c. 125. Vega, p. i. lib. ii. c. . Ier-
a, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5.

187

B O O K men, after leaving a considerable garrison in

VI. Michael, under the command of Benalcazar. T

s-~ '~ Peruvians had assembled some large bodies oftroo
'53S5 to oppole his progress. Several fierce encounlle

happened. But they terminated, like all the a
tions in America; a few Spaniards were killed 01
wounded; the natives were put to flight with inl
credible flaughtcr. At length Pizarro forced hii
way to Cuzco, and took quiet pofcffion of that ca
pital. The riches found there, even after all tha
the latives had carried off and concealed, eithe
from a fuperflitious veneration for the ornament
of their temples, or out of hatred for their rapa
cious conquerors, exceeded in value what hat
been received as Atahualpa's ransom. But as th
Spaniards were now accustomed to the wealth o
the country, and it came to be parcelled out amonl
a greater number of adventurers, this dividens
did not excite the fame surprise either from no
velty, or the largeness of the fum that fell to th
share of each individual *.

DURING the march to Cuzco, the son of At

hualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died, anda
the Spaniards substituted no person in his place
the title of Manco Capac seems to have been uni
vcrfally recognized t.

Qito con- WWHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employce
Cnal a. Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able al

cnterprifing officer, was aflaned of remaining in
activc, and impatient to have his name dillil
guifhcd among the dilcoverers and conquerors c
the New World. The fcafonablc arrival of
frich body of recruits from Panama and Nicar;
gua, put it in his power to gratify this pallio
.Leaving a uilicicLt fbrcc to protcdt the infant ll

tlciiic
.' Sec NOTE N'XXVII. *- lerrcra, dec, ¥. lib. v. c.:

ement entrusted to his care, he placed himself B o O t
the head of the reft, and set out to attempt the VI.
idudion of Q.ito, where according to the re- '-r
rt of the natives, Atahualpa had left the greatest I533.
rt of his treasure. Notwithstanding the vast
iance of that city from St. Michael, the diffi.
ty of marching through a mountainous coun-
covered with woods, and the frequent and
rce attacks of the best troops in Peru, com-
nded by a skilful leader, the valour, good con-
&, and perseverance of Benalcazar surmounted
ry obstacle, and he entered QGito with his vic-
ious troops. But they met with a cruel mortifi-
ion there. The natives, now acquainted, to
ir sorrow, with the predominant pafion of their
aders, and knowing how to disappoint it, had
rried off all those treasures, the profpet of which
d prompted them to undertake this arduous ex-
ition, and had supported them under all the
ngers and hardships wherewith they had to firug-
in carrying it on -.
BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanili leader Alvarado',
o attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame expedition,
its riches attra6ted a more powerful enemy.
ro de Alvarado, who had distinguished him-
so eminently in the conquest of Mexico, hav-
obtained the government of Guatimala as a
ompence for his valour, soon became disgusted
h a life of uniform tranquillity, and longed to
again engaged in the bustle of military service.
e glory and wealth acquired by the conquerors
Peru heightened this pallion, and gave it a de-
mined direacion. Believing, or pretending to
ievc, that the kingdom of Quilo did not lie

within

Zaratc, lib. ii. c. . Vega, p. i. lib. ii. c. 9. Her-
i dc. 5. lib. iv. . i , 12. Jib .
v. c. 2, 3. lib. vi. c. 3.

i8gi

BO K within the limits of the province allotted to P

VI. zarro, he resolved to invade it. The high rcp
_^TT tation of the commander allured volunteers iro!
1533. every quarter. He embarked with five hunire

men, of whom above two hundred Were of s1I
diftincEiori as to serve on horseback. He [au
at Puerto Viejo, and without sufficient knowled
of the country, or proper guides to condut hil
attempted to march directly to Quito, by followi
the course of the river Guayquil, and crossing t
ridge of the Andes towards its head. But in th
route, one of the most impracticable in all Am
rica, his troops endured such fatigue in forci
their way through forests and marihes on the
grounds, and suffered so much from exceflive ce
when they began to ascend the mountains, th
before they reached the plain of Quito, a sift
part of the men and half of their horses die
and the reft were so much dispirited and worn ou
as to be almost unfit for service-. There thej
met with a body, not of Indians, but of Span!
ards, drawn up in hostile array against the
Pizarro, having received an account of Alvar
do's armament, had detached Almagro with fomn
troops to oppose this formidable invader of hi
jurifdition; and these were joined by Bcnalca
zar and his vi6torious party. Alvarado, thoug
surprised at the fight of enemies whom he di
not expeCt, advanced boldly to the charge. Bt
by the interposition of Ibme moderate meni
each party, an amicable accommodation too
place; and the fatal period, when Spaniar
suspendcd their conquests to cnlbruc their hall
in the blood of their countrymen, was p)(olt1p
ed a few years. Alvarado engaged to return

* See NOTE XXXVIII.
190

his government, upon Almagro's paying himahun- B 0 d K
dred thousand pesos, to defray the expence of this vI.
armament. Most of his followers remained in the '-r"
country; and an expedition, which threatened I534
Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed to
augment its strength '.

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in Honours
Spain. The immense quantities of gold and fil- cPnrreo an
ver which he imported t, filled the kingdom with Almaglo
no less astonishment than they had excited in Pa-
nama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was
received by the emperor with the attention due to
the bearer of a present so rich as to exceed any
idea which the Spaniards had formed concern-
ing the value of their acquisitions in America,
even after they had been ten years matiers of Mex-
ico. In recompence of his brother's services, his
authority was confirmed with new powers and pri-
vileges, and the addition of seventy leagues, ex-
tending along the coast, to the southward of the
territory granted in his former patent. Almagro
received the honours which he had so long desired.
The title of Adelantado, or governor, was con-
ferred upon him, with jurifdition over two hun-
dred leagues of a country, itretching beyond the
louthern limits of the province allotted to Pizarro.
Ferdinand himfclf did not go unrewarded. IHe
was admitted into the military order of St. Jago, a
diftlindion always acceptable to a Spanish gentle-
man; and soon fct out on his return to Peru, ac-
companied by many perlons of higher rank than
had yet served il that country i..

SOME

Zarate, lib. 2. c. 1o-13. Vega, p. Ii. lib. ii. c. I, 2.

9,&c. Golnara Hilt. c. 126, &c. Rcmefal. Hill. Guatiinal.
b. iii. c. 6. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. , 2. 7, 8.
t Sec NOTE XXXIX. : Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega,

p. , i. i i. ii . 19. Herrera, (Iec. 5. lib. vi .
c. 3.

rgi

B O O K SOME account of his negotiations reached Peru

vI. before he arrived there himself. Almagro no soon-

- er learned that he had obtained the royal grant of
5BeI34. an independent government, than, pretending that

Beginning0 o,
dissentions Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas, lay
between i- within its boundaries, he attempted to render him-
Almagro. felfmafter ofthatimportant flation. Juan and Gon.

zalez Pizarro prepared to oppose him. Each of the
contending parties was supported by powerful ad-
herents, and the dispute was on the point of being
terminated by the sword, when Francis Pizarro ar-
rived in the capital. The reconciliation between
him and Almagro had never been cordial. The
treachery of Pizarro in engrossing to himself all the
honours and emoluments, which ought to have been
divided with his associate, was always present in
both their thoughts. The one, conscious of his own
perfidy, did not exped forgiveness; the other, feel-
ing that he had been deceived, was impatient tobe
avenged; and though avarice and ambition had in-
duced them not only to dissemble their sentiments,
but even to at in concert while in pursuit of wealth
and power, no sooner did they obtain poffeffionf
these, than the fame paflions which had formed this
temporary union, gave rife to jealousy and discord.
To each of them was attached a small band of inte-
refted dependents, who, with the malicious art pc.
culiar to such mer, heightened their iufpicions, and
magnified every appearance of offence. But with
all those feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus
assiduously cheriffed, each was so thoroughly ac
quainted with the abilities and courage of his rival
that they equally dreaded the confcquences of at
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of 'izarro a
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firnncls
which he manifcfied in his cxpoflulations with Al
magro and his partizans, avertcd that evil lor th
present. A ncw reconciliation took place; the chic

arilil

article of which was, that Almagro should attempt B O O K
the conquest of Chili; and if he did not find in VI.
that province an cftablifhment adequate to his merit '-r'
and expectations, Pizarro, by way of idemnifi- 1534
cation, should yield up to him a part of Peru. This
new arrangement was confirmed with the fame June z.
tacred folenitics as their first contract, and ob-
served with as little fidelity*.

SooN after he concluded this important tranf- Regulations

action, Pizarro marched back to the countries on°P'zarr°
tle fca coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval
of tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either
Spanish or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which distinguishes his cha-
ratcr, to introduce a form of regular government,
into the extensive provinces subjet to his authority.
Though ill qualified by his education to enter into
any dilquifition concerning the principles of civil
policy, and little accustomcd by his former habits
of life to attend to its arrangements, his natural
sagacity supplied the want both of science and ex-
Derience. He distributed the country into various
diftridts; he appointed proper magistrates to prc-
fide in each; and cftablifhed regulations concern-
ing the administration of juflice, the collecion of
the royal revenue, the working of the mines, and
the treatment of the Indians, extremely finple
but well calculated to promote the public prol'pe-
rity. But though for the present he adapted his
plan to the infant slate of his colony, his aspiring
mind looked forward to its future grandeur. He Founldation
confidcred hinmfelf as laying the foundation of as Lilma.
great empire, and deliberated long, and with much
lolicitudc, in what place he hould fix the feat of
government. Cuzco, the imperial city ofthc Incas,

VOL. II. O was

* Zaiantc, lib. ii. c. 13. Vega, p. 11. lib. ii. c. [9. Benzo,
lib. iii. c. 6. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vii. c. 8.

I93

B O O K was situated in a corner of the empire, about four

VI. hundred miles from the sea, and much farther
__r from ,ito, a province of whole value he had
r534. formed an high idea. No other settlement of the

Peruvians was to considerable as to merit the nanie
of a town, or to allure the Spaniards to fix their
residence in it. But, in marching through the
country, Pizarro had been struck with the beauty
and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one of the
most extensive and belt cultivated in Peru. There,
on the banks of a small river, of the fame name
with the vale which it waters and enriches, at the
distance of fix miles from Callao, the most conm-
modious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded
a city which he destined to be the capital of his

153; government. He gave it the name of Ciudad de
January 18. os Reyes, either from the circumfiance of having

laid the first fione, at that season when the church
celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or, as is
more probable, in honour of Juanna and Charles,
the sovereigns of Castile. This name it itill retains
among the Spaniards, in all legal and formal deeds;
but it is better known to foreigners by that of Lima,
a corruption of the ancient appellation of the valley,
in which it is situated. Under his infpceion, the
buildings advanced with such rapidity that it oIon
assumed the form of a city, which, by a magnificent
palace that he ere&ed for hinmfelf, and by the
ilately houses built by several of his officers, gave,
even in its infancy, some indication of its iubfc-
quent grandeur .

Almagroin. IN consequence of what had been agreed with
vad Chi. Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards Chili;

and as he pofieflcd in an eminent degree the vir-
tues most admired by soldiers, boundlcfs liberality

and

* Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. Calancho
Coronica, lib. . c. 7. Barnueuo, Linla fiuld.tda, ii. 294.

and scarless courage, his flandard was followed B o o K
by five hundred and seventy men; the greatest vI.
body of Europeans that had hitherto becn. aftmn- '-r-
bled in Peru. From impatience to finish the ex- '535.
pedition, or from that contempt of hardship and
danger acquired by all the Spaniards who had
servcd long in Amcrica, Almagro, inflead of ad-
vancing along the level country on the coast, chose
to march across the mountains by a route that was
fiorter indeed, but almost inmpraticable. In this
attempt his troops were expof'd to every calamity
which men can susser, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigour of the climate in those elevat
ed regions of the torrid zone, where the degree
of cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perifned; and the
survivors, when they defccnded into the fertile
plains of Chili, had new difficulties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different
from the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, inde-
pendent, and their bodily constitution, as well as
vigour of 1iirit, nearly refenmbling the warlike
tribes in North America. Though filled- wi:it
wonder at the firil appearance of the Spaniards,
and fill more astonishcd at the operations of their
cavalry and the effcEts of their fire-arms, the ChiL
lefe ioon. recovered so far fron their fuwprife, as
not only to defend thcmfelvcs with obftiacy, but
to attack their new enemies with mored:etermihed
ficreenes than any American nation had.hithe-rtb
discovered. 'he Spaniards, howeverv coinuita
to penetrate into the country, and colleted loine
confiderablc quantities of gold.; but were so fat
from thinking of making any fetlletlemnt amidt
such formidable neighbours, that, in pite of all
the experience and valour of their leader, the
final ill'uc of the expedition ill. remained ex-
tremely dubious, when ilhey were rccalled' from

0 A it

1:95

B O O Kit by an unexpeEted revolution in Peru . The

VI. causes of this I shall endeavour to trace to their

'^'v source.
.An 535 So many adventurers had flocked to Pcru from
An infur-
retlon of every Spanish colony in America, and all with
te Peru- such high expectations of accumulating idepen-

dent fortunes at once, that, to men poffefied with
notions so extravagant, any mention of acquiring
wealth gradually, and by schemes of patient in-
duftry, would have been not only a disappoint-
ment, but an insult. In order to find occupation
for men who could not with fafcty be allowed to
remain inaftive, Pizarro encouraged some of the
most distinguished officers who had lately joined
him, to invade different provinces of the empire,
which the Spaniards had not hitherto visited. Se-
veral large bodies were formed for this purpose;
and about the time that Almagro set out for Chili,
they marched into remote difiri&s of the country.
Its rife, No sooner did Manco Capac, the Inca, obfcrve

the inconsiderate security of the Spaniards in thus
dispersing their troops, and that only a handful
of men, remained in Cuzco, under Juan and Gon-
zalez Pizarro, than he thought that the happy pe-
riod was at length come for vindicating his own
rights, avenging the wrongs of his country, and
extirpating its oppressors. Though ftrily watch-
ed by the Spaniards, who allowed him to reside
in the palace of his ancestors at Cuzco, he found
means of communicating his scheme to the per-
sons who were entrusted with the execution of it.
Among people accutonmed to revere their fovc-
reign as a divinity, every hint of his will carries
the authority of a command; and they thnm-
iflves were now convinced, by the daily increase

in

* Zarate, lib. iii. c. . Gomara Hlif. c. 131. Vega, p.

2. lib. ii. c. 20. Ovalle Hist. de Chile, lib. iv. c. 15, &c.
Herrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 9. lib. x. c. , &c.

in the number of their invaders, that the fond B o o K
hopes which they had long entertained of their vo- VI.
luntary departure were altogether vain. All per- _--
ceived that a vigorous effort of the whole nation 535-
was requisite to expel therm, and the preparations
for it were carried on with the fecrccy and ilence
pcculiar to Americans.

AS TER sone ulluccefsful attempts of the Inca and pro-

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening gre'r36
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained permil-
lion from him to attend a great festival which was to
be celebrated a few leagues from the capital. Un-
der pretext of that foleninity, the great men of the
cnmpire were aficmbled. As loon as the Inca joined
them, the standard of war was erected; and in a
short time all the fighting men, from the confines of
Qiito to the frontier of Chili, were in arms. Many
Spaniards, living securely on the iettlements allot-
ted them, were massacred. Several detachments,
as they mare ned careleisly through a country which
fcemed to be tamely submissive to their dominion,
were cut off to a man. An army amounting (if we
may believe the Spanilh writers) to two hundred
thousand men, attacked Cuzco, which the three
brothers endeavoured to defend with only a hundred
and eventy Spaniards. Another formidable body
invested Lima, and kept the governor clolely shut
up. There was no longer any communication be-
tween the two cities; the nunicrous forces of the
Peruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every mcffenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and
JLima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worst concern-
ing the other, and imagined that they themselves
were the only persons who had survived the general
cxtinction of the Spanish name in Peru *.

IT

Vega, p. i. lib. ii. c. 28. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Cieca de
Leon, c. 82. Gornara Ililt. c. 135. lierrera, dec. v. lib. viii. c. 5,

I97

. o0 o IIT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded i;

VL person, that the Peruvians made their chier effort.

During nine months they carried on the siege witi

sieg6, incessant ardour, and in various Ibrlns; and tho'
Cuzco. they displayed not the fame undaunted ferocity as

the Mexican warriors, they conducted ome of their
operations in a manner' which dilcover greater fa-
gacity, and a genius more sus'ceptible of improve.
ment in the military art. They not only oblerved
the advantages which the Spaniards derived from
their discipline and their weapons, but they endea-
voured to imitate the former, and turn the latter
against them. They armed a considerable body of
their bravest warriors with the swords, the fpcars,
and bucklers, which they had taken from the Spa-
aiff soldiers whom they had cut off in differcnt
parts of the country. These they endeavoured to
rmarlhal in that regular compact order, to which
experience had taught them that the Spaniards
were indebted for their irrcfiftible force in action.
Some appeared in the field with Spanish mufl:ets,
and had acquired skill and rcfolution enough to use
them. A few of the boldest, among whom was
the Inca himCelf, were mounted on the horses which
they had taken, and advanced briskly to the charge
like Spanish cavaliers, with their lances in the rclt.
It was more by their numbers, however, than by
those imperfe& efiays to imitate European arts,
and employ European arms, that the Peruvians
annoyed the Spaniards *. In pite of the valour,
heightened by delpair, with which the three bro-
thers defended Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered
pofifflion of one half of his capital ; and before
the Spaniards could drive him out of' it, they loft
Juan Pizarro, the best beloved of all the brothers,
together with fomc other persons of note. Worn

o;1u
* Se NQTJ, XL.

r99

out with the fatigue of incessant duty, distressed B 0 0 K
with want of provisions, and despairing of being VI.
able any longer to resist an enemy whose numbers s
daily encrealed, the soldiers became impatient to 53.6.
abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their
countrynlen, if any of them yet survived, or of
forcing their way to the ea, and finding Iome
nmans of e'caping from a country which had been
lb fttal to the Spanith name'. While they were
brooding over those desponding thoughts, which
their officers laboured in vain to dispel, Alma-
,ro appeared suddenly in the neighbourhood of
Cu zco.

TIHE accounts transmitted to Almagro concern- Arrivalof

ing the general infurrction of the Peruvians, Almagro.
ecre such as would have induced him, without he-
fitatio, to relinquish the conquert of Chili, and
haflen to the aid of his countrymen. .But in this and motives
rcoblution he was confirmed by a motive less gene- f his c-
rous, but more interesting. By the fame messenger
who brought him intelligence of the Inca's revolt,
hc received the royal patent creating him governor
of Cili, and defining the limits of his jurifdic-
tion. Upon confidering the tenor of it, he deemncd
it manifest beyond contradiction, that Cuzco lay
within the boundaries of his government, and he
was equally Solicitous to prevent the Peruvials
front recovering possession of their capital, and to
wrcft it out of the hands of the Pizarros. From
impatience to accomplish both, he ventured to re-
turn by a new route; and in marching through
the landy plains of the coalt, he fuffcred, from
heat and drought, calamities of a new species,
hardly inferior to thoe in which he had been in*
volvcd by cold and amine on the fuminits of the
Andes.

HIs
* HIerrcra, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 4.

B O O K His arrival at .Cuzco was in a critical moment.

VI. The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eycs upon
,-ir' him with equal solicitude. The former as he did

1537- not fludy to conceal his pretensions, were at a
isopnsra lols whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or

to take precautions against him as an enemy. The
latter knowing the points in contest between him
and his countrymen, flattered themnfelves that they
had more to hope than to dread from his operati-
ons. Almagro himelf, unacquainted with the
detail of the events which had happened in his
absence, and solicitous to learn the prccile poflure
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and with great circumnpcction. Various negoci.
ations with both parties were set on foot. The
Inca conducted them on his part with much ad,
drels. At first he cndeavoured to gain the fricnd.
ship of Almagro; and after many fruitleis over-
tures delpairing of any cordial union with a Spa.
niard, he attacked him by furprie with a nume-
rous body of chofcn troops. But the Spanish
discipline and valour maintained their onted lu-
pcriority. The Peruvians were rcpuled with fuich
slaughter, that a great part of their army dilierHld,
and Almagro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco
without interruption.

rtai;1',f- Tiil Pizarros, as they had no longer to make
feion of head aiiainft the Peruvians, dircdtcd all ticir at-

tention towards their new enemy, and took nica-
furcs to obftru't his entry into tlie capital. Pru-
cdnce, howcvcr restrained both partics for oinic
time Irom turning their arms agaii i one another,
mwile lurrounded b conminI CienemieCS, who would
rejoice in thec mutual flaughtlcr. Dillr-cirt clicnmcs
of accommodation \wci propol;ed. Each enda-
voured to deccive the other, or to corrupt his ol-
lo Cers.
200

TH: generous, open, affable temper of Alma- B 0 O K
gro gained many adherents of the Pizarros who VI.
were dilgufted with their harsh domineering man- 1
rers. Encouraged by this defection, he advanced 1537
towards the city by night, furpriled the centinels,
or was admitted by them, and investing the house
where the two brothers rcidcd, compelled them,
atier an obltinate defence, to surrender at difcre-
tion. Almagro's claim of juriifdicion over Cuzco
was univerlally acknowledged, and a form of ad-
piniltratio.l eiablifhed in his Name*.

Tlwo or three pcrlbns only were killed in this c;iil war
firftact of civil hostility ; but it was soon followed ffitRtAu
bv scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro having magro.
diperfed the Peruvians who had invefled Lima,
and received tome considerable reinforcements from
H-ispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred
men, under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado,
to miarch to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his bro-
thers, if they and their garrison were not already
cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which, in
the initncy of the Spanish power in America, must
be deemcd a considerable force, advanced near to
the capital before they knew that they had an ene-
my more formidable than Indians to encounter.
It was with astonishment that they beheld their
countrymen polled on the banks of the river Aban-
cav to oppolc their progrcls. Almagro, however,

fished rather to gain than to conquer them, and
by bribes and promises endeavoured to Icduce
ticir leader. The fidelity of Alvarado remained
ulltlhkcn ; but his talents forvar were not equal to
lis virtue, Al magro amuled him with various
mIovcllments, of which he did not comprehend the
meanica g, while a large detachment of cholcn ol- July z.

diers

' Zarate, lib. iii. c. 4. Vcga, p. . lib. ii. c. 29. 31,
Coinmara -Hifl. c. 34. Hcrr;ite, dcc. 6. lib. ii. c. -5.

7 0 O0 K dicrs pased the river by night, fell upon h11 ca;

VI. by firprile, broke his troops bcfore they h I: ti!::

^-bi- tto form, and took hin pritoncr, together with !;s

1537. prircipal oficers ".

hut does not By the suddel route of this body, the colicQ
dnPrvage is between te two rivals mull have been dccided, ii

Armagro had known as wecl how to improve s
how to gain a vicitory. Rod-rigo Orgognez, atl o!i'C;'
of great abilitics, ho having servcd ul!!cr :i:
contlable Bourbon, when he led the impcrial 2an ,
to Rome, had been accuflomed to bold and cc-i
five counfcls, adviscd him infantly to ifluc orclis
for putting to death Ferdinand apd Gonzola Pizar.
ros, Alvarado, and a f othcr perfobs whom ic
could not hope to gain, ad to march dircclllsv ilh
his vistorious troops to Lina, before the govcrnor
iad time to prepare for his defence. But Al.
Inagro, though he dilccrncd at once the utility ns
the counfcl, and had courage to have carried i:
into execution, Lhfffrcd himfclf to be influnced bv
ifetimcnts unlike those of a soldier of fbrtunc
grown old in service, and by fcruplcs which fLiilcd
l!ot the chief of a party who had drawn his fvord
in civil war. Feelings of humanity restrained him
from fiedding the blood of his opponents, and the
dread of being deemed a rebel deterred him froni
cntering a province which the king had allotted to
.nothcr. Though he kncw that arms nult termi-
nate the difpumc between hinm and Pizarro, and re-
solvcd not to liiun that n;nde of dccifion, yet, wilt
a tin-lidl c licacy pr pol c rous at fch a jun clurc. lie
was to iiicitous that his rival fiould be confdc!cc
a!, tic a !;'rjlor, lhbat hce marched quietly back 0
Cuzco to wait hi,; aplproach i-.

: Zartec, lib. iii. c. . (Go. Hilt. c. 13. 'Veg, 1 I
lih. ii. c. 3,, I-Tr34 ern (lec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

j l 'cr er:l, delc. G. lill. ii. c. Io, 11.
202

PIZARRO was ill unacquainted with all the B 0 0 s
itercfling events that had happened near Cuzco. VI.
'he account of Almagro's return, of the lots of 'Vr
ie capital, of the death of one brother, of 1537
;c imi ribnnicnt of the other two, and ofiizairo.
ie defeat of Alvarado, were brought to him
once. Such a tide of misfortunes almost
crwhlelimed a pirit which ad continued firm
d erct under the rudest shocks of advcrfity.
lu the ncccftity of attending to his own afe-
, as vcll as the defirc of revenge, prcfervcd
ii from finking under it. He took mcafurcs
r both with his wonted sagacity. As he had .i,'I
e comnmand of the sea-coast, and expeed concua.
nfidcrable supplies both of men and of ni-
tarv flores, it was no lets his intercft to gain
r.c, and to avoid ation, than it was that of
.li1.ro to precipitate operations, and bring
c contcft to a ifpccdy issue. He had rccourle
,ars wh'ich be had formerly practt!fd with
cccef, and Almagro wvas again weak enough
luHflr himnfelf to be arnufcd with a rolpedc
tcrminating their diflsrcnces b forbe ami-
ible accommodation. By varying his overtures,
d shifting his ground as ofcen as it fuitcce
is purpose, obmetilics 1ccmning to yield every
lin that his rival could dcfirc, and then re-
'ting all that he had granted, Pizarro dcx-
:rolfly protracted the ncgociation to tiich a
1ngth, that though every day was precious tQ
linWagro, fveral months cla.psed without coni-

tl 1 any final agreclent. While the atten-
0 of Alipagro, and the officers with whom
conlltcd, was occupied in detcting and
tlitg the fraudulcnt intentions of the govcr-

o, Gonz;alo Pizarro and Alvarado found means
Icorrupt the foldicrs to whole cuflody they

IS-Crip

203

:04

O K were committed, and not only made their clcai
VI. thenielves, but pcriuadcd sixty of tc mei \.
- i forilmerly guarded them to accoillm a!y tle'r !;,1l,
1$37- Fortune having thus dclivcrcd cIc oft li;i.;,

thers, the goxcernor lcrupled not at one at 0
perfidy moie to procure the iclcale ol tlIc o[
I-e propoQcd, tlat cvery point ill controver!?, Li
twccn Alniagro and limicf ihould be ib,!c
to the dcciion of thcir lovcrcign ; that uitl;ii
awlard was known, ach fiould recain undii;iiC'-
1)porcilion of whatever part of the country hle i!,
occupied ; that Ferdinand Fizarro houli Lc ie
at libcrty, and return infiantly to Spain, tie
thcr with the officers, whom Aln!agro piol;,,jii
to lend thither to rcprcficnt the jufiice oi i
claims. Obvious as tile defig o 'izarro \\
in tliofe propolitions, and ianiiliar as L:is a
iccs might nw have bcen to iiis opponciie, Ai
niagro, with a credulity approaching to ic;atu.
tion, relied op his fliwerity, and concluded
agreement on thie i terns t.

lisprcp,3ra- 'l'Ii momcit that Ferdiland Pizarro rccovcrc
ioil, j.ur his liberty, the governor, no lenicr ietterdc iiti

operations by anxiety about iis brothcr's lii
threw otf' every dilguilc which hi s concrn tr i
had obligcd him to afiLbic. 'lhe trcaty u;as ior
gotten ; pacific and conciliatinlg incalurics lcr
no norc menitioned ; it Mas in the fiell,
openly declared, and not in the cabinet;
armls, iand not by nlgociation, that it Imull n11
be dcccioiinced \\ho fl:ould be inailcr ol I'clu
T'he raplidiy of' Iiis ];reparations lfiitd Iluh
dccifiv c 1tlt;lt;on. Seven hundrcI d mnc( i ic
13. soon readytl to niarch tol ards Cuzco. 'lhce (,:

. Zaratu, lil). iii. c. 8. Ilerrcra, dec. 6. li1) ii. c. 1.

'I- l-ci'rcian, (dc. 6. ilib. iii. c. (. Zarlac, lil. c. . (
nIara ! iilt . .lc. \ c;, p. . lib. i. c. 35.

Band of there was given to his two brothers, B 0 K
whom he could peritedly confide for the execu- Vi.
nl of his iuoft violent schemes, as they were '~
F,,d on not only by the enmity flowing from 153S
Ii;lv rivallhip, but animated with a desire of
Ecgeance, excited -by recollction of recent dill
race and fuffcrings. After an unfuccel'sful at-
anpt to crots the mountains in the dire& road
etvwcea Lima.and Cuzco. they marched towards
i South aloug the coaii as far as Nalca, and thec
iring to the left, pcnctrated through the de-
les in that branch of the ndes which lay be-
veea them and the capital. Almagro, insetad
harkcning to ome of hlis oficers, who advised
il to attempt the defence of thoee difficult paiTes,
aited the approach of' the enemy in the plain
Cuzco. Two reasons eemrn to have induced
in to take this relolution. His followers amount-

hardly to five hundred, and lie was afraid
weakening such a feeble body, by fending
y detachment towards the mountains. His ca-
lry far excceded that of the adverse party, both
lnumber and dilciplinc, and it was only in an
pen country that he could avail hiti'clf of that ad-
ntage.
l'll Pizarros advanced without any obfiruc- Hisalty
Dn, but what arose from the nature of the delert co.t '"
id horrid regions through which they marched.
s loon as they reached the plain, both faions
cre equally impatient to bring this long-protracted
nitell to an iflue. 'T'houghl countrymen and
iends, the ulbjcc'ts of the lIame iovereign, and
ich with the royal adlalrd (di('laycdl; and tlioung
C' beheld the niountaiins tllat tilrolulled tlie
ali in which the w\Vcrc dirawin p coveI ed witl a
,1 nlultitude of 'lt.-li;iii, alicilnbled to enJoy the
':ict:lc of thlir iiitu;il clarapc, and preparcd to
tack wihatvcr party rclinailcd ailer of tlle field

to

2cd5

B O 0 K so fell and implacable was the rancour ii.ii

VI. had taken pofelaion of every brcalt, that not o

',r-' pacific counsel, not a single overture towards
,538. commodation proceeded from either fide. '

fortunately for Almagro, he was Ib worn out \;i
the fatigues of service, to which his advanced a
was unequal, thait, at this crisis of his fate,
could not exert his wonted activity ; and he x:
obliged to commit the leading of his troops toO
gognez, who, though an officer of great umc;
did not poffels the fame ascendant either overl
spirit or afiet;ions of the soldiers, as the cin
whom they had long.been accustomcd to follow ai

revere.

April 26. THE conflict was fierce, and maintained bv cac
Alima:o 0 eqa 1 1> 1
i:eied. party with equal courage. On the fide of l

magro, were more veteran soldiers, and a large
proportion of cavalry; but these were counter
balanced by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, an
by two companies of well-difciplined inufketccr
which, on receiving an account of the infurrec
tion of the Indians, the emperor had sent froi
Spail *. As the ule of fire-arms was not frequec
among the adventurers in America t, lihail
equipped for iervice at their ovn xpcncce, thi
fniall band of ioldiers, regularly trainedand armed
was a. novelty in Peru, and decided the fate ofti
day. Wherever it advanced, the weight us a la ]
and well-iiLflained fire bore down horlc and io0
before it; and Orgognez, while he enclcavoul
to rally and animate iis troops, having rcceivcd
dangerous wound, the route became gncc ral. 'lT
barbarity of the conquerors staincd the glor
which they acquired by this complete vidtory
The violence of civil rage hurried on fbmlc
slaughter their countryimc n with indil'criiiiti3
cruelty ; the ncatincls of private revenge ilti

paLC

H ecrrera., (!ec. 6. ib. iii. c. 8. ' j Zairate, lib. iii. c. .
2o6

20o

gated others to ingle out individuals as the objects B 0 0o 1
of thcir vengeance. Orgognez and several oficers VI.
ofditfinioa wcre nmafacred in cold blood ; above '
a hundred and forty Ibldicrs fell in the field; a 153S
large proportion, where the number of combatants
as ew, and the heat of the contest soon over.
Ainagro, though bo fceble that he could not bear
thc motion of a horse, had insisted on being car-
ricd in a litter to an eminence which overlookcd the
:ld of battle. From thence, in the umofi agita-
tion of mind, he viewed the various movements of
both parties, and at last, beheld the total defcat of
his own troops, with all the pailionate indignation
of a veteran leader long accustomed to vidory. Hc
endeavoured to save himflelfby flight, but was taken. .
prilbncr, and guarded with the trictcft vigi-
a:cc .
'FTH Indians, intlead of executing the resolution
iich they had formed, retired quietly after the
attle was over; and in the history of the New
World, there is not a more striking inifancc of the
ion'lerful alcendant which the Spaniards had ac-
uired over its inhabitants, than that after secing
nc of thecontending parties ruined and dillpcrcJd,
nd the other weakened and fatigued, they had
otcourage to fall upon their encmies, when for-
tue presented an opportunity of attacking them
ilh uch advantage t.
Cuzco was pillaged by the vidcorious troops, :!,.,.:-
ho found there a considerable booty, confiftingtio,s
artly of the gleanings of the lldiian treasures, and
artly of the wealth aaffed by their antagonifis
r0n the spoils of Peru and Chili. But lb far did

this

Z rrntc, lib. iii. c. , 2. Vega,p. . Iib. ii. . 36--38.

irrera, dc. 6 l. lib . iii. c. i 0- 12. Iilb. iv. c. I- 6.
4 Zarate, lib. iii. c. i . Vet-a, p. 11. lib. ii. c. 38.

B O O K this, and whatever the bounty of their leader could

VI. add to it, fall below the high ideas of the reconi.
'.'-ry pence which they conceived to be due to tlicir

1538. merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratii:

such extravagant expectations had rccourie to tlc
fame expedient which his brother had employed
on a imilar occasion, and endeavoured to find oc.
cupation for this turbulent assuming spirit, in or.
der to prevent it from breaking out into open n;-.
tiny. With this view, he encouraged his iiolt
astive officers to attempt the discovery and re.
duction of various provinces which had not hi.
therto submitted to the Spaniards. To every sand.
ard ereEted by the leaders who undertook any of
those new expeditions, volunteers resorted with
the ardour and hope peculiar to the age. Several
of Almagro's soldiers joined them ; and thus Pi-
zarro had the fatisfadtion of being delivcred both
from the importunity of his discontented friends
and the dread of his ancient enemics*.

Aimagro ALMAGRO himself remained for several monlh!
ried, in cutfody, under all the anguifhoffufpence. Foi

although his doom was determined by the Pi
zarros from the moment that he fell into thci
hands, prudence constrained them to defcr grati
fying their vengeance, until the soldiers who ha
served under him, as well as several of their ovi
followers in whom they could not perfcetly con
fide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they lct out up
their different expeditions, Almagro was im1pcacl
condemned, ed oftreafon, formally tried, and condcmnuci

die. The fcntcnce atoniflcd him; and thoug
he had often braved dath with an undaunccd I1i
rit in the field, its approach, under this igionil
nious form, appalled hinlr so much that he had ri

cour

* Zaratc, lib. iii . c . 2, on. iil, c.

C 141. Ilcrrlrt;l,
6. lib. iv. C.

I
o8

course to abjet supplications, unworthy of his for- B O O K
mci famie. He befbught the Pizarros to remcmber VI.
the ancient fricndlhip between their brother and 'srs
him, and how much he had contributed to the sic- 538.
cess and prolperity of their family; he reminded
them of the humanity with which, in oppofitio to
the repeated rcmonflranccs of his own most attached
friends, he had spared their lives when he had
them in his po\wer; he conjured them to pity his
age and infirmities, and to susser him to pats the
wretched remainder of his days in bewailing his
crimes, and in making his peace with Heaven.
The intreaties, ays a Spanish hiflorian, of a man
so much beloved, touched many an unfeeling heart,
and drew tears from many a hard eye. But the
brothers remained inflexible. As toon as Almagro
knew his fate to be inevitable, he met it with the
dignity and fortituce of a veteran. He was and put to
firangled in prilon, and afterwards publickly be-deat"'
headed. He suffered in the feventy-fifth year of
his age, and left one on by an Indian woman ofDclibiati-
Panama, whom, though at that time a prisoner in on. ot tll
Limna, he named as fucceIfbr to his government, Spain con-
purluant to a power which the emperor had grant- l'totpru
ed him .

As, during the civil diflenfions of Peru, all in-
tcrcourfe with Spain was lulpendcd, the detail of
the extraordinary tranifations there did not soon
reach the court. Unfortunately for the vidtorious
iaction, the first intelligence was brought thither
by obme of Almagro's officers, who left the coun-
try upon the ruin of their caulc; and they related
vwhat had happened, with every circumllftarce un-
favourable to Pizarro and his brothers. Their am-
hibion, their breach of the inAft iulemn engage-
nients, tleir violence and cruelty, wcrc painted

VOL. II. P w ith
* Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Gom. Hilt. c. 14. Vega, p. lI.
lib, ii. c. 39. IHerrera, dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9. lib. v. c. .

209

B 0 O K with all the malignity and exaggeration of party

VI. hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who arrived soon a:s

%-'rm ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary plen.
1539. dor, endeavoured to efface the impreflion which

their accusations had made, and to justify his
brother and himself, by representing Almagro as
the aggressor. The emperor and his ministers,
though they could not pronounce which of the
contending factions was most criminal, clcarly
discerned the fatal tendency of their difecnfions.
It was obvious, that while the leaders, cntrufled
with the conduct of two infantcolonies, employed
the arms which should have been turned against the
common enemy, in destroying one another, all at-
tention to the public good must ccafe; and thcre
was reason to dread that the Indians might im-
prove the advantage which their disunion presentcd
to them, and cxtirpate both the victors and the van-
quifhed. But the evil was more apparent than the
remedy. Where the information which had been
received was so defective and suspicious, and the
fccne of ation so remote, it was almost impoflible
to chalk out the line of conduEt that ought to be
followed; and before any plan that hould be ap-
proved of in Spain could be carried into execution,
the situation of the parties, and the circumfiances
of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effc"ts extremely pernicious.

Vaca dCa- NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a pcr-
;h o lent thi- ,.
th CtIith Illon to Peru, veiled with extensive and dicfrctionary
nlpllc ipow. power, who, after viewing deliberately the pofiure

of affairs with his own eyes, and enquiring upon
the spot, into the condu& of the different leaders,
hould be authoriscd to efiablifl the government in
that form which he deemed most conducive to the
interest of the parent flatc, and the welfare of the
colony. The man felceed for this inportant
charge wias Chrilloval Vaca de Cafiro, a judge in

the

the court of royal audience at Valladolid and hisgB o 0 K
abilities, integrity, and firmness, justified the choice. VI.
His inftruEions, though ample, were not fueh as - '
to fetter him i his operations. According to the 1539.
different altpcd of affairs, he had power to take up-
on him differcnt charaicers. If he found the gover-
nor still alive, he was to assume only the title of
judge, to maintain the appearance of acting in con-
cert with him, and to guard against giving any just
cause of offence to a man who had merited so highly
of his country. But if Pizarro was'dead, he was
entrusted with a commilfion, that he might thciu
produce, by which he was appointed his fueceflbr
in the government of Peru. This attention to Pi-
zarro, however, seems to have flowed rather from
dread of his power, than from any approbation
of his ncafures ; for at the very time that the court
teemed 1b solicitous not to irritate him, his bro-
ther erdinand was arrested at Madrid, and con'
fined to a prifln, where he remained above tweaty
years '.

WHILE Vaca de Cafiro was preparing for his , 4o.

voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru. iza.odi-
The governor conlidering himfrelf, upon the death among i
of Almagro, as the unrivalled poffefibr of that vast followrs.
empire, proceeded to parcel out its trritories
among the conquerors; and had this division bee
made with any degree of impartiality, the extent
of country whihl he had to bestow was fiuicient
to have gratified his friends, and to have gained' his
enemies. But Pizarro conduted this tranfation
not with the equity and candour of a judge, atten-
tive to di'covcr and to reward merit, but with the
illiberal pirit of a party leader. Large diftriEts,
in parts of the country most cultivated and popu-

P 2 lous,

* Gomra Hlft. c. i42. Vega, p. . lib. ii. . 4. 'ee
rera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. o, . lib. x. c. i.

B O O I ous, were set apart as his own property, or granti

VI. ed to his brothers, his adherents and favourites.
^ó'-m^ To others, lots less valuable and inviting were atf

1540. signed. The followers of Almagro, amongst v hom

were many of the original adventurers, to wlholi
valour and perseverance Pizarro was indebted for
his success, were totally excluded from any portion
in those lands, towards the acquisition of which
they had contributed so largely. As the vanity of
every individual sets an immoderate value upon his
own services, and the idea of each, concerning
the recompencc due to them, rose gradually to a
more exorbitant height in proportion as their con-
quests extended, all who were disappointed in their
expecations exclaimed loudly against the rapaci-
oufhefs and partiality of the governor. The parti-
fans of Almagro murmured in secret, and medi-
tated revenge "

Progrefsof RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in South
the Spainih America had been incc Pizarro landed in Peru,

their avidity of dominion was not yet satisficd.
The officers to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated into
several new provinces, and though some of them
were exposed to great hardships in the cold and
barren regions of' the Andes, and others fuffcrcd
distress not inferior amidst the woods and marfhcs
of the plains, they made discoverics and conquests
which extended their knowledge of the country,
as well as added to their power. Pedro de Val-
divia re-affumed Almagro's scheme of invading
Chili, and, notwithstanding the fortitude of the
natives in defending their poffcflions, made such
progress in the conquest of the country, that he
founded the city of St. Jago, and gave a begin.
uing to the cftahlifhrmcnt of the Spanilh domi.

nion

* Vcga, p. ii. lib .

iii . -.
. errera, deci 6, lib. viii. c. 5.

213

nion there*. But of all the enterprises undertakeng o o K
about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was the VI.
lmof remarkable, The governor, who seems to a
have rcfolved that no person in Peru should poflefs [54o.
any station of diflinguifhcd eminence or authority Rxearkable
but thole of his own family, had deprived Benal-of onzalo
cazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his command in Piza"'
that kingdom, and appointed his brother Gonzalo
to take the government of it. He inftru&ed him to
attempt the discovery and conquest of the country
tr the east of the Andes, which, according to the
iifarl ation of the Indians, abounded with cinna-
mon and other valuable spices. Gonzalo, not in-
fcrior to any of his brothers in courage, and no
Idis ambitious of acquiring diftinsCion, eagerly en-
gaged in this difficult service. He set out from
kQito at the head of three hundred and forty fol-
diers, nearone half of whom were horsemen, with
four thousand Indians to carry their provisions. In
forcing their way through the defiles, or over the
ridges of the Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to
neither of which they were accustomed, proved
fatal to the greater part of the wretched attendants.
The Spaniards, though more robui, and inured o Hardthip,
a variety of climates, suffered considerably, andtleyndurc.
loft some men; but when they dcfcended into the
low country, their distress incrcafed. During two
months it rained inceflahtly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their cloath t.
The vast plains upon which they were now enter-
ing, either altogetherwithout inhabitants, or occu-
pied by the rudcft and least industrious ribes in
the New World, yielded little fubfiftcncc. They
could not advance a fep. but as they cut a road
lhrough woods, or made it through narfhes. Such

inccffant

* Zarate, lib. iii. c. 13. Ovalc, lib. ii. c. I, &c,
'; Zaratc, lib. iv. c. 2.

B O O K incessant toil and continual scarcity of food, seem

,I. more than lufficient to have exhausted and difpi-

' rited any troops. But the fortitude and perfevc-
1540. rance of the Spaniards in the sixteenth century

were insuperable. Allured by frequent but falle
accounts of rich countries before them, they per-
lifted in fruggling on, until they reached the banks
of the Coca or'lapo, one of the large rivers whose
waters pour into the Maragnon, ad contribute to
its grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they
built a bark, which they expected would prove of
great utility, both in conveying them over rivers,
in procuring provisions, and in exploring the coun-
try. This was manned with fifty soldiers, under
the command of Francis Orellana, the officer next
in rank to Pizarro. The ftrcam carried them down
with such rapidity, that they were soon far a-head
of their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
difficulty by land.

D.efertedby AT this distance from his commander, Orellana,
Orellana. a young man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy

himself independent, and, traniported with the
predominant paflion of the age, he formed the
icheme of difinguiffling himself as a discoverer,
by following the course of the Maragnon, until it
joined the ocean, and by tirveying the vast regions
through which it flows. This 1cheme of Orellana's
w'as as bold as it was treacherous. For, if he be
chargeable with the guilt of having violated his duty
to his commander, and with having abandoned his
.tellow-itoldiers in a pathlcfs dfert, where they had
hardly any hopes of success, or even of safety, but
what were founded on the fcrvicc which they cx-
pcccd from the bark, his crime is, in foIc mica-
.ilrc, balanced by the glory of having ventured up-
on a navigation of near two thousand leagues,
through unknown nations, in a vcflcl hastily con-
ftruilcd with green timbcr, and by very unlkilti

haInds,

hands, without provisions, without a compass, or Ba O K
a pilot. But his courage and alacrity supplied eve- VI.
ry defed. Colmmitting himself fearlessly to the 's-
guidance of the itream, the Napo bore him along sa i,?t}
to he South, until he reached the great channel of the Marag-
the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coast, no""
he held on his courle in that diretion. He made
frequent descents on both fides the river, ometimes
seizing by force of arms the provisions of the fierce
savages, feated on its banks, and sometimes procur-
ing a fupplyof food by a friendly intercourse with
more gentle tribes. After a long series of dangers,
which he encountered with amazing fortitude, and:
ofdiftreffes which he supportcd with no less mag-
nanimity, he reached the ocean , where new pe-
rils awaited him. These he likewise. surmounted,
and got safe to the Spanifi settlement in the island
Cubagua-; from thence he failed to Spain. The
vanity natural to travellers who visit regions un-
known to the reft of mankind, and the art of an
adventurer, Iblicitous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an extraor-
dinary proportion of the marvellous in the narra,
tive of his voyage. He pretended to have disco-
vered nations o rich, that the roofs of their temples
were covered with plates of gold : and described a
republic of women so warlike and powerful, as to
have extended their dominion over a confiderablo
traal of the fertile plains which he had visited. Ex-
travagant as thofc talcs were, they gave rife to an
opinion, that a region abounding with gold, dif-
tinguihed by the name of El Dorado, and a conm-
niunity of Amazons, were to be found in this part
oftthe New World, and iuch is the propensity of
mankind to believe what is wondcrful, that it has
been slowly, and with difficulty, that rcafon and

obfcrvation
* See NOTE XLI.

21

B O K observation have exploded those fables. The voy,

VI. age, however, even wlen tirippcd of every roman.
óV tic embellifhmct, deserves to be recorded, not
1540. only as one'of th mnof mnemorable occurrences in

that adventurous age, but as the first event that led
to any certain knowledge of thole imenfe regions
that stretch eastward from the Andes to the
ocean .
Ditirefs of No words can defcribc the consternation of Pi,

ro zarro, when he did not find the bark at the conflu.

ence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had or-
dered Orellana to wait for him. He would not al-
low himfelfto fufpcCt that a man, whom he had
entrusted with such an'important command, could
be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him at such
a'juncture. But imputing his absence from the
place of rendezvous to' ome unknown accident, he
advanced about fifty leagues along the banks of the
Maragnon, expecting every moment to fee the bark
1541. appear with a supply of provisions. At length lie

came up with an officer whom Orellana had left to
perish in the desert, because he had the courage to
remonfirate against his perfidy. From him he
learned the extent of Orellanras crime; and his
followers perceived at once their own de!perate si-
tuation, when deprived of their only rcfource.
The spirit of the flouteft hearted veteran funk with-
in him, and all demanded to be led back instantly.
Pizarro, though he affurned an appearance oftran-
quillity, did not oppose their inclination. But lie
was now twelve hundred miles from Quito; and in
that long march the Spaniards encountered harcl-
ifips greater than those thcy had endured in their
progrcfs outward, without the 'alluring hopes

which

# Zarnie, lib. iv. c. 4. Gomara His. c. 86. Vega, p1. 1
lib. iii. c. 4. -lerrera, dec. 6. lib. ix. c. 2,-5. Rolricquic

J1. Maragnoriy Amazos, lib. i. c. 3.
21r6

which then soothed and animated them under theiB o o K
tffferings. Hunger compelled them to feed on vI.
roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and horses, r
to devour the mot loathsome reptiles, and even 1541.
to knaw the leather of their saddles and sword-
bclts. Four thousand Indians, and two hundred
and ten Spaniards, perished in this wild disastrous
expeditionl, which continued near two years; and
as fifty men were aboard the bark with Orellana,
only four-score got back to Quito. These were
naked like savages, and so emaciated with famine,
or worn out with fatigue, that they had more the
appearance of fpeftres than of men. .

BUT, inflead of returning to enjoy the repose Numberof

which his condition required, Pizarro, on enteringln Peru.l"
kQito, received accounts of a fatal event that
threatened calamities more dreadful to him, than
those through which he had paied.' From the
time that his brother made that partial division of
his conquefis which' hs been mentioned, the ad-
herents of Almagro, confidering themfclves as
proscribed by the party in power, no longer en-
;crtincd any hope of bettering their condition.
Great nurbbers in despair relorted to Lima, where
the houle of young Almagro was always open to
them, and the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed hiim to enjoy,
was fpcnt in afording them fubfiflence. The
warm attachme nt with which every pcrfon who
Icrved undcr tlhe elder Alnmagro dcvoted hinirelf
to his inicrelts, was quickly transferred to his son,
who was now grown up to the age of manhood,
!ld polTcifcd all the qualities which captivate the
aifctions of ldicrs, Of a graceful appearance,

dextrous

Zaratc, lib. iv. c. 2-5. V ga, p. 1 . iii. c. 3, 4,
5, 1. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lib. ix. c. 2-5

d. 7. lib, iii. c. i4. Pizar. Varolls Illuitr. 349, &c.

2I7

B OO K dextrous at all martial exercises, bold, open, ge.

VI. nerous, he feetmed to be formed for conmand;

sras* and as his father, conscious of his own inferiority
co5l4d fronl the total want of education, had been ex-
young Al- trenlely attentive to have him infiruted in every
Tmalr' fcicrncc becoming a gentleman.; the accomplish.

ment which he had acquired heightened the re-
fpe& of his followers, as they gave him dillincio
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a point of
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor was afieCtion for Al-
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their own diftrceffs. Many of theun, deflitute
of common neceflarics , and weary of loitering
away life, a burthen to their chief, or to such of
thcir abciates as had laved some rcnlilault of their
fortune froin pillage and confilcation, longed i-
patiently for an occasion to exert their activity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of all their nlifcry.

coillfpi; l Their fiequent cabals did not pals unobLlcrved;
licof pi.. and the governor was wained to be on his guard

against men who nmditated fonie dcl.pcratc deed,
and had relolution to execute it. But cither from
the native intrepidity of his inud, or from con-
tempt of pcrl'obs whole poverty rendcrcd their
machinations of little conflcqucncc, he clifrcgard-
cd tlle admlonitions of his friends. " Be in no
pain, laid lie carclefsly, abojit my life; it is per-
lc t!ly lafc, as long as cvery 11111 iln I'ru knows
that I can in a moment t hin to death whn
clarcs to harbour a thought against it." This 'c-
curity gave the Almagiiaus full lIil ure to (ligcll
and ripenl Cevry part of their Iclihcc; and Juan

d

h. Ecc NOTE LXII.
a18

219

cHerrada, an officer of great abilities, who had B O
he charge of Almagro's education, took the lead VI.
a their consultations, with all the zeal which that -r
;onneiion inspired, ad with all the authority 1541.
;hich the acendant that he was known to have
iver the mind of his pupil gave him.
ON Sunday, the twety-ixth of June, at mid- andkillhim,
lay, the fcafon of tranquillity and rcpofe in all
ulity climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
f the mos determined conspirators, sallied out
f Almagro's houte in complete armour; and
irawing their swords, as they advanced hastily to-
'ards the governor's palace, cried out, "Long
live the king, but let the tyrant die." Their as-
[ociates, warned of their motions by a signal,
vcre in arms at different stations ready to support
them. Though Pizarro was usually surrounded
by luch a numerous train of attendants as suited
the magnificence of the moRt opulent subjet of
the age in which lie lived, yet as he was just risen
!rom table, and most of his own dotiefics had
etired to their own apartments, the conspirators
fed through the two outer courts of the palace
ol:crvcd. They were at the bottom of the
air-cafe, before a page in waiting could give the
larm to his maiter, who was converting with a
ew friends in a large hall. The governor, whole
cady mind no iorm of danger could appal,
aruing up, called for arms, and commanded
ancilco de Chaves to make fats the door. But
hit ofiicer, who did not retain 1b much presence
f mind as to obey this prudent order, running
tllc top of the flair-calc, wildly aked the con-
iratorls what they meant, and whither they were
0oi1g ? Inltlcad of anVeing, they stabbed him
: tilc henri, and burf into the hall. Some of
!ic pcrlo;is wvho wcrc there thrcwv ticiifclvcs from
lic wiudo 'A,; o hers attempted to l'; and a few

drawing

B O 0 K crawing their swords, followed their leader ii

VI. anl inner apartment. The conspirators, animate(

with having the objc& of their vengeance now ir
I341. view, rufled forward after them. Pizairo, xit

no other arms than his sword and buckler, de
fended the entry, and supported by his half-bro.
ther Alcantara, and his little knot of friends, he
maintained the unequal contcft with intrepidity
worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigour
of a youthful conbatant. " Courage, cried lie,
companions, we are yet enow to nalke tliofe trai-
tors repent of their audacity." But the armour of
the conspirators proteed them, while every thrust
they made took efiet. Alcanta:ra fell dead at his
brother's feet; his other defendants cere miiortally
wounded. The governor, ob weary tat he li
hardly wield his sword, and ino lonler ab!e to
parry tle many weapons Iirioully aimed at iilin,
received a deadly thruit full in his ti;ioal, funk to
the ground, and xpired.

Almagroa- AS fu as he was slain, the alaffis run oui
:'""~l;g^ into the fireets, and wavi-ng their bloody fwVords,
as is Iuc -
orl. proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two

hundred of their afiociates having joined thcin,
they conduc.cd young Allmaro in folcnti, pro.
ccltion through the city, and aficniblilig tlc nla-
giftrales nlld }rincipal citizens, compelled 1 ici to
Scknowledgc hini as lawful fucccfipr to his f;ilicr
ill is government. The palace cf Pizarr,, toc-
tller with the houfcs of fcveral oi his adcllcrct ,
wcrce pillagcd by the foldicrs, \\ho had the faitis
factionl at once of bcing lavellged o their cnnlC;,
and of eitieldIing thci kInilvvs by tice spoils, of tl:o
lhrough whofc hands all t11hC ealth of P'cru ]ld

'I i

* Z;ar;at, lib. iv. c. 6-o. Gotara lifl. <. . 14}

Vega, p. i i. iib, iii. r. 5-7. Herrera , (I.c. (1. lit, . '
4-7. Pizirro Var. IllulI. 1. 83.
22(0

ToE boldness and iuccfcs of the conspiracy, as B 0 K.
eli as the name and popular qualities of Alma- VI.
ro, drew many foldicrs to his flandarci. Ec(ry ~
vcnturcr of dcflprate fbrtune, all who were dil- N :I1-
tisficd wvith Pizarro, and, lfom the rapacioul- peralal;cc
is of his governlmel t in the latter -ears of,}iisdif'rd
fe, the number of ,lji!!coitents v. s conlildeable,
ec!ared without hcliiation, i ftavour of Alma-
o, and he was ibon at the head of eight hun-
rcd of the nmoft gaiant veterans in Peru. As
is youth and inexperience .diflijualieid him fromn
ikh g tie command of them hinicif, he appoint-
1 lerrada to at as eneral. But thoughl Almna-
roIpccdily colleced such a refpcliable lorcc, the
cqiclfcence in his govecrnment was far from being
encral. Pizarro l.d left imany friends to whom
ismeniory was dear; the barbar-ous aflillination
a nan to Vwhaom liis country was so highly in-
brcd, fillcd every injparial pcrl bn with horror.
be ignominious birth of Almagro, as well as the
ubtlul title on wLicih le ibunded his pretensions,
dothers to confidcr hlim as an usurper. The
cers who commanded in some provinces refused
rconiizc his authority, until it was confirmed
thcemnpelror. Iu others, particularly at Cuzco,
royal Itandard was crelcd, and preparations
de to revenge the murder of their ancient
der.
THlosr, feeds of dircord, which could not have A-.iv.,lof
D long dormant, acquired greater vigour and v,cl;C

Cawo,

iity, whien the arrival of Vaca de Cafiro was
ownr. After a long and disastrous voyage, lie
sdriven by frel's of weather into a fliall har-
urin the province ofPoltayan ; and proceeding

thlience by land, after a journey no Iecls tc-

ous than dificult, he reached OQ!ito. In his

lie received accounts of Pizarro's death, and
the cvents which followcd upon it. lle immc-

diately

B0 6 id£iarely produced the royal comliflion app6irntli

VI. hiii governor of Pru, with the famne privilegti

'T- ' and auth'ority; and his jurifdiAion Was ack.ov;
wh' led ged, without hefitatioln, by Benalcazar, Ad,
thetitle of lailtado, or lieuteant-geineral for the emperor ii
governor. Ppayan, and by Pedro de Puelles, who, il iL,

abfehce of Goilzal-o PiZarro, had the commando
the troops left at QGito. Vaca de Castro not onl
aftlmed the fuprelne authority, but sheed that h
poffetlcd the talents which the exercise of it at tha
juntur'c cquircd. By his influence and addref
hc soon acmbled uch a body of troops, as no
only fct him above all scar of being exposed to an,
insult froin the advise party, but enabled hinmi
advance from Qgito with the dignity that becam
his charadter. By difpatehing perlbus of cons
dencc to the differeil icftlleents in Peru, with
formal notification of his arrival, and of his coni
miion, he communicated to his countrymen th
royal pleasure with rclpect to the government ofth
country. By private cmifiarics, he cxcited luc
officers as had discovered their disapprobation(
Alniagi-o's proeeedings, to manifest their dotv
their sovereign, by supporting the perlon honourl
with his coilnmrifion. Those neatures were lpn
ductive of great ffects. Eicouraged by the at
proach of the newv governor, or prepared by I
machinations, the loyal were confirned in thc
principles, and avowed them with greater bol
ness; the timid ventured to declare their fcntiment
the neutral and wavering, finding it cceffary
chute a fide, began to lean to that which now a
peated to be the afeft as well as the most jil '.

Conaua of AtM AG O obhcrvcd the rapid progrcls of t
Alnagro. spirit of dilaffc.Elion to his caulc, and, in ordei

gi

' Bcnzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iv. c. . GorII

c. 14t, 47. Hcrrcra, dec. 6. lib. x. c. , 2, 3, 7, &c.
222

n i 1 i i r A Ivi -1 -Ki L ^A. -2. 3

give an effc&ual check to it before the arrival of 0 0 :
Vaca deCaftro, he et out at the head of his troops VI.
ibrCuzco, where the most conliderable body of -
opponents had creced the royal flandard, utider i542.
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During
his march thither, itcrrada, the skilful guide of his
youth and of his counl is died ; and from that time
his measures were conspicuous for their violence,
butconcertcd with little agacity, and executed with
no addrels. Holguin, witlh forces far iferior to
those of the oppoiite party, was del'cending towards
the coast at the very time that Almagro was on his
way to Cuzco. By a very simple firatagem, he de-
ceived his unexperienced adversary, avoided an
engagcment, and cff&c-'ed a junClion with Alvara-
do, an oicer of note, who had been the fir:st to de-
clare against Almagro as an usurper.

SooN after, Vaca rle Castro cntcred the ca-mp Piogre of
with the troops which he brought from O ito, and vlir.
erefting the royal ilandard before his own tent,
he declared, that, as governor, he would difeharge
in person all .the functions of general of their com-
bined forces. Though formed by the tenour of his
past life to the habits of a edentary and pacific
profelion, heat once aflumcd the ativity, and dif-
covered the dccilion of an officer long accuiolmed
to command. Knowing his strength to be now far
luperior to that of the enemy, he was inlpaticnt to
terminate the coneltC by a battle. Nor did the lol-
lowecrs of Alnagro, who had no hopes of obtain-
illg pardon for a crime lo atrocious as the murder
of thc governor, decline that mode of dccifion.
They met at Chu:p.s, about two lhundred mIiles from Sct 16.
(izco, and fought \\ithl all the fierce animoiity in-
Ipircd by the violcnc of civil rgc, tle rancour of
IlPvate cuitT, the cagcriclis of rvcngc, and ihe
las tiTrf.)ts of deCIlpair. ViCt.or. altler rctliinini g

}oLg

224
B O K long doubtful, declated at aft for Vaca dc Castro,

VI. The fperior number of his troops, his own in.
^- trepidity, and the martial talents of Francico dc
i542- Carvajal, a veteran officer formed under the great
Defeats Al- Captain in the wars of Italy, and who on that day

laid the foundation of his future fame in Peru, tri.
umphed over the bravery of his opponents, though
led on by young Almagro with a gallant spirit,
worthy of a better caule, and deserving another
fate. The carnage was great in proportion to the
number of the combatants. Many of the vanquish.
cd, efpccially such as were conscious that they
might be charged with being accessary to the affal
fination of Pizarro, rushing on the words of the
enemy, chore to fall like ioldiers, rather than wait
an ignominious doom. Of fourteen hundred men,
the total amount of combatants on both fides, five
hundred lay dead on the field, and the number of
the wounded was frill greater .

Severity of IF the military talents displayed by Vca de
his proceed- Cafiro, both in the council and in the field, fur.
lmnS' prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were ill

more astonished at his conduA after the vidor,
As he was by nature a rigid dispenser of juficc,
and persuaded that it required examples of extraor-
dinary leverity to restrain the licentious spirit of
soldiers so far removed from the feat ofgovcrnmc::t,
he proceeded dircly to try his prisoners as rebeis,
Forty were condemned to susser the death of trai-
tors, others were banished from Peru. Their
leader, who made his elfape from the battle, be.
ing betrayed by some of his officers, was pub.
licly beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the nanic

0(

* Zarate, lib. iv. c. 12-19. Gomara, c. 148. Vega,
i. lib. iii. c. 1i.-8. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. i. c. , 2,
lib. iii. c. -1 .

of Almagro, and the spirit of the party,' was ex- B O O I

~~~~~ li~ci*. *_ _VI.

DURIrNG those violent convulsions in Peru, the '~~
lemperor and his miniftcrs were intently employed 1542-
il preparing regulations, by which they hoped onsof the
not only to rc-elfablith tranquillity there, but toremperor

concerning

introduce a lnlre prclfe lryflelll of internal policy lls domini-
into all their iettlcinents in the New World. Ra- olsin Ani"
pid and extensive as the Spanilh conqueits in Ame-
rica had been, they were not carried on by any re-
gular exertion of the national force, but by the oc-
cafionil efforts of private adventurers. After fitting
out a few of the first armaments for difcovcring new
regions, the court of Spain, during the busy reigns
of Ferdinand and of Charles V. the former the
moi intriguing prince of the age, and the latter
the inofl ambitious, was cncunmbered with such a
multiplicity of schemes, and involved in war with
so many nations of Europe, that it had not leisure
to attend to dillant and less intcrefling objecs.
The care of prosecuting discovery, or of attempt-
ing conquest, was abandoned to individuals; and
with luch ardour did men push forward in this new
career, on which novelty, the spirit of adventure,
avarice, ambition, and the hope of meriting heaven,
prompted them with combined influence to enter,
that in lcds than half a century alnoft the whole of
that cxtcnfive cnmpire which Spain now poflcftcs
in the New World was fubjcedcd to its dominion.
As the Spanish court contributed nothing towards
the various expeditions undertaken in America,
it was not intitled to claim miuch fiom their sue-
cess. The fovcrcignty of the conquered provinces,
with the fifth of thle old and filvcr, was rcfcrvcd
ibr tlic crown ; every thing ell'c was ILizcd by the

VOL. 11. anobciatcs

* Zirate, lib. iv. c. 27.. (.mrnr., c. o. clcr ., c. 7.
l iii. c.12. lib. vi. c. i.

iB O affociatcs as their right. The plunder of til

VI. countries which they invaded erved to indenifi

- --'ó them for what they had expended in cquippin,
1542. themselves for the ervicc ; and the conquered ter-

ritory was divided among them, according to rules
which cuflom had introduced, as permanent efta-
bliflnments which their fucccfsful valour merited,
In the infancy of those fettlemcnts, when their ex-
tent as well as their value were unknown, many
irregularities ecaped observation, and it was found
necefiary to connive at many exceifes. The con.
quered people were pillaged with deftrutdive rapa-
city, and' their country parcelled out among its
new masters in exorbitant shares, far exceeding the
highest recompence due to their ferviccs. The
rude conquerors of America, incapable of forming
their establishments upon any general or cxtenfive
plan of policy, attentive only to private intcreft,
unwilling to forego present gain from the proipect
of remote or public benefit, seem to have had no
objeEt but to amass udden wealth, without regard-
ing whatmight be the confequencesof the means by
which they acquired it, But when time at length
discovered to the Spanish court the importance of
its American poffefions, the necefity of new-mo-
delling their whole frame became obvious, and in
place of the maxims and pracices prevalent among
military adventurers, it was found requisite to sub-
titute the institutions of regular government.

One evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the islands, and employed thenifelvcs in
searching for gold and silver with the fame incon-
fiderate cagcrnels. Similar effcts followed. The
natives employed in this labour by maflers, who
in imposing their tasks had no regard cither to

what

what they felt or what they were ale to perform, B O O K
pined away and perished so fast, that there was VI.
,cabou to apprehend that Spain, instead of pol-f.'"
Ietling countries peopled to uch a degree as to be 142'
*luiceptible of progressive improvement, would soon
remain proprietor only of a vast uninhabited dc-
fart.

THE emperor and his ministers were so sensible

of this, and so solicitous to prevent the extinction
of the Indian race, which threatened'to render
their acquisitions of no value, that fom time to
time various laws, which I have mentioned, had
been made for fccuring to that uuhappy people
more gentle and equitable treatment. But the dif-
tance of America from the feat of empire, the
feebleness of government in the new colonies, the
avarice and audacity of oldiers unaccustomed to
restraint, prevented there alutary regulationsfrom
operating with any considerable influence. The
evil continued to grow, and at this time the enl-
peror found an interval of leisure from the affairs
of Europe to take it into attentive consideration.
He consulted not only with his ninifiers and the TIheperfons
members of the council of the Indies, but called ,"thwlom
upon several persons who had resided long in thee as.
New World, to aid them with the result of their
experience and observation. Fortunately for the
people of America, among these was Bartholomew
dc las Casas, who happened to be then at Madrid
on a mifiion from a chapter of his order at Chiapa'*.
Though, since the mificarriage of his foriner
schemes for the relief of the Indians, he had con-
tinued shut up in his cloister, or occupied in reli-
gious functions, his zeal in behalf of the former
objects of his pity was ib. far from abating, that,
from an increaled knowledge of their fufielringa,

(~Z its
Refal Jlift. de Chapia, p, 4+6.

B O O K its ardour had augmented. He seized eagerly ili.-

VL- opportunity of reviving his favourite maxins con-
1rv~ cerning the treatment of the Indians. With the
1542. moving eloquence natural to a man on wholec mind

the scenes which he had beheld had made a deep
imprefflion, he described the irreparable waste of
the human fpecics in the New World, the Indian
race almost totally swept away in the islands in ltes
than fifty years, and hastening to extinction on the
continent with the fame rapid decay. With the
decisive tone of one firongly prepofleifed with the
truth of his own iyflem, he imputed all this to a
tingle cause, to the exactions and cruelty of his
countrymen, and contended, that nothing could
prevent the depopulation of America, but the de-
claring of its natives to be freemen, and treating
them as fubjets, not as slaves. Nor did he con-
fide for the success of this proposal in the powers
of his oratory alone. In order to enforce them, he
composed his famous treatise concerning the dc-
ftrudion of America , in which he relates, with
many horrid circumstances, but with apparent
marks of exaggerated delcription, the devastation
of every province which had been vilited by tlc
Spaniards.

i folici- TiE emperor was deeply affli&tcd with the re-

tude to in-
troducea cital of to many ations fliocking to humanity

nerailre- But as his views extendcd far beyond those of Las

formation of - * *
govrnment. Calas, he perceived, that relieving the Indians froml

oppreflion, was but one flep towards rendering his
poffcflions in the New World a valuable acquifiion,
and would be of little avail, ulcfs he could cir-
cunfcribe the power and ulrpations of' his own
lubjcls there. The conquerors of America, how-
ever great their merit had been towards their coun-
try, were mofily persons of such mcan birth, aind

of'
* Rmefal, p. 19Z. 199.

of such abjec rank in society, as give no diftinc- B O O K
tion in the eye of a monarch. The exorbitant VI.
wcalth with which tome of then returned, gave
umbrage to an age not accufiomed to fee men in 542-
incfrior condition elevated above their level, and
riing to emulate or furpais the ancient nobility in
Iplcndour. The territories which their leaders had
appropriated to thcmfclvcs were of enormous ex-
tnt " ; and if the country fiould ever be improvcd
in proportion to the fertility of the foil, they must
grow too wealthy and too powerful for iubjc&s.
It appeared to Charles, that this abule required a
remedy no less than the other, and that the regula-
tions concerning both must be enforced by a mode
of government more vigorous than had yetbeen in-
troduced into America.

WiTH this view he framed a body of laws, con- Newregu-
taining many alutary appointments with relfpe lti re
to the constitution and powers of the supreme coun-
cil of the Indies; concerning the fation and jurif-
diction of the royal audiences in different parts of
America, the administration ofjutficc, the order of
government, both ccclcfiaftical and civil. These
were approved of by all ranks of men. But toge-
ther with them were issued the following regulations,
which excited universal alarm, and occasioncd the
most violent convulions :-- " That as the repar-
timientos or fharcs of land fcizcd by levcral per-
Ions appearcd to be exccilivc, the royal audiences
arc empowered to reduce them to a moderate ex.
lent: That upon the death of any conqueror or
plantcr, the lands and Indians granted to him
liall not defccnd to his widow or children, but rc-
turn to the crown : That the Indians shall hcnce-
il;rtii be cxempted from pcrfonal fcrvicc, and
fliall not be compcllcd to carry the baggage of

travellers,
* Sec NOTE XLIII.

229

B 0 0 travellers, to labour in the mines, or to dive in the

VI. pearl fisheries : That the tated tribute due by their

to their superiors shall be ascertained, and they
-542i fSlall be paid as servants for any work they volun.

tarily perform: That all persons who are, or have
been in public offices, ecclefiafics of every deno.
mination, hospitals and monasteries, {hall be de-
prived of the lands and Indians allotted to them,
and these be annexed to the crown: That every
person in Peru, who had any criminal concern in
the contests between Pizarro and Almagro, should
forfeit his lands and Indians ."

Hisminif- ALL the Spaniflh ministers who had hitherto
tcrst rmon- been entrusted with the direcion of American aft
firateagainRf
them, fairs, and who were best acquainted with the state

of the country, remonstrated against those regula-
tions, as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
represented that the number of Spaniards who had
hitherto emigrated to the New World was Ib ex-
tremrely small, that nothing could be expeEted from
any effort of theirs towards improving the vait re-
gions over which they were scattered; that the
iuccefs of every scheme for this purpose must de-
pen'd upon the ninifiry and service of the Indians,
whose native indolence and aversion to labour, no
profpce of benefit, or promise of reward could
lurmount; that the moment the right of imposing
a task, and cxacting the performance of it was taken
friam their mafiers, every work of induflry must
cease, and all the sources from which wealth be-
gun to pour in upon Spain must be flopped for
ever. But Charles, tenacious at all times of his own
opinions, and bo much imprcfld at prefcnt with
the view of the disorders which reigned in Ame-
rica, that he was willing to hazard the application

even

* Ierrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 5. Fernandeo Hilt. lib. i.

C. 1, 2.
230

even of a dangerous remedy, persisted in his refo- B o O K
lution of publishing the laws. That they might VI.
be carried into execution with greater vigour and t
authority, he authoriled Francisco Tello de San- I542.
doval to repair to Mexico as viitador or uperin-
tendclit of that country, and to co-operate with
Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy, in enforcing
them. He appointed BPlafco Nugnez Vela to beA veroy
governor of Peru, with the title of Viceroy; and in appointed
order to firengthen his administration, he efta-t ,oi.'
blifhed a court ofroyalaudience in Lima, in which
four lawyers of eminence were to preside as
judges .

THE viceroy and uperintendent failed at the I544
fame time; and an account of the laws which they f:ectJ of

the regui.-

were to enforce reached America before them.tionin te
Thle entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed as Spi'.
the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited grant
of liberty to the Indians asseted every Spaniard in
America without diftintion, and there was hardly
one who might not o3a ome pretext be included
under the other regulations, and susser by them.
But the colony in New Spain had now been to long
accustomed to the refiraints of law and authority
under the feady and prudent administration of
Mendo, that how much soever the spirit of the
new ftatules was detested and dreaded, no attempt
was made to obftru& the publication of them by
any at of violence unbecoming subjects. The ma.
giftrates. and principal inhabitants, however, pre.
Icnted dutiful addreflcs to the viceroy and fupcr-
intendent, reprelfnting the fatal confcquences of
enforcing them. -appily for them, Mcndoza, by
long rcfidence in the country, was lo thoroughly
acquainted with its ftatc, that he knew what was

for

" Zarate, lib. iii.c. 21. Gomara, c. 151. Vega, p. 2. lib.
. . 20.

231

13 O O for its interest as well as what it could bear ; and

VI. Sandoval, though new in office, displayed a deglee
'-_r'-- of moderation ieldom poffefled by perlbnsjuft en-

I544- tering upon the exercise of power. They engaged

to fuipend, for some time, the execution oi ,hat
was oifenfive in the new laws, and not cnly ccn-
icnted that a deputation of citizens should be 'int
to Lurope to lay bcfore the emperor the apprehcn-
sions of his fubjceds in New Spain with rclpec to
their tendency and cl'ccts, but they concurred with
thicm in lupportig their ientinments. Charles,
mnovcd by the opinion of men whose abilities and
integrity intitled tlhcn t decide concerning what
fell immediately under their own view, granted
such a relaxation of the rigour of the laws as rc-
established the colony in its former tranquillity '1.
I Pu. IN Peru the florni gathered with an alpet flill

more fierce and threatening, and was not lo loon
dilferled. ' he conquerors of Peru, of a rink
much inferior to thole who had liljed Mexico
to the Spanish crown, farther rcmoved from the in-
tpection of the parent ilatc, and intoxicated with
the luddcn acquisition of wealth, carried on all
their operations with greater licence and irregula.
rity than any body of adventurers in the Ncvw
World. Anidfi the general lfbvcriioii o law aii
order, occalioncd by two fuccciivc civil larls,
when each individual was at liecrty to lccidce loi
hinfcll, itlhout any guide but lis on1 inicrefl or
palioO , tllis tu bulent flpi.rit role al ove all IciiIc
of lubordination. To nc thus corruptcd by
;inacll, the i rolduction of regular govcrnmcunl,
the power of a viceroy, and the ;aiillioily o
rcpi'lctSilc cc ur1t ol judicaturc, ould have a)-
lC .l1 lo)i ,lmidablec Iefill;inls, to whlich lley woutlh

· ]'lunaTl,b:'. Ilifi. il>b. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vc,', p. l.

ll. i.

7 1, 22. 1 ll , (ib. .

c. b. vii,

c.

. . c. , I;

'.l')l., .. 1ii A l . I il(. il).

l '. C.
c .

.ave submittcd with reluaance. But they revolted B O O I
ith indignation against the idea of complying with VI.

laws, by which they were to be strippcd at once of r-
all they liad earned so hardly during many yearsof 1544.
:ilvicc and suffering. As thc account of the new
la'\s prcad fucccflively through the different fettle-
nmets, the inhabitants run together, the women in
tears, and the men cxclaiming against the injustice
and ingratitude of their overeign, in depriving
themn, unlcard and unconvidted, of their poficfii-
ons. " Is this, cried they, the rccon;pence due to
Frrfons, who, without pubiic aid, at tl.cirown ex-
pence, and by their own valour, have 1,ibjedted to
the crown of Cal, ile territories of such Vast extent
and opulence ? Are thelc the rewards bellowed or
having endured unparalleled diftreis, for having
cnconntercdl every fpecics of danger in the service
of tlecir country ? Whoie merit is so great, whofc
coclid h:as been so irreproachable, that he may
noL be condemned by ome penal claufc in regula-
tians, conceived in terms as looe and comprehen-
.'5(, as if it had beeni intended that all hould be
c;;tanglcd in their lnarc ? Every Spaniard of note
in Peru has held bfmc public office, and all, with-
ot diiniion, have been confirained to take an
ailivc part in the contefi between the two rival chiefs.
Werc thc forrjer to be robbed of their property be-
caufc they had done their duty ? Were the latter to
Lh pIunifilce on account of what they could not
;.'':1 ? :hall the concqucrors of this great ernpire,
iiincad of receiving marks of diftinlion, be de-
livecd of the natural coulolation of providing for
Ii i ido\\s :nd children, alld leave them to de-
Icn<l fur Ii-,ilnciic on the f:anty upply ticy can
(xtoii froim unfccling courticrs ? We arc not able
i)w\\, Clltilltll(l iliCy, to c:llore unlknown regions
i (jiucil of nuore cfcurc ittleicnts; our conflitu-

tions,
1 crcra, dc. 7 lib. vii c. .q.1 5'..

233

234
B O () tions, dcbilitated with age, and our bodies covcrci

VI. with wounds, are no longer fit for aive service;

- but frill we pof]cfs vigour lufficient to afltrt our ju(i

1544. rights, ad we will not tamely susser them to be
Arin prc- wrested from us *"
vented by BY difeourfes of this fort, uttered with vehe.
the mrodera- * .
lion of Ca omence, and liflened to with universal approbaiocn,
tro. their paflions were inflamed to such a pitch, tla:

they were prcpared for the most violent iealrcs;
and began to hold conuultations in different places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the viccro;
and judges, and prevent not only the execution .
the promulgation of the new laws. From this, ho',,.
ever, they were diverted by the address of Vaca de
Cafiro, who flattered them with hopes, that, as oon
as the viceroy and judges should arrive, and had
leisure to examine their petitions and renonfiranccs,
they would concur with them in endeavouring to
procure some mitigation in the rigour of laws \hicli
had been framed without due attention either to the
state of the country, or to the sentiments of the pco.
ple. A greater degree of accommodation to thcc,
and even some conceflions on the part of govern-
ment, were now become rcquifite to compose the
prerent ferment, and to tooth the colonists into lub.
mifiion, by inspiring them with confidence in their
superiors. But without profound difcernnent, con.
ciliating manners, and flexibility of temper, such

'rhcfpr.itofa plan could not be carried on. The viceroy pol
ifiiffealoli fcffed none of thcfe. Of all the qualities that fit
increased by
tie viceroy. IlICe or high command, he was endowed only witl

integrity and courage; the former harsh and un-
complying, the latter bordering so frequently ol
rafhlncfs or obfliiacy, that in his situation, thcy
March 4. were dcfccs rather than virtucs. From the mominct

that

' Comnar:, c. 12. I-Ierrtrn, dec. 7. lili. vi. c. o1,
Vega, p1, 1 . li. iii. c. 20, 22. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

that le landed at Tumbez, Nugnez Vela seems to B 0 0 K
have confidered himself merely as an executive vI.
officer, without any discretionary power; and, re-
.ardlefs of whatever he observed or heard con- '544.
cerning the state of the country, he adhered to
the letter of the regulations with unrelenting ri-
gour. In all the towns through which he passed,
the natives were declared to be free, every person
in public office was deprived of his lands and ser-
vants; and as an example of obedience to others,
he would not uffer a ingle Indian to be employed
incarrying his baggage in his march towards Lima.
Amazement and consternation went before him as
he approached; and so little solicitous was he to
prevent them from augmenting, that on entering
the capital, he openly avowed that he came to
obey the orders of his sovereign, not to difpenfQ
\\tl hlis laws. This harfl declaration was accom-
panied with what rendered it fiiil more intolerable,
haughtiness in deportment, a tone of arrogance
.nd decision in discourse, and an insolence of of-
sic grievous to men little accuftomled to hold civil
authority in high refpe&t. Every attempt to pro-
cure a suspension or mitigation of the new laws,
the viceroy confidered as flowing from a spirit of
difaffeation that tended to rebellion. Severalper-
sons of rank were confined, and ome put to
death, without any form of trial. Vaca de Cafiro
was arrested, and notwithfianding the dignity of
his former rank, and his merit in having prevented
ageneral infurre&ion in the colony, he was loaded
with chains, and shut up in the common jail '.

Bvr however general the indignation was against Tl ma..
such proceedings, it is probable that the hand ofh'rGon-o,,_
authority would have been ftrortg enough to sup- .,ilo 'lZirto

to be their

prels leacir.

Zarate, lih. ;v .

c. , 2.4, 25. Comara, c. 153-155.
V''la p. i:. li. iv. c, 4, . Vcrni.~iidez, lib, I. c. 6-lo.

TT T r C- T7 . A I ' T T A

3 O0 O K p-css it, and to prcvent its burfling out with opey

XI. violence, if the malcontents had not been pro.
-'"'-' vided with a leader of credit and enincnce to
'54+4 unite and to direcd their efforts. From the iti:.e

that the urlort of the new regulations Mas
known i Pcru, everyr paniard there turned i:is
ceyes towards Gonzalo Pizaro, as the only pc!ion
able to avert the ruin with which they thrcatcniv
t!e colony. From all quarters, letters and ad(.!i:
lcs were lcnt to him, conjuring him to fland lutii
;;s their coiimmon protcctor, and oficring to lupport
him in the attempt with their lives and forbincr
Gonzalo, though iniiirior il talents to his otlcr
broithers, w2as cqually anbit;ous, and of ccurrae
: o Icds (daring. lThe bclhaviour of an ugratciul
c':urt towards lls brothcrs and himtLlfe, dxclt con.
;i;;ually on his mind ; Fcrdina id a slate prifoi.cr
ill EuLope, the children of the govern or in cuiody
of the viceroy, and lent aboald his icct, ;ln:lcii
reduced to the cndition of a l.rivate citizen in a
country, for thle difcovcry and conquefi of hich!

t pain was i dcbicd to l;is la ily. Th cle tlih ugl;
pl.rompted hinl to ftccl fo0r ve:gccance , and to atiert
the righis of his family, of wl;cih he now cnfi-
dcrcd hinimllf as the guardi an and the l'c'r. ELt
as no Spaniard can eaiily fur' ount that cncration
for his fovcrcign \ hich is itcr\\ovcn in lis raiiic,
tl!e idea of iiiarc hing in armls agaiif tc o)al
tfandard, filled hil v willh lorror. 'IIc hcefitalt
longp, and lwas si1 unrclblved, vliecn tle violeinc
of the viccro:y, tle uniicrial call of his counilr-
mcll)I, and thle ccrtaity of beoming loo viiti!;i
lilcif t tthe fvcrity ol tl-e new ;las, o!!vO-:
him, to (q it hi;s rc'lilncc at C 'liluilhc.a d( la i'la:',
and ilre;;il' to C'iurzc,. All tc in habitats wn t ct.:
to mttccl l im, ai,d receivel lim willi tra lllorts o,
joy, is the (cli'cclr ol the colony. In tle fcicc'::
ot I.lici zeal, thel i c.lt't lhiii pircc. ,ti l l' tn'l

oi
236

si the Spanish nation in Perl, to solicit the rcpeal B 0 0 K
of the late regulations. They authorilc-l him to V'
aiiv their reinonitranccs beire tihe roTal audience - -
in',iia, and upon prretet of danger from the 'ji4-
Indians, authorilcl hi:i to iuarch thitihr in arns.
linder sanction of hlis noii nation Pizarro took
poffeifion of the royal treafurc, appointed officers,
ievied soldiers, Icizcd a large train of artillery
which Vaca de Caliro had depoitedl in Guainanga,
and cft out for Lima, as if hc had been advancin
a.ainft a public eneinv. l)ilaiitcion aving now
aifumned a regular form, andi being united under a
chief of uch a diili: lliiihcd nni e, many pcrfons
of note retorted to his tan.ard; an a confidcra-
ble part of the troops raiiel 1b the viceroy to op-
pose his progress, dcicrlcd to liuln in a i)ofA ".

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lma, a revolution D:xnrctin,
had happened there, which encouraged him to O! 'lt\iC

r · l";y 1' 1:1

proceed with alinoft a certainty of lucccis. The court , au-
violence of the viccro 's a' liinitration was not d'l"':
more formidable to the Spaniards of Peru than his
overbearing haughtineSi was odio.s to his abci-
ates, the judges of the royal anulieice. Durin2
their voyage from Sp)ain, Iflic llnptoms of cold-
ne's began to appear . But as loon as they en-
tered upon the exercise of their rclictive offices,
both parties were lo much ex;aliclrated by fIrequent
contefis, ariiing from interference of juri!fdidion
and contrariety of opinion, that their mutual dif-
gust soon grew into open cnnitv. The judges
thwarted the viceroy il every lmicaflre, set att i-
berty prifbncrs whom h ae }a d cnfined, jullifecd
tlec malcontents, ancd anplllutldcc:l t.ir rcton-
il'allces. At a timlc cxvhe both departments of

govcrnlmentt

JZaatc, lib. v. c. . Coirnal, c. IjG, 1 57. 't, .

lib . c. -12. Fernard, ;, lib. . c. 12--1 I7. lcrr'e:: , dtlc.
'. Ib. vii. c. 8, &c. lib. viii. c. - . 1- Gom;ni a, c. .

11 11 - - 1 1- ~ -1 1

B OOK government should have united against the ap.

VI. proaching enemy, they were contending with each
^^r other for tuperiority. The judges at length pre,

I544. vailed. The viceroy, univerlally odious, and aban.

The viceroy
imprisoned. doned even by his own guards, was leized in his
Sept 18. palace, and carried to a delert island on the coafi

to be kept there until he could be fcnt ho!ue to
Spain.

Views of THE judges, in consequence of this, having as-
Pizaro. fumed the ifpreme direction of affairs into their

own hands, issued a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a inel.
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to difnils his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or twenty
attendants. They could hardly expet that a man
so daring and ambitious would tamely comply with
this requisition. It was made, probably, with no
such intention, but only to throw a decent veil oer
their own condut ; for Cepeda, the president of
the court of audience, a rargmntica and aliriing
lawyer, feenms to have held a ecrct correfpondcicc
with Pizarro, and had already formed the plan,
which he aftclrw.rds rxccuted, of devoting hinmfelf
to his fervicc. 'lic imprilonmcnt of the viccro,
the usurpation of the judges, together with tie
universal confusion and anarchy consequent upon
events to singular and unexpeetcd, opeucd 'e

lc

and vast prospects to Pizarro. He now beheld tlk
iupreme power within his reach. Nor did he
want courage to push on towards the obje wvhich
fortune prcfcntcd to his view. Carvajal, the
promlptcr of his rcolutions, and guide of all his
adlions, hd long fixed hlis eye upon it as the only
end at which ia'i) o. i t ) oini. lnlcic ,:
the inferior l luntiol of procurator for tihe Spanill
fettlcments in Peru, he openly demanded to
governor and cnptail' gcnI., l of the v Lole p'0

Vili:c,

'iicc, and required the court of audience to grant B 00 K
h;nl a conmliflion to that cfi'ct. At the head of vI.
selvc hundred men, within a mile of Lima, where '-
here was neither leader nor army to oppole him, 1544.
luch a request carried with it the authority of a com-
iiiand. But the judges, either from unwillingnels
to relinquish power, or from a delire of prcferving
lome attention to appearances, heitated, or seemed
to hciitate about complying. Carvajal, impatient He assumes
of delay, and impetuous in all his operations, tie govern-
marlched into the city by night, seized evcral offi-n"'en
cers ofdiftintiion obnoxious to Pizarro, and hang-
ed them without the formality of a trial. Next
morning the court of audicnce iflucd a co mmiilion
in the emperor's nam;c, appointing Pizarro govcr-
nor of Peru, with full p)o ers, civil as well as mi-
litary, and he entercd the town that day with ex-
traordinary pomp, to take poflclion of his new
dignity .

BUT amidftthe disorder and turbulence that ac- o. 2s.
companied this total diflulution of the frame of go- hvce;o
verument, the minds of men, set loose from theribrty.
ordinary restraints of law and authority, acd with
luch capricious irregularity, that events no less
extraordinary than unexpected followed in a rapid
fucceflon. Pizarro had Icarecly begun to exercise
the new powers with which hc was invested, when
he beheld formidable enemies rife up to oppose
him. The viceroy having been put on board a
vessel by the judges of the audience, in order that
he might be carried to Spain under custody of
Juan Alvarcz, one of their own numbcr; as Ioon
as they were out at Ica, Alvarez, either touched
with rcmorie or moved by fear, fell at the fee.t of
his prisoner, declared him fronm that moment to be

free

Zarate, lib. v. c. 8-lo. Vega, p. I1. lib. iv. c. I3-

19. Gomara, c. 15;9-63. Fernandez, lib. i. c. i8-25.
Htrrera, dec. 7 lib. viii. c. 10-20.

B O O K free, and that he himfclif, and every perlob i t!,

VI. ship, would obey him as the legal reprcflrtaive of

^-wr- their sovereign. Nugnez Vela ordered tcrun :
I544. fleer to Tumbez, and landing there, crcetcd the

royal standard, and refumncd his functions of vice.
roy. Several perlons ofnotc, to whom the cona.
gion of the seditious fipirt wvhich reigned at Cuzco
and Lima had not reached, instantly avowed tcir
rcfolutionto support his authority '. The violence
of Pizarro's government, who oblerved cvcry i;.
dividual with the timid jealousy natural to ulurpcis,
and punifled every appearance of disaffection with
rigour, ibon augmented the number of his adi;c.
rents, as it forced sone leading men in the colon,
to fly to him for refuge. While he was gathering
such strength at Tumbcz, that his forces began to
assume the appearance of what was conficlrcd a
an army in America. Diego Centcno, a bold aid
active officer, exafperatec by the cruelty and op.
prefiion of Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in lhe
province of Charcas, fornccd a con iliracy againl:
his life, cut him off, and declared or the vice-
roy t.

1545. PIZARRO, though alarmed with thofc appcar-
iarchesa- ances of hotlility in the opposite extremes of the
gainft him. empire, was not dilconcerted. He prepared to

assert the authority to which he had attained, whii
the spirit and conduct of an oliccr accunoinmcl to
command, and marched directly againfi the vice
roy as the enemy who was ncarcft as well as mol'
formidable. As he was maiter of the public reve-
nues in Peru, and most of the military mcn wvcc
attached to his family, his troops were lo inume-
rous, that the viceroy, unable to face lthllc,

** Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Comara, c. 65. Fernann; , iil. i
2. 23. IIcrrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 15. 1 Zarite, li!b. v. C

18. Gomara, c. 69. licrrcl;, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 27.
240

treated towards Quito. Pizarro followed him, and B O O K
in that long march, through a wild mountainous VI.
country, both uffered hardships and encountered '~~
difficultics, which no troops but those accultomed 545.
to erve in America, could have endured or fur-
mountcd '. The viceroy had scarcely reached
Ouito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's forces ap-
peared, led by Carvajal, who, though near four-
icore, was as hardy and active as any young fol-
dicr under his command. Nugnez Vela instantly
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and with
a rapidity more resembling a ight than a' retreat,
marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro
continued to pursue, but finding it impossible to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From thence he
dipatched Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who was
.rowing formidable in the southern provinces of
lic cmpire, and he hinfelf remained there to make
head against the viceroy t.

By his own aivity, and the assistance of Be- The viceroy
nalcazar, Nugnez Vela soon asSemblcd four hundred df.cated.
men in Popayan. As he retained, amidfi all his
di'afRcrs, the ame elevation of mind, and the
fame high fente of his own dignity, he rejected
with dil'dain the advice of `ome of his followers,
who urged him to make overtures of accommtoda-
tion to Pizarro, declaring that it was only by the
sword that a contelt with rebels could be decided.
With this itention he marched back to itoto. 1546.
Pizarro, relying on the fupcrlor number, and still
more on the dlfciplic and valour of his troops,
advanced rc)llutely to meet him. The battle was Jnuary
fierce and bloody, both parties fighting like mcnnar
who knew that the potflclion of a great cmpirc,

VoL. II. ihe

See NOT'E XLIV. *- ZarAte, lib. v. c. 15, 16-24.

Gomar;, c. Ih7. Veg., p. . lib. iv. c. 25-28. Fernan-
dez, lib. . . 34. 40. Hrrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 16. 20-27.

24I

B 0 0 Kthe fate of their leaders, and their own iuirt

VI. fortune, depended upon the issue of that day.

But Pizarro's veterans pushed forward with lich
1546. regular and well-directed force, that they oon be.

gan to make impression on their enemies. The
viceroy by extraordinary exertions, in which the
abilities of a commander and the courage of a fl-
dier were equally displayed, held victory for onie
and slain. time in fufpence. At length he fell, pierced with

many wounds; and the rout of his followers bc-
came general. They were hotly prfued. His
head was cut off, and placed on the public gibbet
in ouito, which Pizarro entered in triumph. Th
troops assembled by Centeno were difperfcdl oo
after by Carvajal, and he himself compelled to
to the mountains, where he remained for several
months concealed in a cave, Every person in
Peru, from the frontiers of Popayan to those of
Chili, submitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, un.
der Pedro de Hinojofa, he had not only the unri-
valled command of the South Sea, but had taken
possession of Panama, and placed a garrison in
Nombre de Dios, on the opposite fide of the ifth-
mus, which rendered him mater of the usual avc-
nuc of communication between Spain and Peru *.

Pizarroad- AFTER this decisive viEtory, Pizarro and his
vifedtoaf- followers remained for some time at Quito, and
vereigtyof during the first transports of their exultation, they
Peru. ran into every excess of licentious indulgence, with

the riotous spirit usual among low adventurers
upon extraordinary success. But, amidfi this dif-
fipation, their chief and his confidents were
obliged to turn their thoughts fometinmes to what

was

* Zarate, lib. v.c. 31, 32. Gomara, c. 70. Vega, p. r1!

lib. iv. c. 33, 34. Fernandcz, lib. i. c. 5I-54. Hrr-era,
dec. 7. lib. x. c. 12. 19-22. dec. 8. lib. i. c. 1-3. ien"o,
lib. iii. c. 2.
242

ras serious, and deliberated with much solicitude B 0 0O K
olcerning the part that he ought now to take. VI.
arvajal, no le's bold and decisive in council than bi
nthe field, had from the beginning warned Pi- I546
arro, hat in the career on which he was entering
w\as in vain to think of holding a n-;ddle course;
thar he inuit either boldly aim at all, or attempt
othing. From the time that Pizarro obtained
ofltelfon of the government of Peru, he inculcated
he fanc maxim with greater earnestness. Upon
reciving an account of the victory at Quito, he re-
niulftrated with him in a tone till more peremp-
tory " You have usurped (said he, in a letter
written to Pizarro on that occasion) the supreme
powcr in this country, in contempt of the empe-
ror's commission to another. You have marched,
inhoftile array, against the royal standard; you
hace attacked the representative of your sovereign
in the field, have defeated him, and cut off his
head. Think not that ever a monarch will forgive
inch intults on his dignity, or that any reconcilia-
tion with him can be cordial or sincere. Depend
no longer on the precarious favour of another.
Afume yourself the fovcrcignty over a country,
tothe dominion of which your family has a title
f0,ii;!l on the rights both of discovery and cQn-
qclt. It is in your power to attach every Spani-
ard in Peru of any conleqtence, inviolably to your
i!ccrcft by liberal grants of lands and of Indians,
Or 'by infitlluti ng ranks of nobility, of creating titles
oi honour tiiilar to thole which arc courted
i'.'l I) lmuci l eagcrncls in Europe. By cftabli(h-
5:i oidcrs o' knighthood, with privileges and
K;illiirltions rclnibling thole in Spain, you may
l"ril,\ a ratliication upon the officers in your fcr-
vi,t, luhild Io the ideas of military men. Nor is
i to yolr countrymen only that you ought to at-
ted ; cndcavour to gain the natives. By marry-

R z ing

243

BOO K ing the Coya, or daughter of the Sun next in sue.

VI. cession to the crown, you will induce, the Indians

4 out of veneration for the blood of their aneiert
1546. princes, to. unite with the Spaniards in support o

your authority. Thus, at the head of the princi.
pal inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the new set.
tiers there, you may set at defiance the powe. o
Spain, and repel with ease any feeble force which
it can fend at such a distance." Cepeda, the lawvcr,
who was now Pizarro's confidential counselor,
warmly seconded Carvajal's exhortations, and en-
ployed whatever learning he possessed in demon.
ftrating, that all the founders of great monarchies
had been raised to pre-eminence, not by the ant'
quity of their lineage, or the validity of their rights,
but by their own enterprising valour and perlona
merit .

But hoofes PIZARRO listened attentively to both, and could
to negociate
with the not conceal the fatisfation with which he con.
court of templated the object that they presented to hi
Spai'. view. But happily for the tranquillity of the

world, few men possess that superior strength of
mind, and extent of abilities, which are capable
of forming and executing such daring schemes, ai
cannot be accomplished without overturning the
established order of society, and violating tho'e
maxims of duty which men arc accuflomed to hold
sacred. The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents cir.
cumfcribed his ambition within more narrow
limits. Inflead of apiring at independent power,
he confined his views to the obtaining fiom the
court of Spain a confirmation of the authority
which he now poffecifd ; and for that purpoc, he
sent an,officer of diflintion thither, to give such a
representation of his conduct, and of the slate of

t, he

'Vega, p. 11. lib. iv. c. 40. Fcrnandez, lib. i. c. 34. lib. ii
C. I3. 49. Herrera, dec. 8.'lib. ii. c. o.

ie country, as might induce the emperor and his B O O K
sinisters, either from inclination or from necefli- VI.
;,,to continue him in his present flation.
VVHIL Pizarro was deliberating with refpeat to 1546.

Confultati-

ie part which he should take, consultations were onofth,'
eld in Spain, with no less solicitude, concerning the Spanish mir
leafurcs which ought to be pursucd in order to re-"E'
qablifh the emnperor's authority in Peru. Though
aacquainted with the last exccfes of outrage to
hich the malcontents had proceeded there, the
murt had received an account of the iniurretion
Yainft the viceroy, of his imprisonment, and the
lurpation of the government by Pizarro. A re-
)lution ib alarming, called for an immediate in,
:rpofition of the emperor's abilities and authority.
iutas he was fully occupied at that time in Ger.
any, in conducting the war against the famous
:ague of Smalkalde, one of the most interesting
rd arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of
roviding a remedy for the disorders in Peru de-
olved upon his ion Philip, and the counsellors
hom Charles had appointed to affit him in the
overnment of Spain during his absence. At firfi
iew, the actions of Pizarro and his adherents ap-
cared lo repugnant to the duty of fubjeEts towards
ieir overeign, that the greater part of the minis-
:rs infiltcd on declaring them instantly to be guil-
of rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them
rith excnplary rigour. But when the fervour of
Icir zeal and indignation began to abate, innume-
lblc obltaclcs to the execution of this mealirc
rclcitcd thicmfelves. The veteran bands of in-
iry, the llrcngth and glory of the Spanish ar-
Irc, were then employed in Germany. Spain,
llauftcd of men and money by a long cfries of
'als, in which fle had been involved by the
Fllels ambition of two fuccellivc monarchs, could

not

245

O 0 Knot easily equip an armament of fufmcicnt sori.
VI. reduce Pizarro. To traniport any re pcclablc bjl

of troops to a country so remote as Peru, appal
1546. almost impofible. While Pizarro contilnud ia

ter of the South Sea, the dircet rout by or;oL!
de Dios and Panama was impractica c. I! a
tempt to march to Qiito by land through tli i,
kingdom of Grenada, and the province of' Pci arai
across regions of vast extent, dcfolate, unhlcahi
or inhabited by fierce and hostile tribes, ould
attenided with unsurmountable danger and' ar
ships. The passage to the South Sea by the Stlai
of Magellan was so tedious, so uncertain, a' I
little known in that age, that no confidence coJ
be placed in any effort carried on in a couin
navigation so remote and precarious. INothing tl)
remained but to relinquish the \system \hich i
ardour of thcir loyalty firfl uggcficd. and o
tempt by lenient meafurcs what could not be c
feeted by force. It was manifcft from Pizarros;
licitude to reprcfent his conduCt in a tlaoull'
light to the emperor, that, notwvitfandi!n ih
exceffi s of which he had been guilty, he flillr
tained lentiments of veneration for his fbveri;
By a proper application to thcic, togctil'r ..i
forne such conccflions as should discover a i-iiiio
mnodcration and obrbcarance in govcrnircnl, li
right be yet reclaimed, or the ideas o ,yalt
ratural to Spaniards might so far revive anioiii ii
followers, that they would no longer lend tlici
aid to uphold his usurped authority.

Gafcaap- THE fucefs, however, of this ncgociation, nl
pointcl to lecf delicate than it was important, depelnded c(
Peru a pre- tirely on the abilitics and addrcfs of the pcrloi(i t
siint,. whom it should be committed. After wci bii'

with much attention the comparative Iiicri!

v al'iouU
246

various persons, the Spanish ministers fixed with B O O I
unanimity of choice, upon Pedro de la Gafca, a VI.
priest in no higher flation than that of counsellor ^
to the inquisition. Though in no public office, 1546
he had been occasionally employed by govern-
ment in affairs of trust and conlequence, and had
conduted them with no less kill than success;
diiplaying a gentle and insinuating temper, ac-
coumpanicd with much firmness; probity, superior
to any feeling of private interest; and a cautious
circumnpetion in concerting measures, followed
by uch vigour in executing them, as is rarely found
in alliance with the other, These qualities marked
him out for the function to which he was destined.
The emperor, to whom Gafca was not unknown,
warmly approved of the choice, and communicated
it to him in a letter, containing expreflions of good-
will and confidence, no less honourable to the
prince who wrote, than to the subjed who received
it. Gafca, notwithstanding his advanced age and
feeble conflitution, and though, from the appre-
henfions natural to a man, who, during the course
of his life, had never been out of his own coun-
try, he dreaded the effe6ts of a long voyage, and
of an unhealthy climateS, did not hesitate a mo-
ment about complying with the will of his fove-
reign. In order to shew that it was from this prin- Hi mode.
tiplc alone that he acted, he refuted a bithopricratio"
which was offered to him, in order that he might
bear a more dignified character; he would accept
of no higher title than that of prcident of the
court of audience in Lima; and declared that he
would receive no salary on account of his difcharg-
ing the duties of that office. All he required was,
that the cxpcnce of supporting his family should be
defrayed by the public, and as he was to go like a

minister
' Fernandcz, lib. ii. c. 17.

247

BO 0 IK-miniflerof peace with his gown and breviary, and

VI. without any retinue but a few cdomeitics, ri,
'--~ would.not load the revenue with any enormous

1546. burdenl .

The powers BUT while he discovered such difinterefled Lio-
committed deration with reibect to vvhatevcr relatcd pciu-
to himn- i

ally to himlelf, he demalnded h s official powecro ini
a very different tone. He inifled, as he vas io
be employed in a country so remote from thle iat
of government, wherc e could not have rccouric
to his sovereign for new inftruclions n evicry
emergencc; and as the wholc mucccs of his lic-
gociations rmufi depend upon the coufide-nce wnlich
the people.with whom he.had to treat could placc
in the extent of his powers, that be ought to be
invefled with unlimited authority, that his jurif-
diction mull reach to all persons and tu all caulcs;
that he must be empowered to pardon, to punilh,
or to rcward, as circumstances and tlic beh}aviour
of differenlt lmen mlight requirc; that, in caf of
refintance froni the malcontents, he might b a-
thorifed, to reduce them to obecldcicc by force of
arms, to levy troops for that purpo-c, aid to cil
for atfiflance from the governors of all thel pla!ilh
icttleicnts in America. Thcle power-s, tloi.h
imanifctly conducive to the great objcts of iiis
million, appeared to the Spanifl iiilnisiters to Ic
inalienable prerogatives of royalty, which ouglt
not to be. delcgated to a subject, alld they rcfulcd
to grant thcnm. But tile remperor's views wcre
more cnlarged. As from the nalure o hilii employ-
ment, GafCa niufl be cntrutcd with dilfrctioiiary
power in cvcral points, ad all his clobris Iniglht
prove incffe6lual if he was circuimflcibed in aly

011('

Zar;tc, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, c. 174. Fernandez, lib. ii.

c. 14- 16. Vega, p. ii. lib. v. c. . Herrera, dec. a. il i
-.. 4, &c, i

une particular. Charles scrupled not to invest him B o O K
with authority to the full extent that he demanded. VI.
Highly atisfied with this fresh proof of his master's ""-~
confidence, Gafca haftcned his departure, and I546'
without either money or troops, set out to quell a
formidable rebellion * May 26.

ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found July 7.

Hcrnan Mexia, an officer of note, posted there, at anama.
by order 'f Pizarro, With a considerable body of
menl, to oppose the landing of any hostile forces.
But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
u'ain lo little formidable, and with a title of no
such dignity as to excite terror, that he was receiv-
ed with much refpedt. From Nombre de Dios he
advanced to Panama, and met with a similar recep-
tion from Iinojola, whom Pizarro had entrusted
with the government of that town, and the com-
mand of his fleet fiationed there. In both places
he held the fame language, declaring that he was
lelit by their overeign as a mefenger of peace,
not as a minister of vengeance; that he came to
;cdrels all their grievances, to revoke the laws
which had excited alarm, to pardon pall offences,
and to re-eftablifi order and justice in the govern-
ment of Peru. His mild deportment, the fimpli-
city of his manners, the fanóVity of his profefiion,
and a'winning appearance of candour, gained crc-
dit to his declarations. 'Tle veneration due to a
icrfon clothed with legal authority, and aing
in virtue of a royal coommiflion, began to revive
among men accuflonicd for ome tinm to nothing
niorc rcipc'ablc than an usurpcd jurifdidion.
Hinojofa, Mcxia, and fevcral other officcrs of dif-
tintion, to each of whom Gafca applied fcparatc-
!y, were gained oycr to his interest, and waited

only
* .Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 16-18.

249

B O O K only for tme decent occalion of declaring openll,

Vt. in his favour ".'

'-~-- ' i-'is the violence of Pizarro foop afforded them.
i546. As oon as he heard of Gal'ca's arrival at Panama,
Violent piocerdings though he received at the lamnc time an accouiii of
i Pizano. the nature of his comimilion, and was infobrmlc

that he oercd to render every Spaniard in Peru
easy concerning what was past, by an at of gcnc
ral oblivion; and secure with refpe& to the fturc,
bv repealing the obnoxious laws; inicad of ac.
cepting with gratitude his iovereign's gracious con-
cefiions, he was ib much exasperated on findilr
that he was not to be continued in his !tation as
governor of the country, that he instantly resolvcd
to oppose the president's entry into Peru, and to
prevent his exercising any jurifdiaion there. To
this dclperatc resolution he added aotlcr highly
prepoflerous. lHe sent a new deputation to Spain
to justify this condt6l1, and to insist, in name of all
the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of tli
government to hbinfelf during life, as the only
means of preserving tranquillity there. The pcr-
sons entrusted with this flrange coinnmiflion, inti-
matcd tle intention of Pizarro to the rlefidcnt.
and re(quired him, in his name, to depart fromn
Panama, and return to Spain. Thcv carried likc-
wifc secret inflruions to Hinojofa, dircting hin;
to offer Galca a prelcnt of fifty toulfad pclbs,
if he would comply voluntarily with what v. as
demanded of him ; and if he fliould colninulc
obstinate, to cut him off either by allliination o0
poison --.

M 3\

* Fernandez, lil. ii. c. 21, &c. Zaratc, lil) vi. c. 6, 7

Gomarla, c. 175. Vega, p. . lib. v. c. 3. 'i Zaicatc li.
vi. c. . Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Ierrcra, lcc. 8. '
ii. c. 9, 0o.
23o

MANY circumfiances concurred in pushing on B O K

Pizarro tothofe wild measures. Having been once VI.
accufiomed to the pre-eminence of supreme com- -
niand, he could not bear the thoughts of decend- 1546.
ing to a private fiation. Conlcious of his own de- Gacagain'
merit, he ul'edt that the emperor fludied only
to deceive him, and would never pardon the out-
rages which he had committed. His chief confi-
dcets, no less guilty, entertained the fame appre-
hcnfions. The approach of Gafca without any
military force excited no terror. There were now
above fix thousand Spaniards fettled in PeruS;
and at the head of these he doubted not to main-
tain his own independence, if the court of Spain
should refife to grant what he required. But he
knew not that a spirit of defection had already
begun to spread among thole whom he trusted most
Hlinojofa, amazed at his precipitate resolution of
setting himself in opposition to the emperor's com-
iiffion, and disdaining to be his infirumcnt in
executing the odious crimes pointed out in his Ie-.
cret inflruEtions, publicly recognized the president
as his unly lawful superior. The officers under
his command did the fame. each was the conta-
gious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been sent from Peru;
and at the time when Pizarro xpetded to hear ei-
ther of Galca's return to Spain, or of his death,
he received an account of his being maiter of the
fleet, of Panama, and of the troops stationed
there.

IRKITATID almnoft to inadncfs by an event foPizarrorc-

uncexlpcdtd, he openly prepared for war ; and in i'lvcsO
order to give lome colour of juflice to his arms, he 1547,
appointed the court of audience in Liima to proceed

to
J lcrrea, lec. 8 lib. iii. c. .

254

BO OK to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of having

VI. seized his ships, ieduced his officers, and prcvent-

s'k5"-- ed his deputies from proceeding on thcir voyage
1547. to Spain. Ccpcda, though aing as a jaudge in

virtue of the royal cominifion, did not scruple to
prostitute the dignity of his function, by linding
Galca guilty of trealbn, and condenining himi to
death on that account-'. Wild, and even ridicu-
lous, as this proceeding was, it imposcd on the iow
illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was filled,
by the eiblance of a legal 'ancdion, arralting
Pizarro to carry on hostilities againf a convicted
traitor. Soldiers accordingly resorted froni every
quarter to his fandard, and he was fbon at the
head of a thousand mnen, the bcft equipped that had
ever takcln te field in P'eru.
Pns rr Gca. GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force nmuf

be employed in order to accomplilh the purpoie of
his million, was'no less assiduous in collecingg
troops fiom Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
fcttlcments on the continent; and with uch luc-
cels, that he was soon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet with a conlidcrable body of
April. foldicrs, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance

excited a dreadful alarm ; and though they did
not attempt for sone time to make alc dcccnt,
they did more effcuall llrvicc, by f ting afore
in different places, p)eltous who dilpcr-cd copics
of the at of general indemniity, niiil tlic reoc;l-
tion of the late edits; and who mai.lc known
every where the pacific intenltions, as (Il1 as mIill
telmper of the prcfidcnt. 'l'l cftll'cti' of picading
this infobrinatio.n was wonderful. All who wvc-e
diflhtisficd with Pizarro's violent a(dliil;raiionl

all

'* m rclb .C. 55. Vegacz,

ll. i. ci. ga, p. C.

lb. v. c. 7 . -
r erT:, .e. . liib. iii. c. 6.

all who retained any fentimcnts of fidelity to their B 0 O K
tovercigi, began to nmeditate revolt. Sonic.openly Vi.
clclertcd a caule which they now deemed to be un- - -
iuF. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he lay 5- -
concealed, affmnbled about fifty of his former ad- ofcr.tr.o'
hercnts, and with this feeble half-armed band ad-
vanccd boldly to Cuzco. By a udden attack in
the night-time, in which he di played no icls mi-
litary kill than valour, he rendered himlelfnlafcer
of that capital, though defended by a garrilbn of
five hundred men. Moil of thcfe having ranged
thcniclves under his banners, he had loon the
command of a rclpcctable body of troops*.

PIZARRO, though aonifhed at beholding one lgaiiut

enemy approaching by ea, and another by land, ,llo" L'i-
at a time when he trusted to the union of all Peru marclio,
in his favour, was of a pirit more undaunted,
and more accustomcd to the viciflitudes of for-
tune, than to be diconcerted or appalled. As the
danger from Centeno's operations was the moRs
urgent, be infrantly let out to oppose him. Hav-
ing provided horses for all his Ibldiers, he marched
with amazing rapidity. But every mlorninu he
found his force diminishcd by numbers who 1had
lcit him during the night; and though he becan!i
firfpicious to excels, and punishcd without lmercy
all whol he ulpcLCtcd, the rage of dclclrtion w;as
too violent to be checked. Beobre he got within
light of the enemyi at Huarina, near the lake 'Tii-
aca, h could not muficr more than four hndredC
foldicrs. But thefc hejufily confidered as men of
tried attachment, on whom lie might dcpecd.
Tlicy were indeed the boldefl and mos dcll)crate
;J1' his fIllowers, conlcious like himficlf of crimes
ior vwhich they could hardly cxpect forgivcnccs,

and

Z' ;;,cte, lib. vi. c. 3--16. Gonlnra, c. 180, 18 Ser-
i:.i,d.;, l.b. ii. c. 8. ;L4, &.

I

B 0 O K and without any hope but in the fuccels of tc'r

VI. arms. With thele he did not hesitate to attack Ccn-
C'rlT' teno's troops, though double to his own in number.
1547. The royaiifts did not decline the combat. It w:s
aober 2. the most obstinate and bloody that had hitherto

been fought in Peru. At length the intrepid valour

anddefeats of Pizarro, and the superiority of Carvajal's mii-
trm. tary talents, triumphed over numbers, and ob-

tained a complete victory. The booty was in-
mense , and the treatment of the vanquihed
cruel. By this signal ficcefs the reputation of Pi-
zarro was re-established, and being now deemed
invincible in the field, his army increased daily in
number t.

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the splendid
victory at Iluarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Li-
ma, when the citizens, weary of his oppreffve
dominion, ereEted the royal lfandard, and Alda-
na, with a detachment of soldiers from the fleet,

afrca lands took poffeflion of the town. About the fame
nP'cru. timet, the president landed at Tumbez with five

hundred men. Encouraged by his presence, every
settlement in the low country declared for the
king. The situation of the two parties was no\v
perfectly reversed; Cuzco and the adjacent pro-
vinces were possessed by Pizarro; all the reft of
the empire, from iito southward, acknowledg-
ed the jurifdition of Gafca. As his numbers
augmented fast, Gafca advanced into the interior
part of the country. His behaviour fill conti-
nued to be gentle and unaliuming; he exprcffcd,
on every occasion, his ardent wilh of terminating
the contest without bloodshed. More solicitous to

reclaim

* See NOTE XLV. -] Zarate, lib. vii. c. .,, 3.

Goinara, c. z18. Vcga, p. ii. lib. v. c. 18, &c. Fernandez,
lib. ii. c. 79. 1-errcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. , 2. I Za-raltc
lib. v c. 17.
254

,.claim :ban to punish, he upbraided no nil for B O O K
pall o Li .-s, but received them asa father receives VI-
pcni.eil; children returning to a fen e of their duty. '
'lough dcfirous of peace, he did not fiacken his x54+7
preparatioas for war. He appointed the general
rendezvous of his troops in the fertile valley of
auaxa, on the road to Cuzco *. There he remained Advalc,,
oir iome months, not only that he might have time towards
to make another attempt towaits an accommoda-
tion with Pizarro, but that he might train his new
ioldicrs o the use of arms and accustom them to
|he discipline of a camp, before he led them again{t
1 body of viEorious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated
with the fucccls which had hitherto accompanied
hisarms, and elated with having again near a thou-
naid imen under his command, refused to liRfen to
irv terms, although Cepeda, together with several
of his officers, and even Carvajal hirnmelft, gave
i: as their advice, to close with the prcfident's oer
ofa general indemnity, and the revocation of the
obnoxious laws . Gafca having tried in vaiu
every expedient to avoid imbruing his hands n
the blood of his countrymen, began to move to-
iards Cuzco at the head of sixteen hundred men. Dec. .
PIZARRO, confident of victory, fuffcred the notin,.--r:
royaiifts to pals all the rivers that lie between GiLa- Trc"'rC for
manga and Cuzco without opposition, and o ad-
ancc within four leagues of that capital, flattering
hinllclf that a defeat in lich a situation as rendered
a rctreat inpracticablc would at once terminate the
war. Me then marched out to meet the enemy, and
Carvajal chose his ground, and made the dilpofition. April 9
ot the troops with the dilcerning t e, and profound
lkowlcdge in the art of war, conspicuous in l

his

* Z rate, lib. vii. c. . 'eriiandez, lib. ii. c. 77. 82.
, See NiOTE XLVI. Z Zaratc, lib. vii. c. 6.
'ga, p. . lib. v. c. 27.

255

B O K his operations. As the two armies moved forward

vI. fiowly to the charge, the appearance of each was
b"-'- singular. In that of Pizarro compoled of men cli.
r548. riched with the poils of the molt opulent coulnrv

in America. Every officer, and almost all th'
private men were clothed in stuffs of silk, or brU.
cade, embroidered with gold and silver; and their
horses, their arms, their fiandards, were adorned
with all the pride of military pomp. That of
Gasea, though not so fplelidid, exhibited what was
no less striking. He himlelf; accompanied by the
archbishop of Lima, the bishops of (Oiito and Cuz.
co, and a great number of ecclesiastics, marching
along the lines, blefling the men, and encouraging
them to a relolute discharge of their duty.

Pizarrode- When both were just ready to engage, Cepcda
(erred by his
troops. let spurs to his horfc, galloped off, and Itrrendcricl

hiinfelfto the prefidcnt. Garcilaho de la Vc;i,
and other officers of note, followed his example.
The revolt of persons in Ltch high rank struck all
with amazencut. The mutual confidence on which
the union and strength of armies depend, cealed at
once. Distrust and conflernation spread from rank
to rank. Some silently flipped away, others threw
down their arms, the greatcft number went over )
the royalifis. Pizarro, Carvajal, and some leadcis,
cnployed authority, threats, and intreaties to Itop
them, butin vain. In letsthan half an hour a body
of men, which might have decided the ittc of the
Peruvian empire, was totally dilperled. Pizarro
feeiig all irretrievably loft, cried out in amaze-
ment to a few officers who still faithfully adllhere
to him,: " Wlat remains for us to do ?" ,Let
us rum,' replied one of them, upon the enclv's
firrncft battalion, and die like Roimans." )ce
jedCtd with liclh a rcvcrfe of fortune, lie had

110

* Zarate, lib. vi. c. I.
156

.lot spirit to follow this soldierly counsel, and with B 0 0 K
a tamcncfs dilgraceful to his former fame, he VI.
surrendercd to one of Galca's officcrs. Carvajal, '-r
cndeavouring to elcape, was overtaken and 1548.

i , D '

Z~~~~t]. ~~~~~taken,
icizcd.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless viatory, did andputto

not stain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and death
a i'mall number of the molt diflinguifhed or noto-
rious offendcrs, were punillied capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he lurrendcred,
he submitted to his fate with a composed dignity,
and eenied desirous to attone by repentance for
the crimes which he had committed. The end of
Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his trial he
offered no defence. When the sentence adjudg-
ing him to be hanged was pronounced, he care-
lelsly replied, " One can die but once." During
the interval between the sentence and execu-
tion, he dilcovered no sign cither of remorse for
the past, or of folicitudc about the future ; scoffing
at all who' visited him, in his ulual sarcastic vein
of mirth, with the ame quickness of repartee and
grols plealantry as at any other period of his life.
Ccpeda, more criminal than either, ought to have
ihared the fame fate; but the merit of having
deserted his anfociates at uch a critical mo-
nmcnt, and with such decisive effcct, savcd him
from immediate punifhmncnt. Ile was sent, how-
ever, as a prilbner to Spain, and died in confine-
inent '.

In the minute detail which the contemporary
iillorians have given of tie civil dillcnfions that
ragcd in Peru, with little iiterruption, during ren
)'cars, many circumliiances occur o striking, a,

VOL. 11. S which

' Zarate, lib . C. c. 6, , S. ( inm lra, c. 18 , I /. Vc:i,

I .

1 .

. c.
il , C. ci. a, 'c z, lib. ii. c. 8(,, &c. IJ.i-

I'''., ti. . lib. ib . . c 1 , &c.

0

257

B O O K wh'ich indicate such an uncommon state of ma.

VI. :crs, as to merit particular attention.
-' - '. 1 HOUGH the paniards who first invaded Perni
1548. were of the lowest order in society, and the grcatcr

naryi'ldie'rs part of thole who afterwards joined them were
in. tle civil persons of dcficrate fortune, yet in all the bodies
arsofl c- ol troops brought into t fid b
th e diflerent

leaders who contended for iupcriority, not one
man ated as a hired foldicr, that follows his
standard for pay. Every adventurer in Peru con-
fidered himielf as a conqueror, entitled, by his
services, to an eflablifiment in that country which
had been acquired by his valour. In the contcets
between the rival chiefs, each chooe his fide as hc
was directed by his own judgment or affections.
He joined his commander as a companion of his
fortune, and disdained to degrade hinifelf by re-
ceiving the wages of a mercenary. It was to their
fiwords, not to pre-eminence in ofice, or nobility
of birth, that most of the leaders whom they fol-
lowed were indebted for their elevation ; and each
of their adherents hoped, by the fame means to
open a way for hinifelf to the poficfiion of power
and wealth .

Arm:cim- BUT though the troops in Peru served without
tn "'fve" any regular pay, they were railed at immense ex-

pence. Among men accultonicd to divide the
spoils of an opulent country, the desire of obtain-
ing wealth acquired incredible force. The ardour
of puriuit augmented in proportion to the hope of
fucccfs. Where all were intent on the fame ob.
jeEt, and under the dominion of'the fame paflion,
there wasbut one mode of gaining men or of' e-
curing their attachment. Officcrs of name and
intlucncc, bcfidcs the pronil'e of future establish-
t.;cnts, rcccived in hand large gratuities fron the

chief
1 Vega, p. ii. ib. iv. c. 3S. i

thief with whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pi-B O OK
zarro, in order to raile a thousand men, advanced VI.
five hundred thousand pefbs ". Galca expended T
on the troops which he led againfl Pizarro nine 1548.
hundred thousand pclost. The distribution of
property, beltowed as the reward of success, was
till more exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompence And inm
of his perfidy and addrels, in persuading the court wfri-
of' royal audience to give the fanclion of its autho- dividuals.
rity to the usurped jurit'icion of Pizarro, received
a grant of lands which yielded an annual income
of a hundred and fifty thousand pelosl. Hino-
jofa, who, by his early defeclion from Pizarro,
and surrender of the fleet to Galca, decided the
fate of'Peru, obtained a diftrit of country afford-
ing two hundred thousand pesos of yearly value §.
WVhile fich rewards were dealt out to the principal
officers, with more than royal munificence, pro-
portional iharcs were conferred upon thole of in-
fcrior rank.

SvUCFr rapid change of fortune produced its na- Tlleirporfu-

son and

tural effects. It gave birth to new wants, and new lxury.
desires. Veterans long accustomcd to hardflip
and toil, acquired of a sudden a talte for profule
and inconsiderate diflipation, and indulged in all
the ccclles of military liccntioulhefs. The riot
of low debauchery occupied ome;; a relifl for
expensive luxuries fprcad among others . The
meanell boldier in Peru would have thought him-
lelf degraded by marching on oor, and at a timie
when the priccs of horses in that country were ex-
orbitant, each insistcd on bcing furiiilcil wvith one
before he would take the field. ut though lces

S 2 patient

* Fernaltl cz, l1i,. ii. c. 9p.
1' Z:lIr;!t, li. vii. c. 10. Ilerrcra, lec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
: GoII;I.;,, c. 164.

W V.j, ). i. lib. i. c. 3.
]] ii rr; , d(I . 3. lib. ii. c. 3. dec. 8. i;)' iii. c, i..

B O O K patient under the fatigue and hardships of ser-

VI. vice, they were ready to face danger and death
~''s' with as much intrepidity as ever, and animated

1548. by the hope of new rewards, they never failed,

on the day of battle, to display all their ancient
valour.

withhich 'TOGETHER with their courage, they retained
theircon- all the ferocity by which they were originally dif-
teaSied tinguifhed. Civil discord never raged with a more

fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To
all the passions which usually envenom contcfls
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expected upon the
death of every opponent, shut the door againt
mercy. To be wealthy was of itself sufficient to
expose a man to accusation, or to lubjeat him to
punishment. On the slightest fuipicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching for
any pretext to justify his cruelty, cut off many
more. The number of those who suffered by the
hand of the executioner, was not much inferior to
what fell in the field *; and the greater part was
condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

And want THE violence with which the contending par-
' taitl.' ties treated their opponents was not accompanied

with its usual attendants, attachment and fidelity
to those with whom they aed. The ties of ho-
nour which are held sacrcd among soldiers, and
the principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly
in the Spanish character is in that of any nation,
seem to have been equai.y forgotten. Even re-
gard for decency, and the fcnfe of shame, were

totally
* See NOTE XLVII.

totally loll. During their diffcnfions, there wasB O O K
hardly a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon VI.
the party which he had originally cfpouled, betray "-
the afociates with whom he had united, and vio- 1548.
late the engagements under which he had come.
The viceroy Nugnez Vela, was ruined by the
treachery of Cepeda and the other judges of the
royal audience, who were bound by the duties of
their function to have supported his authority.
The chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo
Pizarro's revolt, were the first to forsake hin, and
submit to his enemies. His fleet was given up to
Gafca, by the man whom he had ingled out
among his officers to entrust with that important
command. On the day that was to decide his
fate, an army of veterans, in fight of the enemy,
threw down their arms without striking a blow,
and deserted a leader who had often conducted
them to vi&tory. Inftancecs of such general and
avowed contempt of the principles and obligations
which attach man to man, and bind them to-
gether in social union, rarely occur in history. It
is only where men are far removed from the feat
of government, where the restraints of law and
order are little felt, where the profped of gain is
unbounded, and imnenfe wealth may cover the
crimes by which it is acquired, that we can find
any parallel to the levity, the rapaciousness, the
perfidy and corruption prevalent among the Spa.
niards in Pcru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in Gafcadevi-

every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and f ontrhi$
tranquillity fccmed to be perfectly re-clablifhed. foldicr.
But two very intercfling objcts still remained to
occupy the preiidcnt's attention. The one was
to find immediately fich employment for a multi-
tu(de of turbulcui and daring adventurers with

which

26r

B O O K which the country was filled, as might prevent

VI. them from exciting new commotions. The other
"rs~' to betow proper gratifications upon those to whose

S48. loyalty and valour he was indebted for his fuccels.

The former of these was in ibme measure accom-
plifhed, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to pro-
fecute the conquest of Chili; and by empower-
ing Diego Centeno to undertake the difovery of
the valt regions bordering on the river de la Plata.
The reputation of those leaders, and the hopes of
bettering their condition in a new country, allur-
ing many of the most indigent and desperate fol-
diers to follow their fiandards, drained off no in-
considerable portion of that mutinous inlanmmable
spirit which Gafca dreaded.

His division TH latter was an alfair of greater difficulty,
of the coun- and to be adjusted with a more attentive and deli-
his foow- cate hand. The repartimientos, or allotments of
crs. lands and Indians which fell to be difiributed,

in conlequence of the death or forleiture of the
former pofefiors, exceeded two millions of pesos
of yearly rent". Gasea, when now absolute maf-
ter of this inmenfe property, retained the fame
difinterefied fentimnents which he had originally
profcflcd, and reifued to relerve the Ifialletl por-
tion of it for himself. But the number of claim-
ants was great; and whilst the vanity or avarice
of every idividual fixed the value of his own
firvices, and eftimnatcd the recompencc which he
thought due to him, the prctcnfions of each were
b cextravagant, that it was impofiible to satisfy all,
Galfca liftcnecl to them one by one, with the most
paticnt attention, and that lie might have leiiure
to weigh the comparative merit of thcir fcvcral
claims with accuracy, he retired, with the arch-
bishop of Litna and a single lfcrctary, to a villagc

twclve
* Vega, p. i. lib. i. c. 4.

twelve leagues from Cuzco. There he !pent feve- B O O K
ral days in allotting to each a diftrit of lands and vL.
nurber of Indians, il proportion to his idea of
their past services, and future importance. But 548
that he might get beyond the reach of' the fierce
iornn of clamour and rage, which he fore!aw
would burst out on the publication of his decree,
notwithfianding the impartial equity with which
he had framed it, he let out for Lima, leaving the
infirument of partition lealed up, with orders not
to open it for iome days after his departure.

THE indignation excited by publifilig the dc- ^ i4.

cree of partition was not lels than Galca had cx- ent i occa
peded. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, hamc, $o"s.
rage, and all the other pailions that moif vehement-
ly agitate the minds of men whc n both their ho-
nour and their interest are deeply af'ccd, con-
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out
with all the fury of military inlblence. Calumny,
threats, and curies, were poured out openly upon
the president. He was accuscd of ingratitude, of
partiality, and ofinjuftice. Among soldiers prompt
toa&tion, such fed itious discourse would have been
toon followed by deeds no le-s violent, and they
already began to turn their eyes towards some dil-
contented leaders, expeEting themi to itand forth
in redress of their wrongs. By some vigorous
interpofitionsof government, a timely check was
given to this mutinous lpirit, and the danger of
another civil war was averted for the present -.

GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame was 1549.
suppressed rather than extinguishcd, laboured with Re-cfta-

blifhes order
the ut most afliduity to Ibothe the malcontents, by and govcrn-

bcflowing mc1t.

* Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara, c. l7. Vega, p. ii.

lib. vii. c. , &c. Fernar(ldez, p. 1 . lib. i. c. , &c. Her-
rera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &c.

263

B O O K bestowing large gratuities on some, by promising

VI. repartinientos, when they fcll vacant, to others,

and by caressing and flattering all. But that the
I549. public security might reft on a foundation more

itaple than their good affecion, he endeavourcd
to itrcngthcn the hands of his 'ucceffors in oiiice,
by re-etabliflhing the regular adminifiration of
juflice in every part of the empire. He intro.
duced order and fimplicitv into the mode of col-
leting the royal revenue. He iflued rcgulatioiis
zoncerning the treatment of the Indians, well cal-
culated to protect them from opprcflion, and to
provide for their inftrudcion in the principles of
religion, without depriving the Spaniards of the
benefit accruing from their labour. Having now
accomplished every objcct of his mission, Gal<a,
longing to return again to a private fiation, conm-

F155. nmittcd the government of Peru to the court of audi-
and ets out ence, and let out for Spain. As, during the anar-
for Spain. chy and turbuliece of the four last years, there

had been no remittance made of the royal rcve-
nuc, he carried with him thirteen hundred thou-
sand pesos of public money, which the ceconomy
and order of his adminiitration cnabled him to
save, after paying all the expcnces of the war.

His recep- I-Ii was received in his nativc country with uni-
tion there. verhal admiration of his abilitics, and of his vil-

lue. BI3oi were, indeed, highly conl'icuous.
Without armlly, or fleet, or public funds ; with
a train lo inpile, that only three thoullud ducaii;
were expended in quipping liin i, l'ct out 0t
oppolc a formidable rebel lion. Byv his addrcIs
and talents he lupplicd(all tloliC clcfc'is, and fCenl-
(c to crcate iniflriiicuts fir executing his ldcfii.ls.
lIc acquirced luch a aval Iorce, as gave himn the
coX.itlaiid. of the tia. l-e railed a body of Cenl
able to cope with the veteran bands h'lich giv\'

I.i \V

Ftrniandez, lib. ii. c. rS.
264.

lav to Peru. He vanquished their leader, on B 0 0 K
v.hofe arms vitory had hitherto attended, and in VI.
place of anarchy and usurpation, he eflablifhed the
governmcnt of laws, and the authority of the right- s550.
tul Ibvcreign. But the praise bcflowed on his abi-
lities was exceeded by that which his virtue me-
rited. After residing in a country where wealth
prefcntcd allurcmlents wh!ich had reduced every
pcrlbn who ad hitherto pof'cefled power there, he
returned from that trying station with integrity not
only untainted but un fufpcced. A fter distributing
among his countrymen poffctlions of greater extent
and value than had ever been in the dilpofal of a
fubjedt in any age or nation, he himself remained
in his original itate of poverty ; and at the very
time, when he brought such a large recruit to the
royal trcafury, he was obliged to apply by petition
fora I'fall fitm to discharge lome petty debts which
he had contracted during the courle of his ser-
vicc . Charles was not inltnfible to such difinte-
refdcd merit. Gafca was received by him with the
mot distinguished marks of eftecm, and being pro-
mnioed to the bishopric of Palencia, he passed the
remainder of his days in the tranquillity of retire-
ment, refp)eted by his country, honoured by his
fovcrcign, and beloved by all.

NOTWITHSTANDING all Gafca's wife regula-
tions, the tranquillity of Peru was not of long con-
linuance. In a country, where the authority of
gnvcrnllmlc was alnloft forgotten during the long
rcvalence of anarchy and nif-rulc, where there
\ crc dilappointcd leaders ripe for revolt, and Ic-
(litious follicrs ready to follow them, it was not
illilicult to kindle conibuflion. Several lucccflive
inlulrrc(ions dclflated thc country for fomne years.
lSut as tlole, though fierce, were only tranficnt

fiorlns,
* Als. p'il's 1Zj,.

B O O K florms, excited rather by the ambition and turb,.

VI. lence of particular men, than by general or publc
'^^ - motives, the detail of them is not the objeEt of ilis

1550. history. Thele commotions in Peru, like ever-

thing of extreme violence, either in the natural r
political body, were not of long duration, and b,
carrying off the corrupted hunjours which ha(
given rife to the disorders, they contributed in :c
end to strengthen the society which at sirs ticy
threatened to defroy. During their fierce conicl;.,
several of the first invaders of Peru, and many u'
those licentious adventurers whom the fame of tlicir
success had allured thither, fell by each othcr'
hands. Each of the parties, as they alternately
prevailed in the struggle, cleared the country of a
greater number, by executing, proscribing, or ba-
nifhing their opponents. Men less enterprising
and desperate, and more accustomed to move in the
path of fober and peaceable industry, fettled il
Peru; and the royal authority was gradually clfa-
blifhed as firmly there as in the other Spanil co.
lonies.

' THE
266

# THE HISTORY OF MERICA. BOOK VII.

THE
H S T O R Y

OF
M E R I C A.

B OO K VII.

kS the conquest of the two great empiresof Mex- B O K
>and Peru forms the most plendid and interest- VII.
g period in the history of America, a view of 'T
cir political inflitutions, and a description of their
tional manners, will exhibit the human species
the contemplation of intelligent observers in a
ry finigular stage of its progress 4.
W'HN compared with other parts of the New Mexico and
orld, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as 'nll''
,lihcd fiates. lnflead of fmnall, independent, t:in otler
)tile tribes, struggling for fubfiftcnce amidst artsca
Iods and marfies, strangers to industry and
Is, unacquainted with subordination, and almost
itlout tle appearance of regular government, we
id countries of great extent ubjeCtcl to the domi-
on of one fbvcrcign, the inhabitants collected
gcther in cities, the wildoiii and foresight of

rulers

* See NOTE XLVIIl.
IICr.·-LL·--·L---

B O O K rulers employed in providing for the nlaintcua

VI1. and it-curit-y of the -people, the empire of lah
^-'r- inl folne mcalurc cfablilhfd, the authority of rcl

gion recognizcd, mnany of the arts efientiai to
brought to lnec degree of maturity, and t]
davMU of ichi as arc ornamental beginning toa;
pear.

Their infe- EUT if tie conparifons be made with the l:c
trlri'yto ple of the acient continelnt, the inferiorii (
ote~ n- America in improvement xili be coniicuous;. ,!
tnint" C lneither the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be c;

titled to rank with those nations which merit th
name of civilized. They, like the rude tribt
around them, were totally unacquainted wmith
useful metals, and the progress which the)y h:
made in extending their dominion over the anini
creation was inconsiderable. The Mexicans hai
gone no farther than to tame and rear turikw
ducks, a fpecics of small dogs, and rabbits'. t.
this feeble essay of ingenuity, the means of Iubfi;
tcnce were rendered bomewhat more plentiful an
secure, than when men depend lolely on liuit
ing; but they had no idea of attempting to fubdui
the more robuit animals, or of deriving any aii
from their ministry in carrying on works of labour
The Peruvians feemn to have ncglc&ed the ifcrio
animals, and had not rendered any of tli(h (o
meftic except the duck ; but they were more fo.iu
natc in tamning the Llama, an animal pcctuliar
thcir coinitry, ill fill i rcfenmbling a canmcl, and o
a fizc fobcwliat larger than a flicep. L'iil( . tli
prote(cion of 111an, lllis li ciCs mutlilicd ,4I(.;1!'
Its wool fliniifnicd tiic Peruvians with clotllili,. il
lcf:h with ibo, I. It \v; even cmllploycd as an Ic.,il
ol burdn, andt carL 1cl i;t nodcr ilc

l oald
xl ii i,,,h11

p) IRC-le

i Trr c . t.c.i. Oh. vii. c. 3.
26S

:icnce and docility*. It was never used for B 0 0 K
,rght; and the brccd being confined to the Vii.
;,oniainous coulntry, its fervicc, if we may judge -"
icidents that occur in the early Spanilf wri-
rs, was not very extenivc among the Peruvians
thcir original flatc.
I. tracing the linc bv which nations proceed to-
rds civility, the dilcoverv of the ulfful metals,
d the acquilition of dominion over the animal.
eation, have been markcd as feps of capital iln-
rtance in their progrcls. In our continent, o-
ety continued in that tate which is denominated
arbarous, long after man had attained both. Even
ith all that command over nature which thefc
nfcr, many ages clapfe before industry becomes
pcrfect as to render fubfifencec fecurc, before
e arts that supply the wants and furnish the ac-
omnodations of iife arc invented, and before any
ca is conceived of the various inlitutions rcqui-
te in a well-ordcrcd iocicty. The Mexicans and
cruviaus, without ktnowledge of the use of me-
Is, or the aid of dorneflic animnals, laboured un-
r diladvantagcs which rnufl have greatly retarded
cir progrels; and in their highest itatc of im-
rovemcnt, their power was so limited, and their
perations so feeble, that they can hardly be confi-
crcd as having advanced beyond the infancy of
ivil life.
AFTER this general oblcrvation concerning the Vc oi ile
noft singular and diftinguiflicd circuniflancc il andii::;.l.jl
he ftatc of both the great empires of America, olcali
aill endeavour to (ive Inch a view of the conflitu-
iOn andl interior police of each, as may enable us
oalccrtain their place in the political feale, to al-
ot them their proper fiation between the rude tribcs
i the New World, and the polished flatcs of the

ancient,
'Veg, -. . 1b. 'iii. c. i-. Zarate, ib. i. c. 14.

269

B0 0 K ancient, and to determine how far they had ri

VII. above the former, as well as how much they
'Ts~ below the latter.
imperfea MEXICO was first fubjeaed to the Span
information crown. But our acquaintance with its laws a
those of manners is not, from that circumstance, mni
MoxicO. complete. What I have remarked conccrni

the defcdive and inaccurate information on whi
ue must rely, with respect to the condition ai
cLtomss of the savage tribes in America, may
applied likewise to our knowledge of the Mexic
emp ire. Cortes, and the rapacious advcnture
who accompanied him, had not leilure or capaci
to enrich either civil or natural history with ne
observations. They undertook their expcditic
in quest of one objec, and seem hardly to has
turned their eyes towards any other. Or if, (1d
ing lome short interval of tranquillity, when
occupations of war ccaied, and the ardour ol pliu
der was suspended, the infsitutions and manir'
of the people whom they had invaded drew hei
attention, the enquiries of illiterate foldicrs wcr
conducted with so little sagacity and preifion, tha
the accounts given by them of the policy at
order eftablified in the Mexican monarchy are fu
perficial, confuted and inexplicable. It is rathcl
from incidents which they relate occasionally, than
from their own dcductions and remarks, that we
are enabled to form tonme idea of the genius and
manners of that people. The obscurity in which
the ignorance of its conquerors involved the an-
nals of Mexico, was augmented by the fupcrltition
of those who iccccded them. As the memory of
pall cvcnts was prclcrved among the Mexicans by
figures painted on skins, on cotton cloth, or on the
bark of trees, the early mnilionarics, unable to
comprehend their meaning, and struck with thcr
uncouth forms, conceivcd thcn to be monumncl::

0u
270

ti idolatry which ought to be destroyed, in order B o oK
;,) facilitatc the converiion of the Indians. In obe- vIi.
(icnce to an cdit ifued by Juan de Zunlmaraga, a --'
i'i;ncilcan monk, the first bishop of Mexico, all
it:;ie rccords of the ancient Mexican story were
oilclicted and committed to the flames, In conle-
(i:encc of this fanatical zeal of the monks who firit
vilitcd i.cw Spain, and which their fucccffors loon
began to lament, wlatever knowledge of remote
events such rude monuments contained was en-
irely loft, and no information remained concern-
ing the ancient revolutions and policy of the ern-
pire, but what was derived from tradition, or from
iome fragments of their historical paintings that
elcaped the barbarous researches of Zummaraga '.
From the experience of all nations it is manifeit,
that the menory of past tranfadtions can neither
be long preserved, nor be transmitted with any
fidelity by tradition. The Mexican paintings,
slhich are fippofed to have served as annals of
thcir empire, are fxw in number, and of ambigu-
ous meaning. 'hus amidil the uncertainty of the
ifrmer, and the obscurity of the latter, we must
glean what intelligence can be collc&ted from the
Icanty materials fcattcred in the Spaniflh writcrs.

ACCOI(DING to the account of the Mexicans Oiginoftlih

thlcmlflvcs, their empire was not of long duration. Mexican
Their country, as they relate, was originally po- monarchy.
Icfied, rather than peopled, by iinall independent
tribes, whole mode of life and manners rclcmbled
those of the rudcft favagcs which we have defcrib-
ed, But about a period corrcfponding to the be-
ginning of the tcnth century in the Christian asra,
lcvcral tribes moved in llcceiliv migrations from
unknown regions towards the north and north-west,

and

* Acoll, lib. vi. c. 7. Torqucm. Proem. lib. ii. lib. iii.
c. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

13 0 0 K and fettled in different provinces of _lnaba, lii

VII. ancient name of New Spain. These, more civi.
~^s~ lized than the original inhabitants, began to fb;on;

them to the arts of iocial life. At Lcngth, towaill
the commencement of the thirteenth century, tl:e
Mexicans, a people more polished than any f te
former, advanced from the border of the Caii)or.
nian gulf; and took poifeflion of the plains adja-
cent to a great lake near the centre of the countr.
After residing there about fifty years, they foundcd
a town, since distinguished by the name of AIxico,
which from humble beginnings loon grew to be the
molt confidcrable city in the New World. The
Mexicans, long after they were eflablifhed in their
new pofleflions, continued, like other martia!
tribes in America, uacquainted with regal domi-
nion, and were governed in peace and conducted
in war by such as were entitled to pre-eminence by
their wifdomi or their valour. But among them, as
in other flates whole power and territories beconle
extensive, the supreme authority centered at last in
a single person ; and when the Spaniards under
Cortes invaded their country, Molntzuma was tlc
ninth monarch in order who had swaycd the Mex-
ican sceptre, not by hereditary right, but by elec-
tion.
Veryrecent. SUCH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans

concerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very short. Fl'oi
the first migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the etabliihment of monarchical govcrnment no:
above a hundred and thirty years, according to
one account ', or a hundred and ninetv-lcie'l,
according to another computation , had clapfcil.
If, on one hand, we fuppofc the Mexican hate 1t

* Acol. I-ill li. vi . i.c. , &c.
l ' Purchas Pilgr. iii. p. o6, &c.
272

have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub- B 0 O K
filed during such a length of time as the Spa- VII.
nifh accounts of its civilization would naturally 'rT
lead us to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how,
anong a people who possessed the art of recording
events by pi'cures, and who confidered it as an eiTen-
tial part oftheir national education to teach theirchil..
dren to repeat the historical bongs which celebrated
the exploits of their anccftors;, the knowledge of
past tranliaions fiould be so slender and limited.
If, on the other hand, we adopt their own fyfltem
with rcipcft to the antiquities of their nation, it is
no less difficult to account either for that im-
proved ifate of tociety, or for the extensive domi-
nion to which their empire had attained, when
first visited by the Spaniards. The infancy of na-
tions is so long, and, even when every circumstance
is favourable to their progress, they advance so
ilowly towards any maturity of firength or policy,
that the recent origin of the Mexicans ecm to be a
firong prcfunmption of exaggeration, in the splendid
descriptions which have been given of their govern-
ment and manners.

Bu T it is not by theory or conje&uresthat history Sass which

decides, with regard to the slate or character of na- pove their
tions. It produces faets as the foundation of every ivilization,
judgment which it ventures to pronounce. In col-
iclting thof which Imuf regulate our opinion in
thc preiet inquiry, foine occur that fuggcil an idea
of conlidcrable progrcls in civilization in the Mexi-
can cripire, and others which lecmn to indicate that
it had advanced but little beyond the savage tribes
around it. Both hall le exhibitcd to the view of the
readcr, that, from cormparing them, he may dctcr-
ninc on which fide the evidence preponderates.

'l' l. right of privaic property was pcrledlly n- The right of
dcrllood, and cflablifhcd in its full extent. Aongfuuytc.

/VOL\ . I1. T feveralbliitcd:

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18.

273

B O O K several savage tribes, we have seen, that the idea of

VII. a title to the separate and exclusive poifeffion ofanv
'ar* objet was hardly known ; and that among all it

was extremely limited and ill-defined. But ill
Mexico, where agriculture and indufiry had made
some progress, the diftination between real and
moveable pofleflions, between property in land and
property in goods, had taken place. Both might
be transferred from one person to another by ale
or barter; both might descend by inheritance,
Every person who could be denominated a freeman
had property in land. This, however, they held
by various tenures. Some pofleffed it in full
right, and it descended to their heirs. The title o[
others to their lands was derived from rheoffice or
dignity which they enjoyed; and when deprived
of the latter, they loft poffcfion of the former.
Both these modes of occupying land were deemed
noble, and peculiar to citizens of the highest claf
The tenure by which the great body of the people
held their property, was very diflerent. In every
diftria a certain quantity of land was measured
out, in proportion to the number of families. This
was cultivated by the joint labour of the whole;
its produce was deposited in a common ftorehoule,
and divided among them according to their rcfpec-
tive exigencies. The members of the Calpitlle,
or associations, could not alienate, their flare of
the common estate; it was an indivisible perma-
nent property, deflined for the upport of their
families . In consequence of this difiribution of
thc territory of the state, every man had an inte-
reit in its welfare, and the happiness of the indi-
vidual was connected with the public security.

rhe number THE number and greatness of the cities in the
andgrentntfs Mexican cmpire is one of the mos striking circuln
of their ci-
ties. fance

* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Torquem. Mon. Ind. lib.

xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.
274

slances, that diftinguilh it from those nations in B 0 0 .
America which we have already described. While VII.
tociety continues in a rude state, the wants of men
are so few, and they stand so little in need of mu-
tual afliftance, that their inducements to crowd to-
gether are extremely feeble. Their induflry at the
Iame time is i ipcerl'et, that it cannot lecure sub-
fiftence for any considerable number of families set-
tled in onefpot. They livedifperfed, at this period
from choice as well as from. neceffitv, or at the ut-
most assemble in small hamlets on the bank of the
river which liupplies them with food, or on the bor-
der of Ibme plain left open by nature, or cleared
by their own labour. The Spaniards, accuflomed
to this mode of habitation among all the savage
tribes with which they were then acquainted, were
aftonilhed, on entering New Spain, to find the na-
tives residing in towns of such extent as resembled
those of Europe. In the first fervour of their ad-
niiration, they compared Zcmpoalla, though a town
only of the second or third size, to cities of great-
eft note in their own country. When, afterwards,
they vilited in succession Tlafcala, Cholula, Tacu-
ba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itself, their amazement
increaled io much, that it led therm to convey ideas
of their magnitude and populoufncls bordering on
what is incredible. Even where there is leifhre
for olervation, and no intcrell that leads to dc-
ceive, conjc6tural efiimatcs of the number of pep-
plc in cities rc extremely loo'e, and uually Illmuh
exaggerated. It is not lurprifiug, then, that Cortes
and is comlIpanions, little acculloncd to lfch com-
pulations, and povwcrully ticipted to magnify, 'in
order to exalt tie merit of their own discoverics
and conlqiclls, Ihould have been betrayed into tlhis
COllmollnll crrlr, and have railld their delcrilption;
coifidIcrably above truth. For this reabn, fomc
cunidcrable abatement ought to be made fronl

'T 2 their

B O K their calculation of the number of inhabitants i.

VII. the Mexican cities, and we may fix the standard
'-",-' of their population much lower than they have

done; but flill they will appear to be cities of luch
consequence, as are not to be found but aniorg
people who have made ome considerable progro's
in the arts of focal life

Thefepara. THE eparation of proffflions among the Mexi-
ioa of pro- .
ifeffons. cans is a symptom of improvement no lets remark-

able. Arts, in the early ages of society, are so
few and so simple, that each man is ffficientl-
inafter of them all, to gratify every demand of hs
own limited desires. The savage can form his
bow, point his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow
his canoe, without calling in the aid of any hand
more skilful than his own. Time must have aug-
nlented the wants of men, and ripened their inge-
nuity, before the productions ofart become lb com-
plicated in their structure, or so curious in their
fabric, that a particular course of education is r-
quifite towards forming the artificer to expertnces
in contrivance and workmanship. In proportion
as refinement spreads, the diftinion of profeflioil
increases, and they branch out into more nume-
rous and minute subdivisions. Among the Mexi-
cans, this separation of the arts necessary in lit-:
had taken place to a confideablc extent. Tiie
funCtions of the mason, the weaver, the goldtinitli,
the painter, and of fevcral other crafts, were c-
ried on by different pcrfons. Each was regularly
initruEted in his calling. To it alone his induftrv
was confined; and by assiduous application to one
object, together with the pcr'evering patience pe-
culiar to Americans, their artizans attained to a
degree of neatness and perfcetion in work far be-
yond what could have been expetcd from the

rude
* See NOTE XI.IX.

%ude tools which they employed. Their various B O O K
productions were brought into commerce; and by VII.
the exchange of them in the stated markets held P
in the citics, their mutual wants were supplied *,
in such orderly intercourse as characterizes an im-
proved state of society.

THE diftindion of ranks eftablihed in the Mex-Thediftinc.

ican empire is the next circumstance that meritstionof
attention. In urveying the savage tribes of Ame-raRks'
rica, we observed that confcioulnefs of equality,
and impatience of subordination, are entiments
natural to man in the infancy of civil life. During
peace, the authority of a uperior is hardly felt
among them, and even in war it is but little ac-
knowledged. Strangers to the idea of property,
the difference in condition resulting from it is un-
known. Birth or titles confer no pre-eminence;
it is only by personal merit and accomplishments
that it can be acquired. The form of society was
very different among the Mexicans. The great
body of the people were in a most humiliating
fiate. A considerable number, known by the name
of Mayeques, nearly relernbled in condition those
peasants who, under various denominations, were
confidered, during the prevalence of the feudal
system, as inftumnents of labour attached to the
foil. The Mayeques could not change their place
of residence without permiflion of the superior on
whom they depended. They were conveyed, to-
gether with the lands on which they were fettled,
from one proprietor to another; and were bound
to cultivate the ground, and to perform fcveral
kinds of fervilc work-t. Others were reduced to
the lowecf form of fubjc&ion, that of' (omeftic ser-
vitude, and felt the utmost rigour of that wretched

state.

* Cortes Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 239, &c. Gom. Cron. c. 79.
'T'orquem. lib. xiii. c. 34. Herrera,'dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 15, &c.

t Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. Corita, MS.

BO 0 IK fRate. Their condition was held to be so vile, ani

vrI. their lives deemed to be of so little value, that
Or~ ' person who killed one of those slaves was not sub-

jeted to any punishment '. Even those confidered
as freemen were treated by their haughty lords as
beings of an inferior species. The nobles possesscd
of ample territories, were divided into various
:classes, to each of which peculiar titles of honour
belonged. Some of these titles, like their lands,
descended from father to son in perpetual fuccef-
sion. Others were annexed to particular offices,
or conferred during life as marks of personal dif-
ti'nction . The monarch, exalted above all, en-
joyed extensive power, and fupremc dignity.
Thus the diftintion of ranks was completely efta-
blifhed, in a line of regular subordination, reach-
ing from the highefl to the lowel neniber of the
community. Each of these knew what he could
claim, and what he owed. The people, who were.
int allowed to wear a dress of the fanme fashion, or
to dwcli in houses of a form similar to thole of the
nobles, accofled them with the nloft fubniflive re-
verence. In the prelence of their fovcreigii, thcy
durst not lift their eyes from the ground,'or look
him in the face+. The nobles tliemfclves, when
admitted to an audience of their overeign, entered
bare-footed, in mean garments, and, as his flavcs,
paid him homage approaching to adoration. Thlis
respect due from inferiors to tholc above he in
rank, was efablifhed with such ccreninoiios accu-
racy, that it incorporated with thecir language, and
influenced its genius and idiom. The Mcxican
tongue abounded in expressions of reverence and
courtesy. 1 he flile and appellations, ucd in the
intercourse between equals, would have been ob un-

becomning

* Herrera, dec. '. lib. iv. c. 7. t Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv.
c. 15. Corita, MS. : Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 4.

becoiling in the mouth of one in a lower sphere; B 0 O K
when he accotled a person in higher rank, as to be VI.
deemed an inult*. It is only in bocieties, which -
time and the iftitution of regular government have
moulded ito form, that we find such an orderly
arrangement of men into different ranks, and uch
nice attention paid to their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans thus familiarized Theirpolito

tat confttus

and bended to subordination, was prepared for sub- tin,,
liitting to nouarchical government. But the de-
scriptions of their policy .apd laws, by the Spani-
ards who overturned them, are o inaccurate and
contradicory, that it is difficult to delineate the
form of their confUitutiou with any precision.
Sonletines they represent the monarchs of Mexico
as absolute, deciding according to thei-r pleasure,
with rcfpedt to every operation of the state. OD.
other occasions, we discover the traces of eftablih-
ed cufloms and laws, framed in order to circum-
scribe the power of the crown, and we meet with
rights and privileges of the nobles which seem to be
opposed as barriers against its encroachments.
This appearance of iconiiltency has arisen from
inattention to the innovations Qs Montezuma upon
the Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition sub-
verted the ancient fyfteni of government, and
introduced a pure defpotiihf. He disregarded their
laws, violated their privileges, and reduced his
Iubjcas of every order to the level of saves f.
The chiefs or nobles of the first rank, ubnlitt:d to
the yoke with such rcluCtance, that, from impati-
ence to {hake it off, and hope of recovering their
original rights many of them courted the protecion
of Cortes, and joined a foreign power against their

domestic

See NOTE}; L. -I -errera, dec. 3, lib. ii. c. 14.
'orquem. lib. ii. c. 69.

279

B O O K domestic oppressor . It is not then under the

VII. reigi of Montezuma, but under those of his pre-
T did'eceffors, that we can ditfover what was the origi-

nal form and genius of Mexican policv.' Froni the
foundation of'thc tonarchy it the elecion of Mon-
tezurna; it seems to have fubfifled with little varia-
tion. That body of citizens, wvhich may be dil-
tinguifhed by' the name of nobility, formed tlie
chfief 'nd mos irefpeótable order in the itate. They
-vere of various ranks,as has already been observed,
and their honours were acquired and transmitted,
in different manners. Their number seems to have
been great. According to an author accustomcd to
examine with attenti'on what he relates, there were
in the Mexican empire thirty of this order, eachl
of whom had in his territories about a hundred.
thousand pebple; and subordinate to these, there
iverc about three thoufarid nobles of a lower clafst.
The territories' belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco
and Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to those
of the Mexican monarch t. Each of these pfolcli
ed complete territorial jrifdition and levied.
taxes fom'their own vafials. But all followed the
flandard of Mexico' in war, serving with a number
of men in proportion to their domain, and tnolt
of them paid tribute to its monarch as their fupc-
rior lord. ' '

IN tiacing those great lines of the Mexican con-

flitufion, an image of feudal policy in its iiofi ri-
gid form riles to'view, and we discern its three
diflinguiihing chara1erifiics, a nobility poficiing
almof in'dependc'nt authority, a 'people deprefed
into the loweft'l ate of fubjcdion, and a king en-
truited with the executive power of the slate. Its

·" t'

' '

* ' 'I'pirit

·* Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. o, 1l. Torquem. lib. iv. c. 4').
J Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 12. ' Torquem. lib. ii. .

57. Corita, MS.
A80

spirit and principles seem to have operated in the B Q Q K
Lcw World in the fame manner as in the ancient. VII-
lThe juriidiction' of the crown was extrenity limit- ^-
ed. All real and effective authority was retained by
the Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the
J;adow of it only left to the king. Jealous to ex-
:cfs of their own rights, they guarded With most
,;igilant anyiety against the encroachments of their
i(vercigns. By a fundamental law of the' empire,

was provided, that the king should not deter-
mile concerning any point of general importance,
'iithout the approbation of the council composed of
the prime nobility U. Unless he obtained their
consent he could not engage the nation in war, nor
could he dispose of the nioft considerable branch
of the public revenue at pleasure, it was appropri-
atcd to certain purposes from which it could not be
divested by the regal authority t. In order to fe-
cure full eflcct to those constitutional restraints,
the Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to
deliend by inheritance, but disposed of it by elec-
tion. The right of election teems to have been
originally veiled in the whole body of nobility,
but was afterwards committed to fix electors, of
whom the chiefs of Tczeuco and Tacuba were a-
ways two. From refpe& for the family of their
monarchs, the choice fell generally upon some
pcrion sprung from it. But as the aivity and va-
lour of thcir prince was of greater moment to a peo-
ple perpetually engaged in war, than a strict adhe-
rcnce to the order of birth, collaterals of mature
age or clifinguifhcd merit were often preferred to
thole who were nearer the throne in direct delccnts.
lo this maxim, in their policy, the Mexicans

appear

IIcrrera, (dc. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

CGril, MS. '] Ibid. c. 7. 1 Acoffa, lib. vi. c. 24.
lHrrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 13, Corita, MS.

B o O'K appear to be indebted for such a fuccefiion of abil

VII. and warlike princes, as raised their empire in
'r^-' a hort period to that extraordinary height of

power, which it had attained w hen Cortcs landed
in New Spain.

Pwer and WHILE the jurisdiction of the Mexican rno.
!,jlendour Ofnarchs continued to be limited, it is probable tha:
larchs. it was exercised with little otcentation. But as

their authority became more extenivc, the fplcn-
dour of their government augmented. It was
in this last ate that the Spaniards beheld it.
and struck with the appearance of Montezu-
ma's court, they describe its pomp at great length,
and with much admiration. The number of
his attendants, the order, the fi-cnce, and the
reverence with which they served him ; the vail
extent of his royal mansion, the variety of its
apartments allotted to different officers, and the
otentation with which his grandeur was dii:
played, whenever he permitted his fubjcts to
behold him, seem to relcmble the magnificence
of the ancient monarchics in Asia, rather than
the simplicity of the infant fRates in the New
W orld. !

prderof BUT it waa not in the ncrc parade of roy.
htlerg°o alty, that the Mcxican potentatcs exhibited their
'vtrnment.

power, they mnanifeflcd more bcncficially in the
order and regularity with which they conclut-
ed the internal adIniniftration and police of
their doninions. Complete jurifdicction, civil as
well as criminal, over its own incediate valTals,
was velcd in the crown. Judges were appointed
for each deplartment, and if we mnay rely on the
account which the Spanilf wriler give of the
iaxinis and laws upon which they foundcd their
dccilions with refpcd to the diflribitiol of pro.

pcety
2 2

perty and the punifiinnt of crimes, justice was B o O K
adniiniftered in the Mexican empire, with a de- VII.
gree of order and equity, resembling what takes "T
ylace in fbcietics highly civilized.

THLIK attention in providing for the support ofProviionfo
government was not less sagacious. Taxes were th'PP°
!aid upon land, upon the acquisitions of industry,
and upon commodities of every kind exposed to
iale in the public markets. These duties, though
considerable, were not arbitrary or unequal. They
were impled according to established rules, and
each knew what share of the common burthen he
had to bear. As the use of money was unknown,
all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
tli natural productions of all the different pro-
;inccs of the empire, but every pecies of manu-
fadure, and every work of ingenuity and art were
collcced in the public store-houses. From those
he emperor supplied his numerous train of atten-
ants in peace, and his armies during war, with
od, with cloaths, and ornaments. People of
ifcrior condition, neither poflcifing land nor en-
acd in commerce, were bound to the perform-
!Ice of various services, By their frated labour
hc crown lands were cultivated, public works
cre carried on, and the various houfcs belong-
g to the emperor were built and kept in re-

'HE improved slate of government among th Thei.pa-
exicans is onlpicuous not only in points elln-lice
al o the being of a well-ordered lociety, but
levcral regulations of inferior consequence with
fpct to police. The inflitution, which I have
ready mentioned, of public couriers, stationed

at

Herrera, d(ct. - . ib. vii. c. 3. dec. . lib. iv, c. 16. 17,
NOTE LI.

283

B i0 K at proper intervals, to convey intelligence from c.t

VI. part of the empire to the other, was a rfinemnut i
'-y- lpolice not int'roduced into any kingdom of Europe

at that period. The firuture of the capital city ii
a lake, vith artificial dykes, and caufcways of great
length, which served as avenues to it froml dife.
rent quarters, ere{ctd in the water with n? le!s in
tenluity than labour, eems to be an idea that could
not have occurred to any but a civilized pcople,
The fame oblcrvation may be applied to the tiruc.
mtre of the aqucduEts, or conduits, by whicl thley
conveyed a fiream offrefh water, from a coufidera.
ble distance, into the city, along one of tle caul-
ways . The appointment of a confiderablc num.
bcr of' pelbols to clean te streets, to light ticin
by fires kindled in different places, and to patrole
as w'atclihcen during the night f, discovers a degree
of attclntion which ve polished nations arc late in
acquiring.
T.'r:ts. T i'!. progress of the Mexicaas in various arts i

confidered as the most decifivc proof of tlicir ii
pcrior refinement.' Cortes, and the early Spaniilr
authors. dcribe this with rapture, and inaintaii,
that the mnofi celebrated European artits could not
furpatf or ven equal them in iniguiuity aiml cat.
nels of workmanfiip. ' They cprelcntcd mnci,
animals, and othcr objects, by liil a dcll'pofitio
of various coloured featliers, as is laid to have
produccd al the ersts of light ad .Bad. and to
have imitated nature with 'truth and delicacy
Their ornaments of gold and filvcr hli;c been de
1cribed to be of a fabric no lcls curious. But i
forming any idea from general dclfcriptions, con
ccrning 'thel tate of arts among nations iipcrkfcdll
polilfcd, we arc extremely ready to err. 1tn cx

* Sec NOTE LII. J Herrera, dec. 2. lib. liii. C'
Torribio, MS.

mining the works of people whole advances in B O O K
ilmprovcment arc nearly the lame with our own, Vll.
we viewt them with a critical, and often with a ---r'
jealous eye. Whereas, when conlcfiousofour own
Iuperiority3 we iurvey the arts of nations compa-
ratively rude, we are aftoniifhed at works executed
by them under uch manifest disadvantages, and
inthe warmth of our admiration, we are apt to rc-
present them as productions more finished than they
really are. To the influence of this illusion, with-
out lbppofilg any intention to deceive, we may im-
pute the exaggeration of foine Spanih authors, in
their accounts of the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from con-
fidering such specimens of their arts as are still
preserved, that we rnuff decide concerning their
degree of merit. As the hip in which Cortes
sent to Charles V. the most curious productions
of the Mexican artizans, which were collected by
the Spaniards when they first pillaged the empire,
was taken by a French corsair*, the remains of
their ingenuity are less numerous than those of the
Peruvians. Whether any of their works with
feathers, in imitation of painting, be still extant
in Spain, I have not learned; but many of their
ornaments in gold and iilver, as well as various
utcnfils employed in common life, are deposited
in the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial
productions, lately opened by the king of Spain;
and I am informed by pcrfons on whole judgment
and tafle I can rely, that these boaftled efforts of
their art arc uncouth reprcfentations of common
objeds, or very coarle images of the human and
fOic animal forms, dcflitute of grace and propri-
e;yt. The juficl's of thcle obfcrvations is con-

firmed
Relic. de Cort. Ranuf. iii. 294, F. ' Sec NOTE LIIL

BO O K firmed by infpeEting, the wooden prints or copper

VII. plates of their paintings, which have been pub
_- lifhed by various authors. In them every figure o:

men, of quadrupeds, or birds, as well as evcrn
representation of inanimated nature; is cxtrenlcly
rude and aukward. The hardest Egyptian itye,
stiff and irperfet as it was, is more elegant. %i
scrawls of children delineate objetds almost as ac.
curately.

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different fation belongs to them, when con.
fidered as the records of their country, as hiftori.
cal monuments of its policy and tranfations; and
lhey become curious as well as interesting objeds
of attention. The noblest and most beneficial in-
vention of which human ingenuity can boast, is
that of.:writing. But the first essays of this art,
which hath contributed more than all others to tLh
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfection slowly, and by a
- gradualprpgreffipn. When the warrior, eager for
fame, wished to transmit tome knowledge of hs
exploits to succeeding ages; when the gratitude of
a people to their sovereign prompted them to hand
down an account of his beneficent deeds to pollc-
rity; the first method of accomiplifhing this, that
seems to have occurred to them, was to dclilcat,
in the best manner they could, figures reprcfinting
the ation of which they were solicitous to prelclve
the memory. Of this, which has very properly
been called piure-writing 't, we find traces anlon
obme of the most savage tribes of America. WV;hc
a leader returns from the field, he flrips a trcc
its bark, and with red paint scratches upon it oIbm
uncouth figures, which reprclcnt the ordcr of hi

lla rcl

* Divine Lcgat. of Moses, iii. 73.
286

287

j

march, the number of his fbllowers, the enemy B o o K
\\hlonm he attacked, the fealps and captives which VII.
he brought home. To thole fimipl annals he trusts -
for renown, and foothcs himllf with hope that by
their means he shall receive praise from the warri-
ors of future times .

COMPARED with those aukward eflays of their
savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexican-s
may be confidered as works of composition and
design. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
auy other method of recording tranfations than
that of delineating the objeóds which they wished
to reprefnt. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex lerics of events in progreflive order, and
delcribe, by a proper disposition of figures, the
occurrences of a king's reign from his acceflion to
his death; the progress of an infant's education
from its birth until it attained to the years of matu-
rity; the different recompences and marks of dif-
tinslion conferred upon warriors, in proportion to
the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular pecimens of this picture-writing have been
prcfervcd, which are justly confidered as the most
curious monuments of art brought from the New
World. The moit valuable of these was publihecd
by Purchas in fixiy-fix plates. It is divided into
three parts. The first contains the hillory of the
iMexican empire under its ten monarchs. The fc-
cond is a tribute-roll, representing what each con-
quiercd town paid into the royal treasury. The
third is a code of their intfitutions, dotcftic, po-
litical, and military. Another pccimen of Mcxi-
can painting has been publifned in thirty-two
plates, by the prcfcsit archbishop of Toledo. To
both arc annexed a full explanation of what te

figures

Sir W.Johnrfon Pllilof. Tranfaht. vol. lxiii. p. 143. Mem.
tla Hontan. ii. 91. Lafitau, Moeurs de auv. ii. 43.

B O 0 K figures were intended to represent, which was ob.

VII. tained by the Spaniards from Indians well ac-

' quainted with their own arts. The style of paint.

ing in all these is the fame. They reprelcnt
thing, not words.. They -exhibit images to the
eye, not ideas to the underfianding. .They Inay,
therefore, be confidered as the earliest aid nloft
imperfect essay of. men in their progress towards
discovering the art of writing. The defets il
this mode of recording tranfaatious rust have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from
its nature, a very tedious operati6n.; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any society, its annals must have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Beefides this, no objects could be
delineated but those: oiffeii'e the conceptions of
the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as
picure:writing could not convey an idea of tllefe,
it must have been a very imperfec art. The ie-
ceflity of improving it must have routed and fiarp-
ene.d invention, and the human mind holding te
fame course in the New World as in the Old,
might have advanced by the fame successive steps,
first from an actual picture to the plain hie'ogly-
phic; next, to the allegorical symbol, then to t:
arbitrary character; until, at length, an alphabc
of letters was discovered, capable of cxprcflig ;',!
the variety of combinations of found employed in
speech. In thepaintingsofthcMexicans wc, accord-
ingly, perceive that this progress was begun anmoln
them. Upon an attentive infpcion of the plalcs,
which I have mentioned, we may observe Ibflc a'-
proachto the plain or simple hieroglyphic, 'l;crc
some principal part or circunlltancc in the 1hlilj1
is made to frand for the whole. In the ann:ls t
their kings, published by Purclas, thc to;vuscoi-
quercd by each are uniformly rprclented in tl'

,*, ti1;I ¢nc
28

fame manner by a rude delineation of a houe ; B 0 0 K
but in order to point out the paiticular towns Vii.
which lhubnitted to their vi&orious arms, pccu-

e -

,lir emblems, fomctimes natural objects, and fonIe-
times artificial figures, are employed. In the tri-
bute-roll, published by the archbishop of Toledo,
the house, which was properly the pióure of the
town, is omitted, and the cblem alone is em-
ployed to reprelcnt it. They ieem even to have
made ome advances beyond this, towards the ue
of the more figurative and fanciful hieroglyphic.
In order to defcribea monarch, who had enlarged
his dominions by force of arms, they painted a
target ornamcntcd with darts, and placed it be-
tween him and those towns which he subdued.
But it is only in one instance, the notation of
numbers, that we discern any attempt to exhibit
ideas which had no corporeal form. They had
invented artificial marks, or figlns of convention,
for this purpole. By means of thcle, they com-
puted the years of the kings reigns, as well as the
amount of tribute to be paid into the royal trcafury.
The figure of a circle rcprefreted unit, and in
f;nall numbers, the coiputation was imade by re-
pcating it. Larger numbers \werc expressed bya pe-
culiar mark, and they had luch as denoted all in-
tegral numbers from twenty to eight thousand.
The ]liort duration of their empire prevented the
Mexicans from advancing farther in that long
courle wvliich conducCts imlen froilm the labour of de-
lineating real objects, to the niplicity and cafe of
alphabetic writing. Their records, notwithfland-
ing lobe dawn of fuchl ideas as ruight have led
to a more pcrlclt lyle, can be confidered as no-
thing more than a lfecies of pi&ure-writing, so
far improved ;is to m.:! their Ifupliiority over the
lfvaic tribes of America, but flill bo dcficive as
to prove that tilhy hadl not plocccdcd far beyond

V L. 1I. U the

289

B O O K the first stage in that progress which must be con,-

VII pleted before any people can be ranked among po-
nr'-' lifhed nations D.

Theirmode THEIR mode of computing time may be con-
*fcomput- fidered as a more decisive evidence of their pro-
ing time.

grefs in improvement. They divided their year
into eighteen months, each consisting of twenty
days, amounting in all to three hundred and sixty.
But as they observed that the course of the fun was
not compleated in that time, they added five days
to the year. These, which were properly inter-
calary days, they termedfupernumerary or waste;
and as they did not belong to any month, no work
was done, and no sacred rite performed on them;
they were devoted wholly to feflivity and pastime t
This near approach to philosophical accuracy is a
remarkable proof that the Mexicans had bestowcd
some attention upon enquiries and speculations,
to which men in a very rude state never turn their
thoughts.

Faasindi. SUCH are the most firiking particulars in the
atng apo manners and policy of the Mexicans, which ex-
frc in civi- hibit them to view as a people considerably refined.
ation. From other circumstances, one is apt to fufpe&

that their chara&cer, and many of their institutions,
did not differ greatly from those of the other in-
habitants of America.

Their wars LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexi.
continual cans were incessantly engaged in war, and the
ous. motives which prompted them to hostility seem to

have been the fame. They fought, in order to
gratify their vengeance, by ffiedding the blood of
their enemies. In battle they were chiefly intent
on taking prisoners, and it was by the number

of

-1' Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2.
190

*; See NOTE LIV.

of these that they estimated the glory of victory. B 0 O K
No captive was ever ransomcd orfpared. All were VII.
sacrificed without mercy, and their fielh devoured ~r
with the fame barbarous joy as among the fiercest
savages. On omen occasions it rose to even wilder
exceflcs. Their principal warriors covered them-
lelves with the flius of the unhappy victims which
they had llain, and danced about the streets, boast-
ing of' their own valour, and exulting over their
enemies . Even in their civil inffitutions we
dilcover traces of that barbarous disposition which
their sty71em of war inlpired. The four chief coun-
icllors of the empire were distinguished by atroci-
ous titles, which could have been assumed only
by a people who delighted in blood t. This fero-
city of characer prevailed among all the nations
of New Spain. The Tlafcalans, the people of
Mechoacan, and other states at enmity with the
Mexicans, delighted equally in war, and treated
their prisoners with the fame cruelty. In propor-
tion as mankind combine in fbcial union, and live
under the inHuence of equal laws and regular po.
licy, their manners soften, sentiments of humanity
arise, and the rights of the species come to be un-
derflood. The fierceness of war abates, and even
while engaged in hostility, men remember what
they owe one to another. The savage fights to de-
stroy, the citizen to conquer. The former neither
pities nor pares, the latter has acquired enifibility
that tempers his rage. To this fecnibility the Mex-
icans em to have been perfect strangers, and
among them war was carried on with bo much of
its original barbarity, that we cannot but fhfpedt
their degree of civilization to have been very im-
pcrfcct.

U 2 TH. k

I lcrrra dcc. , 1ib. ii. c. 15. Go)m. Chron. c. z 7.
i v O1 LV.

BOO K THEIR' funeral rites were not less bloody thati

VII. those of the most savage tribes. On the death of
%»- ~ any distinguished perlbnage, epecially of the en-
aTherfune- peror, a certain number of his attendants were

chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate victims were put to death with..
out mercy, and buried in the fame tomb i.

Theiragri- - THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive
cultureim- than that of the roving tribes who trufled chiefly
,,rsea.

to their bow for food, it seems not to havefupplied
them with such subsistence as men require when
engaged in efforts of aive industry. The Spa-
niards appear not to have been firuck with any fu-
periority of the Mexicans over the other people of
America in bodily vigour. Both, according to
their observation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the ftrcngth
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians.
Tfhis they imputed to their feanty diet, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give firm-
ness to the conftitutiont. Such a remark could
hardly have been made with refped to any people
furnished plentifully with the neceflaries of life.
The difficulty which Cortes found in procuring
subsistence for his small body of soldiers, who were
often constrained to live on the spontaneous pro-
ductions of the earth, seems to confirm the re-
mark of the Spanish writers, and gives no high
idea of the state of cultivation in the Mexican em-
pire.

Afarther A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain
proofofthis.appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican

women gave fuck to their children for several

years

* IHrrera,dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18. Gom. Chron. c. 202.
f Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 306. A. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c.
17. dec. z. lib. vi. c. 16.

years, and during that time they did not' cohabit B 0 O K
with their husbands'. This precaution against a VII.
burden onme increase of progeny, though neceffa. r -
ry as I havealready observed, among savages, who,
from the hardships of their condition, and the pre-
carioufnefs of their subsistence, find it impossible
to rear a numerous family, can hardly be supposed
to have continued among a people who lived at cafe
and in abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, whichDoubts con

has been confidered, and with justice, as the moftentofth,
dccifive proof of a considerable progress in regu-emPire.
lar government and police, is one of those fads
in the history of the New World which seems to
have been admitted without due examination or
lufficient evidence. The Spanish historians, in
order to magnify the valour of their countrymen,
are accustomed to represent the dominion of Mon-
tezuma as firetching over all the provinces of New
Spain, from the North to the Southern Ocean.
But a great part of the mountainous country was
possessed by the Otomies, a fierce, uncivilized peo-
ple, who seem to have been the residue of the ori-
ginal inhabitants. The provinces towards the
north and weft of Mexico, were occupied by the
Chichemicas, and other tribes of hunters. None of
these recognized the Mexican monarch as their fu-
perior. Even in the interior or more level country,
there were several cities and provinces which had
never submitted to the Mexican yoke. Tlafcala,
though only twenty-one leagues from the capital
of the empire, was an independent and hostile
republic. Cholula, though still nearer, had been
fubjedted only a short time before the arrival of
the Spaniards. Tepeaca at the distance of thirty

leagues
* Gom. Chron. c. 2o8. Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 6.

293

B O OK leagues from Mexico, seems to have been a fepa-

VII. rate state, governed by its own laws*. Mechoacan,
~'^'1T the frontier of which extended within forty leagues

of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom, remark-
able for its implacable enmity to the Mexican
siamet. By these hostile powers the Mexican em-
pire was circumscribed on every quarter, and the
high ideas which we are apt to form of it from
the description of the Spanifli historians should be
considerably moderated.

litte inter- IN consequence of this independence of several
course a-
mong itsr e- ates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire,
v- aipro- there was not any considerable intercourie between
vinces.

its various provinces. Even in the interior coun-
try, not far distant from the capital, there fecin
to have been no roads to facilitate the communica-
tion of one difrit with another ; and when the
Spaniards first attempted to penetrate into it, they
had to open their way through soress and marshes,.
.C6rtes, in his adventurous march from Mexico to
Hoiduras in 1525, met with obftruions and en-
dured hardships little inferior to those with which
he must have struggled in the most uncivilized re-
gions of America. In some places, he could hard-
ly force a passage through impervious woods, and
plains overflowed with water. In others, he found
so little cultivation, that his troops were frequently
in danger of perifbing by famine. Such fats
icorrefpond ill with the pompous description which
the Spanish writers give of Mexican police and
industry, and convey an idea of a country nearly
similar to that poffefIed by the Indian tribes in
iNorth America. Here and there a trading or a

war

* I-errera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 15. 21. B. Diaz. c. 130.
-1 Herrera, dcc. 3. lib. ii. c. o.
1 B. Diaz. c. 166. c. 176.
294

war-path, as they are called in North America, B O O
led from one settlement to another *, but gene- VII.
rally there appeared no sign of any established ^-r'-
communication, few marks of industry, and no
Ynanument of art,

A o less striking proof of this imperfecion Farther

in their commercial intercourse is their want ofproofofthis.
money, or rome univertal flandard by which to
estimate the value of commodities. The discovery
of this is among the feps of greatest consequence
in the progress of nations. Until it has been
made, all their tranfa&ions must be to aukward,
so operose, and so limited, that we may boldly
pronounce that they have advanced but a little way
in their career. The invention of such a commer-
cial standard is of such high antiquity in our he-
mifphere, and rites so far beyond the era of au-
thentic history, as to appear almost coeval with
the existence of society. The precious metals seem
to have been early employed for this purpose, and
from their permanent value, their divisibility, and
many other qualities, they are better adapted to
serve as a common standard, than any other substance
of which Nature has given us the command. But
in the New World, where there metals abound
most, the use of them was not known. The exi-
gencies of rude tribes, or of monarchies imperfectly
civilized, did not call for it. All their commer-
cial intercourse was carried on by barter, and their
ignorance of any common standard by which to
facilitate that exchange of commodities which con-
tributes so much towards the comfort of life, may
be jutly mentioned as an evidence of the infant
state of their policy. But even in the. New World
the inconvenience of wanting ome general inftru-
mcnt of commerce began to be felt, and some es-

forts
* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

295

B 0 0 K forts were made towards supplying that defect.

VII. The Mexicans, among whom the number and
~'' greatness of their cities gave rife to a more extended

commerce, than in any part of America, had be-
gun to employ a common standard of value, which
rendered smaller tranfladions much more easy. As
chocolate was the favourite drink of' pcrfons in eve-
ry rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao, of
which it is composed, were of luch universal con.
fumption, that, in their statcd markets, thee were
willingly received in return for commodities of
small price, Thus they came to be confidered as
the inftrumcnt of commerce, and the value of what
one wished to difpofc of, was estimated by the num-
ber of nuts of the cacao, which he might expct in
exchange for it. This icems to be the utmost
length which the Americans had advanced towards
the discovery of any cxpedlent for supplying the
use of money. And if the want of it is to be held,
on one hand, as a proof of their barbarity, thiscxz
pedient for supplying that want, should be admitted
on the other, as an evidence no less satisfying, of
the superior progrcfswhich the Mexicans had made
in refinement and civilization.

Doubts con. IN such a rude state were many of the Mexican
cerning the
slate oftheir rovinccs when firit visited by their conquerors,
cities LEven their cities, cxtcnfivc and populous as they

were, seem rather to be the habitation of men just
emerging from barbarity, than the rcfidcnce of a
polished people. The dcl'ription of''l'lalcala near-
ly rcfembles that of an Indian village. A number
of low straggling huts, Icattcrcd about irregularly,
according to tle caprice of' eacl proprietor, built
with turf and stone, and thatched with reeds, with-
out any light but what they received by a door,
so low thatit could not be entered upright *. In

.Mcxico,

H4lerrera, d. . lil). i. c. xz.
296

Mexico, though from the peculiarity of its fitua- B O
tion, the dilpolition of the houses was more orderly, VII.
the iruAcure of the greater part was equally mean. n
Nor docs the fabric of temples and other public Temples,
edifices seem to have been such as entitled them to
the high prailes beflowed upon them by many
Spanilh authors. As far as one can gather from
their obscure and inaccurate deicriptions, the great
temple of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain,
which has been represented as a magnificent build.
ing, railed to such a height, that the ascent to it
was by a flair-cafe of one hundred and fourteen
ftcps, was a solid mass of earth of a iquare form,
laced partly with stone. Its base on each fide ex-
tended ninety feet, aud decreasing gradually as it
advanced in height, it terminated in a quadrangle
ps about thirty feet, where were placed a shrine of
the deity, and two altars on which the victims were
sacrificed . All the other celebrated temples of
New Spain exa6tly resembled that of Mexicot.
Such ftruturcs convey no high idea of progress
in art and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive
that a form more rude and simple could have oc-
curred to a nation, in its first efforts towards erec-
ing any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were displayed, and ther
if we may believe the Spanffi historians, in theIgs.bu
houes of the eperor and in those of the princi-
pal nobility, There some elegance of design was
vilible, and a commodious arrangement of the
apartincnts was attended to. But if buildings cor-
rc'londing to Iuch descriptions had ever existcd in
tlie Mexican cities, it is probable that fomle rc-
niains of them would fiill be visible. From the
ntanner in which Cortes conducted the liege of

Mexico

H' errera, dec. 2. lib. vii.c. l7. t Scc NOTE LVI.
i

297

B O OK Mexico, we can, indeed, easily account for the to.

VII. tal deftrution of whatever had any appearance of

sl splendor in that capital. But as only two centurics
and a half have elapsed since the conquest of New
Spain, it seems altogether incredible, that in a period
so hort, every vcftige of this boasted elegance and
grandeur should have dilappeared; and that in
hone of the other cities, particularly in tliofe
which did not susser by the dcftrudive hand of the
Conquerors, there are not any ruins, which ca be
confidered as monuments of their ancient magni-
ficence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling houses. Thosc which are d.
ftined for holding the council of the tribe, and in
which all assemble on occasions of public festivity,
may be called flately edifices, when compared
with the reft. As among the Mexicans the difiinc-
tion of ranks was elablilhed, and property wn';
unequally divided, the number of diflinguihcd
firutures in their towns, would of course be great-
er than in other parts of America. But these fccm
not to have been either so solid or magnificent as to
merit these pompous epithets which ome Spanilf
authors employ in describing them. It is proba.
ble that, though more ornamcntcd, and built on a
larger scale, they were erectcd with the fame flight
materials which the Indians employed in their coin
mon buildings , and time, in a space much Ici
than two hundred and fifty years, may have flcp
away all remains of them t.

I'KOM this enumeration of facts, it fccns, 1upo

she whole to be cvident, that the slate of lbcicly ii
Mexico was confidcrably advanced beyond tlia.

1

t See NOTE LVfI.
298

" See NOT'IE L.VIL

of the savage tribes which we have delineated. B O O K
But it is no less manifest, that with refpet to many VII.
particulars, the Spanish accounts of their pro-refs '.r~
appear to be highly erbellifhed. There is not a
more frequent or a more fertile source of deception
in describing the manners and arts of savage na-
tions, or of such as are imperfetly civilized, than
that of applying to them the names and phrases
appropriated to the infiitutions and refinements of
polificd life. When the leader of a fall tribe, or
the head of a rude community, is dignified with
the title of king or emperor, the place of his refi-
dcnce can receive no other name but that of his
palace; and whatever his attendants may be, they
nmut be called his court. IUnder such appellations
they acquire an importance and dignity which
does not belong to them. The illusion spreads,
and giving a false colour to every part of the nar-
rative, the imagination is so much carried away
with the refenblaace, that it becomes difficult to
discern objces as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they first touched on the Mexican coast,
were so much firuck with the appearance of at-
tainments in policy and in the arts of life, far Iiu-
pcrior to those of the rude tribes to which they
were hitherto acquainted, that they fancied they
had at length difcovcred a civilized people in the
New World. This comparison between the people
of Mexico and their uncultivated neighbours,
tlcy seem to have kept conflantly in view, and
obfcrving with admiration many things which
marked their pre-eminence, they employ in de-
feribing their iperfelt policy and infant arts, fich
terms as arc applicable to the institutions of inca far
beyond them in improvement. Both there cir-
cuinfiances concur in detracting fiom the credit
due to the early Spanifl descriptions of Mexican
manners. By drawing a parallel between them

and

299

B K and those of people so much less civilized, they raif,

VII. ed their own ideas too high. By their mode of d.
'-'-' fcribingthemi, they conveyed ideas to others roles

exalted abovc truth. Later wrictrs have adopted
the lyle of the criginal hitforians, and improved
upon it. The colours with which De Solis delieatc
the chara6ter of Montezuma, the iplendour of his
court, the la.s and policy of his empire, are t-
fame that he must have employed in exhibiting to
view the monarch andinftitutions of an highly po.
lilicd people.

BUT though we may admit, that the wartn

imagination of the Spanifl writers has added
some embellishment, to their defcriptious tis
will not justify the decisive and percmltory
tone, with which several authors pronounce aii
their accounts of the Mexican power, policy, and
laws, to be the fictions of men who wished to c,.
ceive, or who delighted in the marvellous. 'lhcre
are few historical acis that can be ascertained br
evidence more unexceptionable, than may be prc.
duced in support of the material articles, in the
description of the Mexican constitution and inai
ners. Eye-witnesses relate what they had beheld,
men who had rcfidcd among the Mexicans both
before and after the conqucit, dcfcribe inlitutios
and customs which were similar to them, perlii
of ifch different professions, that objects mull hae
prelcnted thcmflves to their view under every a-
rious alpcct, soldiers, priefis, and lawyers, all con.
cur in their tcfliilony. Had Cortes vcnlutill t
impofc upon lIIs Iobcrcign, by exhibiting to lillla
pidurc of imaginary manners, there wanted lot
enemies and rivals who were qualified to d(c
tct his deceit, and who would have rejoiced il
cxpofing it. But according to the js rcnialk
of an ahor, wlioe ingeniuity has illultrated, alld
whose clot;ljncc ;,as adorned the hiflory of Aiiic.

rirCi,
3co

sca , this supposition is in itself as improba- BO 0 J
lc, as the attempt would have been audacious. VII
\\ ho, among the dcftroyers of this great cmpire '- "'
V as lo enliglhtclcd by science, or lb attentive to the
1rogrcfs and operations of nc ill fociallifc, as to
iraime a fictitious fsem of policy, so well corn.-
bined and o confiftclt, as that which they deli-
neate in thcir accounts of the Mexican goveri-
mucut ? \Where could they have borrowed the idca
of many institutions in legifation and police, to
which, at that periol, there was nothing parallel
n the nations with which they were acquainted '
There was not, at the beginning of the fixtecntb
century, a regular efcablifhment of posts for con-
veying intelligence to the fovercign of any king-
dom in Europe. The ame oblervation will apply
towhat. they relate, with refpet to the ftruaure of
the city of Mexico, the regulations concerning its
police, and :various laws eitablifhed for the admi-
niftration of justice, or securing the happincis of
the community. ~W5hoevcr is accuflomed to con-
template the pr.ogress of nations,. will often, at
very early ilages of it, difcovcr a premature and
unexpcted dawn of thote ideas, which give rife
to0infitutions, that are the pride and ornament of
its most advanced period. Even in a fltate as im-
perfectly polished as the Mexican empire, the hap-
py genius of fbine sagacious obfcrver, excited or
aided by circumflances unknown to us, may have
introduced inflitutions which are fcldonl found but
inlbcicties highly refined. But it is alnoil impol-
fiblc that the illiterate conquecrors of the New
Worlid should have brnecd, in any one instance;
conception of cufloms and laws beyond the
hndard of iiprovment in their own age and
:initry. Or if Cortes and his followers had been
:apablc of this, what inducement had those )b

whom[1
M. l'Abbe Raynal ift. Philol. & Polit. &c. iii. 127.

B 0 0 K whom they were superseded to continue the dccen.

vII. tion? Why hould Corita, or Motolinea, or Acofia,
''T^^ have amused their fovercign or their fellow-citizens

with a tale purely fabulous?

Religionof IN one particular, however, the guides w0om
ne'xi- we mufl follow have represented the Mexicans o

be more barbarous perhaps than they really were.
Their religious tenets, and the rites of-their wor.
ship, arc describcd by them as wild and cruel in
an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies IJo
considerable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any uperior power are ob.
fcure, and his acred rites few and fimplc, was
formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular fivf
tem, with its complete train of priests, templcs,
vicims, and festivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the slate of the Mexicans was very dif.
fercnt from that of the ruder American tribes.
But from the extravagance of their religious no.
tions, or the barbarity of their rites, no concl:.
sion can be drawn with certainty concerning the
degree of their civilization. For nations, long
after their ideas began to enlarge, and their man.
ners to refine, adhere to systems of fuperflition,
founded on the rude conceptions of early ages.
From the genius of the Mexican religion, we may,
however, form a most juit conclusion with refpcct
to its influence upon. the chara6ter of the people
The alpe6t of superstition in Mexico was gloomy
and atrocious. Its divinities were cloathed will:
terror, and delighted in vengeance. They were
exhibited to the people under dcteftable ornm
that created horror. The figures of ferpcnts
of tygcrs, and of other deflructivc animals, de
corated their temples. Fear was the only prii!
ciple that inspired their votaries. Fais, mnor'
fications, and penances, all rigid, and many
them excruciating to an extreme degree, s'cr

ll
jot

,ie means which they employed to appease their B 0o K
ikrath, and they never approached their altars vii.
without sprinkling them with blood drawn from '-,--~
thcir own bodies. But, of all offerings, human
sacrifices were deemed the moIt acceptable. This
religious belief, mingling with the implacable spirit
of vengeance, and adding new force to it, every
captive taken in war was brought to the temple,
was devoted as a victim to the deity, and sacrificed
with rites no less bolcmn than cruel:. The heart
and head were the portion conlecrated to the gods;
the warrior by whose prowcls the priibncr had been
fcized, carried off the body to feast upon it with
his friends. Under the impression of ideas so
dreary and terrible, and accuflomed daily to fcencs
ofbloodfhed rendered awful by religion, the heart
of man must harden, and be steeled to every senti-
mcnt of humanity. The spirit of the Mexicans
was accordingly unfeeling and atrocious. The gc-
nius of their religion so far counterbalanced the in-
fluence of policy and arts, that, notwithfanding
their progress in both, their manners, intlead of
softening, became more fierce. To what circum-
frances it was owing that fuperflition airmed fihch
a dreadful form among the Mexicans, we have not
fufficicnt knowledge of their history to determine.
But its influence is visible, and produced an effea
that is ingular in the history of the human species.
The manners of the people in the New World,
who had made the grcatell progress in the arts of
policy, were the nolt ferocious, and the barbarity
of bfone of their customs exceeded even tholc of
the tivagc slate.

TI'E empire of Peru boars of an higher antiqui- Prc-tenfio
ty than that of Mexico. According to the traditi- .o ',igh .,.

onary tquity,

* Con. Relat. ap. Rmuf. iii. 240, &c. B. Diaz, c. 8z.

Acota, lib. v. c. 13, &c. Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii c. z1, &c.
Goallra Chron. c. o, cc. S:e NOTE LIX.

3,"3

B O K 6niry accounts collected by the Spaniards it hat

Vii. subsisted four hundred years, under twelve ucce.
s~~w five monarchs. But the knowledge of their an.

cient flory, which the Peruvians could eomrnuni.
cate to their conquerors, must have been both i.
uncertain, perfect and uncertain . Like the other Amerl.

can nations, they were totally unacquainted with
the art of writing, and deflitute of the only means
by which the memory of past tranfadtions can be
preserved with any degree of accuracy. Even among
people to whom the use of letters is known, the
era where the authenticity of history conlmcn cs,
.is much pofierior to the introduction of writing.
That noble invention continued long fbfervient to
the common business and wants of life, before i.
was employed in recording events, with a view of
conveying information from one age to another.
But in no country did ever tradition alone carry
down historic knowledge, in any full continued
stream, during a period of half the length that the
monarchy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

Jefets in THE Qipos, or knots on cords of different co-
their re- lours, which are celebrated by authors fond of th
cords by
~ivpo' marvellous, as if they had been regular annals of

the empire, imperfectly supplied the pace of 'rit-
ing. According to the obscure defeription of thini
by Acofta-t, which Garcilaffo de la Vea h3a
adopted with little variation, and no inprovcercet,
the quipos fcem to have been a device for rndcr-
ing calculation more expeditious and accurate
By the various colours different objc6ts were lde
noted, and byeach knot a diftin6t number. 'hus
an account was taken, and a kind. of rcgiftcr kcpt,
of the inhabitants'in each province, or of the I'Vc-
ral productions collected there for public ulc. ]B
as these knots however varied or combined no 1,0-

r..l

Se NIlia. lit. v. C. 8.
304

* See NOTE LX,

abftrat idea, no operation or quality of the mind B 0 0 K
could be represented, they contributed little to- VII.
wards preserving the memory of ancient events -
and institutions. The Mexican paintings and
symbols, rude as they were, conveyed to them
more knowledge of remote tranfa&tions, than the
Peruvians could derive from their boasted quipos.
Had they been even of more extensive use, and
better adapted to supply the placeof written records,
they perilfhed tb generally, together with the other
monuments of the Peruvian ingenuity, in the ge-
neral wreck occasioned by the Spanish conqucil,
and the civil wars subsequent to it, that no accef-
sion of light or knowledge comes from them. All
the zeal of Garcilaflb de la Vega for the honour of
that race of monarchs from whom he descended, all
the industry of his researches, and the superior ad-
vantages with which he carried them on, opened no
source of information unknown to the Spanish au-
thors who wrote before him. In his Royal Com-
mentaries, he confines hirfelf to illustrate what they
had related concerning the antiquities and inftitu-
tions of Peru *; and his illuflrations, like their ac-
counts, are derived entirely from the traditionary
tales current among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de-

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquclls, and private character of the
early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon no-
thing in their story, as authentic but a few fa6ts,
so interwoven in the systen of their religion and
policy, as preserved the memory of them from be-
ing loft; and upon the defeription of luch customs
and institutions as continued in force at the time
of the conquest, and fell under the immediate

Vo L. I. X oblcrvation

* Lib. i. c. iQ.

305

B O 0 K observation of the Spaniards. By attending care.

VII. fully to these, and endeavouring to separate them
vr~' from what appears to be fabulous, or of doubtful

authority. I have laboured to form an idea of the
Peruvian government and manners;

Origin of :THE people of Peru, as I have already obferv-
their civil
policy. ed *, had not advanced beyond the udeft form of

savage life, when Manco Capac, and his consort
Mama Ocollo, appeared to inftrut and civilize
them Who these extraordinary personages were,
whether they imported their system of legislation
and knowledge of arts from some country more
improved, or, if natives of Peru, how they ac-
quired ideas so far superior to those of the people
whom they addressed, are circumstances with re-
fpe& to which the Peruvian tradition conveys no in-
formation. Manco Capac and his consort, taking
advantage of the propensity in the Peruvians to fu-
perftition, and particularly of their veneration for
the Sun, pretended to be children of that glorious
luminary, and to deliver their infitruions in his
name and authority. The multitude listened and
believed. What reformation in policy and man-
tiers the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of
their empire, and how, from the precepts of the
Inca and his consort, their ancestors gradually ac-
quired some knowledge of those arts, and some re-
lifh for that industry, which render fubfiftcnce fe-
cure, and life comfortable, hath been formerly re-
lated. Those blessings were originally confined
Within narrow precin6ts ; for the authority of the
first Inca did not reach many leagues beyond Cuzco.
But, in process oftime, his 'ucccfforsextended their
dominion over all the regions that firetch to the
weft of the Andes from Chili to Quito, establish-

ing
* Book vi. p. 163, &c.

ing in every province their peculiar policy and re- B o o K
ligious institutions. VII.

THE molt singular and firiking circumstance in--%

the Peruvian government is the influence of reli- rounedI
gion upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas
make ilch a feeble impression on te mind of a
savage, that their effc6 upon his fentincnts and
manners are hardly perceptible. Among the Mex-
icans, religion reduced into a regular system, and
holding a considerable place in their public intti-
tutions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in form-
ing the peculiar character of that people. But
in Peru, the whole system of civil policy was
founded on religion. The Inca appeared not
only as a legislator, but as the messenger of Hea-
ven. His precepts were received not merely as
the injuntions of a superior, but as the mandates
of the Deity. His race was held to be faored;
and in order to prctfrve it diftint without being
polluted by any nixture of inferior blood, the
ions of Manco Capac married their own filters,
and no person was ever admitted to the throne,
who could not claim it by such a pure descent.
To thofc Children of the Sun, (for that was the apr
pellation bellowed upon all the offspring of the
firlf Inca) the people looked up with the reve-
rence due to beings of a superior order. ' They
were deemed to be under the immediate protec-
tion of the deity from whom they issued; and by
him every order of the reigning Inca was 'uppoicd
to be di&ated.

FROM tho'e ideas tw. consequences resulted. Twor-

The authority of the [ca was unlimited and ablb- ~kslto.
lute, in the moPt extcniive neaning of the words.
Whenever the decrees of a prince arc confidered
as the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an
adt of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or op-

X 2 pose

B 0 K pose his will. Obedience becomes a duty of relic

VII. gion; and as it would be prbfane to controul a mo-

'^^r narch under the guidance of Heaven, and pre-
Theafofthe fumptuos io advise him, nothing remains but to

submit with implicit refpeet. This must necessarily
be the effect of every governtent established on
preterifions of intertcourfc with ftperior powers.
Such accordingly was the blind fubmiiion which
the Peruvians yielded to their fokereigns. The
persons of highest rank and greatest power in theit
dominidon acknowledged them to be of a more
exalted nature and in testimony f this, when
admitted into their presence, they entered with a
burden upbn their houlders, as an emblem of their
servitude, and illingnefs to bear whatever the
Inca was pleased to impose. Among their fubjcds,
force was not requisite to second their commands.
Every officer etrufted With the execution of them
Was revered, and, according to the account of an
intelligent observer of Peruvian manners *, might
proceed alone from one extremity of the empire
to another, without meeting opposition; for, on
producing a fringe from the royal Borla, an or-
nament peculiar to the reigning Inca, the lives and
fortunes of the people were t his difpohal.

Allcrimes ANOTHER confcquence of establishing govern-
puiedca ment in Peru on the foundation of religion, was,

that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were not confidered as trangreflions of human laws,
but as insults offered to the Deity. Each, without
any dillinElion between such as were flight and
such as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and
could be expiated only by the blood of the
offender. Consonantly to the fame ideas, punish-
ment followed the trclpafs with inevitable cer-

tailty,
* Zarate, lib. i.c. . 3.

inty, because an offence againfl Heaven wa B O K
deemed such an high enormity as could not be par- VII.
doned". Among a people of corrupted morals, '
maxims ofjurifprudence bo evere and unrelenting,
by rendering men ferocious and desperate, would
be more apt to multiply crimes than toreftrain them.
But the Peruvians, of simple manners and unfuf-
picious faith, were held in such awe by this rigid
discipline, that the number of offenders were ex.
tremely small. Veneration for mponarchs, enlight-
ened and dircated, as they believed, by the divi-
nity whom they adored, prompted them to their
duty; the dread of punishment which they were
taught to confider as unavoidable engeance in-
flieted by pffended Heaven, withheld them from
evil.

THE fyfiem of fuperfitiop op which the Incas.Mid genis

ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority, of their re.
was of a genius very different from that eftabliflied lIo.
among the Mexicans. Manco apqc turned the
veneration of his followers ntirely towards na-
tpral objets. The Sun, as the great source of
light, of joy and fertility in the creation, attracted
their principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as
co-operating with him, were entitled to secondary
honours. Wherever the propensity in the human
iind to acknowledge and to adpre some superior
power, takes this diretion, and is employed in
contemplating the order and beneficence that really
exist in nature, the spirit of fuperfititf is mild.
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
and the fears of men, are supposed to preside in
nature, and become the objets of worship, super-
ftition always affunies a wilder and more atrocious
form. Of the latter we have an example among

the
* Vega, lib. ii. c. 6.

B O O Khe Mexicans, of the former among the people of

VII. Peru. They had not, indeed, made fuph progrels
-rT-'½ in obferyation or inquiry, a to have attained' just

conceptions of the Deity; nor was there i their
language any proper name or appellation of the
Supreme power, which intimated that they had
formed any idea of him as the Creator and Gover-
nor of the World .. ut by direting their vene-
ration to that glorious luminary, which, by its
univerfa and' vivifying energy, is the befi emblem
of divine beneficence, the rites and observances
which they deemed acceptable to hilm re inno-
cent and humane. TI'hcy offered to the Sun a part
of those productions which his genial warmth had
called forth from 'the bosom of the earth, and rear-
ed to maturity; They sacrificed, as an oblation of
gratitude, bme of the animals who were indebted
to his in'fluence for nourifhmept. They presented
to him choice specimens of hose works of ingcnu-
ity which his light had guided the hand of man
in forming. But the Incas never slained his altars
with humfan blood, nor could they conceive that
their beneficent father the Sun would be delighted
with such horrid viiamsnt. Thus the Peruvians,
unacquainted with those barbarous rites which cx-
tinguifh sensibility, and suppress the feelings of na-
ture at the fight of human sufferings, were formed
by the pirit of the fuperfition which they had
adopted, to a national chara6ler more gentle than
that of any people in America.

Itsinfluence ITs influence operated even upon their civil in-
in civil ftitutions, and tended to corre& in them any thing

that was advcrfe to gentleness of character. The
dominion of the Incas, though the mofl absolute of
all despotisms, was mitigated by its alliance with

religion.

t See NOTE LXL
* Acosta, lib. v. c. 3.

religion. The mind was not humbled and depress- B 0 O K
ed by the idea of a forced fubjetion to the will of VII.
a superior; obedience, paid to one who was be- -
lieved to be cloathed with divine authority, was
willingly yielded, and implied no degradation.
The sovereign, conscious that the submissive re-
verence of his pepple flowed from their belief of
his heavenly descent, was continually reminded of
a diftin&ion which prompted him t imitate that
beneficent power which he was fupppfed to repre,
sent. In consequence of those impressions, there
hardly occurs in the traditional history of Peru,
any instance of rebellion againfl the reigning
prince, and, among twelve successive monarchs,
there was not one tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, ndufeon

were carried on with a spirit very different fromther milm-
that of other American nations. They fought,
not like savages, t defitroy and exterminate; or,
like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities
with human sacrifices. They conquered in order
to reclaim and civilize the vanquished, and to dif-
fuse the knowledge of their own institutions and
arts. Prisoners seem not to have been exposed to
the insults and tortures, which were their lot i.
every part of the New World. The Incas took
the people whom they subdued under their pro-
teEtion, and admitted them to a participation of
all the advantages enjoyed by their original sub-
J;cts. This practice, so repugnant to American fe-
rocity, and resembling the humanity of the most
polished nations, must be acribed, like other pe-
culiarities which we have observed in the Pruyian
manners, to the genius of their religion. The n-
cas, confidering the homage paid to any objec but
the heavenly powers which they adored, as impi-
pus, were fond of gaining proselytes to their fa..

vourite

B 0 o Kvouritefyftem. Theidolsof every conquered pro-

vII. vince were carried in triumph to the great temple
vr-' of Cuzco *, and placed there as trophies of the lu-

perior power of the divinity'who was the protetor
ofthe empire. The people were treated ith le-
nity, and inftruLed in the religious tenets of their
new mafterst, that the conqueror might have the
glory of having added to the number of the vota-
ties of his 'fahrthethe Sun.

Pftauproa THE slate of property in Peru, was no lets fin-
perty. gular than that of religion, and contributed, like-

wile, towards giving a mild turn of character to
the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three' hares. One was confc-
crated to the Sun, and whatever it produced was
applied towards the eretion of temples, and fur-
nifhing what was requisite towards celebrating the
public rites of religion. The other belonged to
the Inca, and was set apart as the provifion'made
by the community for the upport of government.
The third and largest share was reserved for the
maintenance'of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. No person, however, had a right
of exclusive property in the portion allotted to him.
He possessed it only for a year, at the expiration of
which a new division was made in proportion to
the rank, the number, and exigencies of each fa.
mily. All those lands were cultivated by thejoint
indufiry of the community. The people, fum-
moned by a proper officer, repaired in a body to
the fields, and performed their common talk, while
songs and inulial instruments cheered them to

ffeea, of their labour. '

By this singular distribution of ter-
"is. ritory, as well as'by the mode of cultivating it, the

idea of a common interest, and of mutual fublrc.

viency

Herrcra, der. 5.. lib. iv. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. 12.

t Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. 8. t Herrera, dec. 5 lib.

iv. c. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. 5
312

viency was continually inculcated. Each indivi- B O O K
dual felt his connecti6n with those around him, VII.
and knew that he depended on their friendly aid ^-r
for what incrcafe he was to reap. A ate thus con-
iituted may be confidered as one great family, in
which the union of members was so complete, and
the exchange of good offices so perceptible, as to
create ftrqnger attachment, and to bind man to man
in closer intercourse, than subsisted under any form
of society established in America. From this re-
ulted gentle manners, and mild virtues unknown
in the avage fiatc, and with which the Mexicans
were little acquainted.

BUT though the institutions of the Incas were so Inequalityo

framed as to strengthen the bonds of affetion ranks
among their subjects, there was great inequality in
their condition. The diftirStion of ranks was
fully established in Peru. A great body of the in-
habitants under the denomination of Yanaconas,
were held in a state of servitude. Their garb and
bouSes were of a frm different from those of free-
men. Like the Tamemes of Mexico, they were
employed in carrying burdens, and in performing
every other work of drudgery *. Next to them in
rank, were such of the people as were free, but
diftingui(hed by no official or hereditary honours.
Above them were railed those whom the Spaniards
call Orejones, from the ornaments worn in their
pars. They formed what may be denominated the
orderof nobles, and in peace, a well as war, held
every office of power or trufi t. At the head of all
were the children of the Sun, who, by their high
defeent, and peculiar privileges, were as much cx-
alted above the Orejones, as they were elevated
beyond the people.

Sucii

* Herrera, dec. 5, lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8. -- Herrera,
dec. . lib. iv. c. .

313

B O O K Suc a form of ocic.ty, from the union of its

VII. members, as well as from the diftinaion in their

^'Yr' aranks, was favourable to progress in the arts. But
Stateofarts. the Spaniards, having been acquainted with the

improved itate of various arts in Mexico, several
years before they discovered Peru, were not b
much firuck with what they observed in the latter
country, and describe the appearances of ingenu-
ity there with less warmth of admiration. The
Peruvians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond
the Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life,
and in such as have some title to the name of ele-
gant.

Improved IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necef.
culturo.a' fity in social life, was more extensive, and car-

ried on with greater kill than in any part of'
America. The Spa :iards, in their progress thro'
the country, were lo fully supplied with provi.
lions of every kind, that in the relation of their
adventures we meet with pone of those dismal
scenes of difirefs occasioned by famine, in which
the conquerors of Mexico were so often involved,
The quantity of foil under cultivation was not left
to the di'cretion of individuals, but regulated by
public authority in proportion to the exigencies of
the community. Even tle calamity of an unfruit-
ful eaftbo was but little felt, for the producE of the
lands cnfecrated to the Sun, as well as those fc
apart for the Inca, being depolited in the Tambos,
or public storehouses, it remained there as a flatcd
provision for times of scarcity . As the extent of
cultivation was determined with such provident
attention to the demands of the slate, the inven-
tion and industry of the. Peruvians were called
forth to extraordinary exertions, by certain dc-

fcds
314

AiZarte,' ib. i. c. 1. Vega, lib. i. c. 8.

fels peculiar to their climate and foil. All the B 0 0 K
valt rivers: that flow from the Andes take their VII
courle eastward to the Atlantic ocean. Peru is ~
xwatcred only by some fireams which rush down
from the mountains like torrents. A great part of
the low ountry is sandy and barren, and never
reirefhed with rain. In order to render such an
ulpronliflng region fertile, the ingenuity of the
Pcruvians had recourse to various expedients. By
means of artificial canals, conduted, with much
patience and considerable art, fron the torrents
that poured across their country, they conveyed a
regular supply of moisture to their fields *. They
enriched the foil by manuring it with the dung of
sea-fowls, of which they found an inexhaustible
store on all the islands scattered along their coafis t
In describing the customs of any nation thoroughly
civilized, such practices would hardly draw atten-
tion, or be mentioned as in any degree remarka-
ble, but in the history of the improvident race of
men in the New World, they are entitled to notice
as singular proofs of industry and of art. The use
ps the plough, indeed, was unknown to the Peru-
vians. They turned up the earth with a kind of
mattock of hard wood* . Nor was this labour
deemed so degrading as to be devolved wholly
~pon the women. Both sexes joined in perform-
ing this neceflary work. Even the childrenof the
Sun set an example of indufiry,. by cultivating a
field near Cuzco with their own hands, and they
dignified this funcqion by denominating it their
triumph over the earth §.

THE

* Zarate, lib. i. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. . & 24.. *I Acofta,
ib. iv. c. .37. Vega, lib. v. c. 3. See NO T E LXII-
t Zarate, lib. . c. 8, !
Vega, lib, v. c. z.

315

O OO K THE uperior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob.
VII. vious, likewile, in the conftruaion of their houtes
"""-' and public buildings. In the extensive plains
Third which firetch along the Pacific Ocean, where the

fiy is perpetually ierene, and the climate ild,
their houfcs were very properly of a fabric ex.
tremely flight. But in the higher regions, where
rain falls, where the vicissitude of fealbns is known,
and their rigour felt, they were conftruted with
greater solidity. They were generally of a Iquare
form, the walls about eight feet high, built with
bricks hardened in the fun, the door low and
firait, and without any windows. Simple as these
firu&ures were, and rude as the materials may
ieem to be of which they were formed, they were
so durable, that many of them still subsist in dif-
ferent parts of Peru, long after every monument
that might have conveyed to us any idea of the do.
meftic slate of the other American nations has va-
niihcd frQro the face of the earth. But it was in
the temples consecrated to the Sun, and in the
buildings deflined for the residence of their nio-
narchs, that the Peruvians displayed the utnioft
extent of their art and contrivance. The deflrip-
tious of them by fiich of the Spanish writers as had
an opportunity of contemplating them while, in
tome measure, entire, might have appeard highly
exaggerated, if the ruins which still rcmain did
not voutch the truth of their relations. Thcl
ruins of sacred or royal buildings are found in
every proyince of the empire, and by their fre-
qucncy dcnionftiatc that they are monuments of a
pswcrful people, who imuft have lhbfifted, during
a period of lbmiii extent, in a slate of no inconfidc-
rablc improvement. They appear to have been
elifices various in their dimensions. Some o' a
moderate size, many of ininenfe extent, all re-

imarkable
3!6

markable for solidity, and resembling each other B 0 0 K
in the stile of architecure. The temple of Pa- VII.
chacamac, together with a palace of the Inca, and s
a fortrcfs, were so connected together as to form
one great firufture, above half a league in circuit,
In this prodigious pile, the fame singular taste in
bdilding is conspicuous as in other works of the
Peruvians. As they were unacquainted with the
use of the pulley, and other mechanical poWers,
and could not elevate the large tlones and bricks
whichthey employed in building to any confidera-
ble height, the walls of this edifice, in which they
seem to have made their greatest effort towards
magnificence, did not rife above twelve feet from
the ground. Though they had not discovered the
ule of mortar or of any other cement in building,
the bricks or stones were joined with so much
nicety, that the feamns can hardly be discerned .
The apartments, as far as the distribution of them
can be traced in the ruins, were ill-difpofed, and
afforded little accommodation. There was not a
single window in any part of the building; and as
no light could enter but by the door, all the apart-
ments of largest dimension mufl either have been
perfectly dark, or illuminated by some other
nicans. But with all these and many other imper-
fedions that might be mentioned, in their art of
building, the works of the Peruvians which still
remain must be confidered as stupendous efforts of
a people unacquainted with the ue of iron, and
convey to us an high idea of the power possessed
by their ancient monarchs.

TiiilsE, however, were not the noblest or most TheirpubUt
ufcful works of the Incas. The two great roadsr°d"'
fromn Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninterrupt-

ed
* See NOTE LXIII.

317

B co i ed firetch above five hundred leagues, are entitled

VII. to till higher praise. The one was conduted
"'~-'' through the interior and mountainous country, the

other through the plains on the sea-coast. From
the language of admiration in which some of the
early writers express their aftonilhment when they
first viewed those roads, and from the more porn.
pous deferiptions of later writers, who labour to
support some favourite theory concerning America,
one might be led to compare this work of the Incas
to the famous military ways which remain as mo-
numents of the Roman power: But in a country
where there was no tame animal except the Llama,
which was never used for draught, and but little as
a beast of burden, where the high roads were seldom
trod by any but a human foot, no great degree of
labour and art was requisite in forming them. The
Peruvian roads were only fifteen feet in breadth-,
and in many places so slightly formed that time loon
effaced every vestige of the course in which they ran.
In the low country little more seems to have been
done than to plant trees, or to fix posts at certain
intervals, in order to mark the proper route to tra-
vellers. To open a path through the mountainous
country was a more arduous task. Eminences were
levelled, and hollows filled up; and, for the pre-
servation of the road, it was fenced with a bank of
turf. At proper distances, Tambos, or ftorehouies,
were eretcd for the accommodation of the Inca
and his attendants, in his prbgrefs through his
dominions. From the manner in which the road
was originally formed in this higher and more im-
pervious region, it has proved more durable; and
though, from the inattention of the Spaniards to
every object but that of working their mines, no-
thing has been done towards keeping it in repair,

its

* Cieca, c. 60.
3t8

319

its course mayftill be traced '. Such was the cele- B o o K
bratcd road of the Incas; and even from this de- VI.
scription, divested of every circumstance of mani- «r
felt exaggeration, or of ufpicious aspect, it must
be confidered as a firiking proof of an extraordi-
naryprogrefs in improvement and policy. To the
savage tribes of America, the idea of facilitating
communication with places at a diflance had never
occurred. To the Mexicans it was hardly known.
Even in the most civilized countries of Europe,
men had advanced far in refinement, before it be-
came a regular object of national police to form
such roads as render intercourse commodious.

Ti formation of those roads introduced ano- and bridgtc
ther improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the reft of America. In its course from south
to north, the road of the Incas was interfeded by
all the torrents which roll from the Andes towards
the Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their
course, as well as from the frequency and violence
of their inundation, there were unnavigable. Some
expedient, however, was to be found for passing
them. The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance
with the use of arches, and their inability to work
in wood, could not conflrut bridges either of
fione or timber. But necefity, the parent of in-
vention, suggestcd a device which supplied that de-
fest. They formed cables of great firength, by
twisting together some of the pliable withs or osiers,
with which their country abounds; fix of which
theyftretched across the fiream parallel to one ano-
ther, and made them fat on each fide. Theic they
bound firmly together by interweaving finaller
ropes so clolc, as to form a compact piece of net-
work, which, being covered with branches of trees

and

' Xerez, p. 189, 191. Zaraic, lib. i. c. 13, 14. Vega,
libi. c. 3. Bouguer Voyage, p. o5. Ulloa Entretenemi-
"lI0o, p. 365.

BO O K and earth, they passed along it with tolerable iecu-

VII. rity *. Proper persons were appointed to attend
V-pr' at each bridge, to keep them in repair, and to aift

paffengerst. In the level country, here the ri.
vers became deep and broad and still, they are
pafied in Balzas, or floats; in the conftrudion, as
well as navigation of which, the ingenuity of the
Peruvians appears to be far superior to that of any
people in America, These had advanced no far-
ther in naval skill than the use of the paddle, or
oar; the Peruvians ventured to raise a mast, and
spread a fail, by means of which their Balzas not
only went nimbly before the winds but could veer
and tack with great celerity ;

Mode of re- NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians
fining silver confined solely to objets of eflential utility. They

had made some progress in arts, which may be
called elegant. They poffefled the precious me.
tals in greater abundance than any people of Ame.
rica. They obtained gold in the fame manner with
the Mexicans, by searching in the channels of ri-
vers, or washing the earth in which particles of it
were contained. But in order to procure ilvcr,
they exerted no inconsiderable degree of skill and
invention. They had not, indeed, attained thel
art of finking a shaft into the bowels of the earth,
and penetrating to the riches concealed there; but
they hollowed deep caverns on the banks of rivers,
and the tides of mountains, and emptied such veins
as did not dip suddenly beyond their reach.
other places, where the vein lay near the furfacc,
they dug pits to such a depth, that the pcrfon who
worked below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in baskets§. They had difcovcred the art

of

* NOTE LXIV. t Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 367, B. Za,

rate, lib. i. c. 14. Vcga, lib. iii. c. 7, 8. Hcrrera, dec. v
lib. iv. c. 3, 4. 1 UlloL Voy. i. 176, &c. Kamuli
iii. 414, A.
320

of fneclting and refining this, either by the simple B O O K
application of fire, or whcre the ore was more VIr
flubborn, and impregnated with foreign fubfian- ^i
ces, by placing it on finall ovens or furnaces on
high grounds, tb artificially constru&ed, that the
draught of' air performed the iuntlion ofa bellows,
a machine, with which they were totally unac-
quainted. By this filmple device, the purer ores
were smeltcd with such facility, that the quantity
of iilver in Peru was to considerable, that many of
the utensils employed in the functions of common
life were made of it *. Several ofthole veifcls and
trinkets are laid to have merited no finall degree of
cftiniation, on account of the neaLcels of the work-
inanilip, as well as the intrinsic value of the mate-
rials. But as the conquerors of America were well
acquainted with the latter, but had fcareely any
conception of the former, most of them were melt-
eddown, and rated according to their weight and
fineness in the division of te spoil.

1N other works of mere curiosity, or ornament, Works of

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many c"gance.
of these havebeen dugout ofthe Guacas, or mounds
of earth, with wlhich they covered the bodies of
the dead. Among these are mirrors of various
dinienfions, of hard shining stones highly plith-
cd; veffcls of earthen ware of different forms;
hatchets, and other infiruments, fotne dc:.iced for
war, and others ftr labour. Some verc si iiut,
ionlc ol'copper, hardened to l;uch a degree by an
unknown procels, as to fipply the place uo iron
on l'evcral occasions. Had thc use of thele tools
lrliecd of copper been general, the rogrefs of
tii P'eruvians in the arts might have been fich, as

VOL. ii. Y to

* Acofta, lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Vcg;; 1. i. lib. vii. c. 25. Uioa
ErIntr:cn. 258.

. 32

B0 o K to emulate that of more cultivated nations. But

VIL. either the metal was so rare, or the operation by
%-^r^ which it was hardened io tedious, that their inrtin-

ments of copper were few, and so extremcly inaai!,
that they seem to have been employcd only ill
flighter works. But even to such a circumiicribcd
use of this imperfect metal, the Pcruvians wvre i-
debted for their uperiority to the other people of
America in various arts *. The fame obfcrvation,
however, may be applied to them, which I former-
ly made with respect to the arts of the Mexicans.
From several specimens of Peruvian utensils and
ornaments, which are deposited in the royal cabi-
net in Madrid, and from some preservcd in diffe.-
rent colledlions in other parts of Europe, I have
reason to believe, that the workmanship is more to
be admired on account of the rude tools with which
it was executed, than on account of its intrinsic
neatness and elegance; and that the Peruvians,
though the mofl improved of all the Americans,
were not advanced beyond the infancy of arts.
Animptr- BUT notwithstanding so many circumstances,

,1c.vi za which fcem to indicate an high degree of.improve-

ment in Peru, others occur that suggest the idea
of a society fill in the first flages of its transition
from barbarism to civilization. In all the domi-

Nocitiesbut nions of the Incas, Cuzco was the only place that
CUZco. had the appearance, or was entitled tothe name of

a city. Every where else, the people lived mostly
in detached habitations, dispersed over the country,
or, at the utmost, fettled together in frnall villages f.
But until men are brought to assemble in numerous
bodies, and incorporated in such close union, as
to enjoy frequent intercourse, and to feel mutual
dependence, they never imbibe perfectly the

spirit,

' UTJloa Voy. tom. i. 381, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c-
'1 Zaratc, lib. i. c. 9. ilcrrcra, dec. v. lib. vi. o. 4.

spirit; or assume the manners of social life. In a B 0 0 K
country ofimmente extent, with only one city, the V1I.
progrels of manners, and the improvement either -r
of the necessary or more refined arts, must have
been so flow, and carried on under such difadvan-
tages, that it is more iurprifing the Peruvians hould
have advanced so far in refinement, than that they
did not proceed farther.

IN collcquencc of this state of imperfeEt union, perfc.

the separation of professions in Peru was not fOfeparationof
complete as among the Mexicans. The lefsprofeffi"°n
closely men aflbciate, the more simple are their
manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts
of common and most necefiary use in life do not,
in such a state, become so complex or difficult,
as to render it requisite that men hould be trained
to them by any particular course of education.
All those profeflions were accordingly exer-
cifed by every Peruvian indifcriminatcly. None
but the artists, employed in works of mere curio-
fity or ornament, conitituted a separate order
of men, or were distinguished from other citi-
zens .

FROM the want of cities in Peru, another con-Little corn

sequence followed. There was little commercial mrciain-
intercourse almong the inhabitants of that greattc"rcurf
empire. The aEtivity of commerce is coeval with
the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in con-
fiderable numbers in one place, its operations be-
come vigorous. The citizen mutt depend for tub-
fiflence on the labour of those who cultivate the
ground. They, in return, must receive fomte:

Y z equivalent.

* Atoftl1, lib. vi. c. 15. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Hirrcra, dec.
v . li . v. c. 4.

323

B O O K equivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is eftabliflied,

VII. and the produtions of art are regularly exchang-
'^r~' ed for the fruits of agriculture. In the towns of

the Mexican empire, ltated markets were held, and
whatever could supply any want or desire of man
was an objet of commerce. But in Peru, from the
singular mode of dividing property, and the man-
ner in which the people were fcttlcd, there was
scarcely any species of commerce carried on be-
tween different provinces , and the community
was less acquainted with that ative intercourse,
which is at once a bond of union, and an incen-
tive to improvement.

Unwarlike Btrr the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was
spirit of the
Peruvians. the most remarkable as well as the most fatal de-

sect in their charaters t. The greater part of the
rude nations in America, opposed their invaders
with undaunted ferocity, though with little con-
duet or success. The Mexicans maintained the
firuggle in defence of their liberties, with such
persevering fortitude, that it was with difficulty
the Spaniards triumphed over them. Peru was
subdued at once, and almost without resistance;
and the most favourable opportunities of regaining
their freedom, and crushing their oppressors, were
loft through the timidity of the people. Though
the traditional history of the Peruvians represents
all the Incas as warlike princes, frequently at the
head of armies which they led to victory and 'con-
quest: few symptoms of such a martial spirit ap-
pear in any of their operations fubequent to the
invasion of the Spaniards. The influence, per-
haps, of thofl institutions which rendered their
manners gentle, gave their ninds this unmanly

softness;

Vega, lib. vi. c. 8. 1- Xerez, 90o. Sancho ap.
Ram. iii. 372. Ilerrera, (dec. v. lib. i. c. 3.

softness ; perhaps, the constant serenity and mild- B O o K
pess of the climate may have enervated the vigour VII.
of their frame; perhaps, folme principle in their'-'r
government unknown to us, was the occasion of
this political debility. Whatever may have been'
the cause, the fa6t is certain, and there is not an
inflance in history of any people 'o little advanced
in refinement, so totally dcftitute of military ta-
lents and entcrprife. This character hath de-
fccnded to their posterity. The Indians of Peru
are now more tanie and depressed than any people
of America. The feeble spirits, relaxed in life-
less inaction, seem hardly capable of any bold or
manly exertion.

BUT, besides those capital defeds in the politi-

cal slate of Peru, Iome detached circumstances and
fats occur in the Spanish writers which discover
a considerable remainder of barbarity in their
manners. The fame cruel custom, that prevailed
in ome of the most savage tribes, subsisted among
the Peruvians. On the death of the Incas, and of
other eminent persons, a considerable number of
their attendants were put to death, and interred
around their Guaca, that they might appear in
the next world with their former dignity, and be
served with the fame respect. On the death of
Huana-Capac, the most powerful of their mo-
narchs, above a thousand vitims were doomed
to accompany him to the tomb*. In one par-
ticular, their manners appear to have been more
barbarous than those of most rude tribes. Though
acquainted with the use of fire in preparing maize,
and other vegetables for food; they devoured
both ncfh and fihf perfectly raw, and astonished

the
* Acofla, lib. v. c. 7.

325

i B 0 O K Spaniard, with a pra~ice repugnant to the ideas

VII. of all civilized people .
: ~s BUT though Mexico and Peru are the possessions

nions of ofm Spain in the New World, which, on accoLint
Spain in both of their ancient and present state, have
Ane"ri. attracted the greatest attention; her other domi-

nions there are far from being inconliderable,
either in extent or value. Most of them were re-
duced to fubjetion during the first part of the
sixteenth century, by private adventurers, who
fitted out their small armaments either in Hifpa-
niola, or in Old Spain, and were we to follow
each leader in his progress, we should discover
the fame daring courage, the fame persevering
ardour, the fame rapacious desire of wealth, and
the fame capacity of enduring and surmounting
every thing in order to attain it, which distinguish
ed the operations of the Spaniards in their greater
American cOnquefis. But, instead of entering
into a detail, which, from the similarity of the
tranfa&ions, would appear almost a repetition of

, .r fr what has been already related, I shall satisfy my-
veyof them. self with fich a view of those provinces of the

Spanish empire in America, which have not hither-
to been mentioned, as may convey to my readers
a more adequate idea of its greatness, fertility,
and opulence.

Such as arc I BEGIN with the countries contiguous to the
adjacent.to two great monarchies, of whole history and infti-
thle empire .
of Mexico. tutions I have given bome account, and shall then

b,riefly dclcribe the other diftrids of bpanifh Amec
rica. The jurifdiion of the viceroy of New Spain
extend over several provinces, which were not
ibjc to the dominion of the Mcx-icans. The

Cinaloa ali coun;tries of Cinaloa and Sonora, that firetch along
Sonora, &c. the call ide of the Vermilion ica, or gulf of Cali-

fornia,

X* Xrcz,p. 190. Sancho, Ran. iii. 37. C. Herrera, dec.
v.1 li . c. 3.

fornia, as well as the inmenfe kingdoms of New B o O K
Navarre and New Mexico, which bend towards VII.
the weft and north, did not acknowledge the so- '- -
vereignty of Montczumna, or his predecessors.
Thcfe regions, not inferior in magnituide to all the
Mexican empire, are reduced more or less com-
pletely under the Spanish yoke. They extend
through the most delightful part of the temperate
zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
and all their producaions, whether animal or vege-
table, are most perfect in their kind. They have
all a communication either with the Pacific Ocean,
or with the,Gulf of Mexico, and are watered by
such rivers as not only enrich them, but may be-
come subservien.t to commerce. The number of
Spaniards fettled in those vast countries, is indeed
extremely small. They may be said to have sub.
ducd, 'rather than to have occupied them. But if
the population in their ancient cftabliihments in
America shall continue to increase, they may gra-
dually spread over those diftrids, of which, how-
ever inviting, they have not hitherto been able to
take poffefion.

ON E circumstance may contribute to the speedy Rich mine.

population of some diftri&s. ery rich mines
both of gold and silver have been discovered in
many of the regions which I have menetined.
Wherever these are opened, and worked with fuc.
cess, a multitude of people resort. In order to
supply them with the necessarics of life, cultiva-
tion must be increased, artisans of various kinds
must afremblc, and industry as well as wealth will
be gradually difiufcd. Many examples of this have
occurred in different parts of America fincc they
fell under the dominion of the Spaniards. Popu,
lous villages and large towns have suddenly arisen
ainidft uninhabited wilds and mountains; and thq
\orking of mines, though far from being the mofi

proper

BO O K proper'objea towards which the attention of an

VII. infant society would be turned, may become the

means both of promoting ueful activity, and of

Areccntand augmenting the number of people. A recent and
rtilae singular inilance of this has happened, which, as il

is but little known in Europe, and may be pro.
dutive of great efie6ts, n:crits attention. The
Spaniards fettled in the provinces of Cinaloa and
Sonora, had been long disturbed by the depreda-
tions of ome fierce tribes of Indians. In the year
1 765, their incursions became so frequent, and to de-
firutive, that the inhabitants, in deipair, applied to
the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for such a
body of troops as might enable them to drive thol!
formidable invaders fron their places of retreat in
the mountains. But the treasury of Mexico was b
much exhausted by the vast tums drawn from it, ii
order to support the late war against Great Britain,
that the viceroy could afford them no aid. The re-
spect due to his virtues, accoinplifhed what his ofi-
cial power could not eflec. He prevailed with the
merchants to advance about two hundred thousand
pelos for defraying the expcncc of the expedition.
The war was conductd by an officer of abilities;
and after heing protraActl for three years, chiefy by
the diificu!ty of purfuinlg he fugitives over moun-
tains nd through defiles which wcre amofl imnpaffa-
ble, it terminated in the year 7 ;i in the final fiib-
niflion of the tribes, which had bccn so long the ob-
jeEl of terror to the two provi c- s. In tlie courle of
this lcrvice, the Spaniards 1,i: ch)cd through coun-
tries into whiich they lem not to have penctratcd
beforc that timc, and difcevercl mines of fucli va-
luc, aq was aflonin.il'nl cvel to iIcn acquainlcl
with the riches conutined in the mountains of the
New World. At Cineumilla, in the province of So-
nora, they entered a plain of fourteen leagues in
extent, in which they found gold in grains, at

tlih

329

the depth of only sixteen inches, of such a size, B o o K
that some of them weighed nine marks, and in VIL
such quantities, that in a short time, with a few la- '"-
bcurers, they colleted a thousand marks of gold
in grains, even without taking time to wash the
earth that had been dug, which appeared to be so
rich, that persons of Ikill computed that it might
yield what would be equal in value to a million of
pcfos. Before the end oftheyear 77I, above two Probable cf-
thousand persons were fettled in Cineguilla, under tce.t oi 1:i.
the government of proper magistrates, and the in-
fpc6tion of several eclefiaftics. As several other
mines, not inferior in riches to that of Cineguilla,
have been difcovcrcd, both in Sonora and Cinaloa *,
it is probable that thete neglecqed and thinly inha-
bited provinces, may loon become as populous and
valuable as any part of the Spanifl empire in
America.

THE peninsula of California on the other fide California,

of the Vermilion sea, feenms to have been les 'tit"':'
known to the ancient Mexicans, than the pro-
vinces which I have mentioned. It was dilco-
vered by Cortes in the year 536. (Sc Book
V.) During a long period it continued to be b
little frequented, that even its form was unknow~n,
and in mot charts it was reprefcnted as an island,
not as a pcninlulat. Though the climate of this
country, if we may judge from its ituation, nmul
be very dcfirable ; the Spaniarcs have made inirll
progr-ct in peopling it. Towards the close of the
last century, the Jleuits, who had great merit in
explori-ing 'this neglected province, and in civiliz-
ing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly acquired
a doiniion over it as complete as that which they
poflctfid in their niflions in Paraguay, and t}ly
laboured to introduce into it the faime policy, an

to

-F Sec NOTE LXV.
' S;cc NOTE LXV.

J330
B 0 0 K to govern the natives by the fame maxims. In ar.

VII. dcr to prevent the court of Spain from conceiving
---rY any jealouiy of their designs and operations, they

seem studiously to have depreciated the country,
by representing the climate as so difagreeablc a.n
unwhole'ome, and the foil a so barren, that no-
thing but their zealous desire of converting the
natives, could have induced them to fettle there .
Several pubiic-pirited citizens endeavoured to un-

ardprobabi- deceive their fovercigns, and to give them a better
'Ivingtsm view of California, but in vain. At length, on the

expulsion of the Jesuits from the Spanish domini-
ons, the court of Madrid, as prone at that junc-
ture to fufpe&l the purity of the Order's intentions,
as formerly to confide in them with implicit trufi,
appointed Don Joseph Galvcz, whose abilities have
since raised him to the high rank of minister for
the indies, to visit that peninsula. His account of
the country was favourable; he found the pearl
fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and difcovcrcd
mines of gold of a very promising ppearance t
From its vicinity to Cinaloa and S nora, it is pro.
bable, that if the population of there provinces
shall increase in the manner which I have fuppoled,
California may, by degrees, receive from them
such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no longer
reckoned aong the desolate aqd ufelcls diftrids
of the Spanish empire.

Vuc.tan Oq the cafl of Mexico, Yucatan and I-Ionduras
liiundu- re core onrchcnded in the government of New

Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said
to have soried a part of the Mexican empire.
'hcl'c large provinces, stretching from the Bay of
Campcachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not,
like the other terriiorics of Spain in the Nw

WorlJ,
W ,ol l3,

: Vciega 'lifi. c' Cilifornil. i. 26.
-' Lur cn:,;llo,, 349, 350.

)rld, derive their value either from the fertility B o o K
their foil, or the richness of their mines, but VI.
y yield, in greater abundance than any part of \
nerica, the logwood tree, which, in dying some
ours, is so far preferable to any other material,
tthe contumption of it in Europe is confidera-
,and it has become an article in commerce
great value. During a long period, no Euro-
n nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those
vinces, or attempted to obtain any share in this
nch of trade. But after the conquest of Ja-
ica by the English, it soon appeared what a
rnidable rival was now feated in the neigh-
irLnoi of the Spanish territories. One of the
objecs tii,:t ;,npted the English, was the
at profit arising from the logwood trade, and
facility of wrelling some portion of it from
Spaniards. Some advcnturers from Jamaica T.heird'e
r'c the first attempt at Cape Catoche, the south-
promontory of Yucatan, and by cutting log-
1.i there, carried on a gainful traffic. When
R of the trees near the coast in that place were
:d, they removed to the island of Trit, in
Bay of Campeachy; and in latter times, their
!cipal nation has been in the Bay of Honduras.
Spaniards, alarmed at this encroachment,
avoured by negociation, remonfirances, and
force, to prevent the English fiom obtaining
footing on that part of the American conti-

But after struggling against it for more

a century, the diflfters of lat war extorted
the court of Madrid a relucant consent to
ate this settlement of foreigners in the heart of
rritorics . The pain which this humbling
flion occasioned, fccms to have fuggefied
thlod of rendering it of little confcqucncc,

mol'e
* Treaty of Iris, Art. :.i;i.

532
B 0 OK more cftcctual than all the efforts of ncgociati

VII. or violence. The logwood produced on thcw,
- "-'ó coast of Yucatan, where the foil is drier, is

quality far iupcrior to that which grows on nari
and reviva]. grounds where the English are fettled. By eiCC

raging the cutting of this, and permitting the in
por!:atin of it into Spain without paying any dut
iuch vigour has been given to this declining brauc
of commerce, and the logwood which the Engli
bring to market has lunk lo much in value, t
their trade to the Bay of Honduras has gradua!
declinedt since it obtained a legal antion; an
it is probable, will oon be finally abandoned.
that event, the provinces of Yucatan and lHondur
will become possessions of considerable importan
to Spain.

CoftaRica STILL farther east than Honduras lie thet
Sua. provinces of Costa Rica and Veragua, which lik

wife belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain; b
both have been bo much negle&ted by the Spa
ards, and are apparently of such ifrall value, tl
they merit no particular attention.
CI.'i. T'I mos important province depending

the vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. Tlie Inc
had eablified their dominion in Ibme of its lo
them diftriccts; but in the greater part of
country, its gallant and high-fpirited inhabit
maintained their independence. The Spaliar
allured by the fame of its opulence, carl!
tempted the conq(leti of it under Diego Alarini
and after his tdeath, Pedro dc Valdivia rclj
tic dlcign. loth met with fierce opposition. I'
former rlinquifhcd the cntcrprize in the In.:::'
which I have lmentioned . The latter, a'c[rl i;
ing given many dillays both of courage all(ll

iha

I:'ualn C(dul; , (C.lliomaneIIs, iii. t..
JI Set NO'TE i,LVii. : Uouk vi.

try kill, was cut off with a considerable body B O O K
troops under his command. rancilco de Vil- II.
)ra, his licutenant, by his spiritcd conducl, '-
hccked the natives in their career, and saved the
miainder of the Spaniards from deflruEdion. By
crccs, all the champaign country along the coalt
as futbjeted- to the Spanif dominion. The
0ontainous couintry is flill poflefled by the
uelchcs, Araucos, and other tribes of its original
habitants, bormidable neighbours to the Spani-
ds; witl whom, during the eouref of two ccn-
ries, they have been obliged to maintain perpe-
al hostility, fulipcndcd only by a ew intervals of
Iccure peace.
THAT part of Chili then, vwhich may properly Excellenc
edeemned a Spanish province, is a narrow dil- fat'tscld
iE, extending along the coali from the dclcrt of foil
tacanias to the island of Chiloe, above nine hun-
rcd iics. Its climate is the most delicious of
eNew VAorid, and is hardly equalled by that
fany region on the face of te earth. Though
0rdering on the Torrid Zone, it nIever feels the
tremity of heat, being ferccncd on the east by
Andes, and refrcfhed from the wcl boy cooling
a-breezcs. The temperature of the air is so mild
d equable, that the Spaniards give it the pree-
nce to that of the louthern provinces in their na-
ve country. The fertility of the foil corrclponds
ith the benignity of the climate, and is wonder-
lly accommodated to Eulopean productions.
le most valuable of there, corn wine and oil,
ound in Chili, as if they had been native to the
!untry. All the fruits ilmported fom Elurope
ita to ll Ilmaturity there. The animals of our
cnlili)crc not only multiply, but improve in this
libhitul region. The horned cattle arc of larger
zetlan thlol of Spain. Its breed of hiorls lur
llcs, hbtlh in bcauty and in 'pirit, tlic fiamous

A 1d(alufianr

B 0 K Andalufian race, from which they sprang. 101

VII has nature exhausted her bounty on the fur
""3"^ face of the earth; she has stored its bowels witl

riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of cop
per, and of lead, have been discovered in variou
parts of it.

Caufeofits A COUNTRY difiinguifhed by so many blessings
being ne- Y Y

i

gleacdby we may be apt to conclude, would early becom
the Spani- a favourite station of the Spaniards, and mu

have been cultivated with peculiar predileciio
and care. Infiead of this, a great part of it re
mains unoccupied. In all this extent of country
there are not above eighty thousand white inhabi
tants, and about three times that number of ne
groes and people of a mixed race. The mos ser
tile foil in America lies uncultivated, and fom
of its mdft promising mines remain unwrought
Strange as this neglect of the Spaniards to avai
themselves of advantages which seemed to cou
their acceptance may appear, the causes of it ca
be traced. The only intercourse of Spain wit
its colonies in the South Sea, was carried on dur
ing two centuries by the annual fleet to Porto-bcllo
All the produce of the colonies were ihippedi
the ports of Callao, or Arica in Peru, for Pan
ma, and carried from thence across the isthmus
All the commodities which they received from th
mother-country, were conveyed fronm Panama
the fame harbours. Thus both the exports an
imports of Chili passcd through the hands of tl
merchants of Peru. These had of course a pro0l
on each; and in both tranfations the Chilcfe fel
their own subordination; and having no direE
intercourse with the parent ftatc, they dcpcnlde
upon another province for the disposal of thci
productions, as well as for the supply of tlei
wants. Under such difcouragcmets, populati0'
could not incrcare, and indultry was dclfitlutl

0',
334

one chicf incitement. But now that Spain, frnom B3 o
motivcs hich 1 filall mnction herealtcr, has VII.
adoptcd a new system, and carries on her corn- 'r--
mcrce with the colonies in the South Sea, by s1ips 4erc.1.
nhicl go round Cape Horn, a dirct itercourlc mirt.
is opcned between Chili and the motlher-country.
T'he gold, the filvcr, and the other conmmodities
of thc province will be exchanged in its own ar-
bours for the anuiactures of Europe. Chili may
ipeedily rife into that importance among the Spa-
nifh tfttlements to which it is entitled by its natu-
ral advantages. It may become the granary of
Peru, and the other provinces along the Pacific
Ocean; it may supply them w\ith 'vine, with cattle,
,vith horses, with hemp, and many other articles
i!or which they now depend upon Europe. Tho'
the nesw ftenm has been ctablified only a few
years, thotf efifets of it begin already to be ob-
'ervcd . If it shall be adhered to with any ftcadi-
ncfs for halfa century, one may venture to foretell,
ihat population, indufiry and opulence will ad-
Vance in this province with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tu- Prov:nc^,:
cumnan ad Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, and aT^d io L
like it were dependent on the vice-royalty of Peru. la Plata.
These regions of immense extcnt firetch in length NoIthern
from north to south above thirteen hundred miles, iali,'"'
and in breadth more than a thousand. This coun-
try, which is larger than inoil Europcan kingdoms,
naturally forms itself into two great divisions, one
on the north, and the other on the south of Rio
de la Plata. The former comprehends Paraguay,
he famous miflions of the Jclfiits, and Itveral
other diftrifts. But as difputcs have long llolfilcd
betwecn the courts of Spain and Portugal, con-
c'ning its boundaries, which, it is probable, will lb

P)oLa
' 2:inj.:~ nltC, lii I. 7.

B O K soon finally ascertained, either amicably, or bv

viI. the decision of the sword, I chute to reserve ny
'-'r'~ account of this northern division, until I ctcr

upon the hitfory of Portuguele America, with
which it is intimately conneded; and, in relat-
ing it, I shall be able, from authentic materials,
supplied both by Spain and Portugal, to give a full
and accurate description of the operations and
views of the Jesuits, in rearing that singular fabric
of policy in America, which has drawn so nuch
attention, and has been so imperfectly underflood.
The latter division of the province contains the
governments of Tucuman and Buenos-Ayres,
and to these I hall at present confine my ob.
Iervations.

View of the THE Spaniards entered this part of America by
latter. the river De la Plata, and though a succession of

cruel difaflers befell them in their early attempts
to establish their dominion there, they were en-
couraged to persist in the design, at first by the
hopes of discovering mines in the interior coun-
try, and afterwards by the neccfiity of occupying
it, in order to prevent any other nation from et-
tling there, and penetrating by this route into their
rich poffeffons in Peru. But except Buenos-
Ayres, they have made no fettlecunt of any con-
fcquence in 'all the vast space which I have eniI-
tioned. There arc, indeed, fcattcred over it, a
few places on which they have beltowed the namec
of towns, and to which they have endeavourcd to
add bmne dignity, by ereting them into bishop-
riclks; but they are no better than paltry villages,
each with two or three hundred inhabitants.
One circumnlancc, however, which was not ori-
ginally forelccl, has contributed to rcnder this
cdifirit, though thinly peopled, of confidcrabic
importance. The province of Tucumnan, togclllc
with the country to the south of the Plata, inllcla ol

bch;l!

being covered with wood like other parts of Ame- B O o K
rica, forms one vail open plain, almost without a VII.
tree. The foil is a deep fertile mold, watered by _
many fireams descending from the Andes, and
clothed in perpetual verdure. In this rich paftu-
rage, the horses and cattle imported by the Spani-
ards from Europe have multiplied to a degree
which almost exceeds belief. This has enabled
the inhabitants not only to open a lucrative trade
with Peru, by supplying it with cattle, horses, and
mules, but to carry on a commerce no less benefi-
cial, by the exportation of hides to Europe. From
both the colony has derived great advantages. But
its commodious situation for carrying on contra-
band trade, has been the chief source of its prof-
perity. While the court of Madrid adhered to its
ancient system, with refpe& to its communication
with America, the river De la Plata lay so much
out of the course of Spanish navigation, that inter-
lopers, almost without any rifque of either being
observed or obftruted, could pour in European
manufactures in such quantities, that they not only
supplied the wants of the colony, but were convey-
ed into all the eastern diftri6ts of Peru. When the
Portuguese in Brasil extended their ettlements to
the banks of Rio Dc la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities flowed
into the Spanish territories with still more facility,
and in greater abundance. This illegal traffic,
however detrimental to the parent fate, contribut-
ed to the increafc of the settlement, which had the
immediate benefit of it, and Buenos-Ayres became
gradually a populous and opulent town. What
may be the effeEt of the alteration lately made in
the government of this colony, the nature of which
fiall be dcfcribcd in the lubfequcnt Book, cannot
hitherto be known.

VOL. II.

Z

ALL

B O O K ALL the other territories of Spain in the New

VII. World, the islands excepted, of whole discovery
r-ter and reduction I have formerly given an account,

tories f are comprehended under two great divisions; the
Spain. former denominated the kingdom Ticrra Firnie,

the provinces of which ftrctch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to the mouth
of the Orinoco; the latter, the New Kingdom of
Granada, situated in the interior country. ith
a short view of there I shall close this part of my
work.
Darien. To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-

jeEt to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the ifihmus of
Darien. Though it was in this part of the conti-
nent that the Spaniards first began to plant colo-
nies, they have made no considerable progress in
peopling it. As the country is extremely moun-
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part of
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains
no mines of great value, they would probably have
abandoned it altogether, if they had not been al-
lured to continue by the excellence of the harbour
of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that of Panama
on the other, These have been called the keys to
the communication between the north and bouth
sea, between Spain and her most valuable colonies.
In consequence of this advantage, Panama has be-
come a considerable and thriving town. The pe-
culiar noxiousness of its climate has prevented
Porto-bello from incrcafing in the fame propor-
tion. As the intercourse with the fettlmeniets in
the Pacific Ocean, is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bcllo and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourifllcd
and enriched by that commerce, to which they
were indebted for their prosperity, and even their
cxislcnce.

TH1X

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Mar-B 0 0 K

tha, ftrctch to the eastward of the isthmus of Da- VII.
rien. The country still continues mountainous, r-
but its vallies begin to expand, are ell watered, eC'a''aena
and extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjeded Marcia.
this part of America to the crown of Spain, about
the year I532. It is thinly peopled, and of courie
ill cultivated. It produces, however, a variety of
valuable diugs, and ome precious stones, particu-
larly emeralds. But its chief importance is de-
rived from the harbour of Carthagena, the safest
and bell fortified of any in the American domini-
ons of Spain. In a situation so favourable, com-
merce soon began to flourish. As early as the year
1544, it seems to have been a town of some note.
But when Carthagena was chosen as the port in
which the galcons should first begin to trade on
their arrival from Europe, and to which they were
directed to return, in order to prepare for their
voyage homeward, the coninerce of its inhabitants
was lo much favoured by this arrangement, that it
fobn became one of the most populous, opulent,
and beautiful cities in America. There is, howc-
ver, reason to apprehend, that it has reached is
highest point of exaltation, and that it will be so
far asseted by the change in the Spanish fyllemn of
trade with America, which has withdrawn from it
the dcfirable visits of the galeons, as to feel at least
a temporary decline. But the wealth now collct-
ed there munfl find or create employmcnt for itself;
and niay be turned with advantage into fime new
channel. Its harbour is o safe, and b conveni.
ently fittatcd for receiving commodities from Eu-
rope, its xrcrclants have bcci ls long accuflomed
to convey tlicfe into all the adjacent provinces,
tliat it is probable tlcy will still retain this branch
of trade, and Carthagena continue to be a city of
treat illportancec

7. RHT

B OK THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on

VII. the eall, was first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in

ra-^' the year 1499- ; and the Spaniards, on their land.
Venezuela. ing there, having observed foime huts in an Indian

village built upon piles, in order to raii thcr
above the stagnated water which covered the plain,
were led to bestow upon it the name of Venezucla,
or little Venice, by their usual propensity to find
a resemblance between what they discovered in
America, and the objets which were familiar to
them in Europe. They made ome attempts to
fettle there, but with little success. The final re.
duEtion of the province was accomplified by means
very different from those to which Spain was in-
debted for its other acquisitions in the lew World.
The ambition of Charles V. often engaged him in
operations of such variety and extent, that his re-
venues were not fuiicient to defray the expence of
carrying them into execution. Among other ex.
pedients for supplying the deficiency of his funds,
he had borrowed large fums from the Velfcrs of
Augfburgh, the moll opulent merchants at that
time in Europe. By way of retribution for the'e,
or in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new loan, he
bcefowed upon them the province of Venezuela,
to be held as an hereditary fief of the crown of
Caflile, on condition, that within a limited time
they should render them'fclves malfers of the coun-
try, and establish a colony there. Under the di-
redion of such persons, it might have becnexpcl
ed that a fettlcment would have been established on
maxims very different from those of the Spaniards,
and better calculated to encourage such uicful in.
duftry, as they might have known to be the onl!
certain source of prosperity and opulence. Bu
unfortunately they committed the execution o
their plan to some of those soldiers of fortune witl
which Germany abounded in the fixtcenth ccn

turo
* Book II.

341

tiry. Thefe'adventurers, impatient to amass rich- B O O K
es, that they might speedily abandon a station VII.
which they loon dilcovered to be very uncomfort- T'
able, inflead of planting a colony that might have
cultivated and improved the country, wandered
from diftri6t to difiri&d in search of mines, plun-
dering the natives with unfeeling rapacity, or op-
prclilng them by the injpofition of intolerable talks.
In the courle of a few years their avarice and ex-
adtions, in comparibon with which those of the
Spaniards were moderate, desolated the province
to completely, that it could hardly afford them sub-
fiftence, and the Velfers relinquished a property,
fconm which the inconsiderate condut of their
agents left them no hope of ever deriving any ad..
vantage. When the wretched remainder of the
Germans deserted Venezuela, the Spaniards again
took pofleffion of it; but, notwithstanding many
natural advantages, it is one of their molt languish-
ing and unproductive ettlements.

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the Caracca,

last of the Spanish territories on this coast; but in Ca.
relating the origin and operations of the mercantile
company, in which an exclusive right of trade with
tlhem has been veled, I shall hereafter have occa-
lion to confider their fate and produEtions.

Tai New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an New King-

inland country of vast extent. This iinportantdom of
addition was made to the dominions of Spain Granad.
about the year 1536, by Sebatlian de Benalcazar
and Gonzalo Xinencs de Quefada, two of the
bravest and most accomplished officers employed
in the conquest of America. The fonncr, who
commanded at that timc in QGito, attacked it from
the south; the latter made his invasion from Santa
Martha on'the north. As the original inhabitants

of
` Ovicdo y Bagno3 I1iX. de Vnczuela, p. xx, &c.

3 0 0 K of this region were farther advanced in improe,
VII. ment, than any people in America but the M/c;,

'c ans and Peruvians*, they defended thlniclvcs
with great resolution and good condut. The abi-
lities and perseverance of Benalcazar and 0uelada
surmounted all opposition, though not without en-
countering many dangers, and reduced the coun-
try into the form of a Spanish province.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far elevated

above the level of the sea, that though it approach-
es almost to the equator, the climate is remarkably
temperate. The fertility of its vallics is not infe.
rior to that of the richest difiriCs in America, and
its higher grounds yield gold and precious flones
of various kinds. It is not by digging into the
bowels of the earth that this gold is found ; it is
mingled with the foil near the surface, and fepa-
rated from it by repeated washing with water.
This operationl is carried o wholly by ncgroe
slaves; for though the chill lubterrancan air has
been discovered, by experience, to be bo fatal to
them, that they cannot be eploycd in the deep
silver mines, they are more capable of performingl
the other pecies of labour than nclians. As he
natives in the New Kingdom of Granada are ex-
empt from that service, which has aficd their
race so rapidly in other parts of America, it is rc-
markably populous. Some diflrils yield gold
with a profusion no lets wonderlul tian 'tlat in te
vale of Cincguilla, which I have frmnrly mcnti-
oned, and it is often found i pepfi/as, or grail;,
which manifcft the abund(ance in which it is pro-
duced On a rising ground near Panmplona, single
labourers have collc&tcd in a day what was e(ltal
in vallc to a thouland pclbs t. A late governor of

Santa

' ool V.
{' Picdr.hita Hifl.delN. Reyno, p. 481, MS, pencs, me.
34z

343

Santa Fe brought with him to Spain a lump of vir- B O O K
gin gold, (-inmated tobe worth lcvern hundred and VII.
lorty pounds sterling. But without founding any _r
.calculation on what is rare and etrordinary, the
value of the gold uually celici. iil Jiis country,
particularly in the provinces oi Popayan and
Choco, is of ciufiderable amount. Its towns are
populous and liourifhing. The number of inhabi-
tants in almost every part of the country daily in-
crcalcs. Cultivation and induRry of various kinds
begin to be ctncouraged and to plolpcr. A onfi-
dcrable trade is carried on with Carthagena, the
produce of the mines, and other commodities,
being conveyed down the great river of St. Mag-
dalen to that city. On another quarter, the New
Kingdom of Granada has a conmmunication with
the Atlantic by the river Orinoco; but the country
which stretches along its banks towards the east is
little known, and imperfectly occupied by the
Spaniards.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

H T S T R Y
HISTORY

M E R C

BOO K VIII.

AFTER tracing the progress of the Spapiards in B 0 0 K
their discoveries and conquells during more than VIII.
half a century, I have conduted them to that 'IT

View of the

period when their authority was established over plicy and
almost all the vast regions in the New World still trade of ti
fubjeft to their dominion. The cffect of their SPaflc"" '
settlements upon the countries of which they took
poffefion, the maxims which they adopted in form-
ing their new. colonies, the interior itructure and
policy of these, together with the influence of their
progreflive improvement upon the parent state, and
the commercial intercourse of nations, arc the
objects to which we now turn our attention, and
they are no less intercefing than important.

TIE first visible conlcqucncc of the cfablifh- Depopulati-

blents made by the Spaniards in America, was the ic.th" n
dimiqutiol of the ancicnt ihabitants, to a degree enctlos

equally te'"".

-IEIL-·-·-·I·····1··13--- - - 
r- __

B 0 0 equally astonishing and deplorable. I have al,

VIII. rcady, on diffircnt occasions, mentioned the dil:
'" ^ aitrous intflucnce under which the conncction of

the Americans with the people of our hcmil)lhcle
comnicm ced, both in the iilands, and in icvcral
parts of the continent, and have to hcd upon
various cau lcs of their ra id col u iu-: ion. \ 'lcrc.
evcr the inhabitants of A iirica hai rcloluiioi0 10
take aris in dc!clcc of ::'ir libecty anr rilts,
tilany p crillc in the uneual co.'ccft, and \xvcc
cut off by their fierce inva,'ers. 'But tl-e grc.tcit
delblation followed after the sword was fi!eaticd,
and the conquerors were fettlcd in tranc-tilliiv.

c^tS c-f It was in the islands, and in thote proviniccs of 1;e
.;in:,- continent which ftrctch frorm the gulf of Triii-
:;,lp,-tof dcad to the confines of Mexico, that the fat:l ct
t_ Co:ij- seies of the Spanifi dominion were firit and mol

ienfibly flIt. All thoie were occupied eithcr by
wandcring tribes of hunters, or by such as liad
marde but finall progrcfs in cultivation and induftrv.
WVhcn they were compcllcd by their new maftcis
to take up a fixed residence, and to apply to re.
gular labour; when tasks were imposed upon them
dilproportioned to their t rength, and were exa(ctd
with unrelenting severity; they poffeied not vi.
gour either of mind or oft body to fuifain illis un-
ulual load of oppreflion. DcjcEtion and despair
drove many to end their lives by violence. 'a-
tigue and famine dcflroycd morc. In all tliol
extcnfive regions, the original race of inhabitanls
waiecl away ; in Ibnic it was totally cxtinguiflic.
In M:exieo, xwhcre a powcr(ul and martial people
diflinitugified iheir opposition to the Spaniards,
by cieorts of c:ourane vo;-tiyv of a better fatc, great
nuibers fell il tlie fi1d1; and there, as well as inl
Peru, flill greater numbers pcrifhcd under lihe
hardlhil)s of attrndiing he panifh armniis in tillir
various cxIed'';... anc.d civil wars, worn out wili1

I lit
-3-6

the inccifant toil of carrying their baggage, provi- B 0 0 K
lions, an i military tlores. VIII.

lBur peither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- ~s
niaris wcre o ceflrudtivc to the people of Mexi-In New

Spain and

co and i-cru, s the incolfiderate policy with Peru.
w\hichl they eitablifhed their new settlements. The
lbrii:r were temporary calamities, fatal to indi-
viduis;s; the latter was a permanent evil, which,
wiii, gradual conlumption wafted the nation,
When the provinces of Mvxcico and Peru were di-
vided aii!i.g the conquerors, each was c;gcr to
obtain a diftritt, from which he might expcc an
infiantaneous rcornpcncc for all his crvices.
Bold advcnturcrs, accuftotncd to the carelclliefs
and diflipation of a military life, had neither in-
duflry to carry on any plan of regular cultivation,
nor patience to wait for its low, but certain re-
turns. Inltcad of fettling in the vallics occupied
by the natives, where the fertility of the foil would
have amply rewarded the diligence of the lan.rr,
they chole to fix their stations in finmc of'the im. 1-
tainous rcgions, frequent both in lc^/ 'Fl. : :cl
in Peru. To Icarch for mincs of gold a! . > -,
was the clief object of their aivity. Thl 'A ,:.
p)roifpcCs which this opens, and the allurig htl cs
i hich it continually preciints, corrcfpond wond.:r-
!illy with the spirit of entcrprizc and adventure
that anillated the first cnii.'rants to Allierica ill
every part of their condut't. In order to push for-
warl thole favourite proi -':, lo nany hnds were
wanted, hat the fervicc ol '(' nativcs Lb'ca',, in-
clil)cll'ably rcquiiite. Thce weCre, accorid ngly,
coinpll (ed to abandon their ancient habitations in
the plains, and driven in crowds to the mnoun-
tains. This ildden tranfi donL fiom the lltry cli-
mate of the vallies, to the chill :pcctil iting air pe-
culiar tlo high laniJds in the to.i-d zone ; the fa-

tiguc

347

O K tigue of exorbitant labour, scanty or unwlholefons
VII. nourishment, and the delpondency occafione by

V a fpecics of opprcfion to which they were not ac-

cuitonied, and of which they saw no end, altictcd
thcm nearly as much as their less industrious coun-
trymen in the illands. They funk under the unitcd
preflurc of thole calamities, and melted away with
almoif equal rapidity', In concqucnce of this,
together with the introduction of thc flnall-pox, a
malady unknown in America, and extremely fatal
to the nativest, the number of pcople both in New
Spain and Peru was lo much reduced, that in a
few years the accounts of their ancient population
appeared almost incredible ,

Ksrt the re. SU CH are the most confidcrable events and causes,
fultaofany which, by their combined operation, contributed
fpolcy, to depopulate America. Without attending to

these, many authors, qftonified at the suddenness
of the de{olation, have ascribed this unexampled
event to a scheme of policy no lets profound than
atrocious. The Spaniards, as they pretend, con-
fcious of their own inability to occupy the vast
regions which they had dil'cQvered, and foreiceing
the impollibility of mintainling their authority
over a people infinitely luperior to themlclvcs iln
number, in order to prclcrve America, rclblved to
exterminate the inhabitants, and by converting it
into a dclart, cndcavourcd to fccure their own do-
minion over it§. But nations leldoni extend their
views to objcts so rcmote, or lay their plans lo
deep ; and, f(r the honour of humanity, wc may
oblcrve, that no nation ever deliberately formcdl
'i}ch an execrable lchcmc. The Spanith Inonarchs,

far

Torqlciradl, i. 63. 13

. Dinz, c. 124. Iler-
rera, dec. ii. lil. x. c. 4. Ullna E;itretn, 26.

. I'orlquie, 61,. 642z, 643. See NOI'E LXVII.

See NO 1'E LXIX.
348

349

iar from aing upon any uch system of deftruc- B o 0 K
tion, were uniformly olicitous for the preservation VlIr.
of their new fubjcdts. With Isabella, zeal for pro-
pagating the christian faith, and the desire of com-
municating the knowledge of truth, and the confo-
lations of religion, to people destitute of spiritual
light, were more than oftenfiblc motives for en-
couraging Columbus to attempt his discoverics.
Upon his fucccfs, he endcavoured to fulfil her
pious purpolc, and manifested the most tender con-
cern to iccure, not only religious inftrution, but
mild treatment, to that inofinefive race of men sub-
je&ed to her crown . Her fuccciors adopted the
fame ideas; and, on many occasions, which I have
mentioned, tleir authority was intcrpofed in the
most vigorous exertions, to protect the people of
America from the opprcfiion of their Spanish sub-
jcts. Their regulations for this purpofc were nu-
merous, and often rcpeatcd. They were framed
with wifdorn, and dictated by humanity. After
their pofieflions in the New World became so ex-
tensive, as might have excited ibmne apprchcnfions
of difficulty in retaining their dominion over them,
the spirit of their regulations was as mild as when
their fettlemcnts were confined to the islands alone,
Their solicitude to protc the Indians lecmns rather
to have augmented as their acquisitions incrcalcd;
and from ardour to accomplith this, they enacted,
and endeavoured to enforce the execution of laws,
which excited a formidable rebellion in one of
their colonies, and spread alarm and difaffcEtion
through all the ret. But the avarice of individu-
als was too violent to be controuled by the autho-
rity of laws. Rapacious and daring adventurers,
lar removed fiom the Icat of government, little

accufonied
* Sec NOTE LXX.

B o O KaccufRomed to the restraints of military difciplin

VIII. while in service, and still less difpoied to rclsect
'7T"' the feeble jurisdiCtion of civil power in an inlaun

colony, despised or eluded every regulation that
set bounds to their exactions and tyranny. The
parent slate, with perlevering attention, issued
edicts to prevent the opprcllion of the Indians;
the coloniits, regardles of thce, or trusting to
their distance for impunity, continued to confider,
and treat them as slaves. The governors them-
Ielvcs, and other officers employed in the colo-
nies, several of whom were as indigent and rapa-
cious as the adventurers over whom they presided,
were too apt to adopt their contemptuous ideas
of the conquered people; and, instead of check-
ing, encouraged or connived at their excefes.
The desolation of the New World hould not then
be charged on the court of Spain, or be confidercd
as the effect of any fyftcin of policy adopted there.
It ought to be imputed wholly to the conquerors
and irft planters of America, who, by mcaflrcs
no less inconsiderate than unjust, counterated the
ediEts of their fovcreign, and have brought dif-
grace upon their country.

hdrt heef- WITH still greater injutiice, have many authors
fe of -el,- represented the intolerating spirit of the Roman

Catholic religion, as the cause of exterminating the
Americans, and have acculcd the Spanifi ecclefi-
aitics of animating their countrymen to the flaugh-
ter of that innocent people, as idolators and cne-
mies of God. But the firfl miflionaries who visitcd
America, though weak and illiterate, were pious
men. They early cploufcd the defence of the na-
tives, and vindicated their charadcr from the al-
perfions of their conquerors, who, defcribiug them
as incapable of being formed to the olliccs of civil
life, or of comprehending the doctriilcs of reli-
gion, contended that they were a fuborldiuate race

oi

fnien, on whom the hand of nature had et the O O Io0
mark of servitude. From the accounts which I vlIr.
have givenl of the hunmane and perfevcriog zcal of '
the Spanilh niiflionarics, in proteing the hellel'3
fock committed to their charge, they appear in a
light, which reflcs lustre upon their function.
They were minietcrs of peace, who endeavoured
to wrest the rod from the hands of oppressors. 'o
their powerful interpofiiion, the Americans were
indebted for every regulation tending to mitigate
the rigour of thcir fate. The clergy in the Spa,
nilh fettlemeLts, rgular as we-ll as secular, are
flill confidcrcd by the Indians as their natural
guardians, to whom they have rccourfe under the
hardships and cxation-s to which they are oo of-
ten exposed .

BUT, notwithfianding the rapid depopulation of T:ic:-,uibe
America, a very confidcrablc number of the na-'"ln'!i',:s

n1~ii x*,c and

Pei

i * A i r> e1;!1 reLl in-

tivc race Itill remains both in Mexico and Pcru,in.
cl'lecially in thole parts which were not expolcd to
the firll furyof the Spanish arms, or dctolated by,
the first efforts of tihcir industry, still more ruinos.
In Guatiniala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, ancl the otlcr
delightful provinces of the xicxican empire that
firetch along the south-sea, the race of indians
still numerous. Thcir fcttlecneits in iome 1ilaces
arc so populous, as to merit the name of ctics-.
In the three audiences into which New Spain is
divided, there are at least two millions of Indians;
apitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient popula-
tion, but such as still forms a body of people luplc-
rior in number to rhat of all the other in l)aiit:inzs
of this vast country . In Peru fcvcral diltltiri',
particularly in the kingldoml of Qito, ar occupied:
alinoit entirely by Indians. In other provinces,

they'

* See NOTE LXXI. t S NOTE LXXII.
1 See NOTE LXXIII.

35-;

B o O K they are mingled with the Spaniards, and in many

VIII. of their settlements pradife the mechanic arts, and
-Cr17 fill most of the inferior fiations in society. As the

inhabitants, both of Mexico and Peru, were accuf-
tomed to a fixed residence, and to some degree of
regular industry, less violence was requisite in
bringing them to some conformity with the Euro-
pean modes of civil life. But wherever the Spa.
niards fettled among the savage tribes of America,
their attempts to incorporate with them have been
always fruitless, and often fatal to the natives.
Impatientof refiraint, and disdaining labour as a
mark of servility, they either abandoned their ori,
ginal feats, and fought for independence in moun.
tains and forefi inaccessible to their oppressors, or
perished when reduced to a slate repugnant to their
ancient ideas and habits. In the difiri&s adjacent
to Carthagena, to Panama, and to Buenos-Ayrcs,
the deiolation is more general than even in those
parts of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spaniards
have taken molt full pofiefion.

Generalidea BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the
of thepolicy New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabi.
of Spain in
s colonies. tants, wcre made at a period when that monarchy

was capable of forming them to best advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful state, equal to so great an under-
taking. Its monarchs, havingextended their pre.
rogative far beyond the limits which once circum.
fcribccl the regal power in every kingdom ot Eu.
rope, were hardly ulbjed to controul, either in
concerting, or in executing their mcalurcs. In
every vwide cxtendcd cempire, the form of govern.
uent iuft be simple, and the authority of the so.
vcrcign ablblutc ; that his rclolutions may be itakcn
with promptitude, anl pervade the whole witl un 1i-
miinifid borce. Such was the powcr of the Spnnilh

nilou;arls,
352

hlonarchs, when they were called to deliberate B O O K
concerning the mode of establishing their domi- VIII.
nion over the most remote provinces that had ever ^-
been fubjcted to any European state. In this deli-
beration they felt thcnifelves underno conititutional
restraint, and that as independent masters of their
own resolves, they might ifluc the edics requisite
for modelling the government of the new colo-
nies, by a mere at of prerogative.

THIs early interposition of the Spanish crown, Early nte--

in order to regulate the policy and trade of its co- p'oftio, otf
lonies, is a peculiarity which diflinguifics theirtthority.
progress from that of the colonies of any other
European nation. When the Portuguel'e, the Eng-
lifh, and French, took pofieffion of those regions
in America which they now occupy, the advan-
tages which they promiled to yield were lb remote
and uncertain, that they were fufl'ered to firuggle
through a hard infancy, alinoft without guidance
or protccion from the parent Ilate. But gold and
filvcr, the first producions of the Spanifil lcttle-
ments in the Nc\v World, were more alluring, and
immediately attracted the attention of their no-
narchs. Though they had contributed little to the
discovery, and almot nothing to the conquet of
the New World, they instantly affunred the func-
tion of its legislators; and havingacquired a species
of dominion formerly unknown, they forlmed a
plan for excrcifing it, to which nothinig similar oc-
curs in the history of human affairs.

'I'll. fundamental naxilll of Sanifl jurifpru- Allpower

dence with rcfpct to Amcrica, is to confidcr what ta,"yloi',,l
has i a

en acquired there as vcftcd in the crown, tie ciowi.

rathcr lian in the flatc. By the bull of Alexanlcr
VI. o which, as its grcat charter, Spain founded
its r;:!t, all the regions that had been, or should
be dilcovcrcd, were .bcllowed as a free gift upon

VOL. II. A a Ferdinand

353

B O OK Ferdinand and Isabella. They and their fuccef-

VIII. fors were uniformly held to be the universal pro-
`bS~ prietors of the vast territories, which the arms of

their fubjests conquered in the New World. From
them, all grants of land there flowed, and to them
they finally returned. Theleaders who conduated
the various expeditions, the governors who presided
over the different colonies, the officers of justice,
and the ministers of religion, were all appointed
by their authority, and removable at their pleafurec
The people who composed infant fettlemcnts were
intitled to no privileges independent of the fovc-
reign, or that served as a barrier against the power
of the crown. It is true, that when towns were
built, and formed into bodies corporate, the citi-
zens were permitted to elet their own magistrates,
who governed by laws which the community
cnacted. Even in the most despotic fates, this
feeble spark of liberty is not extinguished. But in
the cities of Spanish America, this jurifdition is
merely municipal, and is confined to the regula-
tion of their own interior commerce and police.
In whatever relates to public government and the
general interest, the will of the sovereign is law.
No political power originates from the people. All
centres in the crown, and in the officers of its no-
mination.

Allthe ncw W1IIN the colqucfis of the Spaniards in Ame-
dominions .
ot Spain rica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
frubjeflcel to the plan of interior policy for their new domini-
two vice- 1
roy. ons, divided them into two immenc govcrnments,

one ubjecl to the viceroy of New Spain, the other
to the viceroy of Peru. The jurilfdi&tion of the
former extended over all the provinces belonging
to Spain in the northern divilion of the Americal
continent. Under that of the latter was compre-
hended whatever he pofieI'ed in South America.

This

,is arrangement which, from the beginning, was B O 0 K
endcd with many inconveniencics, became in- VIII.
crable when the remote provinces of each vice- '"-'T
alty began to improve in induttlry.and popula-
i. The people complained of their fubjc&ion
a uperior, whose place of' reiidence was lb dif-
it, or lo inacccfliblc, as almost excluded them
ni any intercourfc with the feat of government.
c authority of the viceroy over dilrids so far re-
ivcd fronm his own eye and observation, was un-
>idably both feeble and ill-diredted. As a re-
idy tor those evils, a third viceroyalty has been
blifhed in the preelnt century, at Santa Fe de
Ogota, the capital of tlie new kingdom of Grana-

lic
he jurifdiaion of which extends over the

hole kingdom of Ticrra Firne, and the province
OQito . Those viceroys not only reprefelt the Theirpow-
rlob of their sovereign, but poifets his regal
rrogativcs within the precincis of their own go-
ernmncnts, in their utmost extent. Iike him they

c6i!e lupreme authority in every department of
p rnrlmnt, civil, military and criminal. They

prcfide in every tribunal. They have the sole
ht of nominating the persons who hold many
Scs of the highest importance, and the occasion-
rivilcge of supplying luch as arc in the royal
until the fucceffbr appointed by the king tliall
c. The external ponlmp of their governmenlt is
d to its real dignity and power. Their courts
Fllircd upon the molcl of that at Madrid, with
C :md foot guards, a houlchold regularly efta-
d, umerous attendants, and ensigns ofcom-
, dilplaying iuchl niagnificcnce as hardly re-
lthc appcarance of delegated authorityt.

A a 2 Bu
j loy. de Ullon, i. 23. 255.

U'lula, Voy. i. 432. Gage, 61.

355

B O O K BUT as the viceroys cannot discharge in perfo

VIII. the funt&ions of a upreme magistrate in every par
-rs ' of their extensive jurifdi&ion, they are aidedi1
CAditSenoe. their government by officers and tribunals finiila

to thole in Spain. The condu& of civil afflirs i
the various provinces and diftrits, into whict
the Spanish dominions in America are divided, i
committed to magifirates of various orders anc
denominations ; ome appointed by the ki,
others by the viceroy, but all subjed to his con
mand, and amenable to his jurisdiction. h
administration of justice is veiled in tribunai
known by the name of Audiences, and forre
upon the model of the court of Chancery in Spair
These are eleven in number, and dispense juPic
to as many diftrits, into which the Spanikh doin
nions in America are divided':. The number
judges in them is various, according to the cxte
and importance of their jurifdicion. The flaric
of a judge in the court of Audience is no lefshi
nourable than lucrative, and is commonly filled b
persons of such abilities and merit, as rcndersth
tribunal extremely refpecable. Both civil an
criminal causes come under their cognizance, ar

Tir jurif- for each peculiar judges are set apart. Tliough
Their juril- .
diiuon. is only in the most dclpotic governments, tihai t

fovercign exrci fes in person the formidable prer
gative of adminificring justice to his fibjc&s, t
in absolving, or condemning, conLflts no la u
what is dcpofitcd in his own brcait; though in
the monarchies of Europe, judicial autloriy
committed to magifiratcs, vwholt decilions arc
gulatcd by known laws and cftablifhcd lforlis,
Spnnifli viceroys have often attempted to intri
thlfciilves into the cfat of juficc, and \i111
ambition which their distance frolm lh c'"

* See NOTE LXXIV.

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

357

a superior, rendered bold, have aspired at a B 0 0 K
wer which their master does not venture to as- vIII.
me. In order to check an uiurpation which must s-
ave annihilated justice and security in the Spanish
olonies, by fubjeding the lives and property of
1 to the will of a single man, the viceroys have
een prohibited, in the nolt explicit terms, by
peated laws, from interfering in the judicial
roceedings of the courts of Audience, or from
elivering an opinion, or giving a voice with re-
e& to any point litigated before them *. In some
articular cafes, in which any question of civil
ight is involved, even the political regulations of
e viceroy may be brought under the review of
e court of Audience, which, in those inftanccs,
ay be deemed an intermediate power placed be-
een him and the people, as a constitutional bar-
er to circumscribe his jurifiition. But as legal
ftraints on a person who ric1refents the lovereign,
d is clothed with his authority, are little suited
the genius of Spanish policy, the hcfitation and
cerve with which it confers this power on the
ourts of Audience, are remarkable. They may
vise, they may remonfirate, but in the event f
direct collision between their opinion and the
ill of the viceroy, what he determines must be
arried into execution, and nothing remains for
ni, but to lay the matter before the king and the
ouncil of the Indiest. But to be entitled to re-

lonfirate, and inform against a person, before
iho1n all others muse be silent, and tamely submit
his decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity
lthe courts of Audience. This is farther aug-
centcd by another circumflancc. Upon the dcath

of

ecop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35 44.

3 44. l). il. tit. iii . 36. 37.

'I'olorz. 1 )cjure In l. lib. v. c. 3. .40,41. Rccop. lib. ii,
t. x1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1. 34. Lib. v. tit . ix. 1.1.

3 0 0 Kos a viceroy, without any provision of a fuccc?,
VIII. by the king, the supreme power is vestcd in l
^-C- court of Audience resident in the capital of t,

viceroyalty, and the senior judge, aflifted by li
brethren, exercises all the unctions of the vicero
while the office continues vacant -. In mattcrstli
come under the cognizance of the Audie.ccs, ir
the course of their ordinary juri Ifdictiou, as cu;i:
of justice, their sentences arc final in evcry litil.
tion concerning property of less value than I:
thousand pesos; but when the ubje& in dilpc,
exceeds that fum, their decisions arc uhjcea to ii
view, and may be carried by appeal befure ti.;
royal council of the Indiest.
Council of IN this council, one of the mofl confidcrablc

the ndi the monarchy for dignity and power, is vflcdl ;!

supreme government of all the Spanifli domin;;
in America. Itwasfirft efiablifhed by Ferdin,,nt!
in the year i5 I, and brought into a more pcrl:
form by Charles V. in the ycar I524. Its ilii'
Its power, diOtion extends to every department , ccclcfitiiail

civil, military, and commercial. All laws n c
ordinances relative to the govcrnmcnt and pclii,
of the colonies originate there, and mull bc,,
proved of by two-thirds of the mcmbcrs, bcI;3
tlicy are issued in the name of the king. All tic
officers, of which the nomination is cirvcii:
the crown, arc conferred in this council. 'oil
each pcrlon employed in America, fi'-mn the .ic.
roy downwards, is accountable. It rcvicws tli:
condu, rewaxrds their services, and inftiu ie thi
punifinmcnts due to their nalvcrlations, It. lot
it is laid whatever intelligence, cither plllici 0
secret, is received from America, and ever)y f;:l ill

01

* Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 57, &c.
t Recop. lil. v. tit. xiii. I. i, &c.
. Recop.. lib. ii. tit. ii. 1. . 2, &c.

359

of improving the administration, the police, or B 0 K
the commerce of the colonies, is submitted to its III.
consideration. From the first institution of the r
council of the Indies, it has been the constant ob-
jet of the catholic monarchs, to maintain its au-
thority, and to make such additions from time to
time, both to its power and its splendor, as might
render it formidable to all their fubjets in the
New World. Whatever degree of public order
and virtue still remains in that country, where so
many circumfiances conspire to relax the former,
and to corrupt the latter, may be ascribed in a
great measure to the wife regulations and vigilant
infpetion of this refpetable tribunal *.

As the king is supposed to be always present in Cara de

his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in Contrata
the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been inflituted, in order to regulate such commer-
cial affairs, as required the immediate and pcrfo-
nal infpetion of those appointed to superintend
them. This is called Cafli de la Conlratacion, or
the house of trade, and was eflablifhed in Seville,
to whole port commerce with the New World was
confined, as early as the year I501. It may be fn-
confidercd both as a board of trade, and as a court tins.
of judicatucr. In the formcr capacity, it takes
cognizance of whatever relates to the intcrcourlf
of Spain with America, it regulates what comnmo-
dities fllould be exported thither, and has the in-
fpclion of 'uch as arc received in return. It dc-
cidcs concerning the departure of the flects for the
Weft Indies, the freight and burden of the sips,
their equipment, and deflination. In the latter
capacity it judges with rclicc to every :!:1.'on,
civil or commercial, or crinillal, arising ill (:: -
qucnce of the tranfahions of Spain with America;

and
* ;olorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. 1. 2.

B O O Kand in both these departments, its decisions are

VII . exempted from the review of any court but that of
'~T-r/ the council of the Indies ".

SUCH is the great outline of that system of go-

vernment, which pain has cflabliied in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
subordinate boards and officers employed in the
adminifiration of justice, in collecting the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of
the country, to delcribe their different funciions,
and to inquire into the mode and effect of their
operations, would prove a detail no lels intricate
than minute and unintcrefting.

r aeon s'ecrHe firt object of tle Spallifh monarchs was to
exclusive secure the productions of the colonies to the pa-
trade. rent slate, by an ablolute prohibition of any in-

tercourle with foreign nations. 'I hey took pof-
feflion of America by right ci cnqueft, and con-
fcious of the feeblcnefs of their infant lettlements,
and aware of the difficulty in eflablifhing their
dominion over unch vast regiolns, or of rtating
so many rclucant nations under the yoke, they
dreaded the intrusion of fir:.,icrs; thlc even
hunned their inlpction, and ci: avi:eT, d to kcci
them t a diftancc from their o;fis. This Ipirit
of jcaloul' and cxclufion, which at irft was natu-
ral, and rlhalis nicccfihay. alignmcnted as tilcir
polTeflions in iAuicrica exict(lc(i, and the value of
thci calnic tl be ncu c fully :d':dcrfto, In con-
Ic(tiucinc of it, a lylieil: of coloniizing was intro-
ducec, to \hilich there had !iliicto beccn n1othing
hiilar among mankind. l Inhe iacicIut world, it
xvas not unonlnomon to 1lend !forh colonies. But
thicy wcre of two kinds eonl. ' lhcy lie cithcr
migrations, which C1rved to dilbiIlecn a at of

its

*.Recop. lib. i, tit. i. Veisin Norte de a Contratacion,
360

its fuIpcrluous fubjcEls, when they muitiplied tooB O O K
tlft ibr the territory which they occupied: or they VIII.
ecrc military dctaclhmiicis iatioincd, as garrisons, ^
in a conquered province. The colonies of some
Grcck republics, and the swarms of northern bar-
barians' which fettled in different parts of Europe,
were of the first fpccics. The Roman colonies
were of the lecond. In the former, the connec-
tion with the other-country quickly ceased, and
they became independent states. In the latter, as
the disjuncien was not complete, the dependence
continued'. In their American settlements, tiC Regulations

for thatpur.

Spanilh monarchs took what was peculiar to each,pfol'a'p
and fludied to unite them. By fending colonies
to regions so remotc, by eftablifling in each a form
of intcrli p;olicv and adininiftration, under dif-
tinli governors, and with peculiar laws, they dis-
joine! ' them from the mother-country. By rctain-
ing n their o' ds th! ri;hts of legif:'-'ion as
well is that of lipofing taxes, togc':..' ';iL;; the
power of nominating the persons who illed every
department, civil or military, they secured their
dependence. Hlappily for Spain, the situation of
her colonies was luch, as rendered it poflible to re-
duce this new idea into practicc. Almiot all the
countries which she had dil'covcrcd and c ocupied,
lay within the tropics. The produtions of that
large portion of the globe are different fron, rhole
ot Europe, even in its most southern provinces.
'l'he (lualities of the climate and of the foil natu-
rally turn the indufiry of those who fettl tere
into new channels. When the Spaniards firfl took
poi)fIclion of their domains in America, the pre-
cious nictals which they yielded were the only ob-
jct tha attracted their attention. Even when their
cflbris began to take a better dirction, they em-
ployed thcilnclves alinoft wholly in rearing ucl,
)cculiar produtions of the climate, as, froi their

rarity

36

BO OK rarity or value, were of chief demand in the mo

VIIi. thcr-country. Allured by vast prol'pes of im-
' nil mediate wealth, they disdained to waftc their in-

duftry on what was less lucrative, but of luperior
moinc t. In order to render it impoifible to cr-
rect this error, and to prevent them from making
any efforts that might interfcre with those of Spain,
the cftablifhnicnt of icvcral 1tpccies of manufactures,
and even the culture of the vine, or olive, are pro-
hibited in the colonics , under severe penaltiest.
They must trust entirely to the mother-country for
the objcts of primary necessity. Thcir clothes,
their furniture, their instruments of labour, their
luxuries, and even a confidcrable part of the pro-
viiions which they conlume, wcre importc(d from
Spain. During a great part of the fixtecnth cen-
tury, Spain poffefllng an cxtenfive commerce and
flourifiling nianuftaturcs, could supply with eale
the growing dcnmands of her colonics, from her
ow'n ftorcs. 'The produce of their mines and
plantations was given in exchange for tlihfe. But
ail that the colonies received, as well as all that
they gave, was conveyed in Spauifli bottoms. No
vc!hel belonging to the colonies was ever permittcd
to carry il;e .,lllnodities of America to Europe.
Evenl the commrcial intereouric of one colony
'xvih another, was either abfolutelv prohibited, or
lihiiild by many jealous rcefriAions. All that
Am 'lrica yields flows into the ports of Spain; all
th:;t it con!imlns nimu iflue frol thLlem. No bo-
rc:it cr can enter one of its colonies without x-
pt i; permiiln ; no veflcl of any foreign natinl
is rctivcdl illto their harbours; and tlhe pains of
death, with confil laiol of movcallcs, are d-
nmliinecd aai.intt every inhlabitant w\lio prculls to
traide wtitl tem l. ''hus the colonics arc kclpt i

a {late

Sec NO'TE LXXV. 1 1. Ullon Rea1n. dIcs Mi.nus.
1c. }). 20t. i Rccopil, lib. ix. tit. xxvii. . 1. 4. 7, &c.
362

a slate of perpetual pupillage; and by the intro- B o 0
ducion of tis commercial dependcnce, a refine- VJII.
nc'i': in policy of which Spain fct the firit example
to thic Europcan atios, the iprcnacy of the pa-
rent slate hath bccn nmaintaincd over' remiote colo-
nies during two centuries and a half.

Sucli arc the capital maxims to w hich the Spa-s 5lo'pro-

?'

' : of p0.

nil-f nmonarchs Icen to have attended in frming pulation
their new fcttl :ncnts in America. But they could oln EU-
nor plant with the lame rapidity that they had dc- lpe
stroyed; and, from many concurring caul's, thcir
progress was extremely flow in filling up the i-
nicn!c void which their devaflations had occasion-
ed. As oon as the rage for dilfco. ry and adven-
turc began to abate, the Spaniards opened their
eyes to dangers and difirecfes, which at firfr they
did not perceive, or hd de!pilcd. The numerous
hardflips with which the members of in.lint co-
lonies have to truggle, the difca!es of unwhole-
some climates, fatal to the confiitution of Euro-
peans; the difficulty of bringing a country, co-
vered with forests, into culture ; the want of
hands necefiary for labour in toame provinces, and
the flow reward of industry in all, unlefis where
the accidental discovery of mines enriched a few
fortunate adventurers, werc evils universally cflt
and magnified. )ilcouragecl by the view ofthcllc,
Ihe spirit of migration was io much damped, that
sixty years after the difcovcry of the New World,
the number of Spaniards in all is provinces is
computed not to have cxcccdccl fifteen thouilld

TU'll mode in which propcrty was dill iribu inl I)couraoed

lhe Spanish colonies, and tli regulations ctla-l by 'l,lol;t
blificd with rcli,(el to the tranfillilion of it, wlhc-
ther by dlccnt, or by lalc, were extremely un-

iavourablc
See NOTE LXXVI.

36.

0 0 K favourable to population. In order to promote

n
;VIHII rapid increase of people in any new settlement, pro-

perty in land ought to be divided into ifmall shares,
and the alienation of it should be rendered ex-
tremecly eali But the rapaciousness of the Spa-
niih conquerors of the New World paid no re-
gard to this fundamental maxim of policy; and,
as they possesscd power, which enabled them to
gratify the utmost extravagance of their wishes,
many of them seizcd diftrits and provinces of
vast extent, and held them as enco:?iendas. By
degrees they obtained the privilege of converting
a part of these into AMayorafgos, a species of fief,
introduced into the Spanilh fyllem of feudal ju-
ritprudcncc-, which can neither be divided nor
alienated. Thus a great portion of landed proper-
ty, under this rigid form of entail, is withheld
from circulation, and dccends firom father to son
unimproved, and of little value cither to the
proprietor or to the community. In the account
which I have given of the reduction of Peru, va-
rious examples occur of enormous tracfs of coun-
try occupied by oime of the conquerorst. The
cxccflcs in other provinces were finilar, for as the
valc of the lands which they acquired was ori-
ginally eftirnated according to the number of In-
dians which lived lupo them, America was in ge-
neral lb thinly pcopled, that only difirics of grcat:
extent could afford fich a number of labourcrs,
as might be employed in the mines with any profI
pcit of confiderabic gain. The pernicious cf-
icls oi' tholc radical errors in the dillribution and
natu re of propeCrt)' in the Spauilh I'Cttllcmcnts, are
lelt throulgh every departmcnt of industry, and
slay be confidered as one great caulc of a pro-

grcls

'' Dr. Smibh I.irtilry, ii. 166<).
'j Rccop. libi, iv. til. iii. 1. 2..

24 Bouk VIl

1

ij

1
j

grefs in population f much flower than that B 0 0.
which has taken place in better constituted co- VIII.
lonies*.

To this we may add, that the support of the andtle n

enormous and expenlive fabric of their ecclefafti-t. 'e
cal eftablifhmiet, has-been a burden on the Spa-policy.
nifh colonies, which has greatly retarded the pro-
grefs of population and industry. The payment
of tithes is a heavy tax on industry ; and if the ex-
action of them be not regulated and circumscribed
bythe wifdoin o' the civil magistrate, it becomes
intolerable and ruinous. But, instead of any re-
ftraint on the claims of ecclesiastics, the inconfide-
rate zeal of the Spanish legislators admitted them
into America in their full extent, and at once im-
posed on their infant colonies, a burden which is
in no flight degree opprcflive to society even in its
mofi improved ftatc. As early as the year I501,
the payment of tithes in the colonies was enjoined,
and the mode of it regulated by law, and every
article of primary neccility, towards which the at-
tention of new ettlers must naturally be turned,
was fubjccted to that grievous cxa&tiont. Nor
were the demands of the clergy confined to articles
of fimplc culture. Its more artificial and opcrole
produdcions; Ilch as lugar, indigo, and cochincal,
were soon declared to be tithcable t; and thus the
indufiry of the planter was taxed in every stage of
its progrcls, from its udcft cfiay to its highcit im-
provement. TIo the weight of this legal inpofition,
the bigotry o-f the Alcrican Spaniards has made
many voluntary additions. From their fond de-
light in lthe cxlcrnal polmp and paradc of religion,
and from fuperititious rcvcrcnce lor ccclcfiallics of
every denomination, they have bcftored profile

donatives

See NOT'E XXVIT. 1 Recop. lib. i, tit. xi. . 1.
t Ibid. 1. 3. anld 4.

36

o o t{ donatives on churches and monasteries, and have
VIII. unprofitably wafted a large proportion of that
;+r-' wealth, which might have nourilhcd and givcn

vigour to productivc labour in growing colonies.

,'rious or- BuT lo fertile and inviting are the regions of
',lsoilo- Ainerica, which the Spaniards have occupied,
lonies. that notwithstanding all the circumstances vwllich

have checked and retarded population, it has gra-
dually increascd, and filled the colonies of Spain
with citizens of various orders. Among tclc,

apetnes the Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diftin-
firt. guifhed by the name of Chapetones, are the sift in

rank and powcr. From the jealous attention of
the Spanifhi court to secure the dependence of the
colonies, every department of confequcncc is
filled by perbons sent from Europe; and in order
to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being em-
ployed, each must bring proof of a clear defccnt
from a, family of Old Ch'rijiias, untainted with any
nmixture of Jcwilh or Mahometan blood, and nevcr
disgraced by any censure of the inquisition . In
such pure hands, power is deemed to be ahfely
lodged, and almost every public funclion, from
the viceroyalty downwards, is committed to thcmn
alone. Every pcrlbn, who by his birth, or rcfi-
dcncc in America, may be ulpccted of any at-
tachmcnt or intcrcft advcrfc to the mother-coun-
try, is the objcct of diftrult to fucli a degree, as
amounts nearly to an xclufion from all offices of
confidence or authority t. By this conli)icuous
predilection of the court, the Chapetones are
rai fed to ch a pre-eminence in America, that they
look down with dildain on every other order of
I ncn.

* ecop. lil. ix. tij. ; v. . 15, 16.
' Sce NOTE LXVII.

THE charater and slate of tle Creoles, or de- B 0 o K

fcendants of Europeans iettled in Anicrica, the VIII.
second class of Iubje&{s in the rfpanifh colonies, -r '
has enabled the Chapetones to acquire other ad-Clre°1cst'e
vantages, hardly lels conidcrabl. than thole which
they derive from the partial fvo-lr of government.
'I'hough some of the Crcolian race arc dccccndcd
fiiom the conquerors of the New World ; though
others can trace up their pedigree to the noblest
families in Spain ; though many are poeffed of
ample fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence
of'a sultry clin.atc, by the rigour of a jealous go-
vernment, and by their despair of attaiining that
ditlindtion to which mankilln naturally aire,
the yigour of their minds is tb entirely broken,
that a great part of them waste life in luxurious in-
dulgences, mingled with an illiberal fuperflition
still more debaing. Languid and uninterprizing,
the operations of an ative extended commerce
would be to thenm ol cunberfoine and oppreflive,
that in almost every part of America they decline
engaging in it. The interior traffic of every co-
lony, as well as its trade with the neighbouring
provinces, and with Spain itfllf, are carried on
chiefly by the Chapetoncs *; who, as the recom-
pcene of their indullry, amals iminenic wealth,
while the Creoles, funk in sloth, are satisfied with
the revenues of their paternal cfatcs.

FROM this flated conmpetition 'or powerl a:nd Rvalip

wcaltli, between thole two orders of citizens, and acltcc,
the various paliions excited by a rivalihip lo intc-
rct ing, their hatred is violent and imnplacable.
On every occaiion, fynploms of this aversion
break out, and the coillmon appellations wlvich
';ach bellows on the other, arc as contimpltuous as

.liolc
V oy. dC Ullon, I. 27, l. Voy. dc Frczicr, 227

367

o o 0 donatives on churches and monafiterics, and have
VIII. unprofitably wafted a large proportion of that
h-¥-i- wealth, lwhich might have nourithed and given

vigour to produdtive labour in growing colonies.

C;rious or- B3UT lo fertile and inviting are the regions of
'rol oO- America, which the Spaniards have occupied,
lionies. that notw ithfanding all the circumfiances wlich

have checked and retarded population, it has gra-
dually increased, and illed the colonies of Spain
. vvith citizens of various orders. Among thclc,

apto the Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diftin-
ifi fn. guilhed by te name of Cizapetones, are the first in

rank and powcr. From the jealous attention of
the Spanifl court to secure the dependence of the
colonies, every department of confequcnce is
filled by persons sent from Europe; and in order
to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being em-
ployed, each must bring proof of a clear dcfccnt
fromn a family of Old Criians, untainted with any
nmixture of Jewish or Mahlometan blood, and iievcr
disgraced by any censure of the inquisition . In
such pure hands, power is deemed to be iafely
lodged, and almost every public function, from
the viceroyalty downwards, is committed to themn
alone. Every pcrfon, who by his birth, or rcfi-
dcncc in America, may be uljcefted of any at-
taclhmnt or intercit advcrfc to the mother-coun-
try, is the objcet of dillruit to fuchl a degree, as
amounts nearly to an cxclufion from all offices of
confidcnce or authorityt. By this confpiicuous
prcdiletion of the court, the Chapetones are
railed to luch a pre-cminence in America, that they
look down with dilfain on every other order of
men.

* Recop. lill. ix. tit. :vI . 1. i5, 16.
' See NOTE LXXVII.

TIHE character and slate of the Creoles, or de- B O 0 K

fcendants of Europeans icttled in America, the VIII.
second clals of fubjeas in the rfpanifh colonies, -r
has enabled the Chapetones to acquire other ad-Cre°lst0h
vantages, hardly lels conlihdrabl¢ than thoe whllich
they derive from the partial favour of government.
Though some of the Crcolian race arc dcfccndcd
froni the conquerors of the New World ; though
others can trace up their pedigree to the noblest
families in Spain; though many are poffefied of
ample fortunes, yet, by the cenrvating influence
of a iuliry clinate, by the rigour of a jealous go-
vernment, and by their deipait of attaining that
diftin&ion to wllich mankind naturally aspire,
the yigour of their minds is so entirely broken,
that a great part of then waste life in luxurious in-
dulgences, mingled with an illiberal superstition
still more debasing. Languid and uninterprizing,
the operations of an ative extended commerce
v'ould be to them lb cumberfotie and opprcflive,
that in almost every part of America they decline
engaging in it. The interior traffic of every co-
lony, as well as its trade with the neighbouring
provinces, and with Spain itclff, are carried on
chiefly by the Chapetones ; who, as the recom-
pcunc of their indufiry, amas imnenfc wealth,
while the Creoles, fink in sloth, are latisficd with
the revenues of their paternal eftatcs.

FROM tllis ated competition for power and Rivalihip

wcalth, between those two orders o' citizens, and hBt.CCi1
the various pafliios excited by a rivalfhip lb inte-
rciting, their haired is violent and implacable.
On every occasion, lfympIoms of this avcrlion
break out, and the coimmon appellations vwhich
aceli bellows on the other, are as contcmlptuou as

tl.olc
Voy. d Ullozi, . 27, 5I. Voy d Fzicl, 227.

367

B O O K those which flow from the most deep-rooted na

VIII. tional antipathy ¢. The court of Spain, fromu
-rT- e refinement of distrustful policy, cherifhcs thole

feeds of discord, and foments this mutual jealoufv,
which not only prevents the two most powerful
clafies of its fubjets in the New World from com-
bining against the parent state, but prompts each
with the most vigilant zeal, to observe the motions
and to counteract the fchernes of the other.

A mixed THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanish co-
race forms r , a
the third or- lonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of an
deof ci- European and a ncgroe, or of an European and

Indian, the former called Alldattoes, the latter
IeJfizos. As the court of Spain, fblicitous to in-
corporate its new vassals with its ancient fubjccts,
early encouraged the Spaniards fettled in America
to marry the natives of that country, several alli-
ances of this kind were formed in their infant co-
lonies t. But it has been more owing to licentious
. indulgence, than to compliance with this inju!nc-

tion of their fbvereigns, that this mixed breed has
multiplied so greatly, as to conflitute a considerable
part of the population in all the Spanish fcttlemcnts.
The several stages of descent in this race, and the
gradual variations of shade until the African black,
or the copper-colour of America, brighten into an
European complexion, are accurately marked by
the Spaniards, and each distinguished by a pecu-
liar name. Thofc of the first generation arc now
confidered and treated as Indians and negrocs;
but in the third descent, the charaEleriflic huc of
the forncr dilappcars ; and in the fifth, the decper
tint of the latter is so entirely effaced, that they can
no longer be diftinguifiecd from Europeans, and are

entitled

& Gage's Survey, p. 9. Frezier, 226.
' Recopil. lib. vi. it. i. 1. 2. ll. errera, dec. i. lib. v. c. 12

Dec. iii. lib. vii. c. 2.
36.8

cntitled to all their privileges *. It is chiefly byB O -K
this mixed race, whole frame is remarkably robust VIII.
and hardy, that the mechanic arts are carried on, '
and other active functions in focicty arc discharged,
wiich the two higher clafics of citizens, from
pride, or from indolence, diciain to exercilct.

T'iil: negroes hold the fourth rank among the Negrote

.inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. The intro-fourthorder.
duCtion of that unhappy part of the human pecies
into America, together with their fcrviccs and Iuf-
icrings Lherc, liail be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to point out a peculiarity in their situation udcr
the Spanilh dominion. In several of their fettle-
nicnts, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
hllicHy employed in donmefic fervicc. 'hey form
a principal part in the train of luxury, and are che-
rifcd and caressed by their fupcriors, to whose
vankvi and plcalures they arc cqually subservient.
Their drcls and appearance is hardly lcs splendid
thau that of their maflers, whoec manners they imi-
tatc and lwhofi pallions they imbibe t. Elevated
by [his dillinltion, they have afilumed such a tone
of fupcriority over the Indians, and treat them
with fucl inlblence and scorn, that the antipathy
between the two races has become implacable.
Even in Peru, whcre negroes are more numerous,
and employed in field-work, as well as domcftic
tcrvice, they maintain their ascendant over the In-
dians, and their mutual hatred lubfifts with equal
violcnce. The laws hlave industriously fomcntcd
this aversion, to which accident gave rife, and by
imol rigorous injuntions, have endcavoured to

VOL. 1I. 1 b prevent

* Voy. de Ulloa, i. p. 27.

- Ibid. p. 29. Voy. de
louzucr, p. 101. MOle:lez. Teforos, Vcrdaderos, i. 354.

.1 Gage, p. 56. Voy. de Ulloa, i. 45 .

369

B Q 0 K prevent every intercourse that might form a bond of

VIII. union between the two races. Thus, by an artful
^y policy, the Spaniards derive frength from that

which is the weakness of other Europcan colonies,
and have secured as associates and defenders, tho'c
vers persons who elfewherc are objcs of jealoul'
and terror. .

Then THE

Indians Indianform the last, and the mons de-

form the aft r
orderofciti-preffed order of men in that country, which be-
zens. longed to their ancestors. I have already traced

the progress of the Spanish ideas with refpe to
the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the mobt important of their more
early regulations, concerning a matter of so much
consequence in the adminifiration of their new do-
minions. But since that period to which I have
brought down the hiflory of Anerica, the infor-
mation and experience acquired during two cen-
turies, have enabled the court of Spain to make
such improvements in this part of its American
system, that a short view of the present condition
of the Indians may prove both curious and inte-
refting.

sent condi BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in 1542,
tion. which have been so often mentioned, the high prew

tensions of the conquerors of the New World, who
confidered its inhabitants as slaves, to whose service
they had acquired a full right of property, were
finally abrogated. rom that period, the Indians
have been reputed freemen, and entitled to the
privileges of fubjc&s. When admitted into this
rank, it was deemed just, that they hould contri-
bute towards the lupport and improvement of the
focicty, which had adopted them as members.

But

* Reropil. lib. vii. tit. v. 1. 7. Herrera, dec. viii. lib. vii.
c. 1i. Frezier, 244.

But as no considerable benefit could be expeted B O O K
from the voluntary efforts of' men, unacquainted VIII.
with regular industry, and averic to labour, the --s-
court of Spain found it ncceflary to fix and lecure,
by proper regulations, what it thought reasonable
to cxact from them. With this view, an annual Tax impot.
tax was imposed upon every male, fiom the age of"d o"them.
eighteen to fifty; and, at the fame time, the nature
as well as extent of the services which thcy might
be required to perflorm, were alcertaincd wvith pre-
cifion. This tribute varies in diffircnt provinces,
but if we take that paid in New Spain as a medium,
its annual amount is nearly four hilliugs a eicad,
no exorbitant urnm in countries where, as at the
source of wealth, the value of money is extremely
.lo\w*. The right of levying it likewile varies.
In America, every Indian is either an immediate
Vassal of the crown, or depends upon rome subject
-to whom the diflril, in wlich he resides, has been
glanted for a limited time, under the dcnomina-
tion of encoi'encda. In the former cafe, about three-
fourths of the tax are paid into the royal trealury;
in the latter, the fame proportion of it belongs to
the holder of the grant. When Spain first took
poficfion of America, the greater part of it was
parcelled out among its conquerors, or those who
first fettled there, and but a fnall portion reserved
for the crown. As thole grants which were made
for two lives only--, reverted iucceflively to the so-
vcrcign, lie had it in his power either to diflufe his
favours by grants to Icew proprietors, or to aug-
ment his own revenue by valuable annexationst.

Bb Of

Sec NO'TE LXXIX. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 42.

HLacluyt, vol. iii. p. 461. 1' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii,
1. 48. Solorz. de nd. jure, lib. ii. c. 16.

; See NOTE LXX.

B O - K Of these, the latter has been frequently chofcn

VIII. the number of Indians now depending immediate-
'^~s~^ ly on the crown, is much greater than in the first

age after the conquest, and this branch of the royal
revenue continues to extend.

he services The benefit arising from the services of the In-
demanded. dians accrues either to the crown, or to the

holder of the encomienda, according to the fame
rule observed in the payment of tribute. Thole
fcrvices, however, which can now be legally ex-
a&ted, are very different from the servile tasks
originally imposed upon the Indians. The na-
ture of the work which they must perform is de-
fined, and an equitable recompence is granted for
their labour. The flated services demanded of the
Indians, may be divided into two branches.
They are either employed in works of primary
necessity, without which society cannot subsist
comfortably, or are compelled to labour in the
mines, from which the Spanish colonies derive
their chief value and importance. In confe-
quence of the former, they are obliged to assist in
the culture of maize, and other grain of necef-
fary consumption; in tending cattle, it ercEting
edifices of public utility, in building bridges,
and in forming high roads t; but they cannot
be confirained to labour in raising vines, olives,
and sugar-canes, or any fpecics of cultivation,
which has for its obje&t the gratification of lux-
ury, or commercial profit .. In consequence of
the latter, the Indians are compelled to undertake
the more unpleasant talk, of extracting ore from
the bowels of the earth, and of refining it by

ucccfiivc

t Rccopil. l;b. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Solorz. de Ind. jure, ii-

lib. i. c. 6, 7. 9. :1 Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. c. 1. 8. Solor.
lib. i.c. 7. N .41, &c.

successive processes, no less unwholesome than B Q 0
operose . VII,

THE mode of exacing both these services is '

the fame, and is under regulations framed with a Txeinogd
view of rendering it as little oppreflive as possible thof.
to the Indians. They are called out alternately
in divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can be
compelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the
number called out must not exceed the seventh part
of the inhabitants in any diftritd. In New Spain,
where the Indians are more numerous, it is fixed
at four in the hundred . During what time the
labour of those Indians, who are employed in agri-
culture, continues, I have not been able to learn §.
But in Peru, each Mita, or diviion, destined for
the mines,'remains there fix months; and while
engaged in this service, a labourer never receives
less than two shillings a day, and often earns more
than double that fumn I No Indian residing at a
greater distance than thirty miles from a mine, is
included in the Mita 'or division employed in
working it ; nor are the inhabitants of the low
country expo'ed to certain deftrucion, by com-
pelling them to remove from that warm climate, to
the cold elevated regions where minerals abound§§.

THE Indians iwho live in the principal towns, Ho go-

are entirely subjet to the Spanish laws and magif- ve*md.
trates; but in their own villages, they are governed
by Caziques, some of whom are the delcendants
of their ancient lords, others are named by the
Spanifl viceroys. Thcee regulate the petty as-
fairs of the people under them, according to

maxims

* See NOTE LXXXI. 1'' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 2 .
:| Ibid. 1. 22. § See NOTE LXXXII.
11 Ulloa Entreten. 265, 266. ' Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. . .
$§ Ibid. 1. 9, and tit. i. 13.1 Sec NOTE LXXXII.

373

B O K maxims ofjuftice transmitted to them by tradition

VIII. from their accftors. To the Indians, this jurii-.
%rT-a diction, lodged in fnch friendly hands, afiords

force consolation; and so little formidable is this
dignity to their new aflters, that they often allow
it to descend by hereditary right . For the far-
ther relief of men so much exposed to opprciion,
the Spanish court has appointed an officer in every
difiria, with the title of Protector of te Indians.
It is his function, as the name implies, to aficrt the
rights of he Indians, to appear in their defence
in the courts of justice; and by the interpoation
of his authority, to fct bounds to the encroach-
ments and exactious of his countrymen t. A cer-
tain portion of the reserved fourth of the annual
tribute, is dtined for the salary of the caziqucs
and protecors, another is applied to the mainte,
nance of the clcrgy employed in the inlruction of
the Indians t. Another part ccms to be appro-
priated for their support, and the payment oftheli
tribute in years of famine, or when a particular
difirid is aficded by any extraordinary calamity §.
Becides this, provision is made by various laws,
that hospitals lfall be founded in every new et-
tlenient ibr the rcception of Indians . Such hof£
pitals h-ave accordingly been crcced, both for the
indigent and infirm in Lima, in Cuzco, and in
Mexico, where the Indians are treated with ten,
dernefs and humanity .

Suc-r is the great outline ofjurifprudence and

policy by which the Indians are now governed
in the provinces belonging to Spain. In thole

regulations

* Solorz. de jure Ind. lib. i. c. 26. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vii.
t Solorz. lib. i. c. 27.. 2 201. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vi.
- Rccopil. lib. vi. it. v, 1. o3. Tit. xvi. 1. 2--1 5.
g Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. 13. Ij Recp iil. lih. i. tit. iv.

1. I, &c. ¶ Voy. dc Uloa, i. 429. 509. Churchill, iv. 496.
374

regulations of the Spanish monarchs, we discover B O O
no traces of that cruel system of extermination, VIII.
which they have been charged with adopting; and ~Tl
if we admit, that the neceflity of fccuring ihbfift-
ance for their colonies, or the advantages derived
from working the mincs, give them a right to avail
themifelves of the labour of the Indians, we muff
allow, that the attention with which they regulate
and recompense that labour, is provident and fa-
gacious. In no code of laws is greater oblicitude
displayed, or precautions multiplied with more
concern for the preservation, the ecurity, and the
happiness of the i'bjed, than we discover in the
collection of the Spaniih laws for the Indies. But
those latter regulations, like the more early ediEts
which have been already mentioned, have too of-
ten proved ineffectual remedies against the evils
which they were intended to prevent. In every
age, if the fame causes continue to operate, the
fame effects must follow. From the immense dif-
tance between the power entrusted with the execu-
tion of laws, and that by whole authority they are
enaced, the vigour even of the most absolute go-
vernment must relax, and the dread of a superior
too remote to observe with'accuracy, or to punish
with dispatch,s must insensibly abate.' Notwith-
standing the numerous injuntions of the Spanish
monarchs, the Indians still susser, on many occa-
sions, both from the avarice of individuals, and
from the exactions of the magifiratcs, who ought
to have proteded them, unreasonable tasks are
imposed; the term of their labour is prolonged,
and they groan under all the insults and wrongs
which are the lot of a dependent people *. From
tome information on which I can depend, such op-,
preflion abounds more in Peru, than in any other

colony.,
" See NOTE LXXXIV,

0 , Kcolony. But it is not general. According to' the
VtII. accounts, even of thole athors who are most ex-

posed to exaggerate the fuflerings of the Indians,
they, in several provinces, enjoy not only eic,
but affluence; they posiess large farms; they are
mafiers of numerous herds and flocks; and, ;y
th'e knowledge which they have acquired of Europe-
an arts and industry, are fuppliecl not only with
the neccffarics, but with many luxuries of life .

Ecciefiafti- AFTER explaining the form of civil policy in
calconftitu- the Spanifih colonies, and the state of the various
colonic. orders of perlbns subjet to it, the peculiarities in

their ecclesiastical constitution merit confidcration.
Notwithstanding the fuperfitious veneration with
which Spaniards arc devoted to the Holy See, t-e
vigilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand early
prompted him to take precautions against the in-
troduction of' the papal doniniun into Aiicr-ica.

Rearaints With this view iie lolicited Alexander \VI. ior a
jurif:slaio. grant of the tythcs in al the newiy-di!cowcrcd

countries t, which he obtained on condition of his
making provision for the religious inftruUton of
the natives. Soon after, Julius II. conferred on
him the right of patronage, and absolute dcif'po'al
of all ccclefiafftical bcncices there '. Both thcb
pontiris, unacquainted VWith the value of what he
demanded, betlowed those donations with an
inconfidcrate liberality, which their fucceflors
have oitlcl lamented, and wiflied to recall. In
conlequencc of thofc grants, the Spaniih mo-
narchs have become, in effe&, the heads of the
.American church. In them the arlninillration of
its revenues is veiled. 'I.'heir nomination of pcr-
itols to supply vacant bencfices i instantly cn-

firmcd

* Gage's Survey, p. . . 90 lol. 1 9, &c. -I. Bulla A!e:x.

VI. A. I). 15o0L, ap. Solorz. de jllrclnd. ii. p. 498. . BLlla
Julii, ii. I5o),. Ibid. 509.

firmcd by the pope. Thus, in all Spanish Ame- B 0 o i
;ica, authority of every fpccies entres in the VIII.
crown. There no collision is kno'wn between i
fpiriual and temporal jurildiction. The king is
tlc only f'upcrior, 'hi's name alone is heard, and
(lo dependence upon any foreign power has been
introduccd. Papal bulls cannot be admitted into
Amnerica, nor are they of 'any force there, until
they have been prcvioufly examined, and approv:
el of bh the royal council of the Indies ; and if
any bull should be surreptitiously introduced, and
circulated in America without obtaining that ap-
probation, ecclcfiafiics are required not only to
pre-vcnt it fr'm taking effet, but to seiz'e all the
copies of it, and tran!rnrit them to the council of
the Indicst. To this limitation of the lpapaljurif-
diAtion, equally singular, wkhether we conrider the
age and natio n

in which it was devised, or the jea-

lous attention vwith which Ferdinand and his fuc-
cefibrs have 'ftulicd to maintain it in full force t
Spain is indebted, in a great meafire, for the uni-
form tranquillity which -has reigned in her Ameri-
can dominions.

'I'-i hierarchy is eftablified in America in the Forma&d

fame form as in Spain, with its fiill train of arch- e ' oftv
bilhops, bishops, deans, and other dign;taries. churc in
The inferior clergy are divided into 'thrce classes, O Spnil'h
unrer the denomination of C'bras, Dofirineros, and
Mil/ioneros. The first are parilh-priefts in those
parts of the country where the paniards have
fettled. T'he econd have the charge of Ihch clif-
trios as are inhabited by Indians, fubjeAcdc to the
Spanish government, and living under its protec-
tion. The third are cmployed in convcrti'ng and

i'n'fi ru.iin g

* Recopil. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. 2. and Autas dcl Confejo de la

Indias, clxi. ' lKccop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55. '1 Recop.
lib. i. palim.

p Q K inftru&ting those fiercer tribes, which disdain sub,
VIII. miflion to the Spanish yoke, and live in remote or
'y inaccessible regions, to which the Spanish arms

have not penetrated. So numerous are the eccle-
fiaftics of all those various orders, and iuch the
profule liberality with which many of them are
endowed, that the revenues of the church in Ame-
rica are immense. The superstition of Rome ap-
pears with its utmost pomp in the New World.
Churches and convents there are magnificent and
richly adorned; and on high fftivals, the display
of gold and silver, and precious flones, is such as
exceeds the conception of an European :. An ec-
clefiaftica establishment so splendid aid expensive,
is unfavourable, as has been formerly observed, to
the progress of rising colonies; but in countries
where riches abound, and the people are so de-
lighted with parade, that religion muff aflume it
in order to attra& their veneration, this propensity
to orientation has been indulged, and becomes lets
pernicious.

pernicious TE early institution of monasteries in the Spa-
effeasof nifh colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in multi-
inutios. plying them, have been attended with confe-

quences more fatal. In every new settlement the
firt objec is to encourage population, and to in-
cite every citizen to contribute towards augment-
ing the firength and number of the community.
During the youth and vigour of society, while
there is room to' pread, and sustenance is procured
with facility, mankind increase with amazing ra-
pidity. But the Spaniards had hardly taken pof-
feflion of America, when, with a nioft prepofle-
rous policy, they began to cre& convents where
persons of both sexes were shut up, under a vow
io defeat the purpocfs of nature, and to counteran

the

* Voy. de Ulloa, i. 430.
378

the first of her laws. Influenced by a misguided B O O I
piety, which ascribes tranfcendcnt merit to a state VIII.
of celibacy, or allured by the profpect'of that ,'Tr
liallcis eale, which, in sultry climes, is d'emed
luprcme felicity, numbers crowd into those man-
sions of' loth and fuperftitiou, and are loft to foci-
ety. As none but perlbns of Spanish extract are
admitted into the monasteries of the New World,
the evil is more sensibly felt, and every monk or
un, may be confidered as an aive member with-
drawn from civil life. The impropriety of such
foundations in any situation where the extent of
territory requires additional hands to improve it,
is lo obvious, that some catholic states have cx-
prelsly prohibited any person in their colonies
from taling the monafic vows *. Even the Spa-
nifh monarchs, on tome occasions, seem to have
been alarmed with the Ipreading of a spirit so ad-
verse to the increase and prosperity of their colo-
nics, that they have endeavoured to check it t. But
the Spaniards in America, more thoroughly under
the influence of superstition than their countrymen
in Europe, and diredted by ecclesiastics more bi-
goted and illiterate, have conceived uch an high
opinion of monaflic fandity, that no regulations
can restrain their zeal; and, by the exccfs of their
ill-judged bounty, religious lioufes have multiplied
to a degree no lcfa amazing than pernicious to so-
ciety .

IN viewing the state of colonies, where the num- Cha-raerf

c cclcfiaftict

her and influence of ecclesiastics is so great, th in panith
charactcr of this powerful body is an objcSt thatAmerica.
merits particular attention. A confidlcrable part
ps the secular clergy in Mexico and i'eru arc na-

tives

* Voy. de Ulloa, ii4.24 '1' Herrera, dec. v. lib. ix.

c. I. 2. Recop. lib. i. tit. iii. 1. , 2. Tit. iv. c. z. Solorz.
lib. iii. c. 23. See NOTE LXXXV.

00 Ktives of Spain. As persons accustomed by their
VI-I. education to the retirement and indolence of aca.
"sV demic life, are more incapable of ative cnter-

prize, and less dilpofed to firike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclcfiaflical avcen-
turers by whom the American church is recruited,
are commonly fucli as, from merit or rank in life,
have little profpet of success in their own coun.

of the fecu- try. Accordingly, the lfcular priests in the New
iars World are still lel diflinguiihcd than their bre-

thren in Spain, for literary accomplifhncnts of
any species; and though, by the ample proviiiou
tWhich has been made for the American church,
many of its members enjoy that ease and inde-
pendence, which is favourable to the cultivation
of fciencc; the body of lccular clergy has hardly,
during two centuries and a half, produced one
author hose works convey such ueful informia-
tion, or poffcfs such a degree of merit, as to be
ranked among thole which attrat the attention of
cnlightened nations. But the greatest part of the
ecclefiaflics in the Spanish fettlemnents arc rcgulars.

oftheregu- On the difcovry of Aneriea, a new field opened
lars. to the pious zeal of the monastic orders; and, with

a becoming alacrity, they immediately sent forth
niiffionaries to labour in it. The first attempt to
instruct and convert the Americans, was made by
nmonks; and, as ioon as the conqucft of any pro-
vince was complctced, and its cclcfiaftical efta-
blifhnrent began to alune some form, the popes,
as a reward of their service, permitted the miflion-
aries of the fonr mendicant orders, to accept of
parochial charges in Amcrica, to perform all l)i-
ri tal furnAiois, and to receive the tythes, and
other cimolileiints of the benefice, wil hout dcpcil-
ing on the juril li 'lion of the bishop of the diocclc,
or being fubjci to his cenulrcs. In conlfcqlucnct
of this, a new career of ufcf'lnels, as well s nWc

objctis

38i

objecs of ambition presentcd thcmfelves. Wheln- B o o i
ever a call is made for a irefh i;pply of niiiliona- VI.
ries, nen of the molt daring and alpiring minds, T
ilrpatient under the rctraint of a cloiftcr, weary
of its insipid uniformnity, and fitigued with the
irklome repetition of its frivolous functions, offer
their fervicc witl eagerness, and repair to the New
World in quest of liberty and diftinion. Nor
do they purlue thcem without luccelf. The highest
ccciefiaftical honours and most lucrative prefer-
ments in Mexico and Peru, are often in the hands
of regulars; and to them chiefly the Americans
arc indebted for any portion of science that is cul-
tivated among them. They arc alniofi the only
Spanih eccleliaftics, from whom we have received
accounts either of the civil or natural history of the
various provinces in America. Sonic of them,
though deeplytinged with the indelible fuperftitiori
of their profefliou, have pubiifhcd books w\:ich
give a favourable idea of their abilities. The na-
tural and moral history of the New World, by the
Jeluit Acofta, contains more accurate obfcrvations,
perhaps, and more found cicnce, than are to be
found in any decliitiou of rcmoic countrics pub-
lifhcd in the fixtecinth cettury.

BUT the hlaie diulltt with monaflic liif, to D:rToiute

which America is indebted lor onlme infiruAors of nan,' o'
worth and abilities, filled it with othcrs of a very i;.n.
(lilcrcnt chara(Ier. The gi(dly, the profligte, the
avaricious, to whom the pu\C ovrt anl rigic dilci-
plinc of a convent are ito!crablc, confidcr a mil-
lion to America as a rclcalc froill I)orltiication and
bondage. There tliey Ibo) Obtaill lImic parochial
clarge, and, tair lremcoved, by tlicir litruatio, firom
tlc inl'pcction of tllcir illollltiic I;tperiors, and c-
clapt, by their chartatecr, frolm the jui-il'di&iio of'
their dcioc.:lan i , llcy arc hlardly Iubjccl to any

con tr ul.
' Avein.lo Thef. I;li;. ii. 253.

i o o K controul. According to the tefiniony of the mo

vIIi. zealous catholics, many of the regular clergy in
'-y-' the Spanish fcttlements, are not only dcftitute of

the virtues becoming their profeflion, but regard.
less f that external decorum and refpct for the
opinion of mankind, which prelerve a fernblance
of worth, where the reality is wanting. Secure of
inpunity, forne regulars, in contempt of their vow
of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and are
so rapaciously eager in amafling wealth, that tey
become the iioft grievous oppreflors of the Indi.
ans, whom it was their duty to have protcdcd.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their vow
of chaflity, indulge with little dilguife in the nol
difblute licentioulnefs*.

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for re.

drefling enormities so manifest and offensive. Se-
veral persons no less eminent for piety than difl
crnment, have contended, that the regulars, in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought tc
be confined within the walls of their cloisters, and
ihould no longer be permitted to encroach on the
funtions of the secular clergy. Some public-lpi
tited magifiratcs, from conviction of its being nc
ceffary to deprive the regulars of a privilege bic
flowed at fifft with good intention, but of whicl
time aid experience had dilcovcrcd the pcrnicioul
effefs, openly countenanced the secular clergy ir
their atteniptt to aiert their own rights. Th'
16xs. Prince D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Philil

III. took mcafures fo'dccifive and effcunal for cir
cumfcribing the regulars within their proper fplcrc
as struck them with general conternation f. T he
had rccourlc to their usual arts. T'hey alariic{
the fupcrftitious, by rcprefenting the procccding
of the viceroy as innovations fatal to rcligior

''lhe
Sec NOTE LXXXVI. See NOTE LXXXVII

they employed all the refinements of intrigue, in B 0 O K
order to gain persons in power; and fccondcd by the VIII.
powerful influence of the Jesuits, who enjoyed all -i
the privileges which belonged to the Mendicant
ordcrs in America, they iiade a deep impreflion
on a bigoted prince, and a weak ministry. The
ancient prafice was tolerated. The abuses which
it occasioned continued to increase, and the cor-
ruption of Monks, exempt from the eftraints of
discipline, and the infpeation of any fperior, be-
came a dilgrace to religion. At lalt, as the vene-
ration of the Spaniards for the monastic oders
began to abate, and the power of the Jesuits was
upon the decline, Ferdinand VI. ventured to ap-
ply the only effedual remedy, by issuing an edid
prohibiting regulars of every denomination from June15d
taking the charge of any parish with the cure of
fouls; and declaring, that on the demise of the
present incumbents, none but secular priests, sub-
jed to the jurifdiiion of their diocesans, hall be
presented to vacant benefices `. If this regulation
is carried into execution with ftcadinefs, in any
degree proportional to the wisdom with which it
is framed, a very considerable reformation may
take place in the ecclefiafltical slate of Spanish
America, and the ecular clergy may gradually
become a rfpeatable body of men. The deport-
nient of many ecclefiafiics, even at prefcnt, seems
to be decent and exemplary, ohcrwitf they would
not be held in such high ellimation, and possess
fich a wonderful afccndant over the minds of
their countrymen, throughout all the Spanish set-
tle meits.

BUT whatever merit the Spanih cclefiaflics in Smallpr.
America may poffcls, the lcccfs of their endca- verting the

v outs hIndian to
VOUT8 chriftlianit.
* Real Ccdula MS. penes me.

383

B 0 OK vours in communicating thc knowledge of true rc-

VIII, ligion to the Indians has been more imperfet than
-r- might have been expeted, either from the degree

of their zeal, or from the domiinion which they
had acquired over that pople. For tnis vaious
realns mlay be alighed. Thcfirft nliiiionarics, iu
their ardour to make proflyte.s, admittcd te pco-
plc of America into te christian church, without
previous inftru&tion in the doctrines of religion,
and even before they thcmnelvcs had acquired iiich
knowledge of their language, as to be able to ex-
plain to them the myflcries of faith, or the prc-
cepts of duty. Refling upon a fubtlc diitinction
in scholastic theology, they adopted this firangc
practice no less inconfiftcit with the spirit o a
religion, which addreffcs itself to the underfland-
ing of men, than rcpugna.t to the dictatcs of rea-
fonl. As soon as any body of people, overawed
by dread of the Spanish power, moved by the c-
ample of their own chiefs, incited by levity, or
yielding from mere ignorance, cxprefled the flight-
eft desire of embracing the religion of their con-
quer.ors, they were instantly baptized. W¥ hile this
rage of conversion continued, a single clergyman
baptized in one day above five thousand Mcxicans,
and did not desist until he was lo exhausted by
fatigue, that he was unable to lift his hands . In
the courle of a few years, after the reduction of
the Mexican empire, the sacrament of baptlifn
was adwinifrcrcd to more than four illionst.
Prolclytes adopted with such inconfidcrate hafc,
and who were neither iftrudledl in the nature
of te tenets, to which it was iuppored thcy had
given a.ient, nor taught the abuirdity of tholil

wj icli

P. Torrilio, MS. Tnrquem. Mon. Ind. lilb. xvi. c. .
1 P. Torribio, Ibid. 'Ior:ltcm. lib. xvi. c. .

38s

which they were required to relinquish, retained B O O K
their veneration for their ancient superstitions in VIII.
full force, or mingled an attachment to its doc. '
trines and rites, with that slender knowledge of
Christianity which they acquired. These senti-
ments they transmitted to their posterity, into
whose minds they have funk so deep, that the
Spanish ecclesiastics, with all their induflry, have
not been able to eradicate them. The religious
institutions of their ancestors are frill remembered,
and hield in honour by the Indians, both in Mex-
ico and Peru; and whenever they think themselves
out of reach of infpedion by the Spaniards, they
assemble and celebrate their idolatrous rites *.

BUT this is not the mroft unsurmountable ob-

ftacle to the progress of Christianity among the
Indians. The powers of their uncultivated under-
standings are so limited, their observations and
refleEtions reach so little beyond the mere objects
of sense, that ihey seem hardly to have the capacity
of forming abftrat ideas, anrd possess not language
to express them.' To'fuch men, the sublime and
spiritual do&rines of Chrifianity must be incom-
prehenfible. The numerous and splendid cere-
monies of popish worfiip, as they catch the eye,
please and interest them; but when their inftruc-
tors attempt to explain the articles of faith, with
which those external observances are onnet'ed,
though they liften with patience, they so little
conceive the meaning of what they hear, that their
acquiescence does not merit the name of belief.
Their indifference is still greater than their incapa-
city. Attentive only to the present moment, and
ingroffed by the objets before them, the Indians
so fildom refect upon what is pal, or take thought

VOL. II. C c for

* Voy de Ulloa, i. 341. Torquem. lib. xv. c. 23. Lib. xvi,
c. 8. Gage, 71.

Q O K what is to come, that neither the promises nor
VITI. t4reats of religion, make much iplpreflion 9lpo
h.~tr~ them; arqd while their foresight rarely extends o

ar as the next day, it is aliploft il)poflible to in,
spire them with solicitude about the concer s of a
fiture world. Astonished equally at their flownceI
of comprehcnfiop, and at their infcnfibi!ity, olme
qs the early miniornaries pronounced them a race of
pen so brutish, as to be incapable of underftan]-
ipg the first principls of religion. A council held
at Lirna, decreed, that on account of this incapa-
fity, they oqght to be excluded froml.the acrat:.l!t
of the Eucharist *. And though Paul ill. by hi5
famous bull, iuiled in the year I537, declared thci
to be rational creatures entitled tp ail the privilegcs
9fchriftians ; yet, after the laple of two cptu-
ries, during hbich they have bee1 ncieiicrs of the
church, lb imperfeEt are their attaimncnts in kno .
ledge, that very few pofltcs such a portion of lpiri-
t.al difcernmeit, as to be deemed worthy of being
admitted to the holy communion t. From this idea
of their incapacity and ipmpcrfed knowledge of
;eligipp, when th, zeal of Philip IS. eitablilicd the
inquisition in Aimerica i the year 57o, the Indiani
were exempted fromi the jurifldicion of that levcrc
tribunal §, apd fill coptipe uc unde the jllipctiio,
ps their diocqfns. 'Even after the most perfct in-
frruffpn, their faith is held to be feeble and di,
bious; an tough time of tcqi have been taught
the learned laguages, ad have gone through the
oifdinary coure of' academic cducation with ap-
plause, their Itiaily i still bo riuch 'iufpeEted, that
jio ndiap is eihir ordaipCd 4, pricf, or cccived
i4tP any rcligiu ,prd41r 11.

Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20. t Torqucm. lib. xvi. c. 25.

Garcia origcn. 311. 1 Voy. de Ulloa, i. 344. § Rccop.
lib. vi. tit. i. 1. . Torlquem? lib. -,vii. c. 13. c
MOTE LXXXVl1..
, .>>

FpOM this brief survey, some idea may be frm- o K

ed of the interior state of the Spanifht colonies. VIII.
The various produtions with which they supply -r
and enrich the mother-country, and the yftem of Produaions

' of the Spa~

commercial intercouric between them, come next nia cols.
in order to be explained. If the dominions ofntCi.
Spain in the New World, had been of such mode-
rate extent, as bore any proportion to the parent
ttate, the progress of her colonizing might have
been attended with the fame benefit as that of other
nations. But when, in leds than half a century,
her inconsiderate rapacity had seized on countries
larger than all Europe, her inability to fill such val
regions, with a number of inhabitants sufficient
for the cultivation of them, was so obvious, as to
give a wrong direction to all the efforts of the calo.
nifts. They did not form compa& settlements,
where industry, circumscribed within limits, bot
in its views and operations, is condu&ed with tha;
fober persevering spirit, which gradually converts
whatever is in its possession to its proper use, and
derives from it the greatest advantage. Instead of
this, the Spaniards, educed by the boundlet
profped which opened to them, divided their pofp
feflions in America into governments ofvaf lx.
tent. As their rumber was too small to a;tept
the regular culture of the immense provinces, which
they occupied rather than peoplecd, they bent thei
attention to a few objects, that allured them wit;
hopes of sudden, and exorbitant gain, and turn¢~
away with contenppt from the humblcr paths of in-
duftry, which lead more slowly, but with greater
certainty, to wealth and increase of national
girength.

OP all the methods by which riches may be aC-.From thei

quired, that of searching for the precious metals i"'s:.
is one of the most inviting to men, who are either
unaccustomed to the regular afiiduity with which

C c z the

IB 0 0 K the culture of the earth, and the operations of coin,

VIII. merce must be carried on, or so enterprising and
^*rw rapacious, as not to be satisfied with the gradual

returns of profit which they yield. Accordingly,
as. ton as the several countries in America iere
fubjeciedto the dominion of Spain, this was alnioft
the only method of acquiring wealth which occur-
red to the adventurers, by whom they were con-
quered.. Such provinces of the continent as did
not allure them to fettle, by the profpcEt of their
affording gold and silver, were totally negleted.
Those, in which they met with a diIappointnient
of the sanguine expectations they had formed, were
abandoned. Even the'value ofthe islands, thefirit
fruits of their discoveries, and the first 'object of
their attention, funk 'fTo much in their eflimatio,;
when the mines which they had opened there
-were exhautfed, that they were deserted by many
of the planters, and left to be occupied by more
indufirious poffefirs. All crowded to Mexico and
Peru, where the vait quantities-of:gold and silver
found aniong the natives, 'wh6 fearehed for them
with little industry, and less kill;' protmifed an
uncxhauftcd tfore, as the recompence of more in-
telligent ind persevering efforts.

Discovery of- DURIN'G several years,'the ardour of their re-
to and o searches was kept p by hope, rather than 'luccefs.
coteca.. At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi, 'in Peru,

were accidentally difeovered in the year 545'.;
by an Indian,' as he was clambering up the moun-
tain, in purfoit of a Llama which had straycd from
his flock. Soon after the minesof Sacotecas, in
New Spain, little inferior to 'the other in value,
were opened. From that time, successive difcove-
rics have been made in both 'colonies;, and silver

mines
* Fernandez, p. i. lib. xi. c. x.

tnines are now so numerous, that the working ofB O O K
them, and of ome few mines of gold in the pro- VIII.
vinces of Tirra Fierma, and the new kingdom of 'VT
Granada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a yftem no lets
complicated than interesting. To describe the
nature of the various ores, the mode of extracing
them from the bowels of the earth, and to explain
the several proceftes by which the metals are fepa-
rated from. the fubflances with which they are
mingled, eiher by the aion of fire, or the attrac-
tive powers of mercury, is the province of the na-
tural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the
historian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the moun Richle

wlhich (hey

tains of the New World poured forth their trea-^ild.
fures, astonished mankind, accuflomed hitherto to
receive a penurious supply of the precious metals,
from the more scanty fores contained in the mines
of the ancient hemisphere. According to princi.
pies of computation, which appear to be extremely
moderate, the quantity of gold and silver that has
been regularly entered in the ports of Spain, is
ecqual in value to four millions flerling annually,
reckoning from the year I492, in which America
was discovered to the present time. This in two
hundred and eighty-three years, amounts to eleven
hundred and thirty-two millions. Immense as this
funm is, the Spanish writers contend, that as much
more ought to be added to it, in consideration of
the treasure which has been extraced from the
mines, without paying duty to the king. By this
account, Spain has drawn from the New World a
supply of wealth, amounting at leait two thousand
millions of pounds sterling *.

THB

* Uztar;z Theor. y Prat. deComercia, c. 3, Herrera, dc.
viii. lib. xi, c. 15. See NOI'FLXXXIX.

064 K TiE mines, which have yielded this amazing
VIII. quantity of treasure, are not worked at the expence
<"-"' of the erown, or of the public. In order to en-
piritths courage private adventurers, the person who dif-
gives rife. covers a new vein, is intitled to the property of it.

'Upon laying his claim before the governor of the
province, a certaifi extent of land is measured off,
and a certain number of Indians allotted him, un-
der the obligation of his opening the mine within
a limited time, and of his paying the customary
duty to the king, for what it shall produce. In-
vited by the facility with which fueh grants are ob-
tained, and encouraged by some striking examples
of success in this line of adventure; not only the
sanguine and the bold, but the timid and diffident
enter upon it with astonishing ardour. With vast
objects always in view, fed continually with hope,
and expecting every moment that fortune will un-
veil her stores, and give them up to their withes,
they deem every other occupation insipid and un-
interesting. The charms of this pursuit, like he
rage for deep play, is so bewitching, and take filch
full possession of the mind, as een to give a new
bent to the natural temper. Under its influence;
the cautious become enterprizing and the covetous
,profuse. Powerful as this charm naturally is, its
force is augmented by the arts of an order of men
&knoWn in Peru, by the cant name of searchers.
These are commonly persons of desperate fbrtuncs,
who, availing themnfeles of some kill in minera-
logy, accompanied with the insinuating manner,
and confident pretensions peculiar to projctors,
'addrels the wealthy and the credulous. By plau-
1fible dferiptions of the appearances which they
have difcovcrcd of rich.veins hitherto unexplored;
:bylproducing when requisite, fpccirmens of promif-
ing ore; by affirming, with an imposing affurancc,
tHat lucets is'certain, ahd that the cipeece nuft

fie

be trifling they seldom fail to persuade, An afIo- B C( 0 i
ciation is formed; a imall tuln is advanced by VIII.
each co-partner; the mine is opened ; the/fetrcher ' ';
is intrufied with the sole direction of every opera-
tion : u foreseen difficultics occur; new deinands
of moncy are made; but amidst a fuccelIion ofdif-
appointments and delays, hope is never extin-
guiihed, and the ardour of expectation hardly
abates For it is observed, that if any peribn once
enter this ieducing path, it is almost impoflible to
rcturn; his ideas alter, he fecnis to be poficffed
wvith another spirit, visions of imaginary wealth
are cohtinually before his eyes, and he thinks,
and speaks, and dreans of nothing elle i.

SUCi is the spirit that mufl be formed, where- Fatal effcas

ever the aive exertions of any society are chiefly of it
employed in working mines of gold and filvcr,
No fpilit is moie advcrle to such improvemcnts in
agriculture and commerce, as render a nation
really opulent. If tlhe yflen of adminifiration in
the 1panifli colonies had been founded upon the
principleA of found policy, the powcr and inge-
luity of the legislature would have been exerted
with ag nmuch ardour, in rcftraining its ftbjeas from
Iulch pernicious industry, as is now' ehployed in
alluring them towards it. " Projects of mining,
" (Iay a good judge of the political conduct of
"nations) inflead of replacing the capital employed
"in theim, together with the ordinary profit of
"flock, comnmnonly absorb both capital and profit.
" They arc the projc(ts, therefore, to which of all
"otlihcr, a prui'deht law-giver, who clflred to i-
"crealc thie capital of his natioh, would liaft clule
"to giVc any eti'adi'dinary cncdtulagciicrit, or to
" turn tovards theil a gr-ater shard of that calpital

" ihadt
* Ulloa ihttdon;- P i~.

D O K" than would go to them of its own accord;
VIII. " Such, in reality, istheabfurd confidence, which

" all men have in their own good fortune, that
"wherever there is the least probability of success,
" too great a share of it is apt to go to them of its
"own accord*." But in the Spanish colonies
government is tfudious to cherish a spirit which it
1hould have laboured to depress, and by the fanc-
tion of its approbation augments that inconsiderate
credulity, which has turned the aive industry of
Mexico and Peru into uch an improper channel.
To this may be imputed the slender progress which
they have made during two centuries and a half,
either in useful manufa&ures, or in those lucrative
branches of cultivation, which furnish the colonies
of other nations with their staple commodities. In
comparison with the precious metals, every bounty
of nature is so much despised, that this extrava-
gant idea of their value has mingled with the idiom
of the language in America, and the Spaniards
fettled there denominate a country, rich, not from
the fertility of its foil, the abundance of its crops,
or the exuberance of its pafturcs, but on account of
the minerals which its mountains contain. In quest
of these, they abandon the delightful plains of
Peru and Mexico, and retort to barren and uncom-
sortable regions, where they, have built some of the
largcft towns which thcy possess in theNew World.
As the ativity and enterpriie of the Spaniards
originally tdok this dire&ion, it is now so difficult
to bend them a different way, that, although from
various causes, the gain of working mines is much
decreased; the fascination continues, and almost
every person, who takes any aive part in the
commerce of New Spain or Peru, is fill engaged
in some adventure of this kind f.

BUT

* Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c. ii. 155.
'] See NOTE XC.

BUT though mines are the chief objects of at- B 0 0 K

tention to the Spaniards, and the precious metals VIIL.
which they yield, form the principal article in '-r
their commerce; the fertile countries which they Other ¢eo-
poflefs, supply them with other commodities ofthespani(h
iuch value or fearcity, as to attract a considerable co"o1"e.
degree of attention. Cochineal is a production
almost peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, and it
yields such profit, as amply rewards the pains and
attention employed in rearing the curious iniCts
of which this valuable drug is composed, and pre-
paring it for the market. Quinquina, or Jesuit's
Bark, the most salutary simple, perhaps, and of
Iloft restorative virtue, that Providence, in com-
passion for human infirmity, has made known unto
man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords a
lucrative branch of commerceS. The indigo of
Guatimala is uperior in quality to that of any
province in America, and cultivated to a confider-
able extent, Cacoa, though not peculiar to the
Spanish colonies, attains to its highest state of per-
fcdion there, and from the great consumption of
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is a
valuable commodity. The tobacco of Cuba, of
more exquisite flavour than any brought from the
New World; the sugar railed in that island, in
Hispaniola, and in New Spain; together with
drugs of various kinds, may be mentioned among
the natural productious of America, which enrich
the Spanish commerce. To thlee must be added
an article of no irticonfiderable account, the ex-
portation of hides; for which, as well as for many
of thofc which I have cnumeratcd, the Spaniards
are more indebted to the wonderful fertility of t;c
country than to their own torefight and industry.

The
* See NOTE XCI.

393

B O0 K The doieftic animals of Europe, partiiularly Hion.

VII, ed cattle, have multiplied in the New World with
'- a rapidity whbich almost exceeds belief. A fcW

years after the Spaniards fettled there, the herds
of tame cattle became so numerous, that th;it pro-
prictois reckoned them by thousands*. Lc's at-
tention being paid to them, as they continued to
increase, they were suffered to run wild, and
spreading over a iduntry of boundlcfs extent, un-
der a mild climate and covered ith rich pafturc,
their number became immcnfe. They range over
the vast plains which extend from Buehos Ayres,
towards the Andes, in herds of thirty dr forty
thousand; and the unlucky traveller who once falls
in among them, may proceed several days before
he can dilentangle hirmfilf from among the crowd
that covers the face of the earth, and femls to
have no end. They are hardly lcfs numerous in
New Spain, and in everal other provinces: these
are killed merely for the fake of their hides; and
the slaughter at certain seasons is tb great, that the
fiench of' the carcases which are left in the field,
would aflcEt the air, if large packs of wild dogs,
and vast flocks of gallinazos, or American vulturcs,
the most voraciou of all the feathered kind, did
not instantly devour thcm. The number of' thole
hides exported in every fleet to Europe is prodigi-
ous, and is a lucrative branch of commerce f.

ALMOST all those articles may be conficcrcd as

staple commodities peculiar to America, and diffi-
rent, if we except that last mentioned, from tlie
produOsions of the mother-country.

Advantage WN.EN. the importation into Spain of those va-
which Spain .
derives from rious articles from her colonies, first became a&ive
her colonies. and

* Oviedo ap Rnmut. iii. ol. B. Hackluyt, iii. 4ó. 51 .
t Acofta, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo iiilt. of Chili. Church.

Colle . iii. 4.7. fep. Ibid. . p. 680. 692. Lcttres Edit. xiii.
235. Feuille i. 249.

I
194

hnd considerable, her interior industry and manu- o K
fatures were in a slate lo pro'pcrous, that with VI1.
the product ofthcfc, he was able both to purchase c
the commoditics of the New World, and to an-
fwcr its growing demands. Under the reigns of
Ferdinand and Ilabclla, and Charles.V. Spain was
one of the most industrious countries in Europe;
Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk, were
fb extensive, as not only to urnifh what was fuffi-
cient for her own consumption, but to afford a fur.
plus for exportation. When a market for them,
formerly unknown, and to which fhc alone had
access, opened iu America, she had recourse to
her domestic fore, and found there an abundant
supply*. This new enployment must naturally
have added vivacity to the ifpirit of industry. Nou-
rifhed and invigorated by it, the manufacures,
the population, and wealth of Spain might have
gone on increasing in the fame proportion with her
colonies. Nor was the slate of the Spanish ma-
rine at this period less flourishing than that of its
manufacures. In the begiLning of the fixtecnth
century, Spain is said to have possessed above a
thouland merchant ffips t, a number probably fr
lupcrior to that of any nation in Europe. By tire
aid which foreign trade and domestic ilduftry give
reciprocally to each other i their pogrels, thbe
augmentation of both nmut have been rapid and
cxtenfive, and Spain might have received the fame
accellion of opulence and vigour ro l her acquifi-
tions in the New World, that other powers hae
derived from their colonies there.

BUT various caulcs prevented this. It is'v/ithl Vllyfhe

nations as with indivicuals, when wealth flows in nowdcrive
gradually, and with modera-te incrcale, i-t fecds tl"'m
and nourishes that aivity hich is friendly o

COIlI ni erce,

t Campomanes, ii. 140.
* Se NOTE XCII.

B 0 0 K commerde, and calls it forth into vigorous and

VIII. well-colndued exertions; but. when it pours in
'T'" suddenly, and with too full a fiream, it overturns

all fober plans of industry, aid brings along with
it a taste for what is wild, and extravagant, and
daring in bufieifs or in aion. Such was the great
and sudden augmentation of power and revenue,
that the pofflflion of America brought into Spain,
and obme symptoms of its pernicious influence
upon the political operations of that mnanarchy
soon began to appear. For a coifiderable time,
however, the supply of teafire from the New
World was scanty and precarious, and the genius
of Charles V. conduted public measures with such
prudence, that the effcts of this influence were
little perceived. But when Philip II; aended
the Spanish throne, with talents far inferior to
those of his father, and remittances from the cola.
nies became a regular and vast branch of revenue,
the fatal operation of this rapid change in the irate
of the kingdon, both on the monarch and his peo-
ple, was at once conspicuouS. Philip, poffefling
that spirit of tinceafing aliduity, which often cha-
raderizes the ambition of men of moderate talents,
entertained such an high opinion of his own re-
sources, that he thought nothing too arduous so;
him to undertake. Shut up himself in the solitude
of the Escurial, he troubled and annoyed all the
nations around him. He waged open war with the
Dutch and English; he encouraged and aided a
rehellious fa6ion in France; he conquered Portu.
gal, and maintained armies and garrisons in Italy
Africa, and both the Indies. By such a multipli.
city of great and complicated operations, purluc
with ardour during the course of a long rcigai
Spain was drained both of men and mone . Un
der the weak adminifiratiot of his fuceccfor, Phi
lip III. the vigour of the nation continued to de

crcae
396

crease, and funk into the lowest decline, when Bo OK
the inconsiderate bigotry of that monarch expelled VIII.
at once near a million of his most industrious sub- --
jes, at the very time when the exhaulted slate ofA.p'. 161
the kingdom required ome extraordinary exertion
of political wisdom to augment its numbers, and
to revive its strength. Early in the seventeenth
century, Spain'felt uich a diminution in the num-
ber of her people; that from inability to recruit her
armies, she was obliged to contraa her operations.
Her flourishing manufactures were fallen into de-
cay. Her fleets, which had been the terror of all
Europe, were ruined. Her extensive foreign com-
merce was loft. The trade between different parts
of her own dominions was interrupted, and the
fiips which attempted to carry it on, were taken
and plundered by enemies, whom they once def-
pifed. Even agriculture, the primaryobjet ofin-
duilry in every prosperous state, was neglected,
and one'of the most fertile countries in Europe
hardly raised what was iufficient for the fipport of
its own inhabitants.

IN proportion as the population and manufac- Rapidde-

tures of the pairent state declined, the demands oft'inc f its 1
her colonies continued to increase. The Spaniards,
like their monarchs, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, deserted the
paths of industry, to which they had been accuf-
tomcd, and repaired'with eagerness to those rcgi-
ons from which this opulence ifflued. By this rage
of emigration, another drain was opened, and the
ftrcngth of the colonies augmented by exhauiling
that of the mother-country. 'All thole emigrants,
as well as the adventurers who had at first fettled
in America, depended abfolutcly upon Spain for
almost every article of necessary consimption.
Engaged in more alluringand lucrative pursuits, or
prevented by ecftraints which government imposed,

they

O O K-they could not turn their own attention toward4
VIII. establishing the manufaaures requisite for comfort,
C. _ able fubfiitence. They received (as I have ob.

served in another place) their clothing, their fur.
niture, whatever minifiers to the cafe or luxury of
life, and even their instruments of labour fronm
,urope. Spain, thinned of people, and void of
indufiry, was unable to supply their increasing de.
imands. She had recourse to her neighbours. The
manfaclures or the Low Countries, of England,
of France, and of Italy, which her wants called
into existence, or animated with new vivacity, fur.
nifhed in abundance whatever he required. In
vain did the fundamental law concerning the ex-
clufio of foreigners from trade with Amlerica, op.
pose this innovation. Neccffity, more powerful
than any fiatute, defeated its operations, and con-
firained the Spaniards thenfclves to concur in elud-
ing it. The Enclifh, the French, and Dutch, re-
lying on the fidelity and honour of Spanish mer-
chants, who lend their names to cover the deceit,
fend out their manufactures to America, and re-
ceive te exorbitant price for which they are fold
there, either in fecie, or in the rich commodities
of the New World. Neither the dread of danger,
ior the allureneit of profit, ever induced a Spa-
iifh fadtor to betray or defraud the pcrfon who
confided in hin ; ;nd that probity, which is the
pride and difliLltion of a nation, contributes to
its ruin. I a hort timle, not above a twentieth
part of the cmnlodiics exported to America was
of Spauifh growth or f4ibric 1-. All the reft was the
property of forcig ilerchants, though entered in
the nanme of Spauinrds. The trca'ure of the New
World may be s;lid lcnceforward tnot to have be-
longed tp Spain. 1clore it reachcd Europe, it was

anticipated
'* ;lvala Reprefentacion, p. 226. :[ Campomancs, ii. 138,

pnticipated as the price of goods purchased from B o 1
fbreigners. That wealth, which, by ap internal VIII
circulation, would have spread through each vein
of industry, and have conveyed life and a Aivity D. 61
to every branch of rrmaufacture, flowed out of the
kingdom with luch a rapid course, as neither en-
richled ior alniated it. On the other hand, the
artilans of rival nations, encouraged by this quick
sale of their commodities, improved lb much iu
.cill and indultry, as to be able to afford them at a
rate so low, that the nanufacures of Spain, which
could Iot vie with theirs, either in quality or cheap-
nets of work, wcrc fill farther depreficd. This
Ilcfirudive col:imcrcc drained off the riches of
the nation aftcr and more completely, than even
the cxtravagant chcmcs of ambition carried on by
its monarchs. Spain was so much astonished and
diftrcrecd, at beholding her Amcrican treasures
vanish almfoft.as oo a they were imported, that
Philip III. unable to iupply what was requisite in
circulation, issucd an edit, by which he endea-
voured to raise copper money to a value in curren-
cy nearly equal to that of filvcr ; and the lord of
the Peruvian and Mexican mines was reduced to a
wretched r':pedicnt, which is the last resource of
petty impovcrifhed ftatcs.

THUS the pofcfions of Spain in America have
pot proved a source of population and of wealth
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na-
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the fpi-
it of indullry subsists in full vigour, every pcrlbn
lcttled in Ibc h colonies, as are iinmilar in their situ-
tion to thore of Spain, is supposcd to give cmploy-
m-nt to three or four at hponc in iupplying his
Wvants t. But wherever the mother-country cannot
iflbrd this supply, every emigrant may be confi-

dered

t Child on trade and colonjs,
p UtarliZ, C. 04.

-B O K dered as a citizen loft to the community, and

VIII. firangers muff reap all the benefit of answering his
^-s- demands.
increased SUCH has been the internal state of Spain from
by themode the close of the sixteenth century, and such her
otregulating . s
its inter- inability to supply the growing wants of her colo.
courfewith nies. The fatal effects of this disproportion be-
America.

tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-
ing them, have been much increased by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the
intercourse between the mother-country and the
colonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing
the trade with America, and debarring her sub-
jeds.there from any communication with foreign-
ers, that all her jealous and systematic arrange-
ments have arisen. These are so singular in their
nature and consequences, as to merit a particular
explanation. In order to'fecure the monopoly at
which he aimed, Spain did not vest the trade
with her colonies in an exclusive company, a plan
which has been adopted by nations more commer-
cial, and at a period when mercantile policy was
an objeEt of greater attention, and ought to have
been better udcrftood. The Dutch gave up the
whole trade with their colonies, both in the East
and Weft Indies, to exclusive companies. The
English, the French, the Danes, have imitated
their example with refpct'to the East Indian comn
merce; and the two former have laid a finilar
restraint upon ome branches of their trade with
the New World. The wit of man cannot, pr-
haps, devifc a method for checking the progrcfs
of industry and population in a new colony
more effectual than this. The interest of thi
colony, and the exclusive company, mnuf il
every point be diametrically oppofitc; and as
the latter poffeffcs such advantages in this un-
equal conicft, that it can prcfcrib a pIlalrc

til;
lab

the terms of intercourse, the former must not only B O O K
buy dear and fell cheap, but susser the mortification VIII.
ot having the inereafe of their surplus flock dif- '
couraged by those very persons to whom alone they
are permitted to difpole of it .

S AIN, it is probable, was preservcd from fall- Thisconfin.

ill, into this error in policy, by the high ideasdto"°ne.
which the early formed coicecrning the riches ofSpain.
the New World. Gold and silver were commodi-
tic of too high value to vest a monopoly of them in
private hands. The crown wished to retain the
direction of a commerce to inviting; and in order
to ecurc that, ordained that the cargo of every
ship fitted out ior America, should be inspected by
the officers of the Casa de Contratacion in Seville,
before it could receive a licence to make the voy-
agc; and that on its return, a report of the com-
modities which it brought should be mnade to the
fame board, before it could be permitted to land
them. In consequence of this regulation, all the
trade of Spain with the New World centered in
the port:.o Sevilc, and was gradually brought into
a form, in which it has been conduóed, with lit-
tle variation, from the middle of the sixteenth
century almost to our own tinms. For the greater
iccurity of the valuable cargoes fcnt to America, as
well as for the more ealy prevention of fraud, tie
commerce of Spain with its colonies is carried on
by fleets, which fail under strong convoys. These
fleets, consisting of two squadrons, one diftinguifiecd
by the name of Galeons, the other by that of the
Flota, are equipped annually. Formerly they took
their departure from Seville; but as the port of
Cadiz has been found more commodlous, they
have failed from it fiece thq y§ar I go.

VoL. 1I. d THe

* mith's Inquiry, ii. 171.

B O O K THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firmn,

VIII. and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost
'-g'L ' every article of luxury, or neceflary conlumptiou,
Carried on
by the Gale- that an opulent people can demand, touch first at
ons. Carthagena, and then at Porto bello. To the for-

mer, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas,
the New Kingdom of Granada, and several other
provinces resort. The latter is the great mart for
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the lea-
son when the Galeons are expected, the produEt
of all the mines in these two kingdoms, together
with their other valuable commodities, is transport-
ed by sea to Panama. From thence, as soon as the
appearance of the fleet from Europe is announced,
they are conveyed across the isthmus, partly on
mules, and partly down the river Chagree to
Porto-bello. This paltry village whose climate,
from the pernicious union of excefiive heat, con-
tinual moiflure, and the putrid exhalations arising
from a rank foil, is more fatal to life than any per-
haps in the known world, is im mediately filled with
people. From being the residence of a few negroes
and mulattoes, and of a miserable garrison relieved
every three months, its streets are crowded with
opulent merchants from every corner of Peru,
and the adjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the
wealth of America is exchanged for the manufac-
tures of Europe, and during its prescribed terma
of forty days, the richest traffic on the face of the
earth is begun and finished, with that simplicity of
transaction and unbounded confidence, which ac-
and Fiota. company extensive commerce*. The Flota holds

its course to Vera Cruz. The trcafures and com-
modities of New Spain, and the depending pro-
vinces, which were deposited at Los Angeles in
expcEtation of its arrival, arc carried thither,

* See NOTE XCIII.
402

and the commercial operations of Vera Cruz, con- B 0 0 K
duded in the ilinme manner with thole of Porto- VIII.
bello, are inferior to them only in importance and 'r'
value. Both fleets, as soon as they have completed
their cargoes from America, rendezvous at the
-IHavanna, and return in company to Europe,

T'ii trade of pain with her colonies, whileBadeffeaof

thus fettered and reftrited, came neceflirily to be thisrrane-
conduied with the fame spirit, and upon the ame mn
principles, as that of an exclusive company. Be-
ing confined to a ingle port, it was ofcourfc thrown
into a few hands, and almost the whole of it was
gradually engrossed by a fiall number of wealthy
houses, formerly in cSville, and now in Cadiz.
Thct by combinations, which they can easily
form, may altogether prevent that competition
which prelervcs conmmoditics at their natural price;
and by ating in concert, to which they arc
prompted by their mutual interest, they may raifl
or lower their value at pleasure. In cont'qucnce of
this, the price of European goods in America is
always high, and often exorbitant. A hundred,
two hundred, and even three hundred per cent.
are profits not uncommon in the commerce of Spain
with her colonies*. From the fame ingrofling
spirit it frequently happens, that traders of the fe-
cond order, whole warehouses do not contain a
complete assortment of commodities for the Ame-
rican market, cannot purchale fron the more opu-
lent merchants, such goods as they want, at a lower
price than that for which they arc fold in the colo-
nies. With the fame vigilant jcalouty that an cx-
clufivc company guards againit the intrusion of the
free trader, those overgrown monopolists endeavour
to check tht progrcfs of every one whose cncroach-

D d z meits
* B. Ulloa Retab. part. ii. p. 91.

403

. O
0 K-ments they dread *. But thisrefiraint ofthe Ames

VIII. rican commerce to one port, not only affieEs its do-
'-r meftic slate, but limits its foreign operations. A

monopolist may acquire more, and certainly will
hazard less, by a confined trade which yields ex-
orbitant profit, than by an extensive commerce in
which he receives only a moderate return of gain.
It is often his interest not to enlarge, but to cir-
cumfcribe the sphere of his.a&ivity.; and instead
of calling forth more vigorous exertions of com-
mercial industry, it may be the object of his atten-
tion to check and let bounds to them. By tome
such maxim, the mercantile policy of Spain seems
to have regulated its intercourse with America.
Inflead of furnishing the colonies with European
goods in such- quantity as might render both the
price and the profit moderate; the merchants of
Seville and CadizTfeem to have supplied them with
a sparing hand, that the eagerness of competition
amongtf customers obliged to purchase in a scanty
market, might enable their factors. to dispose of
their cargoes with exorbitant gain. About the
middle of the last century, when the exclusive trade
to America from Seville was in its most flourishing
Itate, the burden of the two united squadrons of the
Galeons and Flota, did not exceed twenty-feven
thousand five hundred tonst. The supply which
such a fleet could carry mufR have been very inadc,
quate to the demands of those populous and exten-
five colonies, which depended upon it for all the
luxuries, and many of the neceflaries of life...

Remedies SPAIN early became finfible of her declension
propofd. from her former prosperity, and many refpcetable

and

* Smith's Inquiry, ii. I'l. Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i.
438.

*-t Campoinanes, Educ. Popul. i. 435. ii. 110.

405

and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts in B 0 0 K
devising methods for reviving t decaying indulf VII.
try and commerce of their country. From the 'v
violence of the remedies proposed, we may judge
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared.
Some, confounding a violation of police with
criminality against the Ifate, contended, that in
order to check illicit commerce, every person con-
vited of carrying it on, should be punished with
death, -and confiscation of all his effects . Others,
forgetting the diftintion between civil oflences
and as of impiety, insisted, that contraband
trade should be ranked among the crimes reserved
for the cognizance of the Inquisition; that such as
were guilty of it might be tried and punished, ac-
cording to the secret and summary form in which
that dreadful tribunal exercises its jurisdiction t.
Others, uninftruded by obfcrving the pernicious
effects of monopolies in every country where they
have been established, have proposed to vest the
trade with America in exclusive companies, whom
interest would render the most vigilant guardians
of the Spanish commerce against the encroach-
ments of interlopers t.

BESIDE these wild projecqs, many schemes bet-

ter digested, at first without efl'ct, and more be-
neficial, were fuggefled. But under the feeble
monarchs, with whom the reign of the Austrian
line in Spain closed, incapacity and indecision are
conspicuous in every department of govcrnmcnr.
Inflead of taking for their model the ative admi-
niftration of Charles V. they affcctcd to imitate
the cautious procrastinating wisdom of Philip II.
and destitute of his talents, they deliberated per-
petually, but determinced nothing. No remedy was

applied

* M. de Sant Cruz Comercio Suelto, p. 142.
t 'Moncada Rellauracion politica de Elfagna, . 41
| %Za;lla.y Augnon Reprefentacion, &c. p. 190.

B O K applied to the evils under which the national com-

VIII. mcrce, domestic as well as foreign, languilcdl.
'C-' These evils continued to increale, and Spain, with

dominions more extensive and more opulcnt than
any European fate, pofleTied neither vigour nor
money -, nor indufiry. At lcngth, the violence
of a great national convulsion rouzed the flnumbcr-
ing genius of Spain, and the cfbfrts of the to con-
tending parties in the civil war, kindled by the
dilfutes concerning the fucceflion of the crown at
the beginning of this century, called forth in foiie
degree the ancient spirit and vigour of the nation.
While men were forming, capable of adopting
more liberal ftntimcts, than tholf which had in-
fluenced the councils of te mnonarchy during the
course of a century, Spain cicrried from an unex-
pected source the means of availing itfclf of thcir
talents. The various powers who favoured the
pretensions either of the Auffrian or Bourbon can-
didate for the Spanifih thronc, sent lornidable fleets
and armies to their support. France, England and
Holland remitted immense fumns to Spain. The'c
were spent in tbc provinccs which bccanm the
theatre of war. Part of the American trcafurc, of
which they had drained the kingdomn, lowed back
thither. From this ara, one of the most intelli-
gent Spanish authors dates the revival of the mo-
narchy; and, however humiliating the truth may
be, he acknowledgcs that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted fbr the acquisition of a fund of
circulating fpecic, in ome mcalure adequate to the
cxigencies of the public i.

Steps to- As fooii as the Bourbons obtained quiet poflcf-
provemnt sion of the throne, they difccrncd this change in
by the Bour- the spirit 9f thc peoplc, and in the slate of the na-
alcil, tion, and took advantage of it; fbr although that

*' ; ... .... family

c T. Campomanes, i. 420.
.* See NOTE XCI'V.

f.mily has not given monarchs to Spain remark- B O O K
able for Luperiority of genius, they have all been VIII.
beneficent princes, attentive to the happiness of '"
their fubjecs, and solicitous to promote it. It was
accordingly the first objeEt of Philip V. to fupprels
an innovation which had crept in during the course
of the war, and overturned the whole yftten of the
Spanish commerce with America. The Englifhbyexcluding
and Dutch, by their superiority in naval power, fomtirag ,
having acquired such command of the lea, as to cut with Peru;
offal itercourfe between Spain and her colonies,
Spain, in order to, furnish them those ncceffaries of
life, without which they could not exist, and as
the only means of receiving from thence any part
of their treasure, departed tb far front the usual ri-
gourof its maxims, as to open the trade with Peru
to her allies the French. The merchants of St.
Malo, to whom Louis XIV, granted the privilege
tf this lucrative commerce, engaged in it with vi-
gour, and carried it'on upon principles very diffe-
rent from tholf of the Spaniards. They supplied
Peru with European commodities at a more mode-
rate price, and not in stinted quantity; the. goods
which they imported were conveyed to every pro-
vince of Spanish America, in, such abundance as
had never been known in any former period. If
this intercourse had been continued, theexportation
of European commodities from Spain lluft have
ceased, and the dependance of the colonies on the
mother-country have been at an end. 'ihe. roft
peremptory injuntions were therefore iflped, pro-' '73.
hibiting the admifiion of foreign vfels into any
port of Peru or Chili , and a Spanish squadron,
was employed to clear the South Sea of intruders,
whole aid was no longer neccfsary.

BUT

Fc Frezier Voy. 256. B. Ulloa Rtab. ii. Io4, &c. Alcedot
y Herrera Avifo, &c. 236.

B OO BurX though oh the ceflafion of the war, which

VII. was terminated by the treaty of Utrech, Spain ob-
r'':' tained relief fron one encroachment on her comi-

bnychkidg rtrcial fyfiten, fle was expoled to another .which
trade, file deemed hardly less pernicious. A-s an induce-

ment t-hat night prevail with (-ucen Anne to con-
clude a peace which France and dpain de1iref with
equal ardour, Philip V. not only conveyed to Great

'f thet En ritain the AJienla, or contract for fapplying tlle
lifhiAfiet- Spanilf colonies with negroes, ;which had formerly
toconpany. been enjoyed by France, but granted it the more

extraordinary privilege of fending an-nually to the
fair of Porto-bello a sip of five hundred tons, ladent
with Eiropean commodities. In conCequence of
this, Britlf -factories were establishcd at Carta-
gena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Buenos Ayres, and
other Spanish settlements. The veil with which
Spain had hitherto covered the Rate and tra-Iifac-
tions of her colonies was removed. The agetts of
a rival nation, rcfidingin the towns of most cxtcn-
five trade, ad of chiefrcfort, ha-: tbeft oppor-
tunities of'becoming acquainied with 'the intcrii
condition of their proviilccs, of observing their
fiated and occasional wants, and of knowing what
commodities might be inimported into theml with
the greatcft advantage, I-n con-sequence of infor-
nation b authentic and expeditious, the merchants
6f Jamaica, and other English colonics who traded
to the Spanish main, were enabled to a{bort and
proportion their cargocs so cxa&tly to the demands
of tie market, that the contraband conimierce
was carrietl on with a facility and to an cxtc!:t
unknown in any for'mer period. This, how-
ever, was not the most fatal consequence of the
Afliento to the trade f Spain.' The agents of
the British South Sea Company, under cover of
the iportatiou which they were authoriscd to
mnakc by the ship sent annually to Porto-bello, pour.
ed in their commditics on the Spanish contiineIt,

withoiut

without limitation or rcftraint. Iftead of a ship B o o K
of five hlundred tons, as fipulated in te treaty, VIII.
they uually empFloycd one which -cxcecded nine '
hundred tons ill burden. She was accompanied
by two or three otier finaller vessels, which moor-
iug ill forme ncighbouring creek, supplied her
clandcftinely with frcfh bales of goods to replace
Ihch as were 'Ild, The infpe6tors of the iair,
and officcls of the revenue, gained by exorbitant
prclents, connived at the fraud*. Thus, partly
by the operations of the company, and partly by
tlhe aivity of private interlopers, alnoft the'whole
trade of Spanift Amnrica was ingroffed by foreign-
ers. .The itmmen ie commerce of the Galeons, lor- 737
nlcrly the pride of Spain, and the envy of other
nations, funk to nothing, and the squadron ittfclf,
reduced from fifteen thousand to two thousand
tons t, served hardly any purpose but to fetch home
the royal rcvenue arising from the fifth on silver.

'HILE Spain observed those encroachments, CardalCoo-

and felt so lenfibly their pernicious effects, it wased for thi%
ilnpoliible not to make some effort to restrain them. purpose,
Her first expedient was to station hips of force,
under the appellation of G-uarda Costas, upon the
coasts of those provinces, to which interlopers
post frequently resorted. As private itereft con-
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded them
vxinilant and aive, some check was given to the
progress of the contraband trade, though in do-
minions b cxtenfivc, and Ib accelfible by t'ca, no.
number of cruisers was fufficicnt to guard against
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption of
an intercourfc, which had been carried on with o
piuch facility, that the merchants in the Britilh

colonies

* See NOTE XCV. ~ Alcetlo y.-errera, p 359,.
2amnpomancs, i. 436.

49

3 0 0 K colonies were accustomed to confider it almolt a,
VIII. an allowed branch of commerce, excited murmurs
^ry-' and complaints. These authorised, in some mea-

sure, and rendered more interefling, by several
unjuutifiable adcs of violence committed by the cap-
tains of the Spanish Guarda Costas, precipitated
V739. Great Britain into a war with Spain, by which the

latter obtained a final release from the Affiento,
and was left at liberty to regulate the commerce of
her colonies, without being restrained by any en-
gagement with a foreign power.

The use of As the formidable encroachments of the Englifl
regilerpson their American trade, had dilcovered to the
introduced'

r Spaniards the vat consumption of European goods

in their colonies, and taught them the advantage of
accommodating their importations to the occafi-
onal demand of the various provinces, they per-
civcd the ncceffi.ty of devising some method of
iupplying their colonies, different from their an-
cient one,' of lending thither periodical fleets.
' iis node of communication was not only uncer-
tain, as the departure of the Galeons and Flota
was sometimes retarded by various accidents, and
often prcventc(i by the wars which raged in Eu-
rope, but as ill adapted to afford America a re-
gular and tinel.y supply of what it wanted. The
scarcity of European goods in the Spanish fettlc-
incnts frequently became cxccfivc; their price rolt
to an enormous height; the vigilant eye of mercan-
tile attention did not fail to obfervc this favourable
opportunity, an ample fulpply was poured. in by
interlopers from the E;nglilh, the French, and
Dutch illancls; and whcn the Galeons at length
.rrived, tlhey fbund the markets so glutted, by this
illicit commcrce, that there was no demand for
the commodities with which they were loaded.
In order to recedy this, Spain permittcd a confi-
ctcrablc part of her cmmerce with Aicrica, to

be
410o

be carried on by regij/erjhips. These are fitted B o K
out, during the intervals between the fiatcd fcalons VIII.
. hen the Galcons and Flota fail, by merchants _
in Sevillc or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licenced fro
the council of the Indies, for which they pay a
very high premium, and are dcflined for those
S;oris where any extraordinary demand is fbrefeen
or expeted. By this expedient, such a regular
lupply of fresh conmmodities is conveyed to the
American market, that the interloper is no longer
allured by the ame profpet 9f cxcclive gain, or
thc people in the colonies urged by the fame necef-
irtv to engage in the hazardous adventures of con-
traband trade,

IN proportion as experience manifefied the ad- Tie galeons

vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, theabolinlcd
numnber of regifler ships increased; and at length,
in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
abolished. From that period there has been no in-
tcrcourle with Chili and Peru but by single ships,
dispatchcd from time to time as occasion requires,
and, when the merchants expet a market will open.
Thcl fail round Cape Iiorn, and convey diretly
to the ports in the South Sea the productions and
nianufacturcs of Europe, for which the people let-
tled in thole countries were formerly obliged to
repair to Porto-bello or Panamha. These towns,
as has been formerly observed, mull gradually de-
cline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their cxiftence. This disadvantage
howevcr is more than ompenfatcd, for the whole
continent of South America receives lupplies of
Europcan commodities, with b much regularity,
and in fuchl abundance, as must contribute greatly
to the happinecs and prolpcrity of all the colonies
fettlcd there. But as all the register ships defined
ior the South Seas, must fill take their departure'

ironI,

B O 0 from Cadiz, and are obliged to return thither,.

VI11. this branch of the American commerce, even in
-^,- its new and improved form, continues 'ubjet tc

*the restraints of a species of mlonopoly, and feels
tholf pernicious effects of it, which I have already
defcibed.

Schemse for NO OR has te attention of Spain been confined to
reviving ommnece. regulating the trade with its flourishing colonies, it

has extended likewise to the reviving commerce in
tlofe fcttleilents where it was neglected, or had
decaycd. Among the new taftes which the pco.
ple of Europe have acquired, in confequcnce of
their intercourse with the natives of thofc countries
which they conquered in Amcrica, that for choco.
late is one of the most univerlal. The use of this
liquor made with a paste, formed of the nut, or al.
inond of the cocoa-tree, compounded with various
ingredients, the Spaniards first learned from the
Meyxicals; and it has appeared to them, and to
the other European nations, so palatable, lb nou.
Tithing, and o wholeobme, that it has beconc a
commercial article of considerable importance.
'The 'cocoa-tree grows spontaneously in fevcral
parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the bct
quality, next to thole of Guatimala, on the South
Sea, are produced in the rich plains of Caraccas,
a province of Tierra Firme. In consequence o
this acknowledged superiority in the quality of co.
coa in that province, and its communication with
the Atlantic, which facilitates te conveyance to
Europe, the culture of the cocoa there is more cx.
tcnfive than in any diltri& of America. But the
l)utch, by the vicinity of the Icttlemcnts in tlic
finall islands of Curaeoa and Bucn-Ayre, to tli
coast of Caraccas, gradually ingroflcd the greancll
part of the cocoa-trade. The tralLic with the iii

tl!r'

',Canpoinanes, i. 134. 440.
412

ther-country for this valuable commodity ccafed B 0 o K
almost entirely; and such was the supine negli- VI.T
gence of the Spaniards, or the defctls of their~"-v'
commercial arrangements, that they were obliged
to receive from the hands of foreigners this pro-
duftion of their own colonies, at an exorbitant
price. In order to remedy an evil no less disgrace-
.lul, than pernicious to his fubjcfts, Philip V. in byefiahlilh-
the year 1728, granted to a body of merchants, an pantof'ca
exclusive right to the commerce with Caraccas and raccs.
Cumana, on condition of their employing, at their
own expence, a sufficient number of armed veflels
to clear the coast of interlopers, This focitty, dif-
Itinguified sometimes by the name of the Company
of Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain in which
it is established, and sometimes by that of the
Company of Caraccas, from the diftrit of Ame-
rica to which it trades, has carried on its operations
tvith such vigour and success, that Spain has rcco-
.vercd an important branch of commerce, which
fne had suffered to be wrcfted from her, and is

lentifully supplied with an article of extcnfive
consumption at a moderate price. Not only the
arent slate, but the colony of Caraccas, has de-
ived g'cat advantages froin this institution; fr
Ithough, at the first apct, it may appear to be
)ie of thole monopolies, whose tendency is to
heck the Ipirit of industry, instead of calling it
brth to new exertions, it has been prevented from
perating in this manner, by ikveral falttary rcgu-
ations, framed upon foresight of such bad effcts,
nd on purpose to obviate them. The planters in
he Caraccas arc not left to depend entirely on the
oinpany, either for the importation of European
onimoditics, or the sale of their own produtions.
he inhabitants of the Canary Tllands hl've the
rivilegc of flndingtthither aiinually a rcgiftcr(ilip
1 coulidcrablc burde ; and froln Vcra Cruz in
i Nev

4i3

B O O K New Spain, a free trade is permitted in every port

VIII. comprehended in the charter of the toompany. In
'-,-i confequcuce of this, there is such a conipctition,

that both with respect to what the colonies pur.
chafe, and what they fell, the pice tcenms to be
fixed at its natural and equitable rate. '1 hc conl.
pany Iras not the power of raiitig the fornici, oc
degrading the latter at pl'eaur'e; and accordingly
since it was eflablihed, the incrcafc of culture, oi
population, and of live flock, in the province of
Caraccas has been very considerable .

Enlarge- Bu T as it is fiowly that nations rclinquifh any
mentof fyflciie which time has rendered venerablc, or that
commercial
ideasin comm'erce can be diverted from the chancl in
Spain. wvhich it has long been accustomed to flow; Philip

V. in his new regulations concerning the Amcri.
can trade, paid iuch deference to the ancient
maxim of Spain, concerning the limitation of all
importation from the New World to one harbour,
as to oblige both the register fiips which returned
from Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan Company
fiom Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes in the port
of Cadiz. Since his reign, fientiments more liberal
and enlarged begin to spread in Spain. The spirit
of philosophical inquiry, which it is the glory of
the prcfcnt age to have turned from frivolous or
abftruif speculations, to the bufincls and affairs of
men, has extended its influence beyond the Pi-
rennees. In the refcarches of ingenuous authors,
concerning the police or commerce of nations, the
errors and dcfccts of the Spaniih systen with rec
fpct to both met every eye, and have not only
been exposcd with fcverity, but are held up as a
warning to other fiates. The Spaniards, flung
with their reproaches, or convinced by their argu.
ments, and admoniihcd by several enlighteecd

wi'iters

See NOTE XCVI.
4'4

.vritcrs of their own country, seem at length toB o iK
iavc discovered the dcflructive tendency of tholbe V\r.
narrow maxims, which, by cramping commerce -.
in all its opcrations, have lb long retarded its pro-
rcs. It is to the monarch now on the throne,
that Spain is indebted for the first public regula-
tion formed in conlcquencc of there ideas.

WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her an-El:ablif.
cient maxims concerning hercommerce with Anie- nmet oi r-

gulai' pcket

rica, she was so much afraid of opening any chan- boa.P
ncl, by which an illicit trade might find admilion
into the colonies, that ile alloft shut herfclf out
from any intcrcourle with them, but that which
was carried on by her annual fleets. There was
no establishment for a regular communication of
either public or private intelligence, between the
mother-country and its Anerican Icttlemennts.
From the want of this neceflhry inflitution, the
'operations of the state, and the bufincfs of indi-
viduals, were retarded or conducted ulkilfulls,
and Spain often received from foreigners her first
information with rclpcS to very interesting events
in her own colonics. But though this dcfc in
police was Ielfibly felt, and the rciiedy for it was
obvious, that jealous spirit with which the Span ill!
monarchs guarded the ccuiive trade, rctfrainll
them from applying it. At length Charles 11T.
surmounted tholc confidciralions which had de-
terred his prcdcccifors, and in the year 1764., ap-
pointed packet-boats to be difiaclicd th llic fill
lay of each nionth, from Corugna to tlc L-iav;tn-
na or Porto-Rico. From thence Ictteis are con-
vcyed in lilailcr vtfIcls to Verla Cruz aun Poloto-
bello, and tral;n itlcd by oft tlrui., h lic kiii'-
doims of' icrra- irln;5, Granada, IPeru, an.l Nc
Spain. W\ith n Ics rcgk: il;i 'iy packi(..r-boa.ts I;l
once in two lmou!lts to -hio (e la llai, ilr tic a -
coliijlodati';n of !l..'c pruo :isc to ti, c ai of
ot :e

415

B O 0 K Andes. Thus provision is made for a speedy aud

VIII. certain circulation of intelligence throughout t!,c
"r'- vast dominions of Spain, from which equal adva'i-

tages must redound to the political and nmrcautile
intereftofthe kingdom*. With this new arrange-
ment, a scheme of extending commerce has been
more immediately connreced. Each of the packct.
boats, which are veffcls of some considerable bur-
den, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
commodities as are the produst of Spain, and most
in demand in the ports whither they are bound. In
return for thele they may bring home to Corugna
an equal quant-ityof American productions t. This
may be confidered as the first relaxations of thoic
rigid laws, which confined the trade with the New
World to a single port, and .i;e first attempt to
admit the reft of the kingdom to some share in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more dccifive. In
peveral tto the year 765, Charles III. laid open the trade to
vinces. the windward islands, Cuba, Hilifaniola, I'oro,,

Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his iubjecs i,
every province of Spain. He permitted them to
fail from certain ports in each of thcle specificd in
the ediEt, at any fcafon, and with whatever caro
they deemed most proper, without any other war-
rant than a simple clearance from the cuftom-houfc
of the place whence they took their departure.
He releaied them from the numerous and oppref-
five duties imposed on goods exported to America,
and in place of the whole ubftituted a modccrate
tax of fix in the hundred on the commodities felt
from Spain, He allowed them to return either to
the fame port, or to any other where they might
hope for a more advantageous market, and there
to enter the homeward cargo, on payment of
the usual duties. This ample privilege which

at

* Ponz Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. i5.
- Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. p. 3 1.
At6

417

once broke through all the fences, which the jea- B 0 o K
lous policy of Spain had been labouring for two VIII.
centuries and a half to throw round its commercial
intercourse with the New World, was soon after
extended to Louisiana, and to the provinces of
Yucatan and Campeachy :.

TH propriety of this innovation, which may eneficial

be confidered as the most liberal effort of Spanish
lcgiflation, has appeared from its effcets. Prior to
the edid in favour of the free trade, Spain deriv-
ed hardly any benefit from its neglected colonies
in Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trini-
dad. Its commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable,
and that of Yucatan and Cainpcachy was ingroffed
alnoft entirely by interlopers. But as soon as a
general liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
courle with those provinces revived, and has gone
on with a rapidity of progrcffion, of which there
are few examples in the history of nations. In
less than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been
more than tripled. Even in those fettlcments,
where from the languishing state of indufry, great-
er efforts were rcquilitc to rcftore its aivity, their
commerce has been doubled. It is computed, that
luclh a number of hils is already employed in the
free tradc, that the tonnage of them far xceeds
that of the Galeons and FloLa, at the most flonriil-
ing cara of their colmmerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a few imercl ants,
ellablificd in a favourite port. They are difluled
through every province of the kingdom; and by
opening a new marect for their various produc-
tions and manuaftures, must encourage and add
vivacity to the indultry of the farmer and artificer.
Nor does the kingdom profit only by what it cx-

VOL. II. E c ports,

i Append. ii, a la Educ. rop. 37. 54. 91.

-1o O K ports, it derives advantage likewise from what

VIII. receives in return, and has the prospect of being
'""'T'" soon able to supply itself with several commodities

of extensive consumption, for which it formerly
depended on foreigners. The consumption ot
sugar in Spain is perhaps as great, in proportion to
the number of its inhabitants, as that of any Euro.
pean kingdom. But though possessed of countries
in the New World, whose ibil and climate are most
proper for rearing that valuable plant, though the
domefic culture of the sugar-cane in the kingdom
of Granada was once considerable, such has been
the fatal tendency of its institutions in America,
and such the preflfure of injudicious taxes in Eu-
rope, that Spain has loft almost entirely this branch
of indufiry, which has enriched other nations,
This commodity, which has now become an arti-
cle of primary necessity in Europe, the Spaniards
were obliged to purchase of foreigners, and had
the mortification to fee their country drained an-
nually of an immense ium on that account:. But
if that spirit, which the permission of free trade
has put in motion, shall persevere in its efforts wilh
the fame vigour, the cultivation of sugar in Cuba
and Porto-Rico may increase so much, that in a
few years their growth may be equal to the demand
of the kingdom.

Fre trade Her experience of the beneficial confequcnces
fbtweel thi rcfulting from having relaxed fomcwhat of the
culonies. rigour of her ancient laws with rcfpcct to the

commerce of the mother-country with the colo-
nies, has induced Spain to permit a more liberal
intcrcourlf of one colony with another. By one
of the jealous maxims of the old yfteni, all com-
munication between the various provinces situatcd

on

' Uztariz, c. Y9,
418

419

on the South Seas, was prohibited under the most B O O K
revere penalties. Though each of these yield pe- VIt.
culiar produEtions, the reciprocal exchange of '
which might have added to the happiness of their
rei'ective inhabitants, or have facilitated their
progrels in indufiry, so felicitous was the Council
of the Indies, to prevent their rcceiving any lup ply
of their wants but by the periodical fleets from
Europe; that in order to guard againil this, it cru-
elly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in New Spain,
in Guatimnala, and the New Kingdom of Granada,
from such a corrclpondence with their fellow sub-
jceis, as tended anifeftly to their mutual profpe-
rity. Of all the numerous rcfitricions devi ed by
Spain for iccuring tle cxclufive trade with her
American fettlenicits, none perhaps was more illi-
bcral, none eenms to have been more fenlibly fclt,
or to have produced more hurtful effets. This
grievance, coeval with the fcttlernents of' Spai in
the New World, is at last redressed. In the
year 774, Charles Ill. published an edict, grant-
ing to the four vat provinces which I have men-
tioned, the privilege of a free trade with each
other'. What may be the effects of opening this
commlunication between countries dcftined by
their situation for reciprocal intercourle, cannot
yet be determined by experience. They can
hardly fail of being beneficial and extenlive.
The Imotives for granting this prmiiliion arc ma-
nifcftly 110 lel's laudable, than the princille on
which it is fouded is liberal; and bolth dil'covcr
the progrcls of a Ipirit in Spain far elevated above
tlic inarrow prcjudiccs atnd inaxi mls on whici their
ly'llein cIr ,rgulating the trade, and condluting
ihe govcrnliicnt o their colonies, was originally
IfoInded.

E e z AT

* Real Cedula penes nim. Ponz. Viage de Eagna vi.
P1rologo, pI. . NOTE XCVII.

B 0 0 K AT the fame time that Spain has been intent on

VIII. introducing regulations, iuggefted by more en-
'N->-Z largcd views of policy, into her fftemn of A men.
Ncw rcgu-
latons co an commerce, she has not beei inattentive to the
cernng th interior government of her colonies. lHere too
Tovcrnimcnt ,
ot tc colo- there was nluch room for reformation and iniprovc-
n's. Ilenlt, and Don Joieph Galvez, who has now he

diredion of the department for Indian affairs in
Spain, has enjoyed the bcft opportunities not only
of ob!bcving the dcfects and corruption in the po-
litical frame of the colonies, but of discovering the
sources ofthofe evils. After being employed fvcnii
years in the New World o an extraordinary mil:
sion, and with very extensive powers, as inlpccor-
gcneral of New Spain, after visiting in perobn the
remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora, and Califor-
nia, and making several important alterations in
the slate of their police and revenue; he began his
imnifiry witl a general reformation of the tribu-

Rctfolna- nals of juflic in America. In con lcqucnce of the
tothOJ''e progress of population and wealth in the colonies;
jufice. the bufincfs of the Courts of Audience has cn-

creased so much, that the number of judges of
which they vwere originally comnpofed, ias been
found inadequate to the growing labours and duties
of the ofiice, and the ialarics ttled upon thel,
inferior to the dignity of the station. As a remedy
for both, he obtained a royal edict, eflablifhiig an
additional number of judges in each court of Au-
dience, with higler titles and more ample appoint-
1enlltS i.

Nev ,iilii- ''To the filome intelligent minifler Spain is indcb)t-
:,',...I cdl for a new difIribution of governmoent in is

Anricrcan provinccs. Even fincetlle cftblifhlniclii
of a third viceroyalty in the New Kingdoli ol
CGlanada, , ls prodigioi is thle extent of lhc. Spa-

n ill

. .Gazcnl ce Malrid, I ¶1h of' Mjtrii, 1776.
42

r iilh dominions in the New MWorld, that fcveral B O 0 K
placcs subject to the jurifdidion of each of the vIIi
viceroys, were at such an enormous diflance froml -'-
ihe capitals in which they rcfidcd, that neither
their attention, nor their authority, could reach
them. Sonic provinces flubordinatc to the viceroy
of Ncw Spain, lay about two thouiind miles from
Mexico. There are countries fubjct to the vicerov
of Peru fill farther fromn Lima. The pople ll
thiofe remote difirits, could hardly be laid to
cajoy the benefit of civil government. Thie op-
prcflion and inlblence of its inferior nlinieIcrs thcy
often icel, and rather Iubl)it to thcic in filcnc,
thian involve themclelvcs in the cxpciicc and trou-
ble of resorting to the difiantt capitais, whcere
alone they can find redrcfs. As a rcmcdy fiur this, N.'v v;ce-

luoyilry Au-

a fourth viceroyalty has been crcrted, to the ju-',it 1776,
rifdicion of which are fubljcicd the provin- ;"'1) *Jdl
ccs of Rio de Ia Plata, Buenos-Ayrcs, Para-
guay, Tucuman, Potofi, Stu. C-iuz dc la Sierra,
Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and St.
Juan. By this well judged arrangement, two
advantages are gained. All the inconvenicnccs
occasioncd by the remote situation of thofc pro-
vinces, which had been long felt, and long corn..
plained of, are removyd, The countries rnoft dil-
tant from Lima are clparated from the viceroyalty
of Peru, and united under a fulcrior, whole feal
of govcrnmcnt at 13ucnos-Ayrcs will be coIInIIo-
lious and acccfiblc. The contraband trade wii!
hce Portugucfc, Vwlicll was beconme l cLt.nliv.c,
as niun l avc put a final flop to the cxpoi'ta:.ii)n o
colilmmodCities from Spain to her lbutllc'n colonc,,
imay be checked more thoroughly, and wA.ith Irctr-
cr lfcility, when the luprmell mnfg;ib', 1,i r i.;
viciuily t otle places in which it is carricl on, t
view its lprorcis and cficts with his own c) c:..
I),i Piedro Zevallos, who has bccn railed to ll-;

] v.', -

42?

BOO K new dignity, with appointments equal to those of

VIII. the other viceroys, is well acquainted both w\ith
b'-. the slate and the interest of the countries ov.r

which le is to preside, having iervcd in them lijg
and with diflinction. By this difmembcrnl-icnt,
fuccccding that which took place at the erection of
the viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granacl,
alnoft two-third parts of the territories oriinallv

Jlbljcct to the viceroys of Peru, are now lopped oni'
from their jurifdiEtion.

THE-F limiits of the viceroyally of lew Spain

%clInn t rrill

[1 r i l

pirvit, of have lilewife been considerably cireumlrn(rid,
sonoa,,. and with no less propriety and difcernmen . Four

of its inoft remote provinces, Sonora, Cinalea, Ca-
lifornia, and New Navarre, have been sorned ituo
a Icparate govcrnmcnt. The Chevalier de Croix,
who is intrufled with this conmmand, is not dig.
nified with the title of viceroy, nor does le Dnjoy
the appointments belonging to tlat rank, but is
juri cdition and authority is altogether indcIcln-
dent on the viceroyalty of New Spain. The erec-
tion of this last government seems to have bccn
suggested, not only by the consideration of the
rctmte situation of those provinces from Mexico,
but by attention to the late dilcoverics made there,
v, hich I have mcntioncd c. Countries containing
such riches, and which probably may rile into
fich importance, required the immediate inlcc-
tion of a governor, to whom they were fpccially
committed, As every confidcration of duty, of
intcret, and of vanity, mutt concur in prompting
tlho!c new governors to encourage licli exertions s
tend to difiulc opulence andt prolfperity through the
J1oviilncc commilttcd to their charge, the bencficial
ellcds of lhis arrangecmcnt may be confidcrailc.
Many (lislitAs in America long depressed by the
)languor an1d fccbicncfs natural to provinces whlicl

co mpole

J'ool: V11,
422

compose the extremities of an overgrown empire, B O O K
may be animated with vigour and ativity when VIII.
brought so near the feat of power, as to feel its in-
vigorating influence.

SUCH, since the accession of the Bourbons toAttempts to

the throne of Spain, has been the progrcfs oftheirreform do-
regulations, and the gradual expansion of their ?lic

y.

views with respect to the commerce and govern-
ment of their American colonies. Nor has their
attention been so entirely cngrofied by what related
to the more remote parts of their dominions, as to
render them neglectful of what was fill more im-
ortant, the reformation of domestic errors and
defecs in policy. Fully sensible of the causes to
which the declension of Spain, from her former
prosperity, ought to be imputed; they have made
it a great objec of their policy, to revive a spirit of
industry among their fubjedts, and to give such
extent and perfection to their manufactures, that
they may be able to Iupply the demands of Ame-
rica from their own flock, and to exclude foreign-
ers from a branch of commerce which has been so
fatal to the kingdom. This they have endeavoured
to accomplish, by a variety of ediEts issued since
the peace of Utrecht. They have granted boun-
ties for the encouragement of rome branches of in-
duftry; they have lowered the taxes on others;
they have prohibited, or have loaded with addi-
tional duties, such foreign manufadtures as come in
competition with them; they have inflituted focie-
ties for the improvement of trade and agriculture;
they have planted colonies of hufbandmcn in tome
uncultivated difirias of Spain, and divided among
them the waste fields; they have had rccourle to
evcry expedient dcvifed by commercial wisdom),
or commercial jealousy, for reviving their own in-
(ullry, and difcountcnancing that of other na-
tions. Thclc, however, it is not mny province to

cxplain,,

423

B O O K explain, or to inquire into their propriety and es-

V1II. seCts. There is no effort o legislation more ar-
l'-,' duous, no experiment in policy more uncertain,

than an attempt to revive the spirit of indufslv
where it has declined, or to introduce it where it
is unknown. Nations already pofleflcd of extci-
five commerce, enter into competition with such
advantages, derived from the large capitals of
tlhir merchants, the dexterity of their n]anufac-
turcrs, the alertness acquired by habit in every de-
partment of business, that the itate which aims at
rivalling, or supplanting them, rmuft cxpc to
struggle with many difficulties, and be content o
advance slowly. If the quantity of produdtive in-
duftry now in Spain, compared with that of the
kingdoni under the listless monarchs of the Aul-
trian line, its pogrefs must appear considerable,
and is sufficient to alarm the jealousy, and to call
forth the most vigorous efforts of the nations now
in potleffion of the lucrative trade which the Spa-
niards aim at wresting from them. One circun-
fiance may render those exertions of Spain an
object of more serious attention to the other Euro-
pean powers. They are not to be ascribed wholly
to the influence of the crown and its minifecrs.
The fcntiments and spirit of the people seem to
fccond the provident care of their monarchs, and
to give it greater cffe. They have adopted more
liberal ideas, not only with rclfc&t to conmmrcec,
but domestic policy. In all their later writers, dc.
Icts in their arrangements concerning both arc
acknowledged, and remedies proposed, which
pride would not have allowed their ancefors to
confeRs, and ignorance rendered thlem incapable of
di'cerning . But after all that the Spaniards have
done, much remains to do. Many pernicious in-

tfitutions

* See NOTE XCVIII.
A424

fitutions and abufcs deeply incorporated with the B O O K
fyeften of internal policy and taxation, which has VII.
been long cftablifhcd in Spain, mufi be abolished a
before industry and nianutladurcs cal recover an
extensive ativity.

STI LL, however, the commercial regulations ofContraband

Spain with refpe& to hcr cololies, are too rigid tade'
and lyftematical to be carried into complete execu-
tion. The lcgiflature that loads trade with impo-
iitions too heavy, or fetters it by refirietions too
severe, defeats its own intention; and, in truth,
is only multiplying the inducements to violate its
statutes, and proposing an high premium to cncou-
rage illicit traffic The Spaniards, both in Europe
and America, circumscribcd in their mutual inter-
course by the jcaloufy, or oppressed by the exac-
tions of the crown, have their invention continually
on the fitrctch how to elude its edilts. The vigi-
lance and ingenuity of private interest dilcover
means of effeting this, which public wisdom can-
not forelee, nor public authority prevent. This
spirit, counteracting that of the laws, pervades the
commerce of Spain with America in all its branch-
es; and from the highcft departments in govern-
ment, defccnds to the lowest. The very olhccrs
appointed to check contraband trade, are oren
employed as instruments in carrying ii oi; and
the boards instituted to reflrain and punifi it, are
the channels through which it flows. The king is
supposed to be defrauded by various artifices, of
more than one half of the revenue which he ought
to receive from America * ; and as long as it is the
intcrcft of so many persons to fcrccn thole artil-ccs
from detction, the knowledge of them will never
reach the throne. " How many ordinances," hays
Corita, " how many infiruClions, how lmany let-

" trs
" Solorz de InJ, jurc, i. lib. v,

42S

B 3O 0K " ters from our overeign, are sent in order to cor,

VIII. c reE abuses, and how little are they observed, and
~,-V " what small advantage is derived from them! To

"me the old observation appears just, that where
"there are many physicians, and many medicines,
' there is a want of health; where there are many
"laws, and many judges, there is a want ofjuftice.

We have viceroys, presidents, governors, oydors,

"corrigidors, alcades, and thoulands of alguazils
"abound every where; but notwithitanding all
"thelc, public abuses continue to multiply ."
Time has encrcafed the evils which he lamented as
early as the reign of Philip II. A spirit of corrup-
tion has infcted all the colonies of Spain in Ane-
rica. Men far removed from the feat of govern-
ment, impatient to acquire wealth, that they may
return fpecdily from what they are apt to confider
as a state of exile in a remote unhealthful country,
allured by opportunities too tempting to be refifled,
and educed by the example of thole around them,
find their sentiments of honour and of duty gradu-
ally relax. In private life, they give themselves
up to a difiblute luxury, while in their public con-
duO, they become unmindful of what they owe to
their sovereign and their country.

Trade he- BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish trade
tween New .
Spain and in America, there remains one detached, but im-
tlhe Philip portant branch of it, to be mentioned. Soon after
pines. his acccflion to the throne, Philip II. formed a

I56. fchcmle of planting a colony in the Philippine

illands, which had been neglcted finec the time of
their di'covcry- ; and he accomplished it by means
of an armament fitted out from New Spain . Ma-
nila, in the island of Iuconia, was the lation
chosen for the capital of this new cabliflinlClt.

Fron

* MS. penes me. *- Book V»
. T'orltci'n. lib. v. c. 14.
426i

From it an aive commercial intercourse began B O O K
with the Chinele, ad a conliderable number of VIII.
that indufirious people, allured by the profped of '
gain, ctilcd in the Philippines under the Spanish
protecion. Tlhcv supplied the colony o amply
xv it all the valuable produOtions and nianufactures
of the lailt, as cnablcd it to open a trade with
America, by a course of navigation the longest
from land to land on our globe. In the infancy of
this trade, it was carried on with Callao, on the
coafl of Peru; but experience having discovered
many difficuities in this mode of communication,
the fiaple of tis commerce between the east and
weft was removed from Callao to Acapulco, on the
coast of New Spain.

AFT ER various arrangements, it has been brought

into a regular form. One or two ships depart an-
nually fiom Acapulco, which may carry out silver
to the amount of five hundred thouland pesos*,
but have hardly any thing clle of value on board;
in return for which, they bring back spices, drugs,
china, andjapan wares, callicoes, chintz, muslins,
silks, and every precious article with which the
benignity of the climate, or the ingenuity of its
people, have enabled the East to supply the reft of
the world. For omc time the merchants of Peru
wcre admitted to participitate in this traffic, and
might seind annually a hip to Acapulco, to wait the
arrival of the veflels from Manila, and receive a
proportional fliare of the commodities which they
imported. At length, the Peruvians were exclud-
ed by most rigorous cdits, and all the commodi-
ties from the Eall rcfcrved folcly for the confnmp-
tion of New Spain.

IN confquCInc of this indulgence, the inhabi-
tants us that country enjoy advantages unknown

in

427
4 Recop. lib. ix. ?,. 45· 6.

B 0 0 K in the other Spanish colonies. The manufaEturcs

viIi. of the East are not only more suited to a warm
'^~s~^ climate, and more howy than thole of Europe,

but can be fold at a lower price; while at the
fame time, the profits upon them arc lo confidera-
ble, as to enrich all thoe who are employed, ci-
ther in bringing them from Manila, or vending
them in New Spain. As the interest both of the
buyer and feller concurred in favouring this branch
of commerce, it continued to extend in spite of
regulations, concerted with the nioft anxious jca-
lousy to circumlclibe it. Under cover of what the
laws permit to be imported, vast quantities of In-
dia goods arc poured into the markets of New
Spain , and when the flota arrives at Vcra Cruz,
it often finds the wants of the people already sup-
plicd by cheaper and more acceptable commo-
cdities.

'I'HERE is nt in the commercial arrangements

of Spain, any circumitance more inexplicable than
the perniffion of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to ils fun-
clamcntal maxinm of holding the colonies in perpe-
tual dependance on the mother-country, by pro-
hibiting any commercial intcrcourlc that might
suggest to them the idea of receiving a upply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion mufl apper Tlili more extraordinary, from
confideriog that Spain herlclf carries on no dirclt
trade with her fIttlements in the Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her American colonies,
w'hich lhe denies to her ubjcss in Europe. It is
probable, that the coloniis hllich olriginlally tool

oficciiicn ot the Philippines, having been f)C l 011it
irom New Spain, began this intcrcotiri i
wlil

Ct~ot [l:

"1 110'IE XM
428

country which thcy confidcrcd, in tome mearure, B 0 O 1K
as their parent late, before the court of Madrid vIIti
was aware of its confcquences, or could cftablilh -
Icgulations in order to prevent it. Many rcmon-
itranccs have been prcfietcd against this trade, as
detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that trealure which
ought to flow into the kingdon, as tending to give
rile to a spirit of indcpendcnce in the colonies, and
to encourage innumerable frauds, against which
it was inpoilible to guard, in tranjlhfaions o iar
removed from the infpelion of government.
But as it requires no flight effort of political wildoi
and vigour to aboliil any praicc, which numbers
arc intcireced in lupporting, and to which tine has
added the ianion of its authority, the commerce
betwixt Acapulco and Manila seems to be as con-
liderable as ever, and may be conlfidered as one
chief caufc of the elegance and I!lcndor conticu-
ous in tis part of the panifh do!minions.

BU I notwithfianding this general corruption in rublic ree-

thc colonies, and all the defalcations of the public l"" from
revenue, by the illicit importation of foreign com-
modities, or by the fraudulcnt arts of its own sub-
ijcts, the Spanish monarchs receive a very con-
fiderable funi from their American dominions.
This arises from taxes of various kinds, which may
be divided into three capital branches. The firit
contains what is paid to the king, as lbvcrcign, or
luperior lord of the N\ew World: to this class be-
longs the duty on the gold and silver railed from
the mines, and the tribute exaced from the In-
dians; the orlmer is tcrillcd by tle Spaniards the
rigit o'Jigiiiorily, tle latter is the duly o/'va/alagd.
The eIcond branch comprehends the n1IImcrotll
duties upon1 coII)Immii cc, whli achcloilipanll and ol-
prels it ilnevery tlt) of its pIroglre ;, from tle grI t-
tl tirall)l'l iolns of' thle wvolcile Imneichliant, to tile

p c!t

429

B 0 0 K petty traffic of the vender by retail. The third

VIII. includes what accrues to the king, as head of the
b"Tr^ church, and adminii lrator of ecclesiastical funds in

the New World. In consequence of this he re-
ceives the first fruits, annats, spoils, and other ipi-
ritual revenues levied by the apostolic chamber in
Europe; and is entitled likewiic, to the profit ari-
sing from the sale of the bull of Cruzado. This,
which is publishcd every two years, contains an
absolution fronl pal offences by th9 Pope, and,
among other immunities, a permifiion to eat everal
kinds of prohibited food, during lent, and on mea-
gre days. The monks employed in difperfiun
those bulls, extol their virtues with all the fcrvcur
of interested eloquence; the people ignorant and
credulous, liflen with implicit aflent; and every
person in the Spanish colonies, of European, Crco.
lian, or mixed race, purchafcs a bull, which is
deemed el'ential to his salvation, at the rate fce
upon it by government *.
ts amount. 'WHAT may be the amount of those various

funds, it is almost impossible to determine with
precision. The extent of the Spanish dominions
in America, the jealousy of government, which
renders them inaccessible to foreigners, the myflc
rious filenc which the Spaniards are accuftonmd
observe with refpeaW to the interior slate of their
colonies, combine in covering this subject with a
veil which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate, than it is curious,
lhas lately been published of the royal revenue il
New Spain, from which we may form ome idea
wtth rclpct to what is colledted in the other pro.
vinces. According to that account the crown (dos
not receive from all the dcpartments of taxation ll

N cv

* See NOTE C.
430

1New Spain, above a million of our money, from B o o K
which one half mull be deducted as the expeuce VIII.
of the provincial eftabliLhment". Peru, it is pro- 'T
bable, yields a fum not inferior to this, and if
we suppose that all the other regions of America,
including the islands, furnish a third hare of
equal value; we hall not perhaps be far wide from
the truth, if we conclude, that the net public re-
'nue of Spain, railed in America, does not ex-
ceed a million and a half fteling. This falls far
short of the immenle umns, to which suppositions,
founded upon conjccure, have raised the Spanifi
revenue in America t. It is remarkable, how-
ever, upon one account. Spain and Portugal are
the only European powers, who derive a diret
revenue from their colonies as their quota to-
wards defraying the general cxpence of govern-
ment. All the advantages that accrues to other
nations, from their American dominions, arilcs
from the exclufivc cnjoyment of their trade; but
beside this, Spain has brought her colonies to con-
tribute to increase the power of the state; and in
return for protecion, to bear a proportional hare
of the common burden.

ACCORDINGLY what I have computed as the
amount of the Spanish revenue from America,
comprehends only the taxes collcLcdthcrc, and is
far from being the wholc of whlat accrues to the
king from his dominions in the Nev World. The
heavy duties imposcd on the commodities export-
ed froni Spain to America , as well as what is
paid by those which The ends home in return; the
tax upon the ncgroc-flavcs, with which Africa Iiip-

plieC

' Sec NOTE CI.
t Sec NOTE CIII.

*t Sc NOTE Cr.

43t

O O K plies the New World, together with fcveral fmall-r
VIII. branches of finance, bring large fums into the
'^V^ trealury, the precise cxtent of which I cannot prc-

tend to acertain.

Expenceof BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from
Admniniftra-
ion. America be great, the expence of adminiiration

in her colonies bears proportion to it. in every
department, even of her domeflic police and finaii-
ces, Spain has adopted a system more comple.,
and more encumbered with a variety of tribunals,
and a multitude of officers, than that of any u-
ropean nation, in which the sovereign poffcfi c
such extcnfive power. From the jealous spirit witl
which she watches over her American settlement,
and her endeavours to guard against fraud in pro-
vinces so remote from infpetion ; boards and o -
cers have been multiplied there with still more ax-
ious attention. In a country where the expcncc
of living is great, the salaries allotted to every pc:-
son in public office must be high, and must load
the revenue with an immenfc burden. The p=-
rade of government greatly augments the weight of
it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and the Ne;
Kingdom of Granada, as representatives of tlec
king's person, among people fond of oftentatioL,
maintain all the ate and dignity of royalty.
Their courts are formed upon the model of that
at Madrid, with horic and foot-guards, a houf!-
hould regularly eftablifiled, numerous attendanits
and cnfigns of power, dilplaying such pomp, a,
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
rity. All the cxpcnc incurred by iupporting th
external and permanent order of government ;
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have bclics
peculiar appointments tluitcd to their exalted fu-
tion. The fhlarics fixed by law arc indeed cx.
tremcly moderate, that of the viceroy of Peru i
only thirty thousand ducats; and that of thc vice

rou
432

roy of Mexico twenty thousand ducats *. Of late, B O O K
they have been raised to forty thousand. VIII.

THESE salaries, however, constitute but a small r'

part of their revenue. The exercise of an abfo-
lute authority extending to every department of
government, and the power of disposing of many
lucrative offices, affords to them innumerable op-
portunities of accumulating wealth. To these,
which may be confidered as legal and allowed
emoluments, vatl umss are often added by exac-
tions, which in countries so far removed from the
feat of government, it is not easy to discover, and
impoflible to restrain. By monopolizing some
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants,
a viceroy may raise fich an annual revenue, as no
subjet of any European monarch enjoyst. From
the tingle article of prcfsnts made to him on the
anniversary of his Name-day (which is always ob-
served as an high festival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanish faying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Conscious of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
fornlcrly oblerved, grant a comniffion to their
viceroy only for a few years. This circumstance,
however, renders them often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they
labour to improve every moment of power which
they know is hastening fast to a period; and short
as its duration is, it ulually affords sufficient time
for repairing a shattered fortune, or creating a new
one. But even in situations so trying to human
fiailty, there are iftauccs of virtue that rcmain
unleduced. In the year j772, the Marquis de

VOL. II. F f Croix
* Recop. lib. iii. it. iii. C. 72.

433
-I Sc NOTE C..

B 0 O K roix finished the term of his viceroyalty in New

V If. Spain with unfufpefed integrity; and instead of

bringing home exorbitant wealth, returned with
the admiration and applause of a grateful people,
whom his government had rendered happy.

'
, :

NOTES

N O T E S

L T AND N
ILLUSTRATIONS.

F f :i.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOT

E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

i,

. II r

NOTE I. p. I.

OUR knowledge of the events which happened in the
conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of infor-
mation more original and authentic than that of any tran-
fadtion in the history of America. The letters of Cortes
to the Emperor Charles V. are the most valuable of there,
and the first in order of time. As Cortes early assumed a
command independent of Velasquez, it became necessary to
convey such an account of his operations to Madrid, as might
procure him the approbation of his sovereign.

THE first of his difipatches has never been made public.

It was Cent from Vera-Cruz, July 16, 1519. It must have
come to the Emperor's hands while he was in Germany,
as he left Spain on the 22d of May in that year, in order
to receive the imperial crown. I have made diligent search
for a copy of this dispatch, both in Spain and in Germany,
but without success, This, however, is of less confe-
qucncc, as it could not contain any thing very material,
being written o oon after Cortes arrived in New Spain.
The second dispatch, dated OEtober 30, 1520, was pub-

lifhod
.r~~~~~~~~~~~~·--s~~~~~~~~~~~~~

liiied at Seville, A. D. i522, and the third and fourth
soon after they were received. A Latin translation of thetn
appeared in Germany A. D. 1532. Ramufio soon after
made them more generally known, by inserting them in his
valuable collection. They contain a regular and minute his-
tory of the expedition, with many curious particulars con-
cerning the policy and manners of the Mexicans. The
work does honour to Cortes; the style is simple and perfpi-
cuous; but as it was manlfeitly his interest to represent his
own aions in the fairest light, his victories are probably
exaggerated, his losses diminished, and his as of rigour
and violence somewhat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna,

by Francisco Lopez de Gomara, published A. D. I554,
Gomara's historical merit is considerable. His mode of
narration is clear, flowing, always agreeable, and sometimes
elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate and credulous; and
as he was the domestic chaplain of Cortes after his return
from New Spain, and probably corpofed his work at his
desire, it is manifefl that he labours to magnify the merit of
his hero, and to conceal or extenuate such tranEfaions as
were ufavourable to his characer. Of this Herrera ac-
cufes him in one instance, Dec. ii. lib. iii, c. 2. and it is
not once only that this is conspicuous. He writes, howe-
ver, with so much freedom concerning several measures of
the. Sanifl court, that the copies both of his Hiftoria de
las Indias, and of his Cronica, were called in by a degree
of the council of the Indies, and they were long confidered
as prohibited books in Spain, though of late licence to print
them has been granted, Pinelo 3iblioth. 589.

THE chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del Caf.

tillo t comrpoe his Hitoria Verdadera de la Conquifta de
la Nueva El'pagna. He had been an adventurer in each of
the expeditions to New Spain, and was the companion of
Cortc in all his battles andl perils. When he found that
icthcr h? himfclf nor many of his fllow-foldiers were
once mentioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all their
exploits was ascribcd to Cbrtes; the gallant old veteran
lIid hold of his pen with indignation, and compored his
true hiltory. It contains a prolix, minute, confuted nar-
i.'tivc of ill Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar flyle

a5
438

as might betxpe&ted from an illiterate soldier. But as he
relates tranfations of which he was witness5 and in which
he performed a considerable part, his account bears all the
marks of authenticity, and is acc6rrpanied with such a plea-
(ant naiveti, with such interefring details with such amufi
ing vanity, and yet so pardonable in an old soldier who had
been (as he boasts) in a hurdred and nineteen battles as
renders his book one of the mot singular that is to be found
in any language.

PET. MARTYR ab Angleria in a Treatise de Inftilli

nuper inventis, added to his Decades de rebus Oceanieis &
novo orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition. Bt
he proceeds no farther than to relate what happened after his
first landing. This work, which is brief and flight feemn
to contain the information transmitted by Cortes in his first
dispatches, embellished with several particulars cdmmunicated
to the author by the officers who brought the letters from
Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern his-

torians have had recourse for infonration concerning the
conquest of New Spain, is Hiftoria de la Conquifta de
Mexico, per D. Antonio de Solis, first published A. D.
i684 I know no author in any language whose literary
fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. e olis is
reckoned by his countrymen one of the ptreft writers in
the Castilian tongue; and if a foreigner may venture to
give his opinion concerning a matter of which Spaniards
alone are qualified to judge, he is entitled to that praise.
But, though his language be correct, his taste in composition
is far from being just. His periods are so much laboured
as to be often tiff, and sometimes tumid; the figures,
which he employs by way of ornament, are trite or im-
proper, and his observations superficial. These blemishes,
however, might easily be overlooked, if he were not de-
fetive with refpe(& to all the great qualities of an historian.
)eftitutc of that patient industry in research, which con-
duts to the knowledge of truth: a firanger to that impar-
tiality which weighs evidence with cool attention, and ever
eager to establish his favourite system of exalting the cha-
racter of Cortes into that of a perfect hero, exempt fromn
;rror, and adorned with every virtue, he is less solicitous to

difcovcr

discover what was true, than to relate what might appear
splendid. When he attempts any critical discussion, his
reasonings are fallacious, and founded upon an iinperfed
view of faas. Though he sometimes quotes the dispatches
of Cortes, he seems not to have consulted them; and though
he sets out with some censure on Gomara, he frequently pre-
sers his authority, the most doubtful of any, to that of the
other contemporary historians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and most accurate information concerning the cons
quetl of Mexico, as well as every other tranfa&ion in
America. The industry and attention with which he con-
fulted not only the books, but the original papers and public
records, which tended to throw any light upon the subjet
of his enquiries, were To great, and he ufuallyjudges of the
evidence before him with o much impartiality and candour,
that his decads may be ranked among the most judicious and
useful historical collecions. If, by attempting to relate the
various occurrences in the New World in a firia chronolo-
gical order, the arrangement 6f events in his work had not
been rendered so perplexed, difconneaed, and obscure, that
it is an unpleasant task to collec from different parts of
his book, and piece together the detached shreds of a fiory,
he might justly have been ranked among the most eminent
historians of his country. He gives an account of the ma-
terials from which he composed his work, Dec. vi. lib. iii,
9, J9.

NOTE

NOTE II. p. 3.

CORTES purposed to have gone in the train of Ovanda
when he set out for his government in the year 1502, but
was detained by an accident. As he was attempting in a
dark night to scramble up to the window of a lady's bed-
chamber, with whom he carried on an intrigue, an old wall,
on the top of which he had mounted, gave way, and he was
so much bruised by the fall as to be unfit for the voyage.
Gomara, Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna, cap. ,

NOTE III. p. 5.

CORTES had two thousand pesos in the hands of Andrew
Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. These fums are
about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds sterling;
but as the price of every thing was extremely high in Ame-
rica, they madebut a'fcantv ifock when applied in this man-
ner. Herrera, pec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2. B. Diaz. c. 20,

NOTE IV. p. 9.

THE names of those gallant officers, which will often
occur in the fiubfequent story, were Juan Vclafquez de
Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco de Mon-
tejo, Chriftoval de Old, Juan de Efcalante, Francisco de
Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de Salceda, Juan de
Efcobar, Gines de Nortcs. Cortes himself commanded the
Capitana, or Admiral. Francisco de Orozeo, an officer
formed in the wars of Italy, had the command of the artil-
Icry. The experienced Alaminos ated as chief pilot.

NOTE

441

NOTE V. p. Ii.

IN those different conflics, the Spaniards loRf only two
men, but had a considerable number wounded. Though
there be no occasion for recourse to any supernatural cause
to account either for the greatness of their victories, or the
fmallnets of their loss, the Spanifli historians fail not to as-
tribe both to the patronage of St. Jago, the tutelar Saint of
their country, who, as they relate, fought at the head of
their countrymen, and by his prowess gave a turn to the
fate of the battle. Gomara is the first who mentions this
apparition of St. James. It is amusing to observe the em-
barraflfnent of B. Diaz de Castillo, occasioned by the firug-
gle between his superstition and his veraeity. The former
disposed him to believe this miracle, the latter restrained
ihim from affirming it. " I acknowledge, fays he, that all
oint eploits and vicories are oing to our Lord Jesu~
Christ, and that in this battle there was such a number of
Indians to every one of us, that if each had thrown a hatd-
iul Of earth they might have buried us, if by the great
nmercy of God we had not been protected. It may be that
thie person whom Gomara mentions as having appeared o
a mottled grey horse, was the glorious apostle Signor St.
Jago, or Signor St. Pedro; and that I, as being a finner,
was not worthy to fee him. This I know, that I saw
Francisco de Morla on such a horse, but as an unworthy
transgressor, did not defcrve to fee any of the holy apostles.
It may havo been the ill of God, that it was so s Go-
nmara relates, but until I read his Chronicle never hep.rd
among any of the conquerors that Itcli a thing had happen-
ed." Cap. 34.

NOTE VL p. x6.

SE VE RAL Spanifi hiflorians relate this occurrence
ill fich terms, as if tlie wished it should be believed, that
the Indians loaded with the preflnts, had carried them
tioIn the capital in the fame hort space of tinme that
tht. coutiers pei formnd that journey. This is incredible;

all k

and Gomara mentions a circunmftance which fhew¢t that
nothing extraordinary happened on this occasion. This
rich present had been prepared for Grijalva, when he
touched at the fame place ome months before, and was
I)ow ready to be delivered, as soon as Montezuma sent or,
ders for that purpose. Gornara, Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Caffillo, the value of the

silver plate representing the moon, was alone above twenty
toufand pesos, about five thoifand pounds flerling.

NOTE VII. p. 22.

T HIS private traflic was directly contrary to the inftruc-
tions of Veiafquez, who enjoined, that whatever was ac-
quired by trade should be thrown into the common flock.
But it appears, that the oldiers had each a private assort-
rent of toys, and other goods proper for the Indian trade,
and Cortes gained their favour by encouraging this undcr-
band barter. B. Diaz c. 41.

NQT E VI. p. 32.

GOMARA has published a catalogue of the various ar-
ticles of which this present confifed. Cron. c. 49. P.
Martyr ab Angleria, who saw them after they were brought
to Spain, and who Ceems to have examined them with great
attention, gives a description of each, which is curious,
as it conveys some idea of the progress which the Mexicans
had made in fevcral arts of elegance. De infulis nuper in-
ventis liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE IX. p. 38.

THERE is no circumflance in the hifiory of the con-
qucf of Amcrica, which is more queflionable than the
account of the numerous armies brought into the field
against the Spaniiards. As the war with the 'Ilafca-

lanls,

lans, though of ihort duration, was one of the most
considerable which they waged in America, the account
given of their forces merits some attention. The only
authentic information concerning this is derived from three
authors. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor,
dated at Segura de la Frontera, OAober 30, 1520, thus
estimates the number of their troops: in the first battle
6000; in the second battle 100,000; in the third battle
150,0oo. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 228. Bernal Diaz del
Castillo, who was an eye witness, and engaged in all the
adtions of this war, thus reckons their numbers: in the
first- battle 3000, p. 43; in the second battle 6000, ibid.
in the third battle 50,000, p. 45. Gomara, who was
Cortcs's chaplain after his return to Spain, and published
his Cronica in 1552, follows the computation of Cortes,
except in the second battle, where he reckons the TlaC-
calans at 80,000, p. 49. It was manifestly the interest of
Cortes to magnify his own dangers and exploits. For it
was only by the merit of extraordinary services, that he
could hope to atone for his irregular conduc, in assuming
an independent command. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly
disposed to place his own prowess, and that of his fellow-con-
querors, in the most advantageous point of light, had not
the fame temptation to exaggerate; and it is probable, that
his account of the numbers approaches nearer to the truth.
The afembrling of an army of 150,000 men requires many
previous arrangements, and such provision for their fubfifR-
ence as seems to be beyond the foresight of Americans. The
legree of cultivation in Tlafcala does not seem to have
been so great, as o have furni(hed such a vast army with
provisions. Though this province was so much better
cultivated than other regions of New Spain, that it
was called the country ofbread, yet the Spaniards in their
inarch. flffcred such want, that they were obliged to sub-
sift upon 7unas, a fpecics of fruit which grows wild in the
fclds. Hcrrcra, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. 5 p. 182.'

N 0 T:
444

NOT E X. p. 42.

THESE unhappy viaims are said to be persons of dif-
tindion. It seems improbable that so great a number as
fifty should be employed as spies. So many prisoners had
been taken and dismissed, and the Tlafcalans had sent so
many mefiages to the Spanish quarters, that there appears to
be no reason for hazarding the lives of so many considerable
people, in order to procure information about the position
and state of their camp. The barbarous manner in which
Cortes treated a people unacquainted with the laws of
war eablifhed among polished nations, appears so shock-
ing to the later Spanish writers, that they diminish the
number of those whom he punished so cruelly. Herrera
fays, that he cut off the hands of seven, and the thumbs of
some more. Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that
the hands of fourteen or fifteen were cut off, and the thumbs
of all the refl-. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Corteshimfelf, Relat.
p. 228, b. and after him Gomara, c. 48. affirm, that the
hands of all the fifty were cut off.

NOT.E XI. p. 44.

THE horses were objecs of the greatest aftoniffiment to
all the people of New Spain. At first they imagined the
horse and his rider, like the centaurs of the ancients, to be
tome monfrous animal of a terrible form; and supposing,
that their food was the fame as that of men, brought flelh
and bread to nourish them. Even after they difcoveted
their miflake, they believed the horses devoured men in bat-
tle, and when they neighed, thought that they were demand-
ing their prey. It was not the intcreft of the Spaniards to
undeceive them. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi, c. x .

N OTE

445

N OTE XII. p. 9.

A CCORDING to Bart. de as Casas, there was no
reason for this mafiaere and it wag an a of wanton cruelty,
perpetrated merely to strike terror in the people of New
Spair. Relae. de a Ieftruyc. p. i7, &c. But the zeal
of Las Casas often leads him to exaggerate. In opposition
to hin Bern' Diaz. e. 83, afierts, that the first niffionaries
sent into New Spain by the emperor, made a judicial in.
quiry into this tranfadich and having examined the
priefis and elders of Cholula, found that there was a real
conspiracy to cut off the Sparniards, and that the account
given by Cbrtes was exaily true. As it was the objt
of Cortes at that time, and manifefily his intereff, to gain
the good will of Montezumai it is improbable, that he
vould have taken a ftep which tended so visibly to alienate
him from the Spaniards, if he had not believed it to be
necessary for his own preservation. At the fame time, the
Spaniards who served in America had such contempt for
the natives, and thought them so little entitled to the com-
mon rights of men, that Cortes might hold the Cholulani
as guilty upon flight and imperfect evidence; The feve-
rity of the punishment was certainly excessive and atro-
cious.

NOTE XlII. p. 50o

T HIS description is talen almoR literally from Berna!
Diaz dl Caftilol, who was so unacquainted with the atl
of comporftion, as to be incapable of embellishing his nar.
rative. He relates, in a simple and rude style, what passe
in his own mind, and that of his fcllow-foldiers on the
occasion; " and let it not be thought fIrangc, fays he, thi
I fliould write in this manner of what then happened: for
it ought to be confidered, that it is one thing to relate,
another to have beheld things that were never before fccr,
or hardb or fpokecn of among men." Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

NO T
441

NOTE XIV. p. 6.

B. Diaz del CafRillo gives us some idea of the fatigue and
hardships they underwent in performing this, and other parts
of duty. During the nine months that they remained in
Mexico, every man, without any diftintion between
officers and soldiers, slept on his arms, in his quilted jacket
and gorget. They lay on mats, or straw spread on the
floor, and each was obliged to hold himself as alert as
if he had been on guard. " This, adds he, became so ha-
bitual to me, that even now in my advanced age, I always
sleep in my cloaths, and never in any bed. When I visit
my Encamienda, I reckon it suitable to my rank, to have
a bed carried along with my other baggage but I never go
into it, but, according to custom, I lie in my cloaths, an4
walk frequently during the night in the open air, to view
the liars as I was wont when in service." Cap. io8.

N T E XV. p. 63.

CORTES himself, in his second dispatch to the emperor,
does not explain the motives which induced him either to
coodemnr Qualpopoca to the flames, or to put Montezuma
in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz is silent with re-
specs to his reasons for the former; and the only cause he aft
signs for the latter was, that he might meet with no in-
terruption in executing the sentence pronounced against
Qualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75. But as Montezuma was
his prisoner, and absolutely in his power, the insult offered
to that monarch could have no effect but to irritate him un-
necessarily. Gomara supposes, that Cortes had no other

ebjet than to occupy Mo:lt zuma with his own difircfs

ptd fuffierings, that he might give less attention to what
lesel Qualpopoca. Cron. c. 89. Hcrrera adopts the fame
}pinion. Dec. ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it seems an odd ex,
ledient, in order to make a person bear one injury, to load
iln with another that is greater. De Solis imagines,
hi. (ortts had nthing eJf i view thall to itiid(ttt

MNontezunia,

447

Montezuma, so that he might make no attempt to rescue
the vicims from their fate; but the spirit of that monarch
was so fubmiilive, and he had so tamely given up the pri-
foners to the disposal of Cortes, that he had little to dread
from him. If the explanation which I have attempted to
give of Cortes's proceedings on this occasion be not ad-
mitted, it appears to me, that they must be reckoned among
the wanton and barbarous acts of oppression which occur too
often in the history of the conquest of America.

NOTE XVI. p. 67.

D E Solis asserts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the ropofition of
doing homage to the King of Spain, came from Monte-
zuma himself, and was made in order to induce the Spa-
niards to depart out of his dominions. He ascribes his
conduc oh this occasion, as if it had been founded upon
a scheme of profound policy, and executed with such re-
fined address, as to deceive Cortes himself. But there is
no hint or circumstance in the contemporary historians,
Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to justify this theory. Mon-
tezuma, on other occasions, discovered no such extent of
art and abilities. The anguish which he felt in performing
this humbling ceremony is natural, if we suppose it to have
been involuntary. But, according to the theory of De So-
lis, it would have been preposterous, and inconfifent with
his own design of deceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE XVII. p. 69.

IN fevcral of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all their
induflry and influence, could colledt no gold, In others,
they procured only a few trinkets of small value. Monte-
zuma assured Cortes, that the present which he offered to
the King of Caftilc, after doing homage, consisted of ;11
the treasure amafled by his father; and told him, that he
had already distributed the reft of his gold and jewels

among
448

among the Spaniards. B. Diaz. c. I04. Gomara relates,
that all the silver collected amounted to 500 marks. Cron..
c. 93. This agrees with the account given by Cortes, that
the royal fifth of silver was oo marks. Relat; 239. B.
So that the fuin total of silver was only 400o ounces, at the
rate of eight ounces a mark, which demonstrates the propor-
tion of silver to gold to have been exceedingly fimall.

NOTE XVIII. p. o7.

DBE Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in question the truth of
tLij tranlfatioin, from no better reason than that it was in-
confiftcnt with that prudence which diftingutfhes the cha-
;iaer of Cortes. But he ought to have recollected the
impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no less in-
prudent. He ailerts, that the evidence for it refts upon
the teftiiniony of B. Diaz del Catillo, of Gomara, and of
-lHerrera. They all concur, indeed, in mentioning this in-
conidrate ftep which Cortes took5 and they had good rea-
fbn to do so; for Cortes himself relates this exploit in his
ficond dili)atch to the Emperor, and seems to glory in it.
Cort. Relat. Rniuf. iii. I04. D. This is one instance,
among many, of De Solis's having consulted with little at-
tention the letters of Cortes to Charles V. from which the
noft authentic irmination with refpeó to his operations
imuft be drived.

NOTE XIX. p. 74.

IIiR RERA and De Solis fuppofc, that Vcldf(ltlc wsa;
(nccurage d to equip this armaimcnt against Cortcs, by te
accunis vhich he received from Spainl cnerlnilg ilhe
rcception ol the agenlts fsnt by the colony if Vra Cruz,
and the wrinlth wlith wlich iFoif-ca, 13Bilop ot l, rgus,
had clipouled his iitcre t ad cndelineld the procetilings
of Cortes. ii rcra dec . li. i x. c. S. De Solis, lb.
iv, c. 5. Biut tle chronological order of evctics tcftilcs
this fuppofitii. Portocarrerlo and Ilon e.'o (filed fioln
Vera Cruz July 26, 1519. Herrera, dec. ii i. i. c. 4..

VOL. ii. Gg Thecy

449

They landed at St. Lucar in Odober, according to Her-
rera, ibid. But P. Martyr, who attended the court at that
time, and communicated every occurrence of moment to
his correspondents day by day, mentions the arrival of there
agents, for the fitft time, in December, and speaks of it
as a recent event. Epift. 650. All the historians agree,
that the agents of Cortes had their first audience of the
emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to that town to visit
his mother in his way to St. Jago de Compoltella. Her-
rera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. De Solis, lib, iv c. 5. But the
emperor et out from Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the
r th of March, 1520; and P. Martyr mentions his hav-
ing seen at that time the presents made to Charles, Epift.
665. The armament under Narvaez failed from Cuba in
April 520; It is manifest then, that Velasquez could not
receive any account of what passed in this interview at
Tordefillas, previous to his hostile preparations against
Cortes. His real motives seem to be those which I have
mentioned. The patent appointing him Adelantado of New
Spain, with such extensive powers, bears date November
13, 1519. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. tr. He might re-
ceive it about the beginning of January. Gomara takes
notice, that as soon as this patent was delivered to him, he
began to equip a fleet and levy forces. Cron. c. 96.

NOTE XX. p. 76,

JD E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpreters-
he could hold no intercourse with the people of the pro-
vinces, nor converse with them in any way but by signs,
and that it was equally impossible for him to carry on any
communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv. c. 7. But it
is upon the authority of Cortes himself that I relate all the
particulars of Narvacz's correspondence, both with Mon-
tezuma and with his fubjeds in the maritime provinces.
Relat. Ramus. iii. 244, A. C. Cortes affirms, that there
was a mode of intercourse between Narvaez and the Mcx-
icans, but does not explain how it was carried on. Bernal
Diaz supplies this defed, and informs us, that the three

deserters
450.

deserters who joined Narvaez a&ed as interpreters, having
acquired a competent knowledge of the language, c. ix o.
With his usual minuteness, he mentions their names and
c:hara&ers; and relates3 in chapter I22, hdw they were
punished for their perfidy. The Spaniards had now resided
above a year among the Mexicans; and it is not ftlrprifin'g
that several among them fiholld have made some proficiency
in rpeaking their language. This seems to have been the
care. Herrerag dec. ii. lib. x. c. . Both B. Diaz5 who
was present, and Herrera, the most accurate and best in-
formed of all the Spanish writers, agree with Cortes in his
account of the secret orrefpondence carried on with Mon-
tezuma. Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 8, 19. De Solis seems to
confider it as a discredit to Cortes, his hero, that Monte-
zuina should have been ready to engage in a correspondence
with Narvaez. He supposes, that monarch to have con-
tra&ed uch a wonderful affection for the Spaniards, that
he was not solicitous to be delivered from them. After the
indignity with which he had been treated, such an affection
is incredible i and even De Solis is obliged to acknowledge,
that it must be looked upon as one of the miracles which
God wrought to facilitate the conquefr lib. iv. c. 7. The
truth is, Montezurna, however much overawed by his
dread of the Spaniards was extremely impatient to recover
his liberty.

NOTE XXI. p. 89.

HESE words I have borrowed from the anonymous

Account of the European Settlements in America, pub-
lihed by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo. a work o so
much merit, that 1 should think there is hardly any writer
in the age who ought to be afliamed of acknowledging hitm-
iilf to be the author of it.

NOTE XXII p. 95.

T HE contemporary iiforians differ considerably with
rfepert to e lois of the Spaniards on this occalion. Cor-
tes, in his ccud dispatch to the empetor, akes the nuLm-

G g 2 ber

ber only i50. Relat. ap. Ramu.. iii. p. 249, A. But it,
was manifetly his iitereff, at that juncure, to conceal
from the court of Spain the full extent of the loss which
he had sustained, De Solis, always studious to diminish.
every misfortune that besel his countrymen, rates their lots
at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c. 19. B. Diaz as-
firms, that they loft 870 men, and that only 440 escaped.
from Mexico. c. 128, p. o08. b. Palafox, bishop of Los
Angeles, who seems to have enquired into the early tran-
factions of his countrymen in New Spain, with great at-
tention, confirms the account of B. Diaz with refpe to
the extent of their loss. Virtudes del Indio, p. 22. Go-
mara tfates their loss at 450 men. Cron. c. Io9. Some
months afterwards, when Cortes had received several re-
inforcements, he muttered his troops, and found them to be
only 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 255, E. Now, as
Narvaez brought 880 men into New Spain, and about 400
of Cortes's soldiers were then alive, it is evident, that his
loss in the retreat from Mexico must have been much more
considerable than what he mentions. B. Diaz, solicitous
to magnify the dangers and sufferings to which he and his
fellow-conquerors were exposed, may have exaggerated
their loss; but, in my opinion, it cannot well be estimated
at less than 600 men.

NOTE XXIII. p. 1X3.

SOME remains of this great work are still visible, and
the ipot where the brigantines were built and launched, is
fill pointed out to strangers. Torquemada viewed them.
Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

NOTE XXIV. p. 120.

T HE flation of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacuba
was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes, that there they
could diflintly observe what pasTed when their countrymen
were sacrificed. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 273. E. B.
D)iaz, who belonged to Alvarado's division, relates what he
beheld with his own eyes. C. 152. p. 148, b. x4, a.

Like
4S1t

Like a man whose courage was so clear as to be above fils-
picion, he describes, with his usual implicity, the impref.
'sion which this fpeaacle made upon him. " Before," fays
he, "I saw the breatfs of my companions opened, their
hearts yet fluttering, offering to an accursed idol, and their
flesh devoured by their exulting enemies, I was accustomed
to enter a battle not only without fear, but with high pirit.
But from, that time I never advanced to fight the Mexicans
without a secret horror and anxiety, my heart trembled at
the thoughts of the death which I had seen them susser."
He takes care to add, that as soon as the combat began,
this terror went off; and, indeed, his adventurous bravery
on every occasion is full evidence of this. B. Diaz, c.
156. p. 57, a.

NOTE XXV. p. 25.

ONE circumrtance in this siege merits particular notice.
The account which the Spanilh writers give of the nume-
rous armies employed in the attack or defence of Mexico,
seems to be incredible. According to Cortes himself, he
had at one time 150,oo00auxiliary Indians in his service.
Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Gomara asserts, that they were
above 200,000. 'Cron.' c. 136. Herrera, an author
of higher authority, fays, they were about 200,000.
Dec. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None of the contemporary wri-
ters acertain explicity the number of persons in Mex-
ico during the siege. But Cortes, on several occa-
sions, mentions the number of Mexicans who were slain,
or who perifled for want of food ;' and, if we may rely on
those circumstances, it is probable, that above two hundred
thousand must have been hut up in the town. But the
quantity of provisions necessary for the fubfifteice of such
valt multitudes affenibled in one place during' ihree months
is so great, and it requires so much foresight and arrange-
mcnt to collect them, fo'as to be certain of a regular 'ftlp
ply, that one can hardly believe that this could be accom-
pliihed in a country where agriculture was so imperfect as
in the Mexican empire, where there were no tame ani-
mals, and by a people naturally so improvident, and so
incapable of executing a complicated plan as the most im-

proved

453

proved Americans. The .Spaniards, with all their care
and attention, fared very poorly, and were often reduced
-to extreme difrefs from want of proviions. B. Diaz,
p. 142. Cortes Relat. 7T. D. Cortes, on one occa-
sion, mentions slightly the'fubfiftence of his army; and
after acknowledging, that they were often in great wanrt,
adds, that they received supplies from the people of the
country, of fifli, and of some' fruit, which he calls the
cherries of the country, ibid. B. Diaz fays, that they
had cakes of maize, and cerafas de la tierra i and when the
seasons of these was over, another fruit, which he calls
Tunas; but their most comfortable subsistence was a root
which the Indians use as food, to which he gives the natmle
of .,uilites; p. 142. The' Indian auxiliaries had one
means of subsistence more than the Spaniards. They fed
upon the bodies of the Mexicans wham they killed il
battle. Cort. Relat. 176, C. B. Diaz confirms his re-
lation, and adds, that when the Indians returned from Mex-
ico to their own country, they carried with them large
quantities of the flesh of the Mexicans salted or dried, as
a most acceptable'prcfent to their friends, that they might
have the pleasure of feeding on the bodies of their enemies
in their festivals, p. 157. De Solis, who seems to confider
it as an imputation of discredit to his countrymen, that
they should' a in concert with auxiliaries who fed upon
human flesh, is solicitous to prove, that they endeavoured
to prevent their aflbciates from eating the bodies of the
Mexicans, lib. v. c. 24, But he has no authority for this
fromn the original hiltorians. Neither Cortes himself, nor
B. Diaz, seem to have had any such scruple ; and, on many
occasions, mention the ndian repasts, which were become
familiar to them, without any mark of abhorrence. Even
with this additional stock of food for the Indians, it was
hardly possible to procure fiibfiftence for armies amounting
to such numbers as we find in the Spanish writers. Per-
haps, the heft solution of the difficulty is, to adopt the
opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo, the moRs artless of all the
.Hiloriaidoies primitives. 1' Whcn Gomara," fays he,
on ome occasions relates, that there were so many thou-
sand Indians our auxiliaries, and on others, that there were
so many thousand houfcs in this or that town, no regard is
to be paid to his enumeration, as he has no authority for
it, the numbers not being in reality the fifth of what he

relates.
45

relates. If we add together the different numbers which
he mentions, that country would contain more millions than
there are in Castile." C. 129. But though some confir
derable deducion should certainly be made from the Spa-
nifh accounts of the Mexican forces, they must have been
very numerous; for nothing but an immense superiority in
number, could have enabled them to withstand a body of
nine hundred Spaniards, commanded by a general of fudh
abilities as Cortes.

NOTE XXVI. p. 138.

IN relating the oppressive and cruel proceedings of the
conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de las
Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat. de la
Deftruyc. p. x8, &c. is manifestly exaggerated. It is from
the testimony of Cortes himself, and Gomara, who wrote
under his eye, that I have taken my account of the punish-
ment of the Panucans; and they relate it without any
disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his usual custom,
mentions it only in general terms, c. 62. Herrera, so-
licitous to extenuate this barbarous action of his country-
men, though he mentions 60 caziques, and 400 men of
note, as being condemned to the flames, asserts, that thirty
only were burned and the reft pardoned. Dec. iii. lib. v.
c. 7. But this is contrary to the testimony of the original
historians, particularly of Gomara, whom it appears he had;
consulted, as he adopts several of his expressions in this
paflage. The punishment of Guatimozin is related by the
most authentic 'ofthe Spanish writers. Torquemada has
extraced from a history of Tezeuco, composed in' the
Mexican tongue, an account of this tranfEadion, more f-
vourable to' Guatimozin than that of the Spanish authors.
Mon. Indiana, i. 575. According to that account, Cortes
had carcely a hadow 'of evidence to jutify such a wanton
aft of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and his
fellow-fufferers asserted their innocence with their last
breath, and that many of the Spanish foldierg condemned
this action of Cortes as equally unncceflary and unjust, p.
?.00, b. 20o, a.

45

NOTE XXVII. p.. 140

T HE motive for undertaking this expedkion was, to
punish Chriftoval de Olid, one of his officers who had
revolted against him, and aimed at eflablifling all inde-
pendent jurifdiion. Cortes regarded this ifuric-aeio as
of such dangerous example, and dreaded so much the abili-
ties and popularity of its author, that in person he led the
body of troops destined to suppress it. He marched, ac-
cording to Gomara, three thousnd mniles, through a coun-
try abounding with thick forests, rugged mountains, dcc
rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated only in a few places.
What he fuffcred from famine, fron the hoflility of the
natives, from the climate, and from hardships of every fpe-
cies, has nothing in history parallel to it, but what occurs
in the adventures of the other discoverers and conquerors
of the New World. Cortes was employed in this dread-
ful service above two years: and though it was not diftin-
guifhed by any fplsndid event, he exhibited, during the
course of it, greater personal courage, more fortitude of
mind, more perfevcrance and patience, than in any other
period or fccne in his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi, vii,
viii, ix. Gomara Cron. c. 163-177. B1. Diaz, 174-
:9o.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 142.

ACCORDING to Herrera, the treasure which Cortes
brought with him, confifled of fifteen hundred marks of
'wrought plate, two hundred thouflnd pesos of fine gold,
ind ten thouland of inferior fandard, many rich jewels, one
in particular worth forty thousand pesos, and everal trin-
kets and ornaments (f value. )Dc. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. lib.
iv. c. ic afterwards engaged to give a portion with
his daughter of a hundred thousand pesos. Gomara Cron.
. 237. T'he fortune which heleft his sons was very con-
(idcrable. But as we havc before related, the fum divided

among

among the conquerors on the first reduction of Mexico was
very finall. There appears then to be ome reason for fufr
pecting that the accusations of Cortes's enemies were not
altogether deRitute of foundation. They charged him
with having unjufly applied to his own use a difpropor-
tionate (hare of the Mexican spoils; with having concealed
the royal treasures of Montezuma and Guatimozin, with
defrauding the king of his fifth, and robbing his followers
of what was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c.
15. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors them-
fdlves entertained suspicions of the fame kind. B. Diaz.
c. 175.

NOTE XXIX. p. 147.

IN tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New Spain,
we have followed Cortes himself as our most certain guide.
His dispatches to the emperor contain a minute account of
his operations. But the unlettered conqueror of Peru was
incapable of relating his own exploits. Our information
with refpct to them is derived, however, from contempo-
rary and refpeaable authors.

THE mor early accounts of Pizarro's tranfaaions in

Peru, was published by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary.
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no farther
than the death of Atahualpa, in 1533; for the author re-
turned to Spain in 534, and Coon after he landed, printed
at Seville his hort History of the Conquest of Peru, ad-
dreflcd to the emperor.

DON Pedro Sancho, an officer who served under Pizarro,

drew up an account of his expedition, which was tranf-
lated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted in his valuable
collction, but has never been publishec in its original lan-
guage. Sancho returned to Spain at the fame time with
Xerez. Great credit is due to what both those authors
relate concerning the progress and operations of Pizarro,
hut the residence of the Spaniards in Peru had been so
llort, at the time when they left it, and their intercourfo

with

457

with the natives so slender, that their knowledge of the Pe
ruvian manners and customs is very imperfect.

THE next contemporary historian is Pedro Cieza de:

Leon, who published his Chronica del Peru, at Seville in
1553. If he had finilhed all that he proposes in the ge-
neral division of his work, it wovld have been the most
complete history which had been published of any region
in the New World. He was well qualified to execute it,
having served during seventeen years in America, and vi-
fited, in person, most of the provinces concerning which
he had occasion to write. But only the firit part of his
Chronicle has been printed. It contains a description of
Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with an ac-
count of the institutions and customs of the natives, and is
written with so little art, and such an apparent regard for
truth, that one must regret the loss of the other parts of
his work.

THIS ofs is amply supplied by Don Augustine Zarate,

who published, in 1555, his Hiftoria del defcubrimiento
y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarate was a man
tof rank and education, and employed in Peru as comptrol-
ler-general of the public revenue. His history, whether
we attend to its matter or composition, is a book of confi-
derable merit; as he had opportunity to be well informed,
and seems 'o have been inquisitive with refpe& to the man-
ners and tranfadions of the Peruvians, great credit is due
to his eftimony.

DON Diego Fernandez pyblifhed his Hiforia del Peru

in 1571. His sole object is to relate the dissensions and
civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he served in
a public flation in Peru, and was well acquainted both with
the country, and with the principal ators in those singular
scenes which he describes; as he possessed found understand-
ing, and great impartiality, his work may be ranked among
those of the historians most diftinguiihed for their induftly
in research, or their capacity in judging with rfped to the
events which they relate.

THE lat author who can be reckoned among the con-

temporary historians of the conquest of Peru, is Garcilaffo
de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part of his work
entitled, Comzentarias Reaes del Origen de kls Incas Reines
del Peru, was not published sooner than the year 1609,
feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the last
emperor, yet, as he was born in Peru, and was the foi
of an officer of diftiriion among the Spanish conquerors,
by a Cqyq, or lady of the royal race, on account of which
he always took the name of nca, as he was master of the
language spoken by the Incas, and acquainted with the
traditions of his countrymen, his authority is rated very
high, and often placed above that of all the other historians.
Hii work, however, is little more than a commentary upon
the Spanish writers of the Peruvian fiory, and comrpoed
of quotations taken from the authors whom have men-
tioned. This is the idea which he himself gives of it, lib.
i. c. tc. Nor is it in the account of sac&s only that he
follows them servilely. Even in explaining the inflitutions
and rites of his anceftbrs, his information seems not to be
more perfec than theirs, his explanation of the Quipos is
almoit the fame with that of Acofta. He produces no
specimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one which
he borrows from Bias Valera, an early miflionary, whose
memoirs have never been published. Lib. ii. c. 15.
As for composition, arrangement, or a capacity ofdiftin-
guilhing between what is fabulous, what is probable, and
what is true, one searches for them in vain in the conimen-
taries of Inca. His work, however, notwithstanding its
great defects, is not altogether destitute of use. Some
traditions which he received rom his countrymen are
reserved in it. His knowledge of the Peruvian language
as enabled him to corret ome errors of the Spanish writers,
and he has inserted in it some curious faas taken from
authors hofc works were nver published, and are now
loft.

NOTE

NOTE XXX. p. 152.

O NE may form an idea both of the hardships which they
endured, and of the sickliness of the regions which they
visited, from the extraordinary mortality that prevailed
among them. Pizarro carried out I 12 men, Almagro 70.
In less than nine months I30 of there died. Few fell by the
sword; most of them were cut off by diseases. Xerez,
p. 180. .

NO T E XXXI p. 155.

THIS island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfortable
by the unwholefomenefs of its climate,. its impenetrable
woods, its rugged mountains,, and the multitude of insets
and reptiles, that it is.feldomany softer epithet than that of
infernal is employed tm.

describing it. The fun is almost

never 'seen there, aiid throughout the year it hardly ever
ceases to railn' Dec. iii. 'lib. x. c. 3. Dampier touched
at thisifland in the year i685; and his account of the cli-
mate is not more favourable. Vol. i. p. 172. He, during
his cruise on that' oast, visited most of the places where
Pizarro landed, and his description of them throws light on
the narrations of the early Spanish historians.

NOTE XXXII. p. 69.

BY this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spanifl
settlements on the continent. When Cortes began his
expedition in the year 1518, though his armament was more
considerable than that ot Pizarro, and cornpoed of persons
superior in rank to those who invaded Pcru, he could pro-
cure no more than fixtcen horses.

NOT

NOTE XXXIII. p. 171.

IN the year 740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George Juan,
travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame route
which Pizarro took. Froin the description of their journey
one may form an idea of the difficulty of his march. The
sandy plains between St. Michael de Piura and Motupe
extend 90 miles, without water, without a tree, a plant,
or any green thing, on a dreary firetch of burning sand.
Voyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 75.

THIS extravagent and unseasonable discourse of Valverde
has been censured by all historians, and with justice. But
though he seens to have been an illiterate aud bigotted
monk, nowise resembling the good Olmed6, who accom-
panied Cortes, the absurdity of his address to Atahualpa
mu not be charged wholly upon him. His harangue is
evidently a translation, or paraphrase of that form, concerted
by a junto of Spanifl divines and lawyers in the year 509,
for explaining the right of their king to the sovereignty of
the New World, and for direting the officers employed in
America how they hould take poflelfion of any new
country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The sentiments con-
tained in Valverde's harangue muff not then be imputed to
the bigotted imbecility of a particular man, but to that of
the age. Gomara and Benzoni relate one circumstance
concerning Valverde, which, if authentic, renders him an
object not of contempt only, but of horror. They afert,
that during the whole action, Valverde continued to excite
the soldiers to slaughter, calling to them to strike the enemy
not with the edge, but with the points of their swords.
Go'n. Cron. c. r3. Benz. Hi{tor. Nov. Oris, lib. iii.
c. 3. Such behaviour was very different from that of the
Roman Catholic clergy in other parts of America, where
they uniformly exerted their influence to protectL the Indians,
and to moderate the ferocity of their conntrylmn.

NOTE

461.

NOT E' XXXV. pi 176.

T WO different systems hate been formed concerning
the conduct of Atahualpa. The Spaiifh writers; in order
tojuftify the violence of their ountrymen, contend; that
all the Inca's profetlons of friendship were feigned; and
that his intention in agreeing to an interview with Pizarro
at Caxamalci was to cut off'him and his followers at one
low ; that for this purpose he advanced with such a nume-
rous body of attendants, who had arms doncealed under their
garments to execute this scheme. This is the account given
by Xerez and Zarate, and adopted by Herrera. But if it
had been the plan of the Inca to defirby the Spaniards, one
can hardly imagine that he would have permitted them to
march unmolested through the desert of Motupe, or have
negleted to defend the passes in the mountains where they
mighthave been attacked with so much advantage. If the
Peruvians marched to Caxamalca with a intention to fall
upon the Spaniards it is inconceivable that of so great a
body of men, prepared for aion, not one should attempt
to make refiflance, but all tamely susser themselves to be
butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to attack.
Atahualpa's mode of advancing to the interview, has the
afpedc of a peaceable procession, riot of amilitary enterprize.
He himself, and his followersj were in their habits of ceremo-
ny precededj as on days offolemnity$ by:unarmed harbingers.
Though rude nations are frequently cunning and falfc,
yet, if a scheme of deception and treachey must be in-
puted either to a monarch, that had no great reason to be
alarmed at a visit from strangers who solicited admission into
his presence as friends, or to an adventurer so daring,
and so little scrupulous as Pizarro, one cannot hesitate in de-
termining where to fix the presumption of guilt. Even
ainidft the endeavours of the Spanish writers to palliate the
proceedings of Pizarro, one plainly perceives, that it was
his intentions as well as his interest, to seize the Inca, and
that he had taken mcafures for that purpose, previous to any
fiificion of that monarch's design.

GARCILASSO
4b

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to

vindicate his countymen, the Peruvians, from the crime
of having concerted the deftrufion of Pizarro and his fol-
lowers, and no lets afraid to charge the Spaniards with im-
proper conduEt towards the Jnca, has framed another system.
He relates, that a man of majestic form with a long beard,
and garments reaching to the ground, having appeared in
vision to Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and declared that he
was a ,child of the Sun, that monarch built a temple in
honour of this person, and ereced an image of him, re-
fembling, as nearly as possible, the singular form in which
he had exhibited himfelfto his view. In this temple divine
honours were paid to him, by the name of Viracocha.
P. i. lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22. When the Spaniards first
appeared in Peru, the length of their beards, and the dress
they wore, struck every person so much with their likeness
to the image of Viracocha, that they supposed them to be
children of the Sun, who had descended from heaven to
earth. All concluded that the fatal period of the Peruvian
empire was now approaching, and that the throne would be
occupied by new poffefors. Atahualpa himself, confidering
the Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was so far from
entertaining any thoughts of resisting them, that he deter-
mined to yield implicit obedience to their commands.
From those sentiments flowed his professions of love and
refped. To those were owing the cordial reception of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the fubmiflive
reverence with which he advanced to visit the Spanifl ge-
neral in his quarters. But from the gross ignorance of
Philipillo, the interpreter, the declaration of the Spaniards,
and his answer to it, were so ill explained, that by their
mutual inability to comprehend each other's intentions, the
fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all its dreadful confe.
quences, was occasioned.

IT is remarkable that no traces of this superstitious ve-

neration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be found
either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, previous to the
interview at Caxamalca; and yet the two former served under
Pizarro at that time, and the latter visited Peru soon after
the conquest. If either the Inca himself, or his messen-

gurs,

,64

gers, had addrefled the Spaniards in the words which Lti
Vega, put in their mouths, they nuft have been struck with
such fibmiffive declarations; and they would certainly have
availed thernfelves of them to acomplifh their own designs
with greater facility. La Vega himself3 though his narra-
tive of the intercourse between the Inca and Spaniards, pre-
ceding the encounter at Caxamalca, is founded on the
supposition of his believing them to be Viracochas, or
divine beings, p ii. lib. i. c. 7, &c. yet, with his usual
inattention and inaccuracy, he admits in another place,
that the Peruvians did not recollect the resemblance between
them ard the god Viracocha, until the fatal disasters fubfe-
quent to the defeat at Caxamalca, and then only began to
call them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is coii-
firmed by Herrera, dec. v. lib. ii. c. 12. In many different
parts of America, if we may believe the Spanif writers,
their countrymen were confidered as divine beings who hd:
descended fom heaven. But in this intance, as in many
which occur in the intercourse between nations, whole
progress in refinement is very unequal, the ideas of thole
who used the expression, were different from the ideas of those
who heard it. For, such is the idiom of the Indian lan-
guages, or such is the simplicity of those who speak them,
that when they fee any thing with which they were formerly
unacquainted, and of which they do not know the origin,
they fay that it came down from heaven, Nugnez, Ram.
iii. 327, C.

TInE account which I have given of the sentiments and

proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more natural
and confifdent than either of the two preceding, and is
better supported by the fa&s related by the contemporary
historians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 200. two thousand Peru-

vians were killed. Sancho makes the number of the
fliin fix or fevenr thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By La
Vega's account, five thousand were massacred. P. ii. lib. i.
c. 25. The number which I have mcntioned, being Ili)
medium between the extremes, may probably be neareil tlic
truth.

N OT
464

NOTE XXXVI. p. 78

NOTHING can be a more striking proof of this, than
that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to Cuzco.
The diitance between them is fix hundred miles. In every
place throughout this vast extent of country, they were
treated with all the honours which the Peruvians paid to
their sovereigns, and even to their divinities. Under pre-
text of amassing what was wanting for the ransom of the
Inca, they demanded the plates of gold with which the
walls of the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco were adorned;
and though the priests were unwilling to alienate those fa-
cred ornaments, and the people refused to violate the shrine
of their God, the three Spaniards with their own hands
robbed the Temple of part of this valuable treasure; and
such was the reverence of the natives for their persons,
that though they beheld this a of sacrilege with astonish-
menr, they did not attempt to prevent or diflurb the com-
miflion of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap. Ramus0
iii. 375, D.

NOTE XXXVII. p. iS8.

A CCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco, after
setting apart the kidg's fifth, was divided among 480 per-
sons. Each received 4000 pesos. This amounts to
1,920,000 pelis. Dec. v, lib. vi. c. 3. But as the gene-
ral, and other officers, were entitled to a part far greater
than that of the private men, the fum total must have risen
much beyond what I have mentioned. Goinara, c 123.
and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy themselves with afiercing in
general, that the plunder of Cuzco was of greater value
than the ranfor of Atahualpa.

NOTE

465
VOL. I1,

H h

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 190.

No expedition in the New World was conducted with
more persevering courage than that of Alvarado, and in
none were greater hardships endured. Many of the per-
sons engaged in it were, like their leader, veterans who had
served under Cortes, inured to all the rigour of American
war. Such of my readers as have not an opportunity of
perusing the striking description of their fuffcrings by Zarate
or Herrera, may form ome idea of the nature of their march
from the sea coast to Quito, by consulting the account which
D. Ant. Ulloa gives of his own journey in 1736, nearly in
the fame route. Voy. tom. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M,
Bouguer, who proceeded from Puerto Viejo to Quito, by
the fame road which Alvarado took. He compares his own
journey with that of the Spaniih leader, and, by the com-
parison, gives a most striking idea of the boldness and pa-
tience of Alvarado, in forcing his way through so many
obstacles. Voyage du Perou, p. xxviii. &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 9gr.

ACCORDING to Herrera, there were entered on the
account of the king, in gold, 155,300 pesos, and 5400
marks (each 8 ounces) of silver, besides several veffls and
ornaments, some of gold, and others of silver; on account
of private persons, in gold 499,000 pesos, and 54,oo00
marks of silver. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 13.

NOTE XL. p. 198.

T HE Peruvians had recourse to other military arts than
tholf of the Spaniards. As the cavalry were the chief ob-
jec of their terror, they endeavoured to render them inca-
pable of ating, by throwing a long thong with a stone faf-

teaed
466

tened to each end. This twisted about the horse and its
rider, entangled them so as to render them incapable of
aiing. Herrera mentions this as an invention of their own.
Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. i. p.
375, this weapon is common among several barbarous tribes
towards the extremity of South America; and it is more
probable, that the Peruvians had observed the dexterity with
which they used it in hunting, and on this occasion adopted
it themselves. The Spaniards were considerably annoyed
by it. Herrera, ibid. Another instance of the ingenuity
of the Peruvians deserves mention. By turning a river out
of its channel, they overflowed a valley, in which a body of
Spaniards was polled, so fuddcnly, that it was with the ut-
most difficulty they made their cfcape. Herrera, Dec. v.
lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XLI. p. 215.

IIERRERA's account of Orellana's voyage is the mofl
ninute, and apparently the most accurate. It was probably
taken from the journal of Orellana himself. But the dates
are not diftindly marked. His navigation down the Cocaj
or Napo, began early in February 154 1; and he arrived at
the mouth of the iver on the 26th of August, having
spent near seven months in the voyage. M. de la Conda-
mine, in the year 1743, failed from Cuenca to Para, a set-
tlement of the Portuguese at the mouth of the river, a na-
vigation much longer than that of Orellana, in less than
four months. Voyage, p. 179. But the two adventurers
were very differently provided for the voyage. This ha-
zardous undertaking, to which ambition prompted Orcl-
lana, and to which the love of science led M. de la Conda-
mine, was undertaken in the year 1769, by Madame Godin
des Odonais, from conjugal affection. The narrative of
the hardships which fle suffered, of the dangers to which
ime was exposed, and of the difalfters which besel her, is
one of the most singular and affecting stories in any lan-
guage, exhibiting in her conduEt a striking picure of the
tortitude which ditinguifh the one sex, mingled with the
sensibility and tenderness peculiar to the other. Lettre de
M. Godiin, a M. de la Condamine.

H h 2 N O T

.

NOTE XLII. p. 218.

H ERRERA gives a friking picture of their indigence,
Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers of difinaoSion
under Almagros lodged in the fame house, and having but
one cloak among them, it was worn alternately by him
who had occasion to appear in public, while the reft, from
the want of a decent dress, were obliged to keep within
doors. Their former friends and companions were o much
afraid of giving offence to Piiarro, that they durf not en-
tertain, or even converse with them. One may conceive
what was the condition, and what the indigation of men
once accuflomed to power and opulence, when they felt
themselves poor and despised, without a roof under which
to shelter their heads, while they beheld others, whose merit
and services were not equal to theirs, living with splendor
in sumptuous edifices. Dec. vi. lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE XLIII. p. 229.

H ERRERA, the most accurate of the Spanifl historians,
asserts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poffefled dominions in the
neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, which yielded
him an annual revenue greater than that of the archbilhop
of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Europe. Dec. vii.
lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XLIV. p. 241.

A LL the Spanish writers describe his march, and the
ditfreffes of both parties very minutely. Zarate observes,
that hardly any parallel to it occurs in hiflory, either with
refpea to the length of the retreat, or the ardour of the
pursuit. Pizarro, according to his computation, followed
the viceroy upwards of three thoufaiid miles. Lib. v. c. 16. 26.

NOTE

NOTE XLV. p. 254.

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the best informed
historian of that period, to one million four hundred thou-
sand pfos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XLVI. p. 255.

CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an advo-
cate for an accommodation with Gafca. Finding Pizarro
incapable of holding that bold course which he originally
suggested, he recommended to him a timely fubmiflion to
his sovereign as' the safes measure. WVhen the president's
offers were first communicated to Pizarro, " By our Lady
(said he, in that itrain of buffoonry which was familiar to
him) the pries issues gracious bulls. He gives them both
good and cheap; let us not only accept of them, but wear
them as reliques about our necks." Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

N OTE XLVII. p. 260.

DURING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, seven
hundred men were killed in battle, and three hundred and
eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrera, dec. viii. lib.
iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of these were cut off by
Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Zarate makes the
number of thoft put to a violent death five hundred. Lib.
vii. c. .

N 0OT E XLVIII. p. 267.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of the
Mexicans, I have received much information from a large
ril.nufcrilt of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the judges in

the

+69

the Court of Audience of M1\exico. In the year 1553,
Philip II. in order that he might discover the mode ot l--
vying tribute from his Indian fubjeiets, that would be mori
.beneficial to the crown, and lealt oppreflive to them, ad-
dressed a mandate to all the Courts of Audience in Ame-
rica, enjoining them to answer certain queries which he
proposed to them, concerning the ancient form of govern-
ment citablifhed among the various nations of Indians, and
the mode in which they paid taxes to thei-r kings, or chiefs.
In obedience to this mandate, Corita, who had resided nine-
teen years in America, fourteen of which he passed in New
Spain, composed the work of which I have a copy. lie
acquaints his sovereign, that he had made it an obhrjc
during his residence in America, and in all its provinces
which he had visited, to inquire diligently into the manners
and cufcoms of the natives; that he had conversed, for this
purpose, with mani aged and intelligent Indians, and con-
fulted fcveral of the Spanish ecclesiastics, who understood
the Indian languages most perfectly, particularly ome of
those who landed in New Spain loon after the conquefl.
Corita appears to be a man of ome learning, and to have
carried on his inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to
which he pretends, Greater credit is due to his testimony
from one circumitance. His work was not composed with
a view to publication, or in fuppoit of any particular the-
ory, but contains simple, though full answers to queries
proposed to him officially. Though Herrera does not men-
tion him among the authors whom he had followed as guides
in his history, I hould fippofe, from several flhs of which
he takes notice, as well as fiom several expressions which he
usCs, that this memorial of Corita was not unknown to him,

N Q T E XLIX. p. 276.

Ti 1i, early Spanifli writers were so hafly and inaccurate
in ill i;ating the numbers of people in the provinces and
towns of America, that it is inpfllible to afccrtain that of
Mexico itself with any degree of precision. Cortes de-
scribes the extent and populoufilefs of Mexico in general
terms, which imply, that it was not inferior to the greatec
cities in F;nropc. Gomara is more explicit, and affirms,

thai

that there were 60,000 houses or families in Mexico.
Chron. c. 78. Herrera adopts his opinion. Dec. ii. lib.
vii. c. 33; and the generality of writers follow them impli-
citly without inquiry or scruple. According to this account,
the inhabitants of Mexico muff have been about 300,000.
Torquemada, with his usual propensity to the marvellous,
asserts, that there were a hundred and twenty thousand houses
or families in Mexico, and consequently about fix hundred
thousand inhabitants. Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judi-
cious account of the Mexican empire, by one of Cortes's
officers, the population is fixed at 60,000 people. Ramu-
fio, iii. 309, A. Even by this account, which probably is
much nearer the truth than any of the foregoing, Mexico
vas a great city.

N OTE L. p. 279.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted for
this curious observation. Palafox, bishop of Los Angeles,
confirms and illustrates it more fully. 'Ihe Mexican (fays
he) is the only language in which a termination indicating
respect, filavas reverentiales y de cortefia, may be affixed to
every word. By adding the final syllable zin or azin to any
word, it becomes a proper expreflion of veneration in the
mouth of an inferior. If, in speaking to an equal, the word
Father is to be used, it is Tatl; but an inferior fays Tatzin.
One priest speaking to another, calls him Teopixqze; a per-
son of inferior rank calls him Teopixcatzin. The name of
the emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico,
was Montezuma, but his vafials, from reverence, pronounc-
ed it Montezumazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Virtudes del
Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential
nouns, but reverential verbs. The manner in which these
are formed from the verbs in common use, is explained by
D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guevara in his Mexican Gram-
mar, No. 188.

NOTE

471

NO TE LI. p. 283.

FROM comparing several pafages in Corita and Her-
rera, we may colleA with some degree of accuracy, the va-
rious modes in which the Mexicans contributed towards the
support of government. Some perfdns of the first order
seem to have been exempted fiom the payment of ally tri-
bute, and, as their only duty to the public, were bound to
personal service in war, and to'follow'the banner of the so-
vereign with their vaflals. 2. The imrrediate uafials of the
crown were bound not only to personal hmilitary'fervicc,' bit
paid a certain proportion of the produce of their lands in
kind. 3. Those who held offices of honour or trust, paid a
certain share of what they received in consequence of hold-
ing these. 4. Ech Capullee, oriaflbciation, cultivated sone
part of the common field allotted to it, for the behoof of
the crown, and deposited the produce in the royal granarics.
5. Some part of whatever was brought to the public nsar-
];cts, hether fruits of the earth, or the various produc-
tions of their artifs and manufacurers, was demanded for
the public use, and the merchants who paid this were ex-
empted from every' oher tax. 6. The Mayeques, or ad-
fcripti glebe, were bound to cultivate certain- diftridts in
every province, which may be confidered as crown land,
and brought the increase into public florehoufes. Thus the
fiJvercigti received some part of'whatever Was ufefil or va-
luable in the country, whether it was the natural production
of the oil, or acquired by the induflry of the people. What
each contributed towards the fpport of government, seems
to have been inconsiderable. 'Corita, in afwcr to one of
the queries put to the Audience of Mexico, by Philip II.
endeavours to estimate in money the value of what each ci-
tizen might be supposed to pay, and does not reckon it at
more than thrl-e'or four reals, about eighteen-pence or two
liillings a head.

NOTE LII. p. 24.

CORTES, who seems to have been as much afonilied
With this as with any inifancc of Mexican ingenuity, ives
a particular dcl iption of it. Along one of the caufecvays,

sys
47

fays he, by which they enter the city, are conduaed two
conduits, cornpoed of clay tempered with mortar, about
two paces in breadth, and raised about fix feet. In one of
them is conveyed a stream of excellent water, as large as
the body of a man, into the centre of the city, and it sup-
Ijlies all the inhabitants plentifully. The other is empty,
that when it is.necclary to clean, or repair the former, the
ftrean of water may be turned into it. As this conduit
pases along two of the bridges, where there are breaches in
the cafeway, through which' the salt water of the lake
flows, it is conveyed over them in pipes as large as the
body of an ox, then carried from the conduit to the remote
quarters of the city in canoes, and fold' to the inhabitants.
Rtlat. ap. Ramus. 2I, A.

N O T E LIII. p. 289.

IN the armory of the royal palace of Madrid, are shewn
fits of armour, which are called Montezuma's. They
are composed of thin lacquered copper-plates. In the opi-
nion of very intelligent judges they are evidently eaffern.
The forms of the silver ornaments uon them, representing
dragons, &c. may be confidered as confirmation of this.
They are infinitely superior in point of workmlanfiip to any
effort of American art. The Spaniards probably received
them from the Philippine islands. The only unquestionable
specimen of Mexican art that I know of in Great Britain,
is a cup of very fine gold, which is said to have belonged to
MIontezuma. It weighs 50oz. 2dwt. Three drawings
of it were exhibited to the Society of Antiquaries, June o,
1765. A nmal's lhead is represented on this cup. On one
fide the full face, on the other the profile, on the third the
b.ick parts of the head. The relievo is said to have been
produced by punching the inside of the cup, so as to make
the rcprefLcttion of a face oll the oltfidc. The features are
iudce but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Spanish
wvortmainfhip. This cup was purchased by Edward earl of
Orfurd, while he lay in the harbour of Cadiz with the fleet
undler his con-,malnd, and is now in the ponflion of his
Arandfon, Lord Archer. I am indebted for this information
tu my rpcicabl and ingenuous friend Mr. Barrington.

O TF,

473

NOTE LIV. p. 290.

T HE learned reader will perceive how much I have
been indebted in this part of my work, to the guidance of
the bishop of Gloucester, who has traced the successive
steps by which the human mind advanced in this line of
its progress, with much erudition and greater ingenuity.
He is the firfi, as far as I know, who formed a rational
and confiflent theory concerning the various modes of
writing praadifed by nations, according to the various
degrees of their improvement. Div. Legation of Moses,
iii. 69, &c. Some important observations have been
added by the learned and intelligent author of the Traite
de la Formation Mechanique des Langues, tom. i. 295,
&c.

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious monu-

ments extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will not
be improper to give some account of the means by which
they were preserved from the general wreck of every work
of art in America, and communicated to the Public. For
the most early and complete collection of these, publifled
by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of that cu-
rious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza, viceroy
of New Spain, having deemed those paintings a proper
present for Charles V. the ship in which they were ent
to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and they came
into the pofleffion of Thevet, the king's geographer, who
having travelled himself into the New World, and defcrib-
ed one of its provinces, was a curious observer of what-
ever tended to illustrate the manners of the Americans.
On his death, they were publiflied by Hakluyt, at that
time chaplain of the Englilh ambassador to the French
court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were publishcd
at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry Spelan.
Purchas, 'iii. o6.

THE second fpecimcn of Mexican pidture-writing was

published by Dr. Francis Gemclli Carreri, in two copper-
plates. The first is a map, or rcprcfcnltation of the progrles

of
474.

of the ancient Mexicans on their firfi arrival in the country
and of the various stations in which they fettled, before they
founded the capital of their empire in the lake of Mexico.
'The second is a Chronological Wheel, or Circle, represent-
iag the manner in which they computed and marked their
cycle of fifty-two years. The former was given to him
byD. Chriftoval de Guadalajora, in the city of Los Ange-
los; the latter he received from Don Carlos de Siguenza
y Gongorra. But as it seems now to be a received opinion
(founded I know not on what evidence) that Carreri was
never out of Italy, and that his famous Giro del Mndo
is an account of a fiAitious voyage, I have not mentioned
these paintings in the text. ''hey have, however, ma-
::ifeftly the appearance of being Mexican produftions, and
arc allowed to be so by Boturini, who was well qualified
to determine whether they were genuine or supposititious.
ihe style of painting in the former is considerably more
perfcct than any other specimen of Mexican design; but
as the original is fhid to have been much defaced by time,
IfufpeEt that it has been improved by some touches from
the hand of an European artitf. Carerri, Churchil, iv.
p. 487. The chronological wheel is ajuft delineation of
the Mecxican mode of computing time, as described by
Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2. It seems to retemble one which that
learned Jesuit had seen ; and if it be admitted as a genuine
monutnment, it proves that the Mexicans had artificial, or
arbitrary characters, which reprelented several things befidcs
numbers. Each month is there represented by a symbol
expressive of some work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was difcovcred
byanother Italian. In 1736, Lorcnzo Boturini Benaduci
setout for New Spain, and was led by several incidents to
fiudy the language of the Mcxicans, and to collcS the re-
mains of their historical nionuments. He persisted nine
years in his refcarches, with the enthufiafin of a projector,
aiid the patience of an antiquary In 1746, he publifled
ait Madrid, Idela d una NuVeva !-liloria General dea limerica
Scptcntrional, containling an account of the rcfult of his
ilquiics; and he added to it a catalogue of his Ame-
rican Hiiftorical Mufcum, arranged under thirty-fix different
heads, His idea of a New Hiitory appears to me the work

oft

of a whimsical credulous man. But his catalogue oi
Mexican maps, paintings, tribute-rolls, calendars, &c. is
amazing. Unfortunately a hip, in which he had fenta
considerable part of them to Europe, was taken by an
English privateer in the war before last and it is probable
that they perished by falling into the hands of ignorant cap.
tors. Boturini himself incurred the displeasure of the
Spanish court, 'and died in an hospital at Madrid. The
history, of which the 'Idea, &c. was only a profpefgus, was
never publified. ' The remainder of his Museum seems to
have been dispersed. Some part of it came into the pofleffion
of the present archbishop of Toledo, when he was primate
of New Spain, and he published from it that curious tribute-
.roll which I have mentioned.

THE only other collection of Mexican paintings, as far

as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna. By
order of their Imperial Majesties. I have obtained such a
specimen of there as I desired, in eight paintings, made
with such fidelity, that I am informed the copies could hardly
be distinguished from the originals. According to a note
ii this Codex 1diexicanus, it appears to have been a present
from Emanuel King of Portugal to Pope Clement VII.
wvhodied A. D. 1533. After passing through the hands of
several illuitrious proprietors, it fell into those of the cardinal
of Saxe Eisenach, who presented it to the emperor Leo-
pold. These paintings are manifestly Mexican, but they
are in a style very different from any of the former.
An engraving has been made of one of them, in order to
gratify such of my readers as may deem this an objet
Worthy of their attention. Were it an object of fullicient
importance, it might be poflible, with some attention, by
recourse to the plates of Purchas, and the archbishop of
Tolcdo, as a key, to form plausible conjectures concerning
the meaning of this picture. Many of the figures are ma-
nlif:ftly fitnilar. A. A. are targets and darts, almost in the
itmnc form with those published by Purchas, p. 1070, o071,
&c. 13. 13. arc figures of temples, nearly rcfembling tllofe
which occur in Prchas, p. og9 and 1113, and in Lorcn-
zana, Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths,
the figure of which occurs in almost every platce f
; ' l
. .lPt:'chai

I'urchas and Lorenzana. E. E. E. seem to be Mexic.n'l
captains in their war dress, the fantastic ornaments of which
relenible the figures in Purchas, p. Ilio, IIII, iii3.
I should fippofe this picture to be a tribute-roll, as their
mode of noting numbers occurs frequently. D. D. D.
&c. According to Boturini, the mode of computation
by the number of knots, was known to the Mexicans as well
as to the Peruvians, p. 85; and the manner in which the
number of units is reprcfcnted in the Mexican paintings in
my possession, seems to confirm this opinion. They plainly
rclemble a f[ring of knots on a cord or rope.

NOTE LV. p. 29r.

THE first was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance;
the second, the Divider of Men; the third, the Shedder
of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Dark-Houfe. Acof-
ta, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE LV. p. 297.

THE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more holy
than any in New Spain, was likewise the most considerable.
But it was nothing more than a mount of solid earth. Ac-
cording to Torquemada, it was above a quarter of a league
in circuit at the base, and rose to the height of forty fathoms.
Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19.

FROM infpetiig various figures of Temples, which oc-
cur in the paintings engraved by jPurchas, there seems to be
some reason for ilfpeting that all their temples were con-
ftruced in the fame manner. See vol. iii. p. 1109, II IO
1113.

N ) T E LVII p. 298.

NoT only in Tlafcala, and Tcpeaca, but even in Mex-
ico itself, the houifes of the people were mere huts bu;lc
withl turf, or mud, or the branches of trecs. 'They were
xtrecmely low and flight, and without any furniture but
few earthen vclils. Like the rudcft Indians several

families

4N1

families resided under the fame roof, without having any fepa.
rate apartments. Herrera, Dec. . lib. vii. c. 3. lib. x. c,
22. Dec. iv. lib. iv. c. 17. Torquem, lib. iii. c. 23.

NO' E LVIII. p. 298.

I AM informed by a person who resided long in New Spai,
.and visited alnmoft every province of it, that there is il!
in all the extent of that vast empire, any monument, or vi.
tige of alv building more ancient than the conquefi, or
any bridge2 or highway: except some remains of the causeway
from Guadaloupe to the gate of Mexico, by which Cort
entered the city. MS. penes me. The author of another c.
count in manuscript observes, " That at this day there does
not remain even the fnallelf vestige of the existence of y
ancient Indian buildingz, public or private, either in Mexico
or-in any province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays )
through all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New Ga.
licia, New Biscay, New Mexico, Sonoraj Cinaloa, tt
New Kingdom of Leon, and New Santandero, withou
having observed any monument worth notice, except th
ruins near an ancient village in the valley de Casas Grawid,
in lat. N. 30°. 46. longit. 258°. 24. from the island o
Teneriffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W. from Mexico. H
describes this minutely and it appears to have been a paltry
building of turf and stone, plaifRercd over with white earth o
lime. A missionary informed that gentleman, that he ha
discovered the ruins of another settlement similar to the tb
mer, about a hundred leagues towards N. W. on the banii
of the river St. Pedro. MS. penes me.

THOSE teffimonies derive great credit from one circus

fiance, that they were not given in support of any particulL
iyften or theory, but as simple answers to queries which
had proposed. It is probable, however, that when the
gentlemen assert no ruins or monuments of any ancient wor
whatever are now to be discovered in the Mexican Empire
they meant that there were no such ruins or nlonuiil.lii
as conveyed any idea of grandeur or magnificence, ill t

wor

vworks of its ancient inhabitants. For it appears from the
testimony of several Spanish authors, that in Otumba, Tlaf-
cala, Cholula, &c. some vestiges of ancient buildings are
itill visible. Villa Segnor 'heatro Amer. p. 143, 308,
353. D. Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, formerly archbishop of
Mexico; and now of Toledo, in his introducion to that
edition of the Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he pub-
liflied'at Mexico, mentions some ruins which are still visible
in several of the towns, through which Cortes passed in his
way to the capital, p. 4. &c. But neither of these authors
give any description of them, and they seem to be so very
inconsiderable, as to fliew only that some buildings had once
been there. The large mount of earth at Cholula, which
the Spaniards dignified with the name of temple, still re-
mains, but without any fleps by which to acend, or any
facing of stone. It appears now like a natural mount, co-
vered with grass and hrubs, and poflibly it was never any
thing more. Torquem. lib. iii. c. 19. I have received a
minute description of the remains of a temple near Cuer-
navaca, on the road fiom Mexico to Acapulco. It is com-
posed of large itones, fitted to each other as nicely as those
in the buildings of the Peruvians, which are hereafter men-
tioned. At the foundation it forms a square of 25 yards;
but as it rites in height, it diminishes in extent, not gradu-
ally, but by being contraced suddenly at regular distances,
so that it muff have resembled the figure B in the Plate. It
terminated, it is said, in a spire.

NOTE LIX. p. 303.

THE exaggeration of the Spaniih Historians, with relpe&1
to the number of human victims sacrificed in Mexico, appears
to be very great. According to Gomara, there was no year
in which twenty thousand human victims were not offered
to the Mexican Divinities, and in some years they amounted
to fifty thouLand. Cron. c. 229. The ikulls of those unhap-
py persons were ranged in order in a building ere&ed for that
purpose; and two of Cortes's officers, who had counted
thcmn, informed Gomara that their nrumber was a huidred

and

475

'nd thirty-fix thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's account
still more incredible, that the number of viEtims was so great
that five thousand have been sacrificed in one day, nay, on
some occasions, no less than twenty thousand. Dec. iii. lib.
ii. c. 6. Torquemada goes beyond both in extravagance,
for he asserts that twenty thousand children4 ea'ilufive ('f
othervictimss were slaughtered annually. Mon. Ind. lib. vii.
c. 2. The most refpeftable authority in favour of fich
high numbers is that of Zumurr:ga, the first bishop of
Mexico, who, in a letter to the chapter general of his or-
der, A. D. 631, asserts that the Mexicans sacrificed annu-
ally twenty thoiufnd victims. Davila. Teat;o Eccles. 126.
In opposition to all these accounts; B. de las Casas obfervcs,
that if there had beeti fch an annual waste of the humai,
species, thecountry could never have arrived at that degree
of populoufilefs, for which it was remarkable when the
Spaniards first landed there; and he positively asserts, that
the Mexicans never sacrificed more than fifty or a hundred
persons in a year. See his dispute with Sepulveda, ub-
joined to his Breviflima Relacion, p. o05. Cortes does nnt
£pecify what number of viótims was sacrificed annually, bt
B. Diaz. dcl Castillo relates, that an inquiry having been
made, with refFe to this, by the Franciscan Monks, who
Wvere sent into New Spain immediately after the conquell,
it was found that about two thousand five hundred were i-
crificed every year in Mexico. c. 207.

N O T E LX. p. 304.

IT is hardly necessary to observe, that the Peruvian Chro-
nology is not only obscure, but repugnant to concluf'ii;
deduced from the most accurate and cxtenfive observation,
concerning the time that clapses during each reign, in any
given succession of princes. The medium has been found
not to exceed twenty years. According to Acofta aid
Garcilaffo de la Vega, Huana Capac, who died about the
year 1527, was the twelfth Inca. The duration of h
Peruvian monarchy ought not to have been reckoned abo''
two hundred and forty years; but they affirm that it Ih:!
fubfifcd four hundred years. Acofa, lib. vi. c. 19. Vcag,
lib. i. c. 9. By this account, each reign is extended at;

mediul

medium to thirty three years} instead of twenty, the number
alcertained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but so irn-
perfec were the Peruvian traditions, that though the total
is boldly marked, the number of years in each reign is un-
known.

NOTE LXI. p. 30.

MANY of the early Spanish writers aftert, that the
Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xerez. p. 9go. Za-
rate, lib. I. . II. Acoffta, lib. v. c. 19. But Garcilaffo de
]a Vega contends, that though this barbarous practice
prevailed among their uncivilized ancestors, it was totally
abolished by the Incas, and that no human vicim was ever
offered in any temple of the Sun. This assertion, and the
plausible reasons with which he confirms it, are sufficient to
refute the Spanish writers, whose accounts seem to be found-
ed entirely upon report, not upon what they themselves had
observed. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their festivals, the
Peruvians offered cakes of bread, moistened with blood
drawn from the arms, the eye-brows, and noses of their
children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This rite seems to have been
derived from their ancient practice.

NO TE LXII. p. 315.

THE Spaniards have adopted both those cufftoms of the
antient Peruvians. They have preserved some of the aque-
ducts or canals, made in the days of the Incas, and have
made new ones, by which they water every field that they
cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom. i. 422, 477. They like-
wile continue to use guano, or the dung of sea-fowls, as
manure. Ulloa gives a dcfcripion of the alnoft incredible
quantity of it in the small islands near the coast. Ibid. 81.

NOTE LXIII. p. 37.

T HE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at Callo
in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-Cannar, arc
described by Ulloa, torn. i. 286, &c. who inlpected them
with great care. M. de Comdamine publilhed a curious

VOL. II. I i memoir

48

memoir concerning the ruins of Atun-Cannar. Mem. de
'Academie de Berlin, A. D. 1746, p. 435. Acofta de-
scribes the ruins of Cuzco, which he had examined.
Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaflo, in his usual ltile, gives pom-
pous and confuied descriptions of several temples, and other
public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. 21. lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Za-
pata, in a large treatise concerning Peru, which has not hi-
therto been published, communicates ome information *it/h
retpeft to several monuments of the antient Peruvians,
which have not been mentioned by other authors. MS. penes
mie, Articulo xx. Ulloa describes ome of the ancient
Peruvian fortifications, which were likewise works of great
extent and solidity. Torn. i. 39I. Three circumstances
struck all those observers: the vafl size of the stones
which the Peruvians employed in some of their build-
ings; Acoflameafured one, which was thirty feet long,
eighteen broads and fix in thickness; and yet, he adds,
that in the fortress at Cuzco, there were stones considerably
larger. It isdifficult to conceive how the Peruvians could
move these; and raise them to the height even of twelve feet.
The second circiumftance is, the imperfecion of the Peru-
vian art, when applied to working in timber. By the pa-
tience and perfeverence natural to Americans, flones may be
formed into any fliape, merely by rubbing one against ano-
ther, or by the use of hatchets or other infiruments made of
scone; but with such rude tools, little progress can be made
in carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beams
together, or give any degree of union, or itability to any
work composed of timber. As they could not form a centre,
they were totally unacquainted with the use of arches in
building; nor can the Spanish authors conceive how they
were able to frame a roof for those ample structures which
they raised.

THE third circumstance is a firiking proof, which all the

monuments of the Peruvians furnish, of their want of inge-
nuity and invention, accompanied with patience no less
astonishing. None of the stones employed in those works
were formed into any particular or uniform hape, that might
render them fit for building. The Indians took them as
they fell from the mountains, or were raised out of the
quarries. Some were square, some triangular, some con-
vex, ome concave. Their art and industry were em-

ployed
48:

ployed in joining them together, by forming such hollows in
the one, as perfecly corresponded to the projections or ri-
sings in the other. This tedious operation, which might
have been so easily abridged, by adapting the surface of the
stones to each other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets
ofcopper, would be deemed incredible, if it were not put
beyond doubt by infpeting the remains of those buildings.
It gives them a very singular appearance to an European
eye. There is no regular layer or firatum of building, and
no one stone resembles another in dimensions or form. At
the fame time, by the persevering, but ill-direaed industry
of the Indians, all arejoined with that minute nicety which
I have mentioned. Ulloa made this observation concerning
the form of the flones in the fortress of Atun-Cannar. Voy.
i. p. 387. Pineto gives a similar dercription of the fortress
ofCuzco, the molt pferlet of all the Peruvian works. Za-
pata MS. penes me. According to M. de Condamine, there
mere regular strata of building in some parts of Atun-Can-
nar, which he remarks as lingtular, and proof of ome pro-
grds in improvement.

NO0 T E LXIV. p. 320.

iTHE appearance of those bridges, which bend with their
own weight, wave with the wind, and are considerably agi-
tated by the motion of every person who passes along them,
is very frightful at first. But the Spaniards have found them
to be the easiest mode of pafling the torrents of Peru, over
which it would be difficult to throw mbre solid ftru&ures
either of tone or timber. They form those hanging bridges
so firong and broad, that loaded mules pass along them,
All the trade of Cuzco is carried on by means of such a
bridge over the river Apurimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 358. A
more simple contrivance was employed in pafling smaller
streams: a bafkct, in which the traveller was placed, being
fufpcnded from a rong rope stretched across the fireain,
it was pushed or drawn fiom one fide to the other. Ibid.

NOTE

483
I i

NOTE LXV. p. 329.

iM Y information with refpet to those events is takei

from Noticia breve de la expedicion militar de Sonora y
Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo efado, en que por con-
fecuencia de ello, fe ban pueflo ambas provincias, published
at Mexico, June 17th, 1771, in order to satisfy the curio-
fity of the merchants, who had furnished the viceroy with
money for defraying the expcnce of the armament. The
copies of this Noticia are very rare in Madrid; but I have
obtained one which has enabled me to communicate these
curious fads to the public. According to this account,
there was found in the mine Yecorato, in Cinaloa, a grain
of gold of twenty-two carats, which weighed sixteen marks
four ounces four orchavas; this was ent to Spain as a pre-
sent fit for the king, and is now deposited in the royal cabi-
net at Madrid.

NOTE LXVI. p. 329.

T HE uncertainty of geographers with refpea to this
point is remarkable ; for Cortes seems to have surveyed its
coasts with great accuracy. The archbishop of Toledo has
published, from the original, in the possession of the mar-
quis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a map drawn in
1541, by the pilot Domingo Castillo, in which California
is laid down as a peninsula, stretching out nearly in the fame
direftion which is now given to it in the best maps ; and
the point where Rio Colorado enters the gulf is marked
with precision. Hilt de Nueva Efpagna, 327.

NOTE LXVII. p. 332.

I AM indebted for this sac to M. L'Abbe Raynal, torn.
ii. 103; and upon consulting an intelligent person, who
having been long fettlle' on the Mosquito shore, has been
engaged in the logwood trade, I find that ingenious author
has been well informed. The logwood cut near the town

of

of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of much better quality than
that on the other fide of Yucatan, and the English trade
in the bay of Honduras is almost at an end.

NOTE LXVII1. p. 348.

P. Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enume-
rated ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexico, to
which he gives the name of the ten plagues. Many of these
are not peculiar to that province. I. The introduction of
the small-pox. This disease was firt brought into New
Spain in the year 1520, by a negroe slave, who attended
Narvaez. Torribio affirms, that one half of the people, in
the provinces visited with this distemper, died. To this
mortality occasioned by the small-pox, Torquemada adds
the destructive effets of two contagious distempers which
raged in the years 1545 and 1576. In the former 800,000,
in the latter above two millions perished, according to an
exa& account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i.
642. The small-pox were not introduced into Peru for fe-
veral years after the invasion of the Spaniards, but proved
very fatal tothe natives. Garcia Origin, p. 88. 2. The
numbers who were killed, or died of famine in their war
with the Spaniards, particularly during the siege of Mexico.
3. The great famine that followed after the reduction of
Mexico, as all the people engaged, either on one fide or
other, had negleEted the cultivation of their lands. Some-
thing similar to this happened in all the other countries con-
quered by the Spaniards. 4. The grievous talks imposed by
the Spaniards upon the people belonging to the Repartimien-
tos. 5- The oppreflive burden of taxes, which they were
unable to pay, and from which they could hope for no ex-
emption. 6. The numbers employed in collecting the gold
carried down by the torrents from the mountains, who were
forced from their own habitations, without any provision
made for their subsistence, and fubjeed to all the rigour of
cold in those elevated regions. 7. The imnnenfe labour of
rebuilding Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such pre-
cipitate ardour, as destroyed an incredible number of people.
8. The number of people condemned to servitude, under

various

485

vzrious pretexts, and employed in working the filvcr miies.
These marked by each proprietor with a hot iron, like his
cattle, were driven in herds to the mountains. q. The
nature of the labour to which they were fubjeced there,
the noxious vapours of the mincs, the coldness of the climate,
and fcarciry of food were so fatal, that Torribio afirms,
the countrv round several of those mines, particularly near
Guaxago, was covered with dead bodies, the air corrupced

ixvh their f{ench, and fo'maiy vuLltures, and other voracious

birds, hovered about for their prey, that the fun v.'a darken-
ed with their flight. io. The Spaniaid; in the different ex-
peditions which they uiidertook, and by the civil wars which
they carried on, destroycd many ot the natives, whom they
compelled to serve them as lTamlemsc'or carriers of burdens.
This last mode of oppression was particularly ruinous to the
Peruvians. From the numiber of Indians 'who'perifhed in
Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the east
ps the Andes, one'may form some idea of what they fuffere,
and how fast they watled. Torribio, MS Corita, in his
Breve v Summaria Relacion, illustrates and confirns lfve-
yal of Torribio's oblfrvations, to which he refers. MS.
penets me.

NOTE LXIX. p. 348.

EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. I8.
But the passion of that great man for fyfteni, sometimes reii-
dered hin inattentive to research; and from his capacity t,
refine, he was pt, in ome instances, to overlook obvious
and just causes.

NOTE LXX. p. 349.

A Strong proof of this occurs in the teflament of Ifibell:,
wht re he (lifcovers the most tendecr conccln for the hunane
and mild usage of the Indians. Tho(e laudable fciitiinens of
the queen have been adopted into the public law of Spaii,
anid fervc as the introduction to the regulations coJ-

tained
486

ained under the title of the good treatment of the Indian.
Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE LXXI. p. 351.

IN the seventh itle of the first book of the Recopila-
cion, which contains the laws concerning the powers and
functions of archbishops and bishops, almost a third part of
them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as guardians
of the Indians, and points out the various methods in which
it is their duty to interpose, in order to defend them from op-
pression, either with refpec to their person or property.
Not only do the laws commit to them this honourable and
humane office, but they actually exercise it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced from

Spanish authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as he was not
disposed to ascribe any merit to the popilh clergy, to which
they were not fully entitled. Survey, p. 142, 192, &c.
Henry Hawks, an English merchant, who resiled five years
in New Spain, previous to the year 1572, gives the fame
favourable account of the popish clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466.
By a law of Charles V. not only bishops, but other eccle-
fiaffics, are empowered to inform and admonifl the civil
magistrates, if any Indian is deprived of his just liberty
and rights. Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley. 4; and thus
were constituted legal protectors of the Indians. Some of
the Spanish ecclesiastics refused to grant absolution to such
of their countrymen as possessed Encomiendas, and con-
fidered the Indians as slaves, or employed them in working
their mines. Gonz. Davil. Fiatro. Eccles. i. 157.

NOTE
I.

NOTE LXXII. p. 351.

A CCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains
4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of the largest
Indian towns in America. p. 104.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 351.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the
slate of population in those kingdoms of Europe where
the police is most perse& and where science has made the
greatest prcgrefs. In Spanish America, where knowledge
is fill in its infancy, and few men have leisure to engage in
researches merely speculative, little attention has been paid
to this curious inquiry. But in the year 741, Philip V.
enjoined the viceroys and governors of the several provinces
in America, to make an actual survey of thle people under
their jurifdidion, and to transmit a report concerning their
number and occupations. In consequence of this order, the
Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New Spain, appointed
D. Jos. Antonio de Villa-Segnor y Sanchez, to execfite that
commifion in New Spain. From the reports of the magif-
trates in the several diftris, as well as from his own obler-
vationF, and long acquaintance with moit of the provinces,
Villa Segnor published the result of his inquiries in his
Theatro v.iericano. His report, however, is imperfet,
Of the nine dioceses, into which the Mexican empire has
been divided, hehas publilhed an account only of five, viz.
the archbiflopric of Mexico, the biffoprics of Los Angeles,
Mechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The biihoprics
of Yucatan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are entirely
omitted, though the two latter comprehend countries, in
vwhich the Indian race is more numerous than in any part of
New Spain. In his survey of the extensive diocese of Nova
Galicia, the situation of the different Indian villages is de-
fcribed; but he specifies the number of people only in a
finall part of it. The Indians of that vait province,

iln

in which the Spanish dominion is imperfealy eftablilhed,
are not registered with the fame accuracy as in other parts
of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the actual
state of population in the five dioceses above mentioned is,
of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and meflizos, in the
dioceses of

Families.

Mexico - - 05,202
Los Angeles - - 30,600
Mechoacan - 30,840
Oaxaca - - 7,296
Nova Galicia - - 16,770

I90,708
At the rate of five to a family, the total

number is - . 953,540

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico 119,511
Los Angeles - - 88,240
Mechoacan - - 36,196
Oaxaca - 44,222
Nova Galicia - -6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number iS
1,471,955. We may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken from
the Matricula, or register, according to which the tribute
paid by them is colleced. As four diocefcs of nine are
totally omitted, and in that of Noya Galicia the numbers
are imperfectly recorded, we may conclude, that the num-
ber of Indians in the Mexican empire exceeds two mil-
lions.

THE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. seems

not to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa
Segnor observes in general terms, that several Spaniards,
negroes, and people of a mixed race, reside there, with-
out fpccifying their number. If, therefore, we make al-
lowance for these, and all who reside in the four dioceses

omritt;cd

49

omitted, the number of Spaniards, and of those of a mixed
race, may probably amount to a million and a half. In
some places, Villa Segnor distinguishes between Spa-
niards, and the three inferior races of Negroes, Mulattos,
and Mestizos, and marks their numbers separately. But
he generally blends them together. But from the pro-
portion observable in thQfe places, where the number of
each is marked, as well as from the account of the slate
of population in New Spain by other authors, it is manifest
that the number of negroes and persons of mixed race
far exceeds'that of the Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought
not to be reckoned above 500,000 to a million of the
former.

DEFE.c'IVE as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the nun;-
ber of people in Peru, as might enable me to form any
conjeEture equally satisfying with refpeac to the degree
of its population. I have been informed, that in the
year 76I, the protecor of the Indians in the vice-roy-
alty of Peru computeJ that 612,780 paid tribute to tile
king. As all females, and persons uinder age, are ex-
empted from this tax in Peru, the total number of In-
dians ought, by that account, to be 2,449,120. MS,
penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess concerning the state of
population in New Spain and Peru. According to'an ac-
count which I have reason to confider as accurate, the num-
ber of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to Peru
on each new publication, is ,I71,953; to New Spain
2,649,326. I am infbrmned, that but few Indians pur-
caflie bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the Spanifl
inhabitants, and those of a mixed race; so that the num-
ber of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will
amount, by this mode' of computation, at least to three
millions.

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns !11

Spanish America, may give us some idea of the extent
of population, and correEt the inaccurate, but popular

notion
490

notion entertained in Great Britain, concerning the weak
and dfolate flare of their colonies. The city of Mexico
contains at least 150,000 people. Los Angeles contains
above 6o,ooo Spariards, and people of a mixed race.
Villa Senor, p. 2.i7. Guadalaxara contains above 30,000,
exclusive of Indians. Ib. ii. 206. Limacontains 54,000,
D. Cofmie Bueno Defer. de Peru, I764.. Carthagena
contains 25,000. Potofi contains 25,ooo000.' Bueno, 1767.
Popayan contains above 20o,o0. Ulloa, i. 287. Towns
of a second class are still more numerous. Tne cities in

al;e noft thriving settlements of other European nations in
Amerida cannot be compared with these.

TIIESE are such detached accounts of the number of

people in fveral towns, as I found scattered in authors
whom I thounh worthy of cedit. But I have obtained
an enumeration of the ilnhabitants of the towns in the
province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can irely;
and I communicate it to the public, bth to gratify cu-
riofity, and to iefify the miflaken notion which I have
mentioned. St. Francisco de Qito cont.Uls between 50
and 60,ooo people of all the different races. Besides the
city, there are in the Corregimiento 29 curacies efta-
blilhcd in the principal villages, each of which has finaller
hamlets dependiig upon it. The inhabitants of thefl are
moitly Indians'and Mestizos. S,. Juan de Paflo has be-
tween 6 and 8000 inhabitants, besides 27 dependent vil-
lages. St. Migucl de Ibarra 7obQ citizens, and ten vil-
lages. The diftri& of Havala between 18 and 20,000
people. The diitrid of Tacunna between lo and 12,000.
The diflridt of Ambato between 8 and 1o,ooo, besides
'6 depending villages. The city of Riobamba between
16 and 20,000 inhabitants, and 9 depending villages.
'The dftric6 of Chinibo between 6 and 8000. The city
of Guaquil fiom 16 to 20,000 inhabitants, and 14 dc-
pending villages. The district of Atuafi between 5 and
6ojo, and 4 depending villages. The city of Cuenza
b::t\vec 25 and 30,o00 inhabitants, and 9 populous de-
pending villages. 'lihe town of Laxa from 8 to o0,000
inhabitants, adl 14 depending villages. This degree of
population, though lender, if we confider the vast cx-
tent of the country, is far beyond what is commonly

' tippoltcd

491

supposed. I have omitted to mention, in its proper place,
that Quito is the only province in Spanish America that
can be denominated a manufacturing country; hats, cot.
ton fluffs, and coarse woollen cloths, are made there in
such quantities, as to be sufficient not only for the con-
fumption of the province, but to furnish a considerable ar-
ticle for exportation into other parts of Spanish America.
I know not whether the uncommon indufiry of this pro-
vince hould be confidered as the cause or effect of its po-
puloufnefs. But among the ostentatious inhabitants of
the New World, the passion for every thing that comes
from Europe is so violent, that I am told the manufac-
tures of Quito are so much undervalued, as to be on the
decline.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 356.

T HESE are elablifhed at the following places: St
Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in New
Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firme, Santi.
ago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New Galicia, Santo
Fe in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in the
country of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito, St. Jago
de Chili, Buenos Ayres. To each of these are fubjecdl
several large provinces, and some so far removed from
the cities where the courts are fixed, that they can derive
little benefit from their jurifdicion. The Spanish wri-
ters commonly reckon up twelve courts of Audience;
but they include that of Manilla in the Philippine
Islands.

N OT E
42

NOTE LXXV. p. 362.

ON account of the distance of Peru and Chili from
Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of such
bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama, the
Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to plant
vines and olives. But they are ftri&ly prohibited from ex-
porting wine or oil to Panama, Guatimala, or any province
in such a situation as to receive it from Spain. Recop. lib,
vi. tit. xviii. 1. 5-I8.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 363.

THIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D. 55o0
fifty-eight years after the discovery of America. Hist.
Novi rbis, lib. iii. c. 21. But as Benzoni wrote with
thefpirit of a malcontent, disposed to detrad from the Spa-
niards in every particular, it is poffiblg that his calculation
may be too low.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 365.

M Y information, with refpet to the division and tranf-
mifion of property in the Spanifli colonies, is imperfe6t.
The Spanish authors do not explain this fully, and have not
perhaps attended sufficiently to the effc&ts of their own in-
ftitutions and laws. Solorzano de jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. ii.
1. 16. explains in tome measure the introduction of the te-
nure of Mayorafgo, and mentions some of its efflecs. Villa
Segnor takes notice of a singular consequence of it. Hie
oblerves, that in some of the best situations in the city of
lMexico, a good deal of ground is unoccupied, or covered
only with the ruins of the houfs once erclted upon it; and
adds, that as this ground is held by right of M/yorafgo, and
:annot be alienated, that desolation and tholi ruins become
perpetual. Theatr. Amcr. vol. i. p. 34.

N O E

Aj:

N T E LXXVIII. p. 36ó.

TI HERE is no law that excludes Creoles from oces
either civll or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there art
many Cedulas which rerommehd the confcrring places f
trust indiscriminately on the natives of Spain and Amcrcr.
Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p 5, 6. But no:.
withfianding such repeated recommendations, prefernec:t
in almost every differeht line is conferred on native Spa'
niards. A remarkable proof of this is produced by the
author last quoted. From the discovery of Amcrica to
the year 1637, three hundred, and fixty-nipee bishops, or
archbishops, had been appointed to the different diocefcs
in that country, and of all that number only twelve were
Cieoles, p. 40.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 371.

IMODERATE as this tribute may appear; such i the
extreme poverty of the Indians, in many provinces of Ame-
rica, that the exacting of it is intolerably oppressive. Peg;3
Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOT E LXXX. p. 372.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit
and services of the first conquerors, as well as the finall
revenue arising from the country previous to the discovery
of the mines of Sacatecas, the enoomnienzdas were granted for
three, and ometimes for four lives. Rccopil. lib. vi. tit.
ii. c. I4, &c.

NOTF
49m

NOTE LXXXI. p. 373.

D . Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in the mines is
not noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, that many
Meftiios and Indians, who do not belong to any Reparti-
miento, voluntarily hire themselves as miners; and several
of the Indians, When the legal term of their service expires,
continue to work in the mines of choice. Entreten. p.
265. But his opinion concerning the wholesomeness of
this occupation is contrary to the experience of all ages;
and wherever men are allured by high wages, they will en-
gage in any species of labour, however fatiguing or perni-
cious it may be. D. Hern. Carillo Altemirano relates a
curious faEt incompatible with this opinion. Wherever
mines are wrought, fays he, the number of Indiahs de-
creases; but in the province of Campeachy, where there
are no mines, the number of Indians has increased more
than a third since the conquefft of America, though neither
the foil nor climate be so favourable as in Peru or -Mexico.
Colbert Colled. In another memorial presented to Philip
III. in the year 1609, Captain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo
asserts, that in every diftrid of Peru, where the Indians are
compelled to labour in the mines, their numbers were re-
duced to the half, and in ome places to the third of what it
was under the vice-royalty of Don Fran. Toledo in 1581.
Colb. Collet.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 373.

As labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with legal
accuracy, the talks seem to be in a great measure arbitrary,
and like the fcrvices exacted by feudal superiors, in vinea,
prato aut menle, from their vasals, are extremely burden-
some, and often wantonly oppreflive. Pegna Itiner. par
Parochos de Indios.

NO TE

4:95

NOTE LXXXII. . 373.

T HE turn of service known i Peru by the name of
Mita, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it continues
no longer than a week at a time. No person is called to
serve at a greater distance from his habitation than 24 miles,
This arrangement is less oppreflive to the Indians than that
eftablithed in Peru. Memorial of Hern. Carillo Altami.
rano. Colbert Colled.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 375.

lTHE firongeft proof of this may be deduced from the

laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of regula-
tions to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of their num-
ber. Though the laws have, wifely, provided that no
Indian shall be obliged to serve in any mine at a greater
diflance from his place of residence than thirty miles, we
are informed in a memorial of D. Hernari Carillo Altimi-
rano, presented to the king, that the Indians of Peru are
often compelled to serve in mines at a distance of a hun-
dred, a hundred and fifty, and even two hundred leagues
from their habitation; Colbert Collet. Many mines are
situated in parts of the country, so barren and so distant from
the ordinary habitations of the Indians, that the necessity of
procuring labourers to work there, has obliged the Spanifli
monarchs to dispense with their own regulations in fever.!
instances, and to permit the viceroys to compel the people
of more remote provinces to resort to those mines. Efcalona
Gazophyl. Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But in juf.ice to them it
Should be observed, that they have been tfudious to alleviate
this oppreflion as much as possible, by enjoining the viceroys
to employ every method, in order to induce the Indians to
fettle in some part of the country adjacent to the mines.
Id. ibid.

N O T'
49

N O T LXXXV. p. 379.

L ORQUEMADA, after a long enumeration, which has

ttli appearance of accuracy, concludes the number of
monafreries in New Spain to be four hundred. Mon.
Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. '1 ie number of monasteries in the
city of Mexico alone was, in the year 1745, fifty-five.
Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Uiloa reckons up
f)rty convents in Lima, and mentioning those for nuns, he
Lays, that a finall town might be peopled out of them, the
n:mnber of pe. ons (hut up there is so great. Voy. i. 429.
Pnilip III. in a letter to the viceroy of Peru, A. D.
1620, observes, that the number of convents in Linia was
fL. great, that they covered more ground than all the reft of
the city. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 23. 1n. 57. Lib. iii. c. 6.
Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3. The first monatPery in New
Spain was founded, A. D. 1525, four years only after the
conquel. Torq. lib. xv. c. 6.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

effablifhment of the American church in all the Spanish
settlements was, in the year I649, patriarch, 6 ah-
hifhops, 32 bifhaps, 346 .pbendaries, 2 abbots, 5 royal
chaplains,.84o convents. Tcatro Ecclefiaftico de las Ind.
Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jelftits was
expelled from all the Spanish dominions, the colleges,
profi'ed houses, and residencics, which it pufefled in the
province of New Spain, were thirty, in Qito sixteen,
in the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru
feventecn, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen, in
all a hundred and twelve. Colleccion (;eneral de P'rovi-
dencias hafta acqui tomadas ftbre cftranamento, &c. de
la Comparnia, part i. p. 19. T he number of Jeftiits,
prielts and novices in all thel amounted to 2245. MS.
penlls mi'.

VOL. I.

IN
K k

IN the year 644, the city of M\exico presented a pe

tition to te king, praying that no new monaflery might
be founded, and that the revenues of those already efta-
blifled might be circumscribed, otherwise the religious
houses would soon acquire the property of the whole
country. They request likewise that the bishops might
be laid under reftridcions in conferring holy orders, as
there were at that time in New Spain above fix thousand
clergymen without any living. lb. p. 16. They must have
been enormous abuses indeed, when the superstition of
American Spaniards was shocked, and induced to remon-
trate agailnit them.

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 382,

HIS description of the manners of the Spanish clergy,

I should not have ventured to give, upon the eftimony
of protestant authors alone, as they may be fufpeled of
prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, who
had a better opportunity than any proteflant, to view
the interior state of Spanili America; describes the cor-
ruption of the church, which he had forsaken, with so
much of the acrimony of a new convert, that I should have
distrusted his evidence, though it communicates folme
very curious and striking facts. But Benzoni mentions the
profligacy of ecclesiastics in America at a very early period
after their settlement there. Hist. lib. ii. c. 19, 20. M.
Fi'zier, an intelligent observer and zealous for his own
religion, paints the dissolute manners of the Spanish eccle-
fiaftics in Peru, particularly the regulars, in stronger
colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 51. 215, &c.
M. Gcntil confirms this account. Voy. i. 34. Correal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circum-
fances. Voy. i. 6. 155. 161. I have good realon to
believe, that the manners of the regular clergy, par-
ticularly in Peru, are still extremely indecent. Acofta
himrlf acknowledges, that great corruption of man-
ners had been the confcqucence of permitting monks
to forsake the retirement and discipline of the cloister,

alld

and to mingle again with the world, by undertaking the
charge of the Indian parishes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib.
iv. c. ]3, &c. He mentions particularly those viceS,
of which I have taken notice, and confiders the temp-
tations to them as so formidable, that he leans to the
opinion of those who hold that the regular clergy
ihould not be employed as parish prietfs. Lib. . c.
20. Even the advocates for the regulars admit, that
nmany and great enormities abounded among the monks
of diiFrent orders, when set free from the rcitraint of
moinatic discipline; and from the tone f their derfence,
one may conclude that the charge brought againfl theni
was not dftitute of truth. In the French colonies,
the state of the regular clergy is nearly the iatle as
in the Spanifl fttlements, and the fame consequences
have followed. M. Biet, superior of the secular priests
in Cayenne, inquires, with no less piety than candour,
into the causes of this corruption, and imputes it chiefly
to the cxemlpion of regulars from the jurifdiion and
censures of their diocesans; to the temptations to which
th-y are exposcd ; and to their engaging in commerce,
Voy. p. 310. it is remarkable, that all the authors,
whu censure the licentioufiefs of the Spanish regulais
with greatest lfeverity, concur in vindicatilng the con-
du't of the Jcfuits. Formed under a discipline more
perfet than that of the other monaflic orders, or ani-
mated by that concern for the honour of the society,
which takes such full pofilflion of every member, the
Jcfuits, both in iMecxico and Peru, it is allowed, have
maintained a molt irreproachable dcecy of manners.
F ezier, 2.23. Gentil, i. 34. The fame praill is
lik,\eidf dueto the bilhops and most of the dignified
clergy. Frez. ibid.

N OTE
K k 2

NOTE LXXXVIL p. 382.

SOLORZANO, after mentioning the corrupt morals
of some of the regular clergy, with that cautious reserve,
which became a Spanifi layman, in touching on a subjet
so delicate; gives his opinion very explicitly, and with
much firmness, against committing parochial charges to
monks. He produces the testimony of several refpedtable
authors of his country, both divines and lawyers, in confir-
mation of his opinion. De Jure Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 6.
A ifriking proof of the alarm excited by the attempt of
the Prince d'Efquilache to exclude the regulars from pa-
rochial cures, is contained in the Colbert collection of
papers. Several memorials were presented to the king
by the procurators for the monastic orders, and replies
were made to these in name of the secular clergy. An
eager, and even rancorous, spirit is manifest on both
fides, in the conduc of this dispute.

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 386.

INOT only the native Indians, but the Meflizos, or
children of a Spaniard aid Indian, were originally ex-
cluded from the priesthood, and refused admission into
any religious order. But by a law issued Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip II. required the prelates of America to
ordain such mestizos born in lawful wedlock, as they should
find to be properly qualified, and to permit them to
take the vows in any monastery where they had gone
through a regular noviciate, Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1.
7. Some regard seems to have been paid to this law
In New Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a reprefenta-
tion of this to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a
new edit, enforciiig the obfcrvation of it, and professing
his delire to have all his fubjecqs, Indians and mestizos,
as well as Spaniards admitted to the enjoyment of the fame
privileges. Such, however, was the avcrlion of the Spa-

niards

niards in America to the Indians, and their race, that
this seems to have produced little effect; for, in the
year I725, Philip V. was obliged to renew the ijunction
in a more peremptory tone. But so unsurmountable are
the hatred and contempt of the Indians among the Peru-
vian Spaniards, that the present king has been conitrained
to enforce the former edics anew by a law, published
September II, 1774. Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 389.

U ZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator, eems
to admit, that the quantity of silver that does not pay duty
may be stated thus high. According to Herrera, there
was not above a third of what was extraaed from Potofi
that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii. lib. ii. c. 15. Solor-
zano aflerts likewise, that the quantity of silver which is frau-
dulently circulated, is far greater than that which is
regularly tfamped, after paying the fifth. De Ind. jure, vol.
i: lib. v. p. 846.

NOTE XC. p. 392.

W HEN the mines of Potofi were discovercd in the
year i545, the veins were so near the surface, that the
ore was easily extracted, and so rich, that it was refined
with little trouble, and at inall expence, merely by the
acion of fire. This simple mode of refining by fifion
alone continued until the year 1574, when the use of
mercury in refining silver, as well as gold, was difcovcred.
Those mines having been wrought without interruption
for two centuries, the veins are now funk to deep, that the
cxpcnce of extracing the ore is greatly increaid. Be-
fides this, the richness of the ore, contrary to what hap-
pens, in mofi other mines, has become less as the vein
continued to dip, and has diminished to such a degree,
that one is amazed that the Spaniards flould persist in

working

working it. Other rich mines have been successively dif
covered ; but in general the value of the ores has deircafid
so much, while the expence of extracting them has ug-
mented, that the court of Spain, in the year 736, re-
duced the duty payable to the king from a fih to a tenth.
All the quicksilver uscd in Peru, is extracted from the fa-
mous mine of Gunacabelica, dilcovcred in the year 563.
The crown has reserved the property of this mine to itcir;
and the pelfons who puichaifed the quicksilver, p.iid not only
the price of it, but likewise afifth, as a duty to the kinlg.
But, in the year 1761, this duty on quicklilver was abo-
lifed, on account of the increale of expence i working
minecs. Ulloa, E;:tretenimientos, xii. --xv Voya.c, i.p.
505. 523. Any of my readers who are desirous of beinl
acquainted with the mode in which the Spaniards condust
the woi king of their mine, and the refinemeit of the ore,
will lind an accurate description of it by Acofta. Lib. i'. c.
I.-13.

NOTE XCI. p. 393.

IN coInfcquence of this abolition of the fs/', and fme
fubfequcnt abatements of price, which became necclary
on account of the increasing expcnce of working mines,
quicksilver, which was formerly fold at eighty pesos the
quintal, is now delivered by the king at the rate of sixty
pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 32. Note. The
dury on gold is reduced to a twentieth, or five per
cent.

NOT E XCII. p. 395.

M ANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced slate
,l1 indufltv in Spain, at the begimning of the fixtcenth
entury. 'The number of cities Spain iwas confidrable,
and they were peopled llr beyond the proportion that
was common in other paits of Eu rope. The eaurfes
of this, have cxplainedl, -iift. of Cha. V. i. J58.
WVherever cities arc populous, that fpiecies of indultry
which is peculiar to them increases, artificcis and
nllul;ldtIurcrs abound. The cflict of the American

trade

trade in giving ativity to these is manifest from a singular
faht. In the year 1545, while Spain continued to depend
on its own industry, for the supply of its colonies, so much
work was bespoke from the manufalturers, that it was sup-
posed they could hardly finish it in lcfs than fix years. Cam-
porn. i. 406. Such a demand must have put much industry
in motion, and have excited extraordinary efforts. Accord-
ingly, we are informed, that in the beginning of Philip II's
reign, the city of Seville alone, where the trade with Ame-
rica centered, gave employment to no fewer than 16,ooo
looms in iilk or woollen work, and that above I30,000 per-
sons had occupation in carrying on these manutfaaures.
Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious was the
operation of the causes which I shall enumerate, that before
Philip III. ended his reign, the looms in Seville were re-
duced to 400. Uztariz, c. 7.

NOTE XCIII. p. 402.

No bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of treafiure is
examined. Both are received on the credit of the perfoins
to whom they belong; and only one inifance of fraud is re-
corded, during the long period in which trade was carried
on with this liberal confidence. All the coined silver which
was brought from Peru to Portobello in the year 1654, was
found to be adulterated, and to be ingled with a fifth part
of base metal. The Spanish merchants, with their uual
integrity, fuftaine' the whole loss, and indemnified the so-
reigners, by whom they were employed. 'The fiaud was
deteced, and the treafrl-er of the revenue in Peru, the au-
thor of it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de Ma-
nuf. &c. b. ii. p. 102.

N 0 TE XCIV. 1. 406.

IMANY flriking proofs occur of the scarcity of money

in Spain. Of all the immense fuims which ha.ve been im-
ported from Amnrica, the amount of which I llall after-
wards have occasion to mention, Moncada aflerts, that there
did not remain in Spain, in I619, above two hundred mil-.

lioius

5o3

lions of pesos, one half in coined money, the other in plate
and jewels. Reftaur. de Efpagna, Dilc. iii. c. . U-
riz, who published his valuable work in 1724, contds,
that in money, plate, and jewels, there did not remain a
hundred millions. T'heor. &c. c. 3. Canipomanes, on
the authority of a remonfirance from the university of To-
ledo to Philip III. relates, as a certain proof how fcarcc
cali had become, that persons who lent money, received a
third part of the fumr which they advanced, as intercif ad
premium. Educ. popul. i. 417.

NOTE XCV. p. 409.

T HE account of the mode in which the facors of the
South Sea Company conducted the trade in the fair of Porto-
bello, which was opened to them by the Affiento, I have
taken from Don Alcedo y Herrera, president of the court
of Audience in Quito, and governor of that province.
Great credit is due to his teflimony, as he was an eye-wit-
ncfs of the tranfa ions which he relates, and often employ-
ed in detecting and authenticating the fiauds which he dc-
scribes. It is probable, however, that his rprcfentation
being composed at the commencement of the war which
bioke out between Great Britain and Spain, in the year
1739, may, in some instances, be exaggerated. His detail
of tcts is curious; and even English authors confirm it in
tome degree, by admitting both that various frauds were
practised in the tranfations of the annual flip, and that the
contraband trade fiom-Jamaica, and other Britifl colonie,.,
was become enormously great. But for the credit of the
Englini nation it may be ol)crved, that those fraudulent
cp)crations are not to be colfidercd a'deeds of the Company,
bit as the diflonoriralble arts of their factlors and aentls.
''he Company itself fiuflained a considerable loss by the
Afliento trade. Many of its servants acquired immense for-
ituncs. Andefon. Chronol. dduct. ii. 388.

N O T E

NOTE XCVI. p. 414.

SEVERAL faAs, with refpec to the inflitution, the
progres, and the ciFcEts, of this company, are curious,
aiid but ittle known to Engifiil readers. Though the
province of Venezueli, or Craccas, extends four hun-
dred miles along the coast, and is one of the most ser-
tile in America, it was so much neglected by the Spa-
niards, that, during the twenty years prior to the efta-
bIfliment of the company, only five hips failed from
Sl)ain to that province; and during sixteen years, sion
1706 to 1722, not a finlle ship arrived from che Carac-
cas in Spain. Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas,
p. 28. During this period Spain nuift have been sup-
plieu almost entirely with the large quantity of Cocoa,
which it colfumes, by foreigners. Before the erefion
of the company, neither tobacco nor hides were imp(ert-
ed from Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. 117. But lince
the commercial operations of the company began in the
year 1731, the importation of cocoa into Spain has in-
creased amazingly. During thirty years fibfequent to
1701, the number of fanegas of cocoa (each a hundred
and ten pounds) imported from Caraccas, was 643,215.
During eighteen years subsequent to 1731, the number
of fanegas imported was 869,247, and if we suppose
the importation to be continued in the fame proportion
dluring the remainder of thirty years, it will amount to
1,448,746 fanegas, which is an increase of 805,531 fa-
negas. Id.. 148. I)uring eight years fubiquent to
1756, here had been imported into Spain by the Com-
pany 88,1.82 arrobas (each twenty-five pounds) of tobac-
co; and hides to the number of 177,354. Id. 16r.
Since the publication of the Noticias de Compania, in
1765, its trade seems to be on the increase. During
five 'ears subsequent to 1769, it has imported 79,156
fin'grs of cocoa into Spain, 36,208 arrabas of tobacco,
75,496 hides, and 221,432 p)cos il specie. Clamlpo-
nianes, ii. 162. The lt article is a proof of the grow-
ing wealth of the colony. It receives cafli firomn Mcx-
ico in return for the cocoa, with which it supplies th.tt

)provincc

province, and this it remits to Spain, or lays out in pr-
chafing European goods. But belides this, the mos ex-
plicit evidence is produced, that the quantity of cocoa
raised in the province is double to what it yielded in 1731;
the number of its live-flock is more than treble, and its
inhabitants much augmented. The revenue of the biflop,
which arises wholly from tythes, has increased from eight
to twenty thousand pesos. Notic. p. 69. In consequence
of the augmentation of the quantity of cocoa imported into
Spain, its price has decreased from eighty pesos for the
fanega to forty. Id. 6I.

NOTE XCVII. p. 49.

T HIS firit experiment made by Spain of opening a free
trade with any of her colonies, has produced effeEts so re-
markable, as to merit ome farther illustration. The towns
to which this liberty has been granted, are Cadiz and Se-
ville, for the province of Andalusia; Alicant and Cartha-
gena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barcelona, for Catalonia
and Arragon; Santander, for Castile; Corugna, for Gali-
cia; and Gijon, for Asturias. Append. ii. a la Educ.
Popul. p. 41. These are either the ports of chief trade in
their respective difirids, or those most conveniently situatcd
for the exportation of their refpeAtive productions. The
following fats give a view of the increase of trade in the
settlements to which the new regulations extend. Prior to
the allowance of free trade, the duties collected in the cul-
tom-houle at the Havanna were computed to be 104,208
pesos annually. I)uring the five years preceding 1774 hey
role at a medium to 308,000 pesos a year. In Yucatan,
the duties have risen from 8,o00 to 15,0oo. In Hispaniola
from 2,500 to 5,600. In Iorto Rico from 1,200 to 7,000.
The total value of goods imported from Cuba into Sp)ail,
was reckoned, in 1774, to be 1,500,000 pesos. ]duc.
lJ.opul i. 450, &c.

N ) T

NOTE XCVIII .

p. 424.

HE two Treatises of Don Pdro Rodriguez Campc-

irmanes, icaL cl real confj' y Szpr-emo (an ffice ii riank
a;d powevr nearly ftmilar to t.it o Atto.ney (reneial in
Englanid), and IDireAtor of the Roy al Academy of Hit-or',
tilee o;n intiled, Dilcri t fobre el Fioineto ie la IIdI}tllia
Popular; the other I)ifurfo fobre la Educacion Poptl.lar la
l,s Artefanos y fu Fomclnto; the former publishcd in 1774,
;:id the l:tter in I775, afford a striking proof of this. Al-
nili every point of importance with respect to intel ior po-
i'c, taxatici, agriculture, anufactures, and trade, do-
niifiic as well as forcign, is examined in the course of thc(!
works ; and there are not many authors, even in the nations
mn:ft einent for commercial knowledge, who have carried
oi tlieir inquiries with more thorough knowledge of those
various fubjedts, and a more perse fi-cedom firom vulgar
nnd national prejudices, or who have united more happily
the calm refearcnes of philosophy, with the ardent z.al of a
public spirited citizen. ''hefe books are in high estimat-ion
anong the Spaniards; and it is a decisive evidence of the
pl.'orci of their own ideas, that they are capable of rclifl-
inT un author whose sentiments are so liberal.

NOTE XCIX. p. 428.

TIIE galeon employed in that trade,- inflead of the fix
Iundred tons, to which it is limited by law, IRcopl. lib. xlv.
1. 15. is commonly from twelve hundred to two tlhoulalcl
toins burden. T'he hip from Acapulco, tukci. by Lord
Anson, intcead of the 5oo,ooo pes fs permitted by law, had
lln board 1, 13,843 pi.fn', belides lincoiild ilver equal ill
'.'lu to 4 3,611 p -lo more. AIIdJn's Voyage, 384.

NOTE

NOTE C. p. 430.

T HE price paid for the bull varies according to the rat
of different persons. Those in the lowest order, who a
servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or one hlllin
other Spaniards-pay eight reals; and those in public offic
or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals. Solorz. de jut
Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According to Chilton, an Eng
lifh merchant who resided long in the Spanish settlement
the bull of Cruzado bore an higher price in the year i57c
being then fold for four reals at the lowest. Hakluyt, iii
461I. The price seems to have varied at different periods

T t exated for the bulls issued in the last Predicacin .wil

appear from the ensuing table, which will give ome idea o
the proportional numbers of the different classes of citizen:
jn New Spain and Peru.

There were issued for New Spain,
Pulls at

at
at
at

io pesos each
2 pesos each
I peso each
2 reals each

- 4

22,60o

- 64,220
- 2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

at x6 pes6s, 4 reals each
at 3 pesos, 3 reals each
at i peso, 5 reals
at 4 reals
at 3 reals

- 3
- 14,202

78,822
410,325
668,6oi

1,171,953
NO '1' J,

N 0 T E CI. p. 431.

.S Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this in-
irnation, was accomptant-general in one of the most con-
derable departments of the royal revenue, and by that
leans had access to proper information, his testimony with
fpea to this point merits great credit. No such accurate
tail of the Spanish revenues, in any part of America, has
therto been published in the English language, and the
ticulars of it may appear curious and interesting to some
rmy readers.

FROM the bull of Cruzada, published e\
ere arises an annual revenue in pesos
From the duty on silver
From ditto on gold -
From tax on cards -
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

dians

From tax on stamped paper
From ditto on ice
From ditto on leather
From ditto on gunpowder
From tax on salt - -
From ditto on copper of Mechoacan
From ditto on alum
From ditto on Juego de ios Gallos
From the half of ecclefialical annats
From royal ninth of bishoprics, &c.
From the tribute of Indians
From Alcaala, or duty on sale of goods
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house
Fronl the mint

rery two years,

150,000
700,000
6o,ooo
70,000
e In-

16 ,ooo
41,000
15,522
2,500
7 ,550
32,000
- 1,000

6,500
21,100
- 49,000

- 68,8oo

650,000
721,875
- 373,333

357,500
3,552,680

5o9
TiIs9

This fum amounts to 819,161 1. Sterling, and if

add to it the profit accruing, from the sale of 5000 q;ir'.
tals of quicksilver, imported from the iniries of Alm.K,
in Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues f,
the vueria,.and some other taxes which Villa Segnor (^,;
not eitimate, may well be reckoned above a mi. i
pounds ferlin, money. Theat. Mcx. vol. i. p. 38, .,
According to Villa Segnor, the totl produce of the Ai:x.
ican nines, amounts at a medium to eight mnili:o ;
pesos in silver annually, and to 5912 marks of gold. 1:.
p. 4. Several branches of the revenue have hben ex-
plained in the courf- of the hiflory ; ome, which t!:ioc
was no occasion of mentidniinc, require a particular il;:.
tration. The right to the tytcs in the New \Vorl :
v'cftcd in the crown of Spain, y a buill of Alexander VI\
Charles V. appointed them to be applied in the fol'o\i;,
manner: One-fourth is allotted to the bishop of the dioccf,
another fourth to the dean and chapter, and other ofl:::
of the cathedral ; the remaining half is divided into 1n;'"
equal parts. Two of these; under the denomination
las dos novellas reales, are paid to the crown, and consiit!
a bran-ch of the royal revenue. The other fevcn parts r
applied to the maintenance of the parochial clergy, t'
building and support of churches, and other pious u.I
Recopil. lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avcndano T'iL-
faur. Indic. vol. i. . I84.

The Alcavala, is a duty levied by an excise on the faleo

goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In Amrii'
to four'per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana, lib. vi. c.
Avendano, vol. i. i86.

THE A imajor'ififo, or cuflom paid in America on reo

imported and exported, may amount on an average: to fittc
per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. . Avcid.u
vol. i. 188.

THE Avcr:ia, or tax paid on account of convoys

guard the hips failing to and from Amnerici, w In
imposed when Sirt Francis Drake filled the New WVoll
with terror y his expedition inro the South Sea;.
amnounts to 2 per cent. onil the value of goods. A/':L

d1.11:

dano, vol. i. p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley.
43, 44.

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail of

the several branches of rcvenue in Peru, later than the year
1614. From a curious manulcript, containing a iate of
that vice-royalty in all its departments, pefented to the
Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran. Lopes Caravantes,
:iccomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it appears,
that the public revenue, as nearly as I can compute the
valuc of the money in which Caravantes states his ac-
counts, that the revenue colleEted, amounted in ducats, at
4s. Ild. to - 2,372,768

Expences of government - 1,242,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in sterling money 3. 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net fee revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this computa-
tion, such as the duty on itamped paper, leather, ecclefiafti-
cal annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru may be well
supposed equal to that of Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New
Sl);inl, I may take that of Peru as a standard. There
the annual eitablifhment for defiaying the charge of ad-
ministration, exceeds one half of the revenue collcetecd;
and there is no reason for supposing it to be less in Nexw
Spain.

I HIAVI obtained a calculation of the total amount of the
public rcvenue of Spain from Amnerica and the Pl'ilippines,

which,

which, as the reader will perceive from the two last articles
is more recent than any of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas pcfos suer-

tes (Cultoms), &c. - - 2500,000

Duties on gold and silver - - 3,00,000
Duty on coinage of; at the rate of one real

de la Plata for each mark - 30,000

Bull of Cruzada - - I,00,000
Tribute of the Indians - - 2,coo,cc
By sale of quicksilver - 30o,0co
Paper exported on the king's account, and

iold in the royal warehoules - 300,000
Stamped paper, tobaccos and other finall du-

ties - - - 1,000,00
From the trade of Acapulcoj and the

coating trade from province to pro-
vince - - - 500,00

Affiento of negroes - - 200,000
Froin the trade of Mathe, or herb of Pa-

raguay, formerly monopolized by the Je-
suits - - 500,000
From other revenues formerly belonging to

that order - - 400,000

Total 12,000,000

Total in sterling money 2ooo,oo00
Deduce half, as the expencc of adminif-

tration, and there remains net free re-
venue - - - 1350,000

NOTE CII. P. 43r.

A N author, long convcrfant in commcrciail fpecula-
tion, has computed that from the mines of New Spain
alone, the ing receives annually, as his fifth, the fuim
of two millions of our money. Harris Collet. of Voy.
ii. p. 64. According to this calculation, the total pro-
ducc of the mines mufll be ten millions Itcrling; a fitn

exorbitant,

exorbitant, and so little corresponding with all accounts of
the annual importation from America, that the information
on which it is founded muff evidently be erroneous. Ac-
cording to Campomanes, the total produc of the American
mines may be computed at thirty millions of pesos, which,
at four Shillings and fix pence a peso, amounts to 7,425,0001.
Iferling, the king's fifth. of which (if that were regularly
paid) would be ,485,oo000. But from this fum the expence
of administration is to be deducted, which is very confider-
able, as appears from the preceding note. Educ. Popular,
vol. ii. p. 131. note.

NOTE CIII. p. 431.

ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign goods
exported from Spain to America pay duties of various kinds,
amounting in all to more than 25 per cent. As most of the
goods with which Spain supplies her colonies are foreign,
such a tax upon a trade so extensive muff yield a considerable
revenue. Retablif. de Manus. & du Commerce d'Efp. p.
i50. He computes the value of goods exported annually
from Spain to America, to be about two millions and a half
sterling, p. 97.

NOTE CIV. p. 433.

T IHE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by a mo-
nopoly of flat, and by embarking deeply in the Manilla
trade as well as in that to Spain, gained annually a million
of ducats. In one year he remitted a million of ducats to
Spain, in order to purchase from the Conde Olivares, and
his creatures, a prolongation of his government, p. 61. He
was successful in his suit, and continued in office from 1624
to 635, double the usual time.

SH ORT

513
VOL. II.

1, 1

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

SHORT ACCOUNT

OF
What is contained in the LETTER ent to the

EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

r HIS letter is dated July 6th, I519. Cortes,
in his econd dispatch, takes notice that it was
lent off on the i6th of July.

THE great object of the persons who wrote this

letter, is to justify their own conduct in eftablilh-
ing a colony independent on the jurifdiftion of
Velasquez. With this view they endeavour to
detract from his merit, i fitting out the two for-
mer armaments under Cordova and Grijalva, re-
presenting these as equipped by the adventurers
who engaged in the expedition, not by the gover-
nor. They labour likewise to depreciate the ser-
vices of Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exalt
the merit of their own exploits.

THEY contend, that the folc objed of Vclaf-

quez was to trade or barter with the natives, not
to attempt the conquest of New Spain, or the efla-
blifhment of a colony there. This is frequently
mentioned by B. Diaz del Cafillo, c. 19, 41, 42,
&c. But if Velasquez had not conquest and lct-
tlcment in view, there seems to have been no rca-
Ion for equipping such a confidcrablc armaincnt.

THEY
I. 1 a

THEY aflert, that Cortes defrayed the greatest

part of the expence of fitting out the armament.
But this does not agree with the account of his
lender fortune given by Gomara, Cron. c. 7. and
B. Diaz. c. o2, or what I have mentioned Note
iii. vol. ii.

THEY take notice, that though considerable

numbers were wounded in their different encoun-
ters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them
died, and all recovered in a hort time. This
fccnis to confirm what I have observed, vol. ii. p.
39. concerning the imperfeltion of the offensive
weapons of the Americans.

THEY give some account of the manners and

institutions of the Mexicans. It is very hort, and
as they had resided but a short time in the country,
and had but little intercourse with the natives, it
is both defedtive and inaccurate. They describe
minutely, and with great horror, the human facri-
sices offered by the Mexicans to their deities, and
affirm that tfome of their number were eye-wit-
neffes of those barbarous rites.

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue and

description of the presents ent to the Emperor.
That published by Gomara, Cron. c. 29. tcems to
have been copied from it, and Pet. Martyr dc-
fcribcs many of the articles in his treatise De In-
lulls nuper inventis, p. 354, &c.

A CATA-
516

# A CATALOGUE OF SPANISH Books and Manuscripts.

A
C A T A LOGUE

OF
SPANISH Books and Manuscripts.

A

ACARETE de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la Ri-
viere de la Plata, & dela par Terre au Perou. Exftat. Re-
cueil de Thevenot, Part IV.

- A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and thence

by Land to Peru, 8vo. London, 1698.

Acofta (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturelle & Moral des Indes
tant Orientales qu'Occidentales, 8vo. Paris, 16oo.

Novi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis.
Exft. in Colle&. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

-De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de pro-
curanda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salinant, 8vo. 1589.

-- --- (Chriftov.) Tratado de las Drogas y Mede-

cinas de las Indias Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al
vivo, 4to. Burgos, 1578.

Acugna (P. Christoph.) Relation de la Riviere des Ama-
zones, i2mo. Tom. ii. Paris, 1682.

-----.--A Relation of the great River of the Ama-

zones, in South America, 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprere il Regno di fette
Citta. Ramufio, III. 363.

Albuquerque Coello (Duarte de) Momorial de Artes de la
Guerra del Br:asil, to. Mad. 1634.

Alcafarad

____··
 i

Alafarado (Franc.) An Historical Relation of the Difcq
very of the lfle of Madeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Alcedo y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avilo Hiftorico-Poitli

co-Geografico, con las Noticias mas particulares, del Peru
Tierra Firme, Chili, y nuevo Reyno de Granada. 4to. Mad
1740.

Compendio Hiftorico de la Prqvincia y Puerto de
Guayaquil, 4to. Mad. 174:.

Aldama'y Guevara (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Arte de a Len.
gua Mexicana, izmo. Mexico, 1754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes Referi.

endole sus ExIpecliciones y Conqiiilas en varias Provincias de
N. Efpagna. Exit. Barcia Hiftoriad. Primit. tom. i.

Lcttere due, &c. xift. Ramus I. II. 296.

Aranzeles Reales de les Minitros de la Real Aud.encia de
N. Etpa'gna' fol. Mexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Iflas
Malucas, fol. Mad. 609.

-- Anales de Ariaon, fol. Saragrofs, 1630.

Arriago (P. Pable Jos. Ec) Extirpacion de la Idolatria del
Peru,' 4to. Lima, 1621.

Avendagno (Didac.) IThefaurus Indicus ceu generalis In-

ftructor pio Regimine onfcientie, inisi'quae ad Indias spec-
tant, iol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 66o.

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hiftoriadores Primitivos de las
India Occidentales, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

B1arco-xentinera (D. Martin di) Argentina y Conquiftadel
Rio de la Plata Poelna. Exit. Barcia Hiltoriad. Primit. Ill.

Barros (Joao de) Decadesde Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lifloa, 1628.
Bellcfteros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzes del Peru, fol. 2
vols. Lima, 1685.

Bcnzo (Hicron.) Novi Orbis Hiftoria-De Bry America,
Parts IV, V, VI.

Bctascurt y Iigueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las Iglefias
Metro Politanas de las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Conversion de Piritu de Indios
Cumanagotos y otros, 1 2mo. Mad. 690o.

Boturini Benaduci (Lorenzo) Ilea de una nueva Hifloria

general de la America Septentrional, fundada iobrc material
:opiolf tie Figuras, Symbolas Caradtercs, Cantarcs y Manu-
fcritos de Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botcllo
518

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (D. Francisco de) El Nu-
evo Mundo Poema Heroyco, 4to. Barcelone, 1701.

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provincias,
Reynos, y Ciudades del Mundo, 4to. Girona, 1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Geographiae Veteris & Novae, 4to.
paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar Nugnez) Relacion de los Naufra-
gios. Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. Tom. i.

---- - Examen Apologetico de la Hiftorica Narra,
tion de los Naufragios. Exft. ibid.

Commentarios de lo fuccedido duarante fu

gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exit. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exft. Ramufio, III. 3o0.
Cabota (Sebaft.) Navigazione de. Exit. Ramus. II. 2 1.
Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Order
de San Auguftin en el Peru, fpl. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario niftorico de los Viages de Mar y Tierra

hechos en 1768, al Norte de California, di orden del Marques
de Croix, Vi-rey de Nueva Efpagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo que a
fu Mageltad Provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to. 1645.

Caracas-Real Cedula de undacion de la real Compagnia

Guipufcoana de Caracas, 2mo. Mad.; 765.

Caravente, (Fr. Lopez de) IRelcion de las Provincias que

tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe Provien,
y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageftad,' lo que fe Gafta de
ella y 'le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dedicado al Marques de San-
tos Claros, Agno. de 6 I . MS.

Cardenas y Cano (abr.) Enfayo Cronologico par la His-

toria general de la Florida, fol. Mad. 1733.

Caro de Torres (Franc.) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Militares

de Sant lago, Calatrava y Alcantara, fol. 'gad. 1629.

Carranzana (D. Goncatles) A Geographical Description of
the Coaits, &c. ofthe Spanili Weft-Indies, 8vo. Lond. 1740.

Cal`as (Bart. de las) Brcviffima Relacion de la efiruycion
de las Indias, 4to. 1552.

Narraio Iconibus Illuftrata per Theod. de Bry.
4to. Oppent. 1614.

(Bart. de las) An Account of the first Voyages

ant Discoveries of the Spaniards in America, 8vo. Lond. 1693.

Caffani (P. Joseph) Hiftoria de la Provincia de Compagnia
de Jesus del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Mad. 1741.

Caltan heda

519

Caflanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hifloria do Defcobrimento S
Conquifta de India pelos Portugueses, fol. 2 vols. Lifboa, 1552

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera Parte de las Elegias de Va
rones Illufires de Indias, 4to. Mad. 589.

Castillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hifloria Verdadera de la Con.
quifta de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 632.

Cavaliero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de a1s

pefas y Mledidas di varias Naciones, reducidas a las que Corren
en Caitilla, 4to. Mad.. 73l.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Cronica del Peru, fol. Sevill. 1 553.
Cifneros (Diego) Sitio, Naturelez a y Propriedades de la
Ciudad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 1618.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hifloria de Yucatan, fol.
Mad. 688.

Collecao dos Brives Pontificos e Leyes Regias que forao

Expedidos y Publicadas defdeo Anno 1741, fobre a Liberdada
des Peffoas bene a Commercio dos Indos de Brefil.

Coleccion General de las Providencias hafta aqui tomadas

per el Gobierno fobre el Efiragnimento, y Occupacion de
Temporalidades de los Regulares de la Compagnia, de Efpag-
na, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Ferdando) La Hifloria del Almirante, D. Chris-
toval Colon Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. I. .

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua multas Regiones hactenus
incognitas invenit. Exit. Nov. Orb. Grynaei, p. 90.

(Ferd.) Life and Afaions of his Father Admiral
Chrifloph. Columbus. Exft. Churchill's Voyages, II. 479.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en la

muy Noble y muy de la Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos de 15 i
& 1565. fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium celebratum Mex.
ici, Anno 1585, fol. Mexici. 1770.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los Seg-

nores, manera y Differencia de ellos, que havia en la Nueva
Efpagna, y otras Provincias sus Comarcanas, y de sus Leyes,
Ufus y Coltumbres, y de la Forma que tenian en Tributas lus
Vafallos en Tiempo de iu Gentilidad, &c. MS. 4t0. pp. 307.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Lettere del

Viaggio fatto del Fra Marco da Nizza al fette Citta de Cevola.
Exit. Ramufio III. 354.

---- Relation del Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ramnufio
III. .59.

Cortes (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperador Car-

los V. en que ha Relacion de sus Conquiftas en la Nueva Es-
pagna. Exfl. Barcia -lift. Prim. tom. i.

Cortcfi;
520

Cortefii -(Ferd.) De infulis liuper inventis Narrationes ad
Carolum V. fol. 1532.

Cortefe (Fern.) Relationi, &c. Exist. Ramufio III. 225.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte del
Mundo Zaragoff. 4to. 1688.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hifloria de la Fundacion y Dif.
curfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufs. 625.

--- --- (Gil. Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaftico de la
Primitiva Iglefia de las Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. 1649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regulares

de la Compagnia fucitaron contra Don B, de Cardenas Obifpo
de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echavari (D. Bernardo Ibagnez de) El Reyno Jefuitico del

Paraguay. Exit. tom. iv. Colleccion de Documentos, 4to,
Mad. 1770.

Echave y Affu (D. Francisco de) La Eflrella de Lima con-
vertida en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes, 688.

Eguira el Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicana,

five Eruditorum Hiloria Virorum in America Boreali nato-
rum, &c. tom. Prim. fol. Mex. 1755. N. B. No more than
one volume of this work has been published.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana Poema
Eroico, fol. Mad. 1733.

Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Peru-
Vicurn, fol. Mad. 1775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiftoria del Reyno de Portugal,
fol. Amber. 1730.

----- History of Portugal from the first Ages to the
Revolution under John IV. 8vo. Lnnd. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Hifioria del Peru, fol. Scvill. 1571.
- - (P. Juan Patr.) Relacion Hiftorial de las Mif-
siones de los Indios que Claman Chiquitos, 4to. Mad. 1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Difcurfo
VI. del tom. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

- -- Solucion del gran Problerno I-illorico, fobre la

Problacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del tom. v. del Te-
atro Critico.

-- (D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de la cuidad y
Provincia de Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

Freyre (Ant.) Piratas de la America, 4to.

Fraffo

52;

Fraffo. (D. Petro) De Regio Patronatu Indiarum, fol.
vols. Matriti, 1775.

G

Galvao (Antonia) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos antigos y
Modernos, fol. Lifboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the first
Original unto the Year 1555. Osborne's Collect. II. 354.

Garcia (Gregoria) Hifioria Ecclefiafiica y Seglar de la ;n-

dia Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacyon de la Santa Evange-
lia en ella, i2mo. Baeca, 1626.

-- - (Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo

/lundo, fol. Mad. 1729.
Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata del

Defcubrimiento de diverfas Ciudades, y Provincias y Guerras
que tuio con los Indios. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. i.

--- -- Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exit. Ramufio III. 300.
Gomara (Fr. Lqpez de) La Hiftoria general de las Indias,
12mo. Any. 1554.

_--.---

- Hiitoria general de las Indias. Exft. Barcia
Hist. Prim. tor. ii.

"-----*--- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna o Conquifta
de Mexico: Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) Hiftoire Naturelle, Civile & Geogra.

phique de l'Orenoque. Traduite par M. Eidous, I2mo. tom.
iii. Avign. 1758.

Gufmnan (Nugno de) Relacionfcritta in Omitlan Provincia

de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell 1530. Exit. Ra-
mtiuo III. 31I.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides belli Guaranici, ab Anno
1754. Exft. Colleccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

H-crnandes (Fran,) Plantarum, Animalium & Mineralium
Mexicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Rom. 1651.

Herrera (Anton. de) Hifloria general de los Hechos de los

Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tierra Firma del Mar Oceano, fol.
4 vols. Mad. 1601.

---- Hioria General, &c. 4 vols. Mad. 1730.
General 1-litory, &c. Translated by Stephens, 8vo.
i vols. Lond. 1740.

- efcripio India Occidentalis, fol. Amit. 6Z2.

L

Leon (Fr. Ruiz. id) Icrnandia Poema Heroyco de Can-
quifta de Mexico, 4to. Mna. 1755.

---- (Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Oriental y
Occiclental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. 1737.

Lima,

Lima, a true account of the Earthquake which happened

there 28th October, 1746. Translated from the Spaniih, 8vo.
Lond. 1748.

Lima Gozofa, Defcripcion de las feftibas Demonitraciones,

con que eta ciudad Celebro la real Proclamacion de el Nombre
Augufto del Catolico Monarco D. Carlos IIL. Lima, 4to.
1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tomo I. de

las Memorias Hiftorico-Phyficas, Critico-Apologeticas de la
America- Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz. 1759.

Lopez (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Septen-
trional y Meridional, 12mo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. F. Ant.) Hifloria de Nueva Efpagna, efcrita

por fu Efclarecido Conquifiador Hernan Cortes, Aumentada
con otros Documentos y Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Defcripcion Chorographica, del Terre-

torios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de los ritos y
Coftumbres, de las innurnerabiles Naciones que la Habitant.
4to. Cordov. 1733.

----- Hiftoria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la Pro.
vincia del Paraguay, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Defgription de la Gouvernment du Pec

tou. Exit. Voyages qui ont ervi a l'etabliffement de la comp.
des Indes, tom. ix. 105.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfp de las Enfermedadcs de a
Compagnia de Jelus, 4to. -Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las Hiftorias

de los Defcubrimientos, Conquiftas y Guerras de la India Ori-
ental, y sus Iflas, defde los Tiempos del Infante Don Enrique
de Portugal fu inventor, 4to. Mad. 681.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) Dc Rebus Oceanicis & Novq
Orbe Decades tres, i2mo. Colon. 1574.

-- De infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus Inco-
larum. Ibid. p. 329.

----- Opus Epiflolarum, fol. Amfl. 1670.
----- II Sommario cavato della ilia Hifloria del Nu.
evo lundo. Ramlufio lI. i.

Mecllacan-lRelacion de las Ceremonias, Ritos y Poblacion

de los Indios de Mcchuacan-hecha al I. S. D. Ant. dte Men,-
doza Virrey de Nucva Efpagna, fol. MS.

Melcndez (Fr. Juan) Telros Verdaderos de las Indias lif-

tqria de la Provincia de S. Juan Baptilta del Peru, dcl Orden
de Predicadores, fol. 3 vols. RIom. 1681.

Mendozar

521

Mendozar (D. Ant. de) Lettera al Imperatore del Difcopri

mento della Terra Firma della N. Spagna verso Tramontano.
,xft. Ramufio III. 355.
.- -.--- (Juan Gonz. de) Hiftoria del gran Reyno de
China con un Itinerario delNuevo Mundo, 8vo. Rom. 1585.

Monardes (El Dottor) Primera y Secunda y Tercer Parte

de la I-iftoria Medicinal de las Cosas que fe traen de nueitras
Indias Occidentales, que firven en Medicina, 4to. Sevilla
1574.

Moncada (Sancho de) Reflauracion Politica de Efpagna y
defeos Publicos, 4to. Mad. 1746.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fatta per Terra al
Cevole, Regnodi cette Citta. Exft. Ramus. III. 356.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes

Barth. y Gornz. de Nodal al defcubiimiento del Eftrecho que
hoy es nombrado de Maire, y reconocimiento del de Magel-
lanes, 4to. Mad.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiltoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna

dibidida en tres Partes. En la primera trata de los Ritos,
Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad. En la
fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y modo de ce-
lebrar las Fiellas de Nueltra Santa Iglefia. En la tcrcera del
Genio y Caracter de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que nota-
ban uiisAcontecimiientos, con otras particularidades; y Noti-
cias de las principales Ciudades en aquel Reyno. Efcrita en
el Agno 1541 por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos que
primero PaTlaron a entender en fu Conversion, MS. fol. pp.
618.

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, i2mo. Mad.

1605.

Ordenanzas del Confejo realde las Indias, fol. Mad. 6i81.
Ortega (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del prime
Viage hecho al rededor del Mundo, 5to. Mad. 1769.

Offorio (Jerome) History of the Portuguese, during the
Reign of Emmanuel, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1752.

Offorius(Hieron.) De rebus Enmmanuelis Lufitaniae Regis,
8vo. Col. Agr. 1572.

Ovalle (Alonlo) Hiforical Relacion del Reyno de Chili,
fol. Rom. 1646.

- An Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili
Exit. Churchill-Collc&. III. 1.

Oviedo
z52

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiftoria la Conquifta y Publa-
cion de Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Oviedo (Alonfo) Sommaria, &c. Exit. Ramufio III. 44.
Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la Hiltoria
Natural de las India. Exit. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. i.

Oviedo Hiitoria Generale & Naturale dell Indie Occiden-
tale. Exit. Ramufio. III. 74.

-- Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandiffiram
Fiume Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. II111. 45.

P

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o Na-
turaliza y Coltunbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

-- - Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eveque de
l'Angelopolis, i2no. Cologe, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de las
Iflas de Gran Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pena Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Paro-

chos de Indos, en que tratan las materias mas particulares,
tocantes a ellos para fu buen adminiftracion, 4t0. Amberes,
1754.

Peraka Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Conquifit

del Peru Poema Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apoftolde las Indias
y nueves gentes San Franci'co Xavier de la Compagnia de Je-
sus Epitome de lus Apoftolicos hechos, 4to. Pamp. 665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annaics Hiftorios do ellado
do Maranchao, fol. Lifboa, 1749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Defcopri
mtento y Conquilta del Peru. ExiL . Ramuil llI. 371.

Peru-Relatione d'un Secretario de Franc. Pizzarro dclla
Conquelta del Peru. Exit. Ramufio. III. 392.

-- Relacion del Peru, MS.
Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme Mug-

nos, &c. por haverlos Cojnmcrciado illicitamente en tiempo de
Guerra, ol. 755.

Phlilipinas-Carta que escribe un Rcligiofo antiguo de Phil-

pinas, a un Amigo fuyo en ElPagna, que le pregunta el Na-
turely Genio de los lndios Naturales de Eflas Iflas. MS. 41t0

Piedrahina (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Conquiltas
del Nuevo Reyno de Gr.nada, fol. Ambrcs.

Pinelo (Ant. deLcon) Epitome dela Bibliotheca Oriental y

Occidental en que fe contienen los Efiritores, d las Indias
Orientales y Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1737.

Pinzonius focius Admir;antis Columbi-Naiigatio & res per
cumrreperta. Exit. Nov. Orb. Grnlli, p. 119.

. Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illuitres del N.
Mundo, fol. Mad. 1639.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hiftorias

.de los Delcubrimieltos de la India Oriental y sus Iflas, 4to.
Mad. 681.

.Q ir (Ferd. de) Tetra Australis Incognita, or a new Sou.
thern Dicovery, containing a fifth Part of the World lately
found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

R

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Nbiicias hifto.

.iales Prafticas, de los Succeffis y Adelantamientos de ela
Conipagnia dede ui Fundacion en 1728 haita 1764, 4to.
i765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, fol. 4
vols. Mad. 1756.

Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern: Cortefe della

gran Citta T'emiftatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe della Nova
Spagna. Exft. Ramus. III. 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria general de las Indias Occiden-

tales y particular de la Governacion de Chiapa y Guatimala,
fol. Mad. 620.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relacion del Viage

defde que falio de Lima, hafta que Ilego a Efpagna, 4to. Mad.
I657.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manuel Com-
pendio de el Regio Patronato Indiano,' fol. Mad. 1755.

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) Hitloria de les Triumphos de Neuf-

tra Sta Fe, entre Gentes las mas Barbaras, en las mifliones de
Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre el es-
tado aCtual do los Papeles universales de la Monarchia, MS.

Rocha Pitta (Sebaltiano de) Hifioria da America Portou-

gueza des dc o Anno de 150 de u 1)efcobrimento ate ode 1724,
fol. Lifboa, I736.

Rodriguez (Manuel,) Explicacion de la Bulla de la Santa
Cruzado, 4to. Alcala, 1589.

---- - (P. Man.) El Maragnon y Amazonas, Hilloria

de los Defcubrimientos, Ensradas y Reducion de Naciones, fol.
Mad. 1i64.

Roman (Hieron.) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols. Mad.
1595.

Rol-enle (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palafox Ar-
zobilio dc Mexico, fol. Mad. 1671.

Rui

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual hecha por los Reli-

giofos de la Compagnia de Jesus, en las Provincias de la Para-
guay Uragay, Parana y Tape, 4to. Mad. 1639.

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Efpagna,
tom. i, ii, iii, fol. Mad. 770.

Salazar y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoria de la Conquifta de
Mexico-fegunda parte-No place nor year.

Salazar y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Confiituciones y Or-

denanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real Univerfi-
dad y efiudio general de San Marcos de la Ciudad de los Reyes
del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Reyes, 1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur l'Origine de la Mea-

ladie Venerienne, dans laquelle on prouve qu'elle n'a point ete
porteede l'Amerique, 12mo. Paris, 1765.

Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al Efirecho de
Magellanes, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (E) Marques) Comercio SueltoyenCompanias
General, Izmo. Mad. 1732.

Schemidel (Hulderico) Hifloria y Defcubrimiento del Rio
de la Plata y Paraguay. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara de Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique & Analy-

tique de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe dite de Jesus,
depuis son entree dans ce Royaume en 1540 jufqu'a son Expul-
sion, en 1759, amo. 3 vols. Lifb. 769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de juftis belli caufis prafer-
tim, in Indos Novi Orbis. MS.

Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro NaVal Hydrographico,
4to. 1648.

Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotero de la Re-
gion Astral Magellanica, 4to. Mad. 1690.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las Conquiftas de
Tierra Firme en las Indias Occidentales, fl. Cuenca, 1 62 7

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hitoria de las Conquiftas de Mexico,
fol. Mad. 1684.

--- Hitlory of the conquest of Mexico.-Tranflated
by Townsend, fol. 1724.

Solorzano Perrcira (Joan.) Politica Indiana.

----- De Indiarum jure five de jufta Indiarum Occiden-
taliumGubernatione, fol. 2. vols. Lugd. 1672.

--- De Indiarum Jure, fol. Matriti, 2 vols. fol.
1629.

Suarez de Figueroa (Chriltov.) Hechos de D. Garcia Hur-
taldodeMendoza, 4to. Mad, 1613.

Tarragones

T

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofmographia,
4to. Milan, 1556.

Techo (F. Nichol. de) The History of the Provinces Para-

guay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exft. Churchill's Coll.
VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols.
Mad. 1723.

Torres (Sim. Per. de)ViagedelMundo. Exft. Barcia Hifl.
Prim. III.

- ' (Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Mili-

tares de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcantara, defde fu Fundacion
haita el Rey D. Felipe II. Adminifiaor perpetuo dellas, fol.
Mad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hiftoria Natural
Efpagna la fol. Mad. 1754.

Differtacion Hiftorico Politica y en mucha parte
Geograficade las Iflas Philipinas, 12mo. Mad. 1753.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de l'Amerique Me-
ridionale, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, 1752.

-- Noticias Americanas, Entretenimientos Phyficos

Hiftoricus, fobre la America Meridional y le Septentrional
Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

(Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire 'Ifole delle

Specierie fino al Mare detto Vermejo nel 1539. Exft. Ramus.
III. 339.

(D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des ManufaAures
& du Commerce d'Efpagne, izmo. Amft. 1753.

Uztariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y Pradfica de Commercio &
de Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

The Theory and Pracice of Commerce, and
Maritime Affairs, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Venegas (Migule) A Natural and Civil History of Califor-
nia, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1759.

Varages (D. Thom. Tamaio de) Reftauracion de la Ciudad

dcl Salvador y Bair dc Todos Santos en la Provincia del Bra'
fil, to. Mad. 1628.

Vargas Machuca (D. Born. de) Milicia yDcfcripcion de las
Indias, 4to. Mad. 1699.

Vega

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire des Guerres Civiles

des Espagnoles dansles Indes, par Baudouin, 4to. 2 tom. Paris
1648.

Vega (Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire de la Conquete de la Flo-
ride. Traduite, parRichelet, 1 2mo. 2 tom. Leyd. 1731.

Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol.
Lond. 1688.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanish Rule of trade to the
Weft Indies, 8vo. Lond. 1702.

Norte de la Contratacion de las Indias Occiden-
tales, fol. Sevill. 672.

Verazzano (Giov.) Relatione delle Terra per lui Scoperta
nel 1524. Exit. Ramuflo III. p. 420.

Viage de Efpagna, 12mo. 6 tom. Mad. I776.
Vitoria (Fran.) Relationes Theologicae de Indis & de jure
belli contra eos, 4to. Mad. 1765.

Viera y Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la Hiftoria general
de las Iflas de Canarin, 4to. 2 tom. Mad. 1772.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hiftoria de Nueva Mexico Poema,
2mo. Alcala, 6xo.
Villa Segnor y Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant.) TheatroAmericano.

Description general de los Reynos y Provincias de la Nueva
Efpagna, fol. tom. Mex. 1746.

X

Xerer (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Conquifla del

Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador Carlos V.
Exfi. Barcia. Hist. Prim. tom. III.

-Relatione, &c. &c. Exit. Ramufio III. 372.

z Z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hiftoria del Defcubrimiento y Conquifta
de la Provincia del Peru. Exit. Barcia. Hilt. Prim. tor. III.

---- Hiloire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du
Perou, 2mo. 2 tom. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Miguel de) Reprefentacion al Rey N.

Segnor D. Phililje V. dirigida al mas feguro Aumento del Real
Erario. No place, 1732.

Zevallos (). Pedro Ordognezde) Hiftoria y Viage del Mun-
do, 4to. Mad. 691.

INDEX.

52

Mm
VOL. II.

# INDEX.

N

D

E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume, and the Figures

to the Page.

A

'
B rSS INIAI, an embassy sent to

that country by John 11. King of

Portugal, i. 55.
Aqcapuica, the nature of the trade carried

on from thence to Manila, ii. 427,
Amount of the treasure on board the flip
taken by Lord Anfor, 507.

Acofla, his merhod of accounting for the

different degrees of heat, in the old and
new continents, i. 4481

Atlair, his account of the revengeful

temper of tile native Americans i.
475.

A_,anijon, his justification of Hanno's ac-

count of the Airican eas, i. 423.
'africa the wlrtll coatll of, first ex-

plorcd by order of Jolml 1. King of
Portugal, i. 40. Is dilcovercd from
Cape Non, to Boij.dor, 42. Cape
Bojador doubled, 46. 'I'hs countries
toatliward of the River Senegal disco-
vered, 52 Cape of Good Hope seen
by Bartholonew Diaz, 55. Causes of
tihe extreme heat of the climate there,
254. Ignorance of tile ancient alro-
noincrs concerning# 4 23.
r.culrune, tile ltate of, amoli the na-
tive Americans, i. 3. 1 wo princi-
pal causes of te defcdti of, 32.
Ag. ,,l.l, is sent to Hflaniola, as a corn-

iniffioner to ifpc the condu6t of Co-
lunibus, i. 3o.

Agiilar, Jclort de, is relieved from a long

captivity ang the Indians at Cozuncel
by Fernando Cortes, ii. io.
ASlr1,fuerjr, Rodrigo, his barbarous treat.

ment of the Irldians of Hilpaniola; J.
214.

Allavala, in the Spanilh Customs, the

term explained, ii. 51o.

.lcxander the Great, his politica harac-

ter, i. 14. His motive in founding the
city of Alexandria, 15. His difcoVe-
ries in India, 6.
Alexander VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand

and Isabella of Caftilethe right of all
their weftein discoveries, i. r3. Sends
mifflonaries with Columbus on his fe-
cond voyage, 114.

Almagro, Diego de, his birth and cha-

rater, ii. r49. Alfociates with Pizarro
and d Luque, in a voyage of disco-
very, 150. His unfilccefful attempts,

r51. Is negleaed by Pizairo in his
Spanish negotiation, 59. Is reCon-
ciled to Ili;n, 6o ltings rcinforoc-
mellt.; to P.zarro at Peru, 178. Be.
ginning of lllrnfions between him and
Pizarro, rz. Invades Chili, 195. Is
created governor of Chili, and marches
to Cusco, 199. Seize3 CuCco out of
the hands of Pizarro, 2.o. Defeats
Alvarado, and takes him prisoner,
ibid. Is deceived by tire atful nego-
tiations of rancis Pizarro, 203. 1s
defeatd y the Pizarro 20. 2 I ta-
ken prifroer. o. Ij tried and con-
demned, zoS. Is put to death, 20g.

Al.m.igro the Ion, flbrds refuge to is

father's followvrs at Lima, i. 217.
His cratter, ibid. Heads a con-
fpiracy a.linft Fra.rcis Pizarro, 2S8.
PiZarro araffinated, 219. is acknow-
ledged as his fuccefrObty zio. Hir prec

Mini m xarlou
- ~ ~ -·'L-t- . - --

carious fituat;on, 221. Is defeated by
Vaca de Castro, 223. Is betrayed and
executed, 224.

.Alrmijorfafgo, in the Spanish American

customs, the amount of, ii. 510.

A.uarado, AlOnzo, is sent from Lima;

by Francis Pizarro, with .a body of
Spaniards to relieve his brothers at
Cusco, ii. 2zo. Is taken prisoner by
Almagro, ioz. His escape, 203.

Alvarado, Pedro de, is left by Cortes

to command at Mexico, while he
marched against Narvaez, ii. 78. He
is besieged by the Mexicans, 84. His
imprudent conduc, 85. His expedi-
tion to Quito in Peru, 189.

dfmazons, a community of, said to exist

in South America, by Francis Orel-
lana, ii. 215.

America, the continent of, discovered by

Christopher Columbus, i. 138. How
it obtained this name, 149. Ferdi-
nand of Caflile nominates two go-
vernments in, 191. The propositions
offered to the natives, ibid. 11 recep-
tion of Ojeda and Nicuefa among
them, 193. The South Sea discover-
ed by Balboa, zo4. Rio de Plata dif-
covered, 213. The natives of, inju-
rioufy treated by the Spaniards, 233.
The vast extent of, 248. The grand
objects it presented to view, 249.
The circumstances of, favourable for
commerce and civilization, 250. The
climates of, 252. Various causes of
the peculiarity of its climates, 253.
Its rude and uncultivated ate when
firit discovered, 257. Its animals, 259.
Its insets and reptiles, 261. Birds,
262. General account of its foil, 263.
Inquiry into the first population of,
t64. Could not be peopled by civi-
lized nations, 270. The northern ex-
tremity of, contiguous to Alia, 273.
Probably peopled by Asiatics, 280.
Condition and charater of the native
inhabitants inquired into, 281. Were
more rude than the natives of any o-
thelr known parts of the earth, 282.
The Peruvinms and Mexicans except-
ed, 283. The sirs discoverers inca-
pable of a judicious speculative exami-
nation, 285. The various fyflems of
iphilofi0)iltes refpcclinit the natives, z86.
Method observed in the present review
of their odily constitution and cir-
cumftances, 288. The venereal dif-

cafe derived fiom this part of ti
world, 307. Why so thinly inhabit-
ed, 337. The country depopulated by
continual wars, 366. Cause of the ex-
treme cbldnefs towards the southern
extremity of, 451. The natural un-
cultivated state of the country defcrib-
ed, 453. Bones of large extint fpe-
cies of animals discovered under ground
near the banks of the Ohio, 454.
Why European animals degenerate there,
455. Supposed to have undergone a
convullive separation from Asia, 459.
Causes of the depopulation of, traced.
ii. 346. This depopulation not the
result of any intentional system of
policy, 348. Nor the result of reli-
gion, 350. Number of Indian natives
fill remaining in Mexico and Peru,
351. All the Spanish doninions there
fubjeced to two viceroys, 354. Its
third viceroyalty lately established, 355
See Mexico, Peru, Cortes, Pizarro, &c.

,Americans, native in Spanish America,

their bodily constitution and complexi-
on, i. 289. Their frength and abi-
lities, 29o. Their insensibility with re-
gard to their women, 292. No de,
formities in their frame, 296. This
circumstance accounted for, 297. Uni-
formity of their colour, 298. A pe-
culiar race described, 301. The Efqui-
maux, 302. Patagonians, 303. The
existence of Patagonian giants yet re-
maining to be decided, 305. Their
diseases, 306. The venereal disease,
peculiarly theirs, 307. The powers and
qualities of their minds, 308. Are only
solicitous to supply immediate wants,
310. The art of computation scarcely
known to them, ibid. Have no ab-
firac ideas, 31z. The North Ame-
ricans much more intelligent than these
of the South, 313. Their aversion to
labour, 315. Their social ate, 317.
Domefic union, ibid. The women,
318. Their women not prolific, 31.
Their parental affection and filial dury,
312. Their modes of subsistence, 324.
Filhing, 325. Hunting, 36. Agri-
culture, 38. The various objects of
their culture, 329. Two principal
caures of the defects of their agricul-
ture, 332. Their want of tame ani-
mals, ibid. Their want of useful me-
tals, 34. Their political iflitutions,
336. Were divided into finall inde-

pendent

E X.
I. .

pendent communities, ibid. Unac-
quainted with the idea of property,
337. Their high sense of equalityand
independence, 338. Their ideas of ub-
ordination imperied, 340. To what
tribe these descriptions apply, 341.
Some exceptions, 343. Florida, ibid.
The Natchez, 344 The islands, 345.
In Bogota, ibid. Inquiry into the
causes of these irregularities, 346. Their
art of war, 349. Their motives to
hostility, 350. Causes of their fero-
·city, 35i. Perpetuity of their animo-
fities, 35z. Their modes of condut-
ing war, 353. Are not destitute of
courage and fortitude, 355. Incapable
of militarydifcipline, 356. Theirtreat-
ment of prisoners, 357. Their forti-
tude under torture, 359. Never eat
human flelh but to gratify revenge,
361. How the South Americans treat-
ed their prisoners, 362. Their mili-
tary education, 363. Strange method
of chufing a captain among the Indi-.
ans on the banks of the Orinoco,
ibid. Their numbers wafted by centi-
nual wars, 366. Their tribes now
recruit their numbers by adopting pri-
foners, 367. Are never formidable in
war, to more polilhed nations, 368.
Their arts, dress, and ornaments, 369.
Their habitations, 37z. Their arms,
374. Their domestic utensils, 375.
Conftru&tion of their canoes, 376. The
liftlcffnefs with which they apply to
labour, 377. Their- religion, 378.
Some tribes altogether destitute of any,
381. Remarkable diversity in their re-
ligious notions, 384. Their ideas of
the immortality of the foul, 387. Their
modes of burial, 388. Why their phy-
ficians pretend to be conjurers, 390.
'rheir love of dancing, 393. Their
immoderate paflion for gaining, 395.
Are extremely addi&ed to drunken.
ness, 396. Put their aged and incu-
rable to death, 400. General fltimate
of their characer, 401. Their intel-
letual powers, 402. Their political
talents, 403. Powers of affection, 404.
Hardncfs of heart, 405. Their insen-
fibility, 406. Taciturnity, 407. Their
cunning, 408. Their virtues, 409o
Their spirit of independence, 410. For,
titude,' ibid. Attachment to their com-
munity, 411. Their fatisfacion with
tlcir own condition, ibid. General

caution with refpet to this inquiry,
414. Two distinguishable classes of,
415. Exceptionsas to their chara&er,
417. Their charaaeriftic features de-
fcribed, 460 Inltances of their per-
fevering speed, 461. An antipathy in-
duftrioully encouraged between them
and the negroes in America, by the
Spaniards, ii. 369. Their prefentcon-
dition, 370. How taxed, 371. Stated
services demanded from them, 372.
Mode of exacting these services, 373.
How governed, ibid. Protetor of the
Indians, his funcion, 374. Reasons
why so small a progress is made in
their conversion, 384.

Amerigo Vespucci, publishes the first writ-

ten account of the New World, and
hence gave name to America, i. 149.
His claim as a discoverer examined,
441.

,4nacoana, a female cazique of Hifpani-

ola, her base and cruel usage by the
Spaniards, i. 180.

Andes, tupendous height and extent of

that range of mountains, i. 249. Their
height compared with other moun-
tains, 446. Gonzalo Pizarro's remark-
able expedition over, ii. 213.

Animals large, very few found in America

at its first discovery, i. 59.

Antients, cause of the imperfecion of the

art of navigation among them, i. 4.
Their geographical knowledge extreme-
ly confined, 22, 423, 424, 426.

Arabians, peculiarly attached o the study

of geography, i. 27.

Argonauts, the expedition of, why so fa

mous among the Greeks, i. iz.

,irithimetic, or computation, the art of,

hardly known to the native Americans,
i. 310.

4,colino, father, his extraordinary miflion to

the prince of the Tartars, i. 32.

4f/atic discoveries made by the Rufians,

i. 273.

.4fi0nto trade, the nature of eplained,

ii. 408. The frauds in, and how put
an end to, 409, 504.

.tahualpa, is left by his fatther Huafcar

his successor in the kingdom of Quito,
ii. 167. Defeats his brother Huatcar,
and usurps the empire of Peru, ibid.
Sends presents to Pizarro, 170. Vitits
Pizarro, 173. Is pcrfidioudy seized by
him, 176. Agrees with Pizarro on a
ranfln), 177. 1s r'fulid his iberty,

18o,

ISo. His behaviour during his con-
finement, 183. A form of trial be-
ltowed on him, 184. Is put to death,
185. Comparfion of authoritics relat-
ing to his tranfaeions with, and treat-
ment by -Pizarro, 462.

Audience of new Spain, board of, ea-

blifhed by the mperor Charles V. ii.
143. Courts of their jurifdidion, 356.

Averia, a Spanlfh tax for convoy to and

from America, when first imposed, ii.
51o. Its rate, 511.

AzSores, those islands difcovyred by the Por.

tyuuefc, i. 50.

Balboa, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a co.

lony at Sante Maria on the gulf of
Darien, i. 194. Receives intelligence
of the rich country of Peru, 2oo. His
chara&er, oz. Marches across the
iftlimus, 203. Discovers the Southern
Ocean, 2o4. Returns, 20o. Is fu-
perfeded in his command by the ap-
pointment of Pedraras Davila, 207.
Is fined by Pedrarias for former tranf-
aftions, zo8. Is appointed lIutenant
governor of the countries on the Sout
Sea, and marries Pedrarias's daughter,
2lo. Is arrefled and put to death by
Pedrarias, zir.
FlTak, Jesuits, a produltion peculiar to Peru,

ii. 393.
Barrfr, his description of the onftrucigr

of Indian houses, i. 482.

gehring and T'fclirikow, Ruffian naviga-

tors, thought to have discovered the
north-welt extremity ot America fiom
the eaflward, i. z75. nceitainty of
their accounts, 458.
tenalcazar, goveinor of St. Michael, re-
duces the kingdom of Qiro, ii. r83.
Is deprived of his command by Pizarro,
213.
Benjamin the Jew of Tudela, his extra-

ordinary travels, i. 31.
Bernaldes, inltance of the Bravery of the

Caribees, mentioned by him, i. 487.

Betchincourt, John de, a Norman haron,

conquers and poffe(fcs the canary islands,
i. 38.

Pirds, an acount of those natural to Ame-
fica, ij. 6z. 'lhe flight of, often

stretch to an immense distance firom land,
431.

Bcgoia in America, some account of the

inhabitants of, i. 345. Cause, ol their
tame fubmifion to the paniali(s, 38.
Their religious dirines and rtti, 36.

Bojador, cape, the rt discovery ot, i.

42. Is doutlcd by the Poltuguefe dif-
coverers, 46.

Bi, i account of the American war song,

I. 478.

Bovadill, Francis de, is sent to Hifpa-

niola to enquire into the conduct of
Columbus, i. 54. Sends Columins
home in irgnst 55. Is degraded, i58,
,Wugainvtilc , his defence of the Periplus of

Hanno, i. 4-2.

1Bortge-, M. his character of the native

peruvians, i. 465.

praj/l, the coast ot, dfcovered by Atvare.

Cabraj, i. 5 1. Remalks on the climate
of, 451.

Briages, Peruvian, described, ii. 483.
Brtenos Ay'res, in 2outh Amer:ca, some ac.

count i tat province, ii. 336.

Bulls papal, of no force in Spanish Ame-

rica, hefore examined and approved
by the royal council of the 1 dies, ii. 377.
See Crusado.
,Burial of the dead, American ;node of, i.

1S8.

C

Pabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese comman-

dtr, discovers t;he coait of Brasil, i.
151.

Cacao, the best in quality, produced in

the Spanish American colonies, ii. 39.
'I he preparation of chocolate friom, de-
rived fiom the Mexicans, 4z12

CadiS the Galeons and flota removed tli-

ther fiom Seville, ii. 401.

Califoria, the peninsula of, discovered by

Fernando Cortes, ii. 144. The true fitte
of this country long unkrown, 329.
Why depreciated by the Jefiits, 330.
Favourable account of, given by Don
Joseph Galvez, ibid.

Californians, tile charadcr of, by P. Ve-

negas, i. 467.

Caripeacly, discovered by Cordova, who
ii repulsed by the natives, i. 239.

Camnteitcal

Catoipoinane, Don Pedro Roderiguez, cha-

racter of his political and commer-
cial' writings, ii. 507. His account
of the produce of the Spanish American
mines, 513.

Canary ifands ere&ted into a kingdom by

pope Clement' Vl. i. 37. Are con-
quered by John de Bethencourt, 3.

Cannibals, no people ever found to eat

human fiefh for subsistence, though often
for revenge, i. 361, 478.

Canoes, American, the conftrution of, de-

fcribed, i. 376.

Caraceas, establishment of the company

trading to that coast, ii. 413. Growth
bs the trade, o04.

Carribbec iahds, discovered by Columbus

in his second Voyage, i. 14. '

Carribbces, their spirit peculiarly fierce, i.

417. Their claracte by M. de Chan-
valon, 466. Probable conjeture as to
the diftin&ion in character between them
and the natives of the larger islands,
488. '

Carpii, hs extraordinary mission to the

prince of the Tartars, i. 32.
;arthagena, the harbour of, the safest and

belt fortified of any in all the Spanish
American dominions, ii. 339.

Carthaginians, state of commerce and navi-

gation among, i. 8. The famous voyages
of Hano and Himilco, 9.
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to

Vaca de Caltro's vitory over young
Almagro, ii. 24. Lncourages Gon-
zalo Pizarro to assume the government
of Peru, 238. Advises Pizarro to as-
fume the sovereignty of the country,
243. Is seized by Gafca and executpd;
257.

Caflillo, Bernal Diaz del, character of his

Hiftoria Verdadero de la Conquifta de la
Nueva Efpagna, ii. 438.

Centeno, Diego, revolts flom Gonzalo Pi-

zarro to the viceroy of Peru, ii. 240.
Is defeated by'Carvajal, and secretes him-
felfin a cave, 242. Sallies out and seizes
Cuzco, 253. Is reduced by Pizarro,
254. Is employed by Gafca to make
discoveries in the regions about the river
Plata, 6z.

Chavealon, M. de, his characer of the

native Caribbees, i. 466.

Chapetencs, in tie Spaninl American co-

lonies, who thus diftinguilced, ii. 366.
Charles 111. king of Spain, c(tablilhes

acket boats between Spain arid the

colonies, ii. 415. Allows fee trade to
the windwardiflands, 416. Granisthe
colonies a free trade with each other,
418.

Charles V. emperor, fends Roderigo de Si-

gueroa to Hispaniola, as chief judge, to
regulate the treatment of the Indians,
i. ziS. Causes this subjet to be de-
bated before him, 230. Equips afqua-
dron at the solicitation of Ferdinand
Magellan, ii. Z9. Resigns his claim
on the Moluccas to the Portuguese,
133. Appoints Cortes governor of New
Spain, 135. Rewards him on coming
home, 142. Eftablifhe a hoard called
the Audienceof New Spain, 143. His
confiltations on A9merican affairs, ,25.
Eftabliflhe new regulations, 229.

Chili, is invaded by Armagro, ii. 1r5.

How subjected by hile Spaniards, 332.
Excellence of its climate and foil, 333.
Cause of its being negleted, 334. Prol-
pet of its improvement, 335.

.Chiuitos, political .fate of that people,

from Fernandez, i. 475.

Chocolate, the use of, derived from the Mex-

icans, ii. 412.

Cholula, in Mexico, arrival of ortes

there, with some account of the town,
ii. 46. A coilfpiracy against Cortes dif-
covered, and the inhabitants destroyed,
48.

Cicero, instance of his ignorance in geogra.

phy, i. 426.

Cinaloa, political ftae of the people there,

i. 474. Their mode of living, 481.
,Ae dde}itute of all religion, 484. Ex-
traordinary large grain of gold found there,
ii. 484.

Cineglilla, in the province of Sonora, late

discoveries of rich mines made there
by the Spaniards, ii. 328. Probable
eftet of these discoveries, 329. Cle-
ment VI. pope, erects the Canary if-
lands into a kingdom, i. 37.

CliNatcs, influenced by a variety of causes,

i. 25z. Their operation on mankind,
414. Inquiry into the cause of the diff
fcrent lderees of heat in, 448.

Coc/ineal, an important pro(lucion, almost

peculiar to New Spaill ii. 393.

Coll, extraordinary predominance of, in

tlhe climatc of America, i. 252. Causes
of this peculiarity, 253.

Colonies, Splanifs American, view of the

policy and trade of, ii, 345. Depopua-
tion the fuitl fset of them, ibid.

Causes

aares of this depopulation, 346. The
mrnall-pox vety fatal to, 348. General
idea of the Spanish policy in, 3 Sz. Ear-
ly interposition of the regal authority in,
353. An exclusive trade the first ob-
ject in, 360. Compared with those
of ancient Greece and Rome, 361.
The great reftri&ions they are sub-
jed to, 36z. Slow progress of their
population from Europe, 363. Are
discouraged by the state of property
there, ibid. ' And by the nature of
their ecclesiastical policy, 365. The
various clafles of people in, 366. Ec-
clefiaftical constitution of, 376. Form
and endowments of tlie church there,
177. Pernicious effcRt of monastic
institutions there, 378. Charater of
the-ecclefhiaics there, 379. Produc-
tions of, 387. The mines, ibid. Those
of Potofi and Sacotecas, 388. The
spirit with which 'they are worked,
390. Fatal effects of tis ardour, 391.
Other commodities that compose the
commerce of, 393. Amazing lncreafe
o horned cattle there, 394. Advan-
tages which Spain formerly derived from
them, ibid. 'Why the fame advantages
are not still received, 396. Guarda
coflas employed to check the con-
traband trade in, 409. The use of
register hips introduced, 410. And
galeons laid aside, 411. Company of
the Caraccas instituted, 43. Eftab-
lifliment of regular packet-boats to,
415. Free trade permitted between
them, 418. New regulations in the
govcrhmlnt of, 420. Reformation of
the courts of justice, ibid. 'A fourth
vice-royalty established, 421. Attempts
to reform domestic policy, 43. Their
trade with the Philippine iflarlds, 426.
Revenue derived from, by Spain, 429.
Expence of admniitatiton there, 43z.
State of population in, 489. The
number of monalteries there, 497. See
Mexico, Peru, &Cc.

Columlsbus Bartliolomew, is sent by his

brother Chriltopher to negociate with
Henry VII. king of England, i. 70.
The misfortunes of his voyage, 73.
Follows his brother to Hispaniola, 123.
Is velted with the administration of
affairs there y his brother on his re-
turn to Spain, 31. Founds the town
of St. Domingo, t39.

E X.

Columnbus, Christopher, birth and edu-

cation of, i. 59. His early voyages,
60. Marries and fettles at Lbon,
61. Hic 6eograptical reflections, 63.
Conce.ves te idea of making difcuve-
ries to the westward, 65. Oters his
services to the 'Genoese senate, 67.
Cause of his overtures being rejected
in Portugal, 69. Applies to the courts
of Castile and Englind, tbid. His pio-
pofal how treated by the Spanih geo-
graphers, 71. Is patronized by, juan
Perez, 74. His proposals aia;n re-
je&ed, 75. Is invited by Ifabtlla, and
engaged in the Spanilh felice, 79.
Preparatons bor his voyage, o. 'Ilie
alnount of his equipment, 8. Sa.lj
friom Spain, 82. His viglant atren-
tiun to all circumstances during his
voyage, 84. Apprehensions of hi
crew, 5. His address in quieting their
cabals, 87. Indications of their ap-
proaching land, 89. An island disco-
vered, 90. He lands, 91. His inter-
view wit th

t natives; 92. Names the

island San Salvadore, 93. Proiscutes
his difcoverits southward, 94. Disco-
vers and lapds on the lfland ot Cuba, 95.
Discovers Hifpan;ola, 96. Suffrs hip-
wreck, but is saved by rite' Indians, 99.
Builds'a fort, oz2. Returns to Euloj.c,
104. His expedient to preserve the me-
mory of his discoveries during a floinm,
106. Arrives at the Azores, bid. Ar-
rives at Lilbon, 107. His reception in
Spain, o18. His'audience with I'erdl.
nand and Isabella, lo9. His equipment
ior a second voyage, I2Z. Difcovelrsthe
Caribbee islands, 114. Finds his colony
on Hispaniola detroyed, 115. Builds
a city, which he calls Isabella, 117.
Visits the interior parts of the coun-
try, 119. 'His men discontented and
f(atious, Izo. Discovers the ifiand of
Jamaica, 122. M'eeta his brotlicr Bar-
tholonew at Isabella, 123. Tihe na-
tives ill used by his men) and begin to
be alarmed, x14. He defeats the In-
dians, t27. Exacts tribute from them,
1zS. Returns to Spain to justify hit
condua, 135. Is furnmihcd with a more
regular plan for colonizatidn, 133. His
third voyage, 136. Discovers the if-
land of Trinidad, 137. Dilcovels the
continent of America, 138. State of
Hispaniola n his arrival, 139. Com-

ppfe5

ofes the mutiny of Roldon and his
adherents, 42. Is diftieiLtd by the
factious behravour of his men, a 2.
Complaints carried to Spain aga;ilft him,
t53. Is Tent home in ilorns, 155.
Clears his conduct, but is not rflored
to lis authority, 157. His solicitations
icgleCtcd, 1 6 Forms new fclhcmes
ofdlrcovery, j6z. Engages in a Ioulth
,oyage, 164. His treatment at H-fFa-
niola, 'ibid. Searches ater a passage
to tle Indian ocean, 66. Is ship-
wrecked on the coast of Jamaica, 17.
His artifice to secure the fi-iendlfip of
the Indians, 170. Is delivered and ar-
rives at Hifpaliola, 173. Returns to
Spain, 174. His death, 175. His right
to the original discovery of America
defended, 434.

Gilumbus, Don Diego, sues out his claims

to his father's privileges, i. SS. Marries
and gees over to Hfpaniola, 189.
Efiablillies a pearl fihery at Cubagua,
29o. Projects the conquest of Cuba,
196. H; mniafures thwarted by Ferdi-
nand, 213. Returns to Spain, 214.

Gorrmerce, the ara from which its com-

mencemnent is to be dated, i. 2. Mo-
tives to an intercourse among diflant na-
tions, 4. Still flourified in the ealtcrn
empire after the subversion of the welt-
ern, z6. Revival of, in Europe, 28.
fompaji, mariner's, navigation extended

moie by the invention of, than by all
the efforts of preceding ages, i. 35.
By whom invented, 36.
Cordamine, M. his account of the coun-

try at the foot of the Andes, in South
America, i. 453. His remarks on the
character of the native Americans,
466.

Coeno, the kingdom of, discovercd by the

IPortuguefe, i 52.

Cflantinople, the consequence of remov-

ing the feat of tile Roman empire to,
i. 24. Continued a commercial city as-
ter the extintidon of the weflerl ecm-
pire, 26. Became the chief mart of
Italy, z8.

Pord,'va, Francisco ciernandc7, discovers

Yucatan, i. 2i8. Is rcpullfd at Cam-
peachy, and rceu ns to Cuba, 239.

Porita, Alonzo, his obfcrvations on tlhe

contraband trade of the Spanish colonies,
ii. 4 5. C ..racer of Ilis Amricani
memoirs, 469.

fortis, Fernando, his birth, education,
illd clai;adcr, ii. 3. Is by V;lalquti;

appointed commander of the arma,
ment fitted out by him against New
Spain, 4 Velasquez becomes jeadous
of him, 6. Velallucz fends ordcrs
to deprive hm of Iris ommflion, and
lay him under arrest, 7. Is prote&t-
ed hy his iroops, 8. The amount of
his forces, 9, Reduces the Indians
at Tablfco, Ix. Arrives at St. Juan
de Ulua, ibid. His interview with
two Mexican commanders, 13. Sends
prefcnts to Montezuma, 15. Receives
others in return, 16. His schemes,
2t. Eftablilhes a orm of civil go-
vcrnnent, 24. Resigns his commis-
sion under Velasquez, and assumes the
command in the king's name, 27.
His fricndihip courted by the Zernpo,
allans, S2. Builds a fort, 3. Con-
cludes a formal alliance with several
caziques, ibid. Discovers a conspiracy
among his men, and dcfroys lis ihipb,
33. Advances into the country, 35.
Is opposed by the 'lafcalans, 37. Con-
cludes a peace with them, 42. His
rafil zeal, 44. Proceed; to Cholula,
46. Dl'covtrs a conlfpiracy .igin him
here, and deiroys tie inhabitarts, 4S.
Approaches in fight of tlirh ap,.;al city
oi Mexico, o5. His first interview
with Montezuma, 51. 5lis anxiety at
his fitu.tion in the city of Mexico,
56. Seizes Montczuma, 60. Orders
him to be fettered, 62. Reasons of
his condut. 63. Prevails on Monte-
zuma to own L;iifclf a vaflal to the
Spanish crown, 66. Amount and di-
vision of his treasure, 67. Enrages
the Mexicans by llis imprudent zeal,
70. An armament fnt by Velasquez
to fuptrfede him, 74 His delibera-
tions on this event, 79. Advances to
meet Naivarz, 79. Defeats Narvaez,
and takes him plifoner, 82. Gains
over the Snifli soldiers to his in-
ttref, S3. RIetiurn to Mexico, 85.
His improper cotlduc on his anival,
86. Is refolbtecly attacked by the Mex-
icans, 87. Attacks theni in turn with-
out fucclcf, SS. Death of Montczuma,
90. -is extraordinary effape fiom death,
91. Abandons the city of Mexico, 9z.
ls attackeld by the Mexicans, 93. His
great lofrcs in the eocunter, 94. Dif-
.ficultios of his retreat, 9. Battle
of Otulmla, 97. Dcfcpts the Mcxi-
sans, 98. ylutinoua spirit of is

troopsI

tiqops, lot. Reduces the Tepeacans,
loz. Is lircngthened by several rein-
forcements, o14. Returns to Mexico,
Jo5. Eftablilhes' his head-quarters at
Tezcuco, 1e7. Reduces, or concili-
ates the surrounding country, loS.
Cabals among his troops, 'og. His
prudence in fupprefling them, ixo.
Builds and launches a fleet of brigan-
tines on the lake, 113. Besieges Mex-
ico, 1 5. Makes a grand assault to
take the city by florm, but is repulf-
ed, 118. Evades the Mexicat pro-
phecy, 121. Takes Gautimozin pri-
soner, 124. Gains possession of the
city, ibid. And of the whole empire,
127. Defeats another attempt to fu-
peifede him in his command, 134.
Is appointed governor of New Spain,
135. His schemes and arrangements,
136. Cruel treatment of the natives,
137. His conduct subjected to in-
quiry, 140. Returns to Spain to jus-
tify himself, 141. Is rewarded by the
Emperor, Charles V. 142. Goes back
to Mexico with limited powers, 143.
pifcovers California, 144. Returns to
Spain, and dies, ibid. Inquiry into
the nature of his letters to the Em-
peror Charles V. 437. Authors who
wrote of his conquest of New Spain,
43$.

Councii of the Indies, its power, ii. 358.
Cr:lces, in the Spanish American colo-

nics, characer of, ii. 367.

Croglan, colonel George, his account of

the discovery of the bones of large ex-
tint; species of animals in North Ame-
rica i. 454.

Crusades to the Holy Land, the great po-

litical advantages derived fiom, by the
European nations, i. 30.

Crufdo, hulls of, publiffied regularly eve-

ry two years in tie Spanith colonies,
ii. 40. Prices of, and amount of the
fale'at the last publication, o58.

Cuba, the island of, discovered by Chris-

tophcr Columbus, i. 95. Is failed round
by Ocampo, 18S. Tlhe conquest of, un-
dertaken by Diego Vrlaf(iucz, 96. Criurl
treaitmint of t!c caziiluc Hatuey, and
his repartee to a friar, 197. Colum-
bus's enthifi:iftic description of a har-
bour in, 431. T'he tobacco produced
there tie finell in all America, ii. 393.

Cubagua, a pearl fiihery eftablilfhed tlhire

i. 190.

Cumana, the natives of, revenge their ill

treatment by the Spaniards, i. 233. The
country desolated by Diego Ocampo,
235.

Cuzeo, the capital of the Peruvian em-

pire, founded by Manco Capac, ii.
164. Is seized by Pizarro, iSS. Is
besieged by the Peruvians, 198. Is
furprfed by Alniagro, 201. Is recover-
ed and pillaged by the Pizarros, 207.
Was the only city in all Peru, 322.

D
Dancing, the love of, a favourite paflion

among the Americans, i. 393.

Darian, the isthmus of, deferihed, i. 20l.

The increase of fttlement there ob-
truded by the noxiousness of the cli-
mate, ii. 338.

De Solis, his unfortunate expedition up the

river Plata, i. 212.

De Saois, Antonio, characer of his His-

toria, de la Conquifta de Mexico, ij.
439-

D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his

vigorous measures for restraining the ex-
cesses of the regular clergy there, ii.
382. Rendered ineffectual, 383.
Diaz, Bartholomew, difcoveis the Cape of

Good Hope, i. 55:

Dificoveries, the difference between those

made by land, and those by ea, fated,
i. 425.

Dodoaell, his objedion to the Periplus of

Hanno exploded, i. 421.

Domingo, St. on the iand of Hifpaiola,

founded by Bartholomew Columbus, i.
139.

Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publicly re-

monftrate against the cruel treatment of
the Indians, i. 215. See Lis Cajas.

Dirunkeiij', strong propensity of the Ame-
ricans to indulge in, i. 396.

E

Enrtl, tlhe globe, of, how divided into

zones by the ancients, i. z2.

Eg.pf'iis, antient, flatc of commerce . nd
navigation amng them, i. 5.

El

,I Dorado, wonderful reports of a country

jo cailcd, nlude by iiancs Utill.ra, ii.
215
E/jeiant, that animal peculiar to the torrid

zone, i.455.
Ef!t1n;aua Ildians, refrinblances bern een

tlene and tiieir ne.gliLouis the Green-
landers, i. 27 . Sonic account l, 362,
4S3.
fl:gie IV. pope, grants to the Port:-
gutfe an exiufive rglit to all te coun-
trlis alcy tlou!d dover, iorn Cape
Non to Ie .orntlntct ot Indla, i. 49.

,iopec, o alieted by the dilmcnber.

ntnt o0 tle Roman eipire by the bar-
barous nations, i. 2 5 Revval of com-
InerLC and navigation in, 28. 'ol.tical
advantages derived from the crusades, 30.

Ferdirand king of C.ftile. See Cmrlus

and /fil ea. Turns his attention at
length to the regulation of American as-
fairs, i. S4. Don Dego de Columbus
sues out his father's clams against him,
138. Ereds two governments on the
continent of America, 192. Sends a
fleet to Darien, and supersedes Balboa,
207. Appoints Balboa lieuteinat-go-
vwrnor ot the countries on the aouth Sea,
210. Sends Dias de bolis to discover a
western pafiage to t e Mioiuccas, 212.
Thwarts the meallfres of Diego Colum.
bus, 213. His decrwe concerning the
tieatment ol the Indians, 216.
Fentrtidez, Don Diego, characer of his

Hiftor.a del Peru, ii. 458.

Fernandez, P. his decfription of the politi-

cal state of the Chiquitos, i. 475.
Fiegeroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief

judge of Hilpaniola, with a commitrion
to examine into the treatment of the In-
dian natives, i. 225. Makes an expen-
ment to determine the capacity of the
Indian, 234.

Flor'da diltoveed by Juan Ponce de Leon,

i. 197. 'he clirl's thire hereditary,
341. Account of, f'om Alvar Nugncz
Caheca de Vaca, i. 470.

FlIta, .Spaifli, some account of, ii. 401.
foilca, hilhop of B:jados, miniiler for

Indian aflairs, oblru.ts the plans of
colonization and discovery sorned by
Columbus, i. 128, 13 . Patronizes
tlit expedition of Alonzo d Ojeda,
148,

G.

Galcons, Spanish, the nature and purpose

o0 title (l;tist, ii. 401. Airangcment
ot tiii.r oj .c, 4t:2.

G,,;i2., on jipl, sent to difcoverthe

tlue tatc of Cliloiia, ii. 330.

Gnma, 'aico ('c, his vo;aagc tor discovery,

i. 144 LouLIt the Cnpe of Good
Hope, 145. Ancliorb belore the city of
Mclinda, ibid. Aivcs at Calcut in Ma-
labr-, j46.

Gamin, itiange propcnfity of the Ameri-

cans to, 1. 395.

Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as

to tme politon of that rivei, i. 424.

Calca, Pedio ic la, f t to Peru as prefi-

dent o the couit of Auder.cc in La,
ii. .6. His charadclr and moderation,
247. 'The powers e was vested with,
248. Arrives at Panama, 249. Ac-
quires pofiifion of Panama with the
fleet and oices there, i5. Advances
towaids Cusco, 225. Pizarro's troopt
desert to him, 256. His moderate use
of the vicory, 257. Devises employ-
ment for hs ibldiers, 261. His d,vi-
sion ot the country among his followers,
262. Restores rder and government,
263. His recepton at his return to
Spain, 264.

CG,.'ims, inflance of his ignorance in geo-

graphy, i. 426.

Geog:-rapyi, the knowledge of, extremely

confined among the ancients, i. z2. Be-
came a favourite Itudy among the Arabi-
ans, 27.

Giantr, the accounts of, in our early tra-

ve3ers, unconfirmed by recent difcove-
rics, i. 5, 4t3.

Girn,, 'iavio, tie inventor of the mariner's

co,ipafs, i. 36.

C,obe, its divilion into zones by the an-

cients, i. 22.

Goli, why tlh firit metal with whici man

was acqulainted, i. 334. Eitraordinary
large gra.n of, found in tile mines of Ci-
nall:s, 490.
Gomara, charater of his Clronica de la

Nueva Efpagna, ii. 438.

Good Hooe, cape of, discovered by Bartho-

loniew Diaz, i. 55.

Govclrn ent, no visible form of, among the

native Aericans, i. 340. Lxceptiolns
343.

Gran Chaco, account of the method of mak-

ing war, among the natives of, fiom Lo-
zano, i. 476.

Granadat

Granada, new kingdom of, in America,

by whom reduced to the Spanish domi-
nion, ii. 341. Its climate and produce,
342. A viceroy lately established there,
355.

Grceks, ancient, progrcfs of navigation and

difcovcry among them, i. ia. Their
commercial intercourse with other nati-
ons very limited, 13.

Grleenland, its vicinity to North America,

i. 278.

Gri/aliva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba

on a voyage of discovery, i. 240. Dif-
covers and gives name to New Spain,
241. His reasons for not planting a
colony in his ewly discovered lands,
243.

Guarlda Coflas, employed by Spain to check

illicit trade in the American colonies, ii.
409.

Guatinala, the indigo there superior to any

in America, ii. 393.

fuatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of

Montezuma, succeeds Quetlavaca in the
kingdom of Mexico, ii. 107. Repulses
the attacks of the Spaniards in florming
the city of Mexico, I8. Is taken pri-
soner by Cortes, 124. Is tortured to
discover his treasure, 126. Is hanged,
138.

Guinia, Dutch, cause of the excessive ser-
tility of he oiil there, i. 457.

H.

anno, his Periplus defended, with an ac.
count of his voyage, i. 421.
latumy, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treat-
menr, and memorable repartee to a Fran-
cifcan friar, i. 197.

Jlauokt''wrth'/s voyages, account of New
· Holland, and tile inhabitants fiom, i.

472.

Heat, the different degrees of, in the old

and new continents accounted for, i.
448. Iiftimated, 456.

Inly, prince of Poltugal, hi5 cllaractr

.md studics, i. 42. Expeditions sorned
by Iis orlc:', 44. Apilies for a papal
grant of his new difcovcrics, 48. His
dtath, 50.

il,,rr.ln, Jian de, alffinates Francis Pi-

zarro, ii. 219. Dies, 223.

lJLr ..ia tile bell hiltorian oi tle conquest

ot New Spain, ii. 440. His account of
Ortllana's voyage, 467.

Hfa,irpla, the island of, discovered hy

Chrftopher Columbus, i. 96. His trali-
fations with the natives, 97. A Colony
left there by Columbus, 103. The Cu.
Iony destroyed, 15. Columbus builds
a city called Ilabella, 117. The natives
ill-uded, and begin to be alarmed, 124
Are defeated by the Spaniards, 127.
Tribute exa&ed from them, 128. 'hey
fchenle to starve the Spaniards, 9. St.
Domingo founded by Bartholomew Co-
lumbusi 19. Columbus sent home in
irons, by Bovadilla, 55. Nicholas dc
Ovando appointed governor, 1 58. Sum-
mary view of the condu4 of the Spa.
niards towards the natives of, 179. Un-
happy fate of Anacoana, 1So. Crcat
produce from the mines there, 182.
The inhabitants diminish, 185. The
Spaniards recruit them by trepanning the
natives of the Lucayos, 186. Arrival oi
Don Diego de Columbus, 189. TLc
natives of, almost extirpated by slavery,
195, 214. Controversy concerning the
treatment of them, 215. Columbus's
account of the humane treatment he re-
ceived from the natives of, 432. Curious
instance of superstition in the Spanifi
planters there, 456.

Holurin, Pedro Alvarez, erects the royal

standard in Peru, in opposition to tilt
younger Anagro,' ii. 223. Vaca de
Castro arrives and aflumes the command,
ibid.
olmer, his account of the navigation of thl
ancient Greles, i. 12.
Ilonduras, the value of that counrry, owing

to its proiuct.ons of the logwood tree, ii.
331.
Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in

Spanillh America, ii. 394.

Iorfce , astonishment and mistakes of te

Mexicans at the first fight of thenL,
ii. 445. Expedient of the l'eruvians
to render them incapable of ation,
466.

lluaa Capac, Inca of Peru, his carafler

and family, ii. 66.

Ilriircar Capac, Inca of Peru, difpitcs Iis

brother Atahualpa's succession to (luito,
ii. 167. Is defeated and taken prilbnt
by Atahlalpa, ibid. Solicits tlle alifl-
ance of Pizarro against his brotlier, 169.
Is put to death by order of Ataliua:lllai
I78.

'lamIi,iJ

.

/,a:aica, discovered by Chriflopher Colum-
bus, i. 122.
7cron:c, St. three monks of that order

feot by Cardinal Ximenes to Hifpaui-
ola, to regulate the treatment of te
Indians, i. 22o. Their conduCt under
this commission, 222. Are recalled,
225.

7eoiits, acquire an absolute dominion over

Calilbrnia, ii. 329. Their motives for
depreciating the country, 330.
Jews, ancient slate of commerce and navi-

gation among them, i. 7.
Incas of Peru, received origin of their em-

pire, ii. 6, 306. Their empire found.
ed both in religion and policy, 307. See
Peru.

India, the motivesof Alexander the Great

in his expedition to, i. 15. The com-
merce with, how carried on in ancient
times, 19. And when arts began to
revive in Europe, 2. The first voy-
age made round the Cape of Good Hope,
145.

indians in Spaniih America. See Ameri-

can:.

Indies, Weftl why Columbus's discoveries

were so named, i. il l.

Innocent IV. pope, his extraordinary mif-

sion to the Prince of the Tartars, i.
32.

I:sjtiion, court of, when and by whom

first introduced into Portugal, i. 4z9.

In/Jes and reptiles, why so numerous and

noxious in America, i. 261.

Join 1. king of Purtugr.l, the first who

sent ships to explore the wevfern coasts of
Africa, i. 40. His son prince Henry en-
gages in these attempts, 42.

7ohn II. king of Portugal, patronises all

attempts towards discoveries, i. 5.
Sends an embassy to Abvllinia, 5s.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus,
69.

Iron, the reason why savage nations were

unacquainted with this mctll, i. ,4.

Ifabl/la, queen of Castile, is alphilc tto by

Juan Perez in eli:llf of ChriftopliLcr Co-
lumbus, i. 74. Is gain aplic(l to by
Quintanilla and Santangel, 77. I pre-
vailed on toequip linll, 78. DicE, 1-7
Fler real motive for encouraging is.o-
veries, i Alnlric: , ii. 3').
a;:,lla, the city ol, in l-Il,I.an'ola, bu;lt
by Christopher Colulnbus, i. 7.

Ital,, the first country in Europe wliere

civilization and arts revived after the
overthrow of tile Roman empire, i. z2.
The commercial fpiii of, ative and en-
terprifing.

L.

Ladrone inds, dife6vered by Ferdinand

Magellan, ii. 31.

Lakes, amazing size of those in North Ame-

rica, i. 250.

Las Cafasi Barthblomew, returns fiom His-

paniola to solicit the cause of the en-
slaved Indians at the court of Spain, i.
219. Is sent back with powers by Car:-
dinal Ximenes, zzo. Returns difratis-
fled, 223. Procures a new commifflon
to be sent over on this subjet, 25.
Recommends the fcieme of fupplyinS
the colonies with lnegroes, 226. Un-
dertakes a new colony, 22S. 'His cbn-
ference with the biflop of Darien be-
fore tlie Emperor Charles V. 30o. Goes
to America to carry his sc!hemes into
execution, 222. Circumstances unfa-
vourable to him, 34. His final mi'-
carriage, 235. Revives his reprefenta-
tions in favour of the Indians, at the
dreire of the emperor, ii. 227. Con-
poses a treatise on the delrution of Ame-
rica, 28.

Leon, Pedro Cieza de, chara6ter of his

Chronica del Peru, ii. 458.

Ley, hlit description of the courage and fe-

rocity of the Toupinamhos, i. 477.

J1;m.; the city of, in Pleru, founded by Pi-

zarro, ii. 194.

LogUwood, the commodity that gives im-

portance to the provinces of Honduras
and Yucatan, ii. 331. Policy of the
Spaniards to defeat the Enlihll trade ii,
n32.

Lo:ai, St. king of France, his embassy to

the chan of the Tartars, i. 32.

Lc:Jano, Ili. account of the method of mak-

ing war among the natives of Gran Clia-
co, i. 476.

Lui,'-, lernando de, a priest, afociates

with PI'i:arro ill is P'eruvian expedition,
ii. 10o.

M.

AM,' ir'ra, the ;n.dln of, filft d;f>:overcd, i.
4S.

Madcr, prince of Nbrth Wales, fory of his

voyage and difcoveiy of Noith America
examined i. 436.

Magellan, Ferdinand, his account of the

gigantic size of the Paragon;ans, i. 303.
The cxiftence of this gigantc race yet
to be dec:ded, 305. 465. His intro-
duction to the court ot Cfl.le, ii. i2S.
Is equipped with a fquadran t a voyage
of discovery, 129. S:ilsthlough the ia-
mous tirait that bears lis name, 130.
Discovers the Ladrone and Philippine
illands, 131. Is killed, ib:d.

Mrgnet, its property of atra.ftng iron

known to the ancients, but not its po-
larinclination, i. 4. Extraordinary ad-
vantages resulting from this discovery,
35.

Malo St. account of its commerce with Spa.

nifh America, ii. 407.

Manro Capac, founder of the Peruvian em-

pire, account of; ii. 164. 306.

Mandeville, Sir John, his eaflern travels,

with a charaer of his .vritings, i. 34.

Manilla, the colony of, eftablifled by Phi-

lip 1I. of Spain, ii. 426. Trade be-
tween it and South America, 47.

Mankind, their difpoftion and manners

formed by their ituation, i. z67. Hence
resemblances to be traced in very distant
places without communication, 68S.
Have uniformly attained the greatest per-
feltion of their nature in temperate re-
gions, 415.

Marco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordi-

nary travels in the East, i. 33.

Marefl Gahliel, his account of the country

between the Illinois and Machillimaki-
nac, i. 471.

Mariana, Donna, a Mexican slave, her

hilalry, ii. It.

Manrinus Tyrius, his erroheous position of

China, i. 430.
iaryr, Peter, his sentiments on the first

discovery of Americai i. 439.

M7fizos, in the Spanifl American colonies,

diflintion between thein and Mulat-
toes, ii. 16g.

Mtals, uful, te original nativesof Amc-

rica totally ulcquainted with, i. 334.

M.rikans, their accolint of their own ori-

gin, compared with later difcbvcrics, i.
2Ro. Descriptions of their historical
piitur.es, 480. V;i;culs ex:aggerated ac-
counts of the numlbel of h luman vislins
.sacrificed by them, 45 ; .lheilr lan-
gnage furiililed with rc(fpcaful tcrminia
tion lr, all ilts wod, ii. 471. ow

E X.

they contributed to the support of go.
vernment, 472.
allcico, arrival of Ferdinand Cortes on t!;e
coast of, ii. i. His interview w;t!i to
Mexican officers, 13. Information ftnt
to . ontezuma, with some panilh pre.
sents, 15. lMntezuma fends presents
to Cortes) with orders not to apiplcjia!
his capital, 6. State of thle c ii- at
that time, 17. 'lhe Zempoallans ;oa'
the friendlhip of Coites, 28. S-vi al
caziques enter into alliance with Co:tii,
30. Character of the natives of rinf.
cala, 36. Tile Tlafc:ilans reduced to
sue sot peace, 4. Arrival of Corte; at
the cap:tal city, 51. The city drfcrbh.ri,
5. Mnintczuna acknowledges himfr'f
a vaffai to tih Sapatinll crown, 66. A.
mort of the tteafucr colleatd hy Co'-
tes, 6. Re.;fons of gold being so'-n:
in such final quantities, 63. The Mex-
icans enraged by the imprudent zeal of
Cortes, 7d0 Attack Alvarado during the
absence of Cortes, 84. Their refoic!e
attack on Cortes when he returned, 7.
Death of Montezuma, 90. The city
abandoned by Coltes, 93. Battle tl
Otumba, 9. The Tepeacnns reduced,
o10. Preparations of the Mexicans a:
gainft the return of Cortes, 105. Co:.
tes besieges the c;ty with a fleet on lti,
lake, 15. The Spaniards repulsed in
florming the city, i18. Gdtitimoz n
taken prisoner, 124. Cortes appo,nttd
governor, 135. His fchenes and a.
rangements, 136. Inhuman treattccrt
of tile natives, 137. Reception of ti:e
new regulations there, 231. A rctro-
spec into he forti of government, po-
licy, and arts in, 267. Our information
concerning, very imperffcd, 273. Or-
gin of the monarchy, 271. Number
and greatness of the cities, 275 Me-
chhnical pdfeltions there diftinguillhd
fiom each other , 76. Diitinclion ol
ranks, 277. Political infiltutiont, 79.
Power and splendor of their nionaiche,
282. Order of government, ii.t. IP'
vision for the fuppoit of it, 233. I'o.
lice of, ibid. T'reir arts, 84. Thlr.r
paintings, 286. Their methodl of cm-
puitilgtime, T

. T heirw wrs contillul

and ferocious, ibid. Their fulrc.a lit,
292. Imnplccltion of tllir al i;iliumi
ibid. Doubts conlcerninr tilhe cxtcrt
the empire, 93. Littl intercolUils a
mong its fevelil provinces, 94. I'lr
ralee of money, 295. Stat of tliir

Cittll

cities, a96. Temples and other public
buildings, 297. Religion of, 302. Cau-
fes of the depopulation of this country,
346. Tile small-pox very fatal there,
348. Number of Indian natives re-
maining there, 351. Lift and character
of those authors who wrote accounts of
the onqueft of, 438. Description of
the aqueduct for the supply of the capital
city, 473. See Colonies.

.:ch/ael, St. the gulph of, in the South

Sea, discovered and named by Balboa,
i. 204. The colony of, eltablihed by
Pizarro, ii. 163.

Migrations of mankind, why firfi made by

land, I. i.

Mind, human, the effortsof, proportioned

to the wants of the body, i. 314.

Mines of South America, the great induce-

ment to population, ii. 327. Some ac-
count of, 3S7. Their produce, 389.
The spirit with which they are worked,
39o. Fatal effecs of this ardor, 391.
Evidence of the pernicious effects of la-
bouringinthem, 495. Of Mexico, total
produce of to the Spanish revenue, 509.
50i.

Molucca Islands, the Spanish claims on,

fold by the Emperor Charles V. to the
Portuguese, ii. 133.

Monaflic inltitutions, the pernicious effects

of, in the Spaniih American colonies, ii.
378. Number of convents there, 497.

Monoons, the periodical couife of, when

discovered by navigators, i. 19.

Monteio, a Dominican preacher at St.

Domingo publicly remonstrates against
the cruel treatment of the Indians, i.

215. Montezuma, the first intelligence received
by the Spaniards of this prince, i. 242.
Receives intelligence of the arrival of
Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 15.
His prelents to Cortes, 16. So bids him
to approach his capital, 7. State of his
empire at this time, iid. His cla, ac-
ter, 18. His perplexity at the arrival of
the Spaniards, 19. His timid negocia-
tions with Cortes, 20. His fclhere for
dectroying Cortes at Clolula dfcovs:rcdl,
47. His irrelolute conclut, o. is
si t interview with Cortes, si. Is
seizcd by Cortes and confined to the Spa-
ninfquarters, 60. Is fcttclel, 62. Ac-
knowledget limnfelf a vflnil to the Spa-
nifl crown, 66. RImlais inflexible
with regard to rligion, 70, Cun-

stances of his death, 9o. Account of
gold cup of his, in England, 473.

Mulattoes, in the Spanith American colo-

nies explanation of this diflinction, iio
368.

N.

Narveaes, Pamphilo, is sent by Velasquez

with an armament to Mexico, to super-
fede Cortes, ii. 74. Takes possession of
Zempoalla, 79. Is defeated and taken
prifiner by Cortes, 8z. How he carried
on his correspondence with Montczuma,
450.

Natchez, an American nation, their politi-

cal inflitutions, i. 334. Causes of their
tame submission to the Spaniards, 348.
Their religious dorines, 35.

Naavigatio, the arts of, very slowly improv-

ed by mankind, i. z. The knowledge of,
prior to commercial intercourse, ibid.
]mperfeeions of among the ancients, 4.
More improved by the invention of the
marine, 's compass, than by all the efforts
of preceding ages, 35. The first naval
discoveries undertaken by Portugal, 40.

Nigroes, their peculiar situation under the

SpaniLh dominion in America, ii. 369.

Newjfund(land, its situation described, i.

448.

Nec- HIolland, ome account of the country

and inhabitants, i. 472.

New Spain, discovered and named by Juan

de Grijalva, i. 241. See Mexico.

Vigno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i.

150.

Norwegians, might in ancient times have

migrated to, and colonized America, i.
z79. 438.

Nugncz Vcla, Blasco, appointed viceroy of

Pern, to enforce the new regulations, ii.
231. Hi clharad3er, 234. Commits
Vaca de Caltro to prison, 35. Difcn-
sions between him and the court of au-
dience, 237. Is confined, z23. Reco-
vFrs his liberty, z39. Refumrs his com-
mand, z2o. Is puifued by Gonzalo Pi-
zarro, 241 Is defeated and killed by
Pizarro, 242.

0.

pram/ps, Diego, sent with a fliuaron from

1-lilpalliola to derfolate rhe Country of Cu-
m~ima, i. 233. 23j.

Oca,fo,

campo, Sebaflian de, first fails round Cuba;
and discovers it to be an island, i. 188.

Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the in-

tercourfe between distant countries con-
tinued long a formidible barrier, i. . See
Compass, and Navigation.

Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to

the Welt Indies; i. 148. His f:cond voy-
age, 159. Obtains a government on the
continent, 192.

Olmrda, Father Barth6lomew de, checks the

rash zeal of Cortes at Tlafcala in Me*ico,
ii. 45. Is sent by Cortes to negbciate with
Narvaez, 77

OrcIl,'na, Francis, is appointed to the com-

mand of a bark built by Conzalo Pizarro,
and deserts him, ii. 214. Sails down
the Maragnon, 215. Returns to Spain
with a report of wonderful difcverics,
ibid. Herrcra's account of his voyage,
467.

Orgognez, commands Almagro's party a-

gainft the Pizarros, and is defeated and
killed by them, ii. o6.

Orircco, the great river of, discovered by

Christopher Columbus, i. 138. The
amazing plenty of fi(h in, 469. Strange
method of chuling a captain, among the
Indian tribes on the banks of, i. 363.

Otaleite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the

artof boiling water, i. 4S3.

Otiumba, battle of, between Cortes and the

Mexicans, ii. 97.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is ent governor to

Hispaniola, i. 159. His prudent regula-
tions, 1 6x. Retuses admission to Colum-
bus, on his fourth voyage, 164. His un-
generous behaviour to Columbus on his
shipwreck, 169, 171. Receives him at
length and fends him home, 173. En-
gages in a war with the Indians, 178.
His cruel treatment of them, 189. En-
courages cultivation and manulactures,
183. His method of trepanning the na-
tives of the Lucayos, 186. Is recalled,
189.

P.

Parjfc Ocean, why and by whom to named,

ii. 131.

Packet boats, first eftahlifliment of, between

Spain and her American cololles, ii. 4 5.

Panama, is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i.

212.

Psrmreidies, the first who divided the earth
by zones, i. 427.

Patatgjians, ome account of, i. 33. The

reality of their gigantic size yet to be de-
cided, 305. 463.

Pedrarias Davila, is ent with a fleet to fiu

perfede Balboa in his government of banta
Maria on the isthmus of Darien, i. 207.
Treats Balboa ill, o20 Rapacious con-
deti of his men, 209. Is reconcled to
Balboa, and gives him his daglter, nco.
Puts Bal.da to deathj 211. Removts his
settlement from Santa Maria to Panama,
212.

Penfguin, the nnme of that bird not derived

from the Wtlch language; i. 437.

Peres, Juan, patronises Columbus at the

c6urt of Castile, i. 74. His solemn invo-
cation for the success of Columbus's voy-
age; 82.

Periplus, of Hanno; the authenticity of that

work juft;fied; i. 42z.

Peru, the first intelligence concerning this

country received by Vafc6 Nugnez de
Balboa, i. 200, 205. The coast of, firlf
discovered by l'zarro; ii. 156. Pizarro's
second arrival, 6i. His hostile proceed.
ings against the natives, 16z. Thecolony
of St. Michael established, 63. State of
the empire at the time of this invasion
ibid. The kingdom divided between Hu.
afcar and Atahualpa, 167. Atahualpa
usurps tle government, 168. Hualcar
solicits affiflance from Pizarro, 169.
Atahualpa visits Pizarro, 173. Is sizcd
by Pizarro, 175. Agreement for his rn-
fom, 177. Is refused hisliberty, iSo.
Is cruelly put to death, 185. Confusion
of the empire on this event, 186. Quito
reduced by Benalcazar, 88S. The city
of Lima founded by Pizarro, 194. Chili
invaded by Almagro, 195. Infurrecion
of the Peruvians, 196. Almagro put to
death by Pizarro, zo9. Pizarro divides
the country among his followers, 211.
Progress of the Spanish arms there, 112.
Francis Pizarro affaflinated, 219. Re-
ception of the new regulations there, 232.
Thle viceroy confined by the court of
audience, 238. The viceroy defeated
and killed by Gonzalo I'izarro, 4z.
Arrival of Pedro do la Gafca, )49.
Redutrion and death of Gonzallo I'i-
zarno, 157. The civil wars there not
carried on with mercenary soldiers, 258.
But nevcrthelefs gratified ith inimenfe
rewards, z59. 'heir profufionand lux-
ury, ibid. Ferocity of their contclls,
260. Their want of faith, ibid. In-
Eanccs, 61. Division of by Gafca a-

nioln

among his followers, 262. A retrofpea
into the original goverrment, arts, and
manners of the natives, 267. The high
antiquity they pretend to, 303. Their
records, 304. Origin of their civil po-
licy, 306. This founded in religion,
307. The authority of the Incas abfo-
lute and unlimited, ibid. All crimes there
punifled capitally, 30S. Mild genius
of their religion, 309. Its influence on
their civil policy, 310. And on their
mili:ary system, 311. Peculiar slate of
property there, 312. Diflinlion of ranks,
313 State of alts, 314. Improved
state oi anriculturc, i/id. I'ieir build-
ings, 316. Tihir public roads, 317.
Thlii bridges, 3 r. Thtei: mode of re-
fining silver ore, 320. Works of ele-
gance, 3. iheir ciliation, never-
the!'fs, hut imperfeCt) 322. Cuzco tle
only place tlat had the appnca"ance ot a
city, iid. No prfet fpi: .tion ol po-
fefTons, 33. Little comnmecial i :rr-
course, ili. TIi ir unwJal:i;e spit,
324. Eat their flcih and fish raw, 3 5.
Brief account ofothcr prov:nce:, un ler tile
viceroy of Ne' Sirn, 326. Causes of
the depopulation of this country, 347.
The fniall pox very fia;l there, 343.
Writers who gave accounts of the con-
queff of, 457. Their method of build-
ing, 4Sr. State of the revenue derived
from, by the crown of Spain, 509.
See Colonies.

peter I. czar of Russia, his extensive views

in prosecuting Asiatic discoveries, i. 273.

Phenicians, antient, fate of commerce and

navigation among them, i. 6. Their
Trade how condu&ed, 421.

Philip II. of Spain, his turbulent difpo-

fition aided by his Amcrican treasures,'
ii. 396. Eflablifles the colony of Ma-
nilla, 426.

Philip III. exhaufls his country by incon-

fiderate bigotry, ii. 396.
Philippine islands, discovercd by Ferdinand

Mlagellan, ii. 131. A colony eftablifled
there by Philip 11. of Spain, 426. Trade
between, and America, 427.

.Physic, the art of, in America, why con-

nected with divilation, i. 390.

Pinto, chevalicr, his description of the

charaacriflic features of the native Ame-
ricans, i. 460.

Pi,on, Vincent Yancz, commands a vef-

fcl under Columbus in his first voyage
of discovery, i. 81. Sails to America
on a private adventure with four fihips,
10o. Discovers Yucatan, 188.
VOL. 11.

Pizarrc, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuzca

by the Peruvians, ii. g98. Is surprised
there by Almagro, 20o. Escapes with
Alvarado, 203. Defends his brother at
the court of Spain, z o. Is committed
to prison, 211.

Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in

his settlement on the isthmus of Da-
rien, i. 194. Marches under him across
the isthmus, where they discover the
South Sea, 204. His birth, education,
and character, ii. 4S. Associates with
Almagro and De Luque, in a voyage of
discovery, 15o. His ill success, 151.
Is ccalltd, and deserted by most of his
followers, 54. Remains on the island
of Gorgona for supplies, ibid. Uiifeovers
the coast of Peru, 156. Returns to
Panama, 157. Goes to Spain to solicit
reiiforcenments, 158. Procures the fu-
p-enle command for himself, 159. Is
afifled \ijth money by Cortes, ibid.
L:lids a ain in Peru, 161. His hoflile
pio-e!,ngs againfl the natives, 16z.
Eilablifles the colony of St. Michael,
163. State of the Peruvian emple at
this time, :bid. Cause of his easy pene-
tration into the country, 68. Is ap-
plied to by Huafcar, for afiftance against
his victorious brother Atahualpa, 169.
State of hii forces, ibid. Arrives at
Caxamalca, 171. Is visited by the Inca,
173 His perfidious seizure of him, 175.
Agrees to Atahualpa's offer for his ran-
fom, 177. Diviiion of their plunder,
179 Refuses Atahualpa his liberty, 18o.
His ignorance cxpofed to Atahualpa, 183.
Bellows a form of trial on the Inca, 184.
Puts him to death, aS5. Advances to
Cuzco, 1S7. Honours conferred on him
by the Spanifli court, 91. Beginning
of dilfenfions between hin ant Almna;ro,
192. Hiscivil regulatiols, 193. Founds
the city of Lima, 194. Infurreiflon of
the Peruvians, 196. Cuzco fcied by
Almagro, 201. Deludes Almagro by ne-
gociations, 203. Defeats Almagro, and
takes him prisoner, 206. Put Almagro
to death, 209. Divides tle country
among his Ibllowers, 211. The impolitic
partiality of his allotments, ilii. Makes
his brother GConzalo governor of Quito,
213. Is afrliflinatcd y Juan de lHerrada,
219.

Pizario, Gonzalo, is made governor of

Quito, by his )brother Francis, ii. 213.
His expedition over the Andes, id.
Is deserted by Orellana, 114. I-is dif-
trefs on this event, 216. His difaf-

trous
N n

'trous return to Quito, 17. Is encou-
faged by the people to oppose Nugnez
Vela, tie new viceroy, 236. Assumes
the government of Peru, 238. March-
es against the viceroy, 240. Defeats
anc kills him, 242. Is advised hy Car-
vajnl to assume the sovereignty of the
country, 243. Chufes to negociate
vith the court of Spainj 244. Con-
fultations of tie court on his conduct)
245. His violent resolutions on the
arrivalof Pedro de la Gafca, 50. Re-
solves to oppose him by violence, 25i.
Marches to reduce Centeno at Cuzco,
353. Defeats him, 254, Is delerted
by his troops on the approach of Gafic,
256. Surrenders and is executed, 257.
His adherents men of no principle,
261.

Plata, Rio de, discovered by Diaz de Solis,

i. z13. Its amazing width, 447.

Pliny, the naturalif, instance of his igno-

rance in geography, i. 427.
Ponce de Lcon, Juan, discovers Florida, i.

197. Romantic motive of his voyage,
198. Population of the earthi flow progress of,

i. I.
Porto Bello, discovered and named by Chris-

topher Colunihus, i. 166.
.Porto Rico, is ifttled and fubjelecd by Juan

Ponce de Leon, i. 87.

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i.

44. Psrtugal, when and by whom the court of
inquisition was first introduced into, i.
429. Porigtigue/, a view of the circumstances

that induced them to undertake the
discovery of unknown countries, i. 39.
41. First African discoveries of, 4.
Mtadeila discovered, 45. They dou-
ble Cape Bojador, 46. Obtain a p.a-
pal grant of all the countries they hould
discover, 49. Cape Verd iands aind
tlhe A7oLS discovered, 50. Voy;ge
to tle Ealt ndicb bIy Valfco dlc Caina,
'45.

'.Pctl/i the ich ilver mincs there, how

difcoveted, ii. 388. 'hle mines of,
greatly e c:;iauftid and frcely woltlh
working, 501.

3'-iifmonrrs ol war, how treated Iy the na-

tive AmieriiC.ti, i. 357.

P'o/r.ct', the iea l, unknown to the

native Amnic:;cins, i. 137. Notions of
the lir'aflia7is concernilig, 473.

I'rorflor of the Inldians, in Spanill Amc.
rica, his unclion, ii. 374.

Ptolemy the plilofopher, his ge6grahlli.

cal description more ample and ex.ilt
than thiofe of his predecelfors, i. 24.
His geography translated 'by the Ara-
biasls 27. His erroneous position of
the Ganges, 424.

.ctiLvar,1, brother of Montezuma, fuc-

cecds him as king of Mexico, ii. o.
ConduCts in person the fierce attaclk
which obliges Cortes to abandon his
capital, o15. Dies of the Imall pox,
106.
i.esvcdio, bishop of Darien, his confe-
rence with Las Casas on the treatmenr
of tile Indians, in the presence of the
emeror, Charles V. i. 230.
icjckiil'cr, the ploperty of the famous
mines of, Guanacabelica, reserved by
the crown of Spain, ii. 50o. 'iTe
price of, why reduced, ibid.

.Quiznquina, or Jesuits bark, a productioi

peculiar to Peru, ii. 393.
Zldpos, or hiitoric cords of tle Peruvians,

once account of, ii. 304.

Qirto, the kingdom of, conquered Iy

Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, ii. 166.
Is left to his son Atahualp, 67. Ata-
Ilualpa's general revolts after his death,
1S7. Is rduced by the Spaniards un-
der Benalcazar, 188. Benalcazar dc-
prived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made go-
vernorl, 13.

R.

Ramufio, his defence of Hanno's account

of tile coat of Africa, i. 422.

Rcgifrer hips, for what pur)poe introduced

in tile trade between Spain and her colo-
nies, ii. 410. Superfl'e the use of the
iraleonei, 411.

Reigion of the native Americans, an in-

q(uiy ito, i. 378.

Rilis,, his account of the political slate o0

thi lpople of Cinaloa, i. 474. 01 their
walnt of' rligion, 484.

Rio ,' I P/l'ata, and 'lucumal, account of

those l'rovinlce, ii. 335.

Rivers, tle iamazing lize of those in Ame-

rica, i. 249.

Ro/'bi/rn professor, his renlarks on the

tenl'icraturi' ol various clinmates, i. 448.

Riollln, Francis, is left chicljuftice i I-l-
palniolai, by Chriitopher Columbus, .

13.'

i;I. Becomes ringleader of a mutiny,
.40. Submits, 143.

Romans, their progress in navigation and

discovery, i. 17. Their military fpi-
rit averse to mechanical arts and com-
merce, 18. Navigation and trade fa-
voured in the provinces under their
government, 19. Their extensive dif-
coveries by land, 20. Their empire,
and the sciences, def'royed together, z5.
Rub-iuis, father, his embalfy from France

to the chan of the Tartars, i. 33.

Rijfians Asiatic discoveries made by them,
i. 273. Uncertainty of, 458.

S.

Sacutcias, the rich silver mines there, when

discovered, ii. 388.

.San Salvador, discovered and named by

Chrifiopher Columbus, i. 93.

Sainch, Don Pedro, account of his Hiflory

of the conquest of Peru, ii. 457.

Sandlvnl, the hocking barbarities executed
by, in Mexico, ii. 137.

Francisco Tello de, is sent by the

emperor Charles V. to Mexico, as vifi-
tador of Ameica, ii. 23 . His mode-
ration and prudence, ibid.

Savage life, a general etimate of, i. 402.
&Salps, a motive of the native Americans

for taking them from their enemies, i.
477.

,Scri/vo, marquis de, his extraordinary

gains during his vice-royalty in Anecrica,
ii. 513.

Scille, extraordinary increase of its ma-

nutaftines by the American trade, ii.
5oz. Its tiade greatly ieduccd, ibid.
The American trade removed to Cadiz,
401.

.Silver ore, method of refining it pradifed

by the native eruvians, ii. 320.

Snoaa, late dilcovriecs of rich mines made

there by the Spai;lr(ls, ii. 321.

Swl, Amciicanikk. i o tle immllortality of,

i. 37.

S:;,h Si',, first discovered by Vasco Nugnez

dce Balbho, i. 204.
/,ai,, general idea of the policy of, with
Irealld to tie Amlielca: n colonies, ii.
3 1a. IEaly intrcl]oliton of tile ire'al
alithority in the colonies, -.5 All
rli American domininions of, fliijctt.
ed to two vice-loys, 3 5. A tlirdl
vice-royalty l;ltly eitabllilh((l, 35 . 'Ti
colonies of, compaid)l wxA'ili liofe of

reece and 1oi1, 361. A vinlflats

Ihe iderived Ironl her coloni,, 391.
Why (lie does ot

(' till deriv tlh: Iiti'lr,

395. Rapid decline ofl rt:(d, 37.
''elis dcline inh.;ifLid by the mode of

regulating the intercourse with Ame-
rica, 400. Employs guarda costas to
check illicit trade, 409. The use of re-
gifter Ihips introduced, 40o. Eftablifi-
ment of the company of Caraccas, 413.
Enlargement of conmmercial ideas there,
414. Free trade permitted to eve-
ral provinces, 416. Revenue deived
from America, 429. Specification, 506.

Spaniards, their curious form of taking

possession of new discovered countries, i.
443.

Srabo, a citation from, proving the great

geographical ignorance of the ancients,
i. 424. His own want of geographical
knowledge, 427.

Supeilftiron, always connced with a desire

of penetrating into the fecrcts of futurity,
i. 389.

T.

'apia, Cliriftoval de, is fen' fiom Spiir
to Mexico, to supersede Cortes in hili
command, but fails in the attempt, .
134.

Tartars, the polfibility of their migrating

to America, i. 277.

TiajaJla, in Mexico, character of the na-

tives of, ii. 36. Oppose te passage of
the Spaniards, 37. Are reduced to sue
for peace, 42.

Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of

any in all America, ii. 393.

Toiipinatmlsbs, account of thcir ferocious cou-

rage from Lely, i. 477.

Trade, fice, opened between Spain and

her colonies, ii. 416. Incrcafe of the
Spanish customs from this mcafur,
506.

Trade, winds, the periodical courfc oft

whecn discovered by navigatols, i. 19

T'arJlle,-s, ancient, character of their writ-

ings, i. 35.

,Triiad, tle island of, digcove'rcd )by Clirif_

toplier Colunibus o Iis tid voyage, i.
137.

Tuciiai:, andt Rio dc la 'lian, accoiunit of

tliofe tIovincei, ii. 335.

Tyre, tlie comlimeice of tliat city lnow con.

duted, i. 421.

93'j'inh of S:iisll Amric.l, low applied
by the couit of Sp,.in, ii. 51o.

V.

I',a dc C/ri, Clii/,'v..;, iis fnt ii

Sp;iin to ;ul;le tlih eovrtiillllniit ot
1'rt, ii. .lr. .'ti'vs't;ll (iitu, 221.

AfJlfit ,;

l '; lul ) hillt:ne tl(l;lty, 2.22.

l)t,al., youn); Al:ii:!',> 2, . ' . eI .
Vcl i' of l.:i pIUiocLtiii,, 224. I'ie,

vel:tis

vents an infurreAion concerted to oppose
the new regulations, 234. Isimprifoned
by the new vicetoy, 235.

Yalverde, father Vincent, his curious ha-

rangue to Aahualpa, Inca of Peru, ii.
174. Gives his sanction to the trial and
condemnation of Atahualpa, S14.
rega, Garcilafo le la, character of his com-
mentary on the Spanifi writers concern-
ing Peru, ii. 459.

Vegetables, their natural tendency to ferti-

lize the foil where they grow, i. 264.
/e/lafjuea, Diego de, conquers the island
of Cuba, i. 196. 237. His prepara-
tions for invading New Spain, ii. .
His difficulty in chufing a commander
for the expedition, . Appoints Ser-
nando Cortes, 3. His motives to this
choice, 5. Becomes suspicious of Cor-
tes, 6. Orders Cortes to be deprived of
llis commission and arrested, 7. Sends
an arma.nent to Mvexico after Cortes,
7z.
'tcnegar, P. his character of the native Cali-

fornians, i. 467.

Venereal disease, originally brought fiom

America, i. 307. Appears to be wear-
ing out, 30. Its first rapid progress,
464.
7ionezuela, hifory of that settlement, ii.

340.
Vrenice, its origin as a maritime state, i. 30.

Travels of Marco Polo, 33.
7erd, islands, discovered by the Portuguese,

i. 50J

Ziceroys, all the Spanifl dominions in

America fubjedced to two, ii. 354.
A third lately established, 355. Their
powers, ibid. A fourth eftabliflied,
42 .

Y/ila, Segnor, his account of the state of

population in New Spain, ii. 489. His
derail of the Spanish American revenue,

509. 7/illcfrgsno, Antonio, one of Cortes's fol-
diers, foments a mutiny among his troops,
ii. 1lo. Is discovered by Cortes, and
hanged, 1il.

UI/a, Don Antonio de, his description of

the characcriflic features of the native
Americans, i. 46 460 461. His reason
for the Americans not being so fenfihle
of pain ns the refl of mankind, i. 479.
t-lis account of th goods exported from

Spain to America, wth the duty on
them, 516.

Volcanos, remarkable number of, in the

northern parts ot the globe discovered by
the Rufftans, i. 459.

W.

Waifer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar

race of diminutive Americans, i. ;oi.
Compared with similar productions in
Africa, 3'2.

War song of the native Americans, ti.c

sentiments and terms of, i. 478,

Women, the condition of, among the na-

tive Americans, i. 318. Are not pro.
lific, 321. Are not permitted to join
in their drunken feasts, 399. Nor
wear ornaments, 481.

X.

Xeres, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro,

the carlieft writer on his Peruvian expedi-
tionl, ii. 457.

Xiimenes, cardinal, his regulations for tile

treatment of tile Indians in the Spa-
nifh colonies, i. 220zo. Pationifes tile
attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii.
12S.

Y.

Yuicata:, the province of, discovered by

Pinzon and Diaz de Solis, i. S8. D)e-
fcribed, 446. From whence that pro-
vince derives its value, ii. 331. Policy
of tile court of Spain with refpedt to,
332.

Z.

Zararc, Don Augufline, charcti.r of lli1

Hillory of tle conquest of Peru, ii. 15q

Zoncs, the earth how divided into, Iby Illc

geography of the ancients, i. 2. Ily
whom first so divided, 427.

ZminaraZa, Juan d, firt bihllop of Mex-

ico, th dcf(Ioycr of all tie anLicint Ie-
cords of tile MexicaUl emlpire, ii. ,7-.
F I N I S.
