1/t

si Mjtz^

THE
H I S T 0 R Y

0 F
AM E R I C A.

V 0 L. III

I

THE
HISTORY

O F
AMERICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH1

AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLANDe

VOLUME THE THIRD.

D U B L I N:
Printed for MelTss. P R C E,WII E STONE, W.WATSOIN, COR COR AN,

R. CROSS, SLEATER, SHEPPARD, CHAMBERLAINE, POTTS,
J.HOEY, F TZSIMONS, WILLIAMS, E.LYNCH, S.WATSON,

WV. COLLES, W. WiLSON, MONCRIEFFE, WALKER,
EXSHAW. M. HAY, ARMITAGE, PORTER, HALL-

HEAD, T. STEWART, FLIN, FAULKNER, BUR-
N ET JEN I N, MILLS, BEATTY, SPOTS WOOD,
GILBERT, VALLANCE, P. WILSON, R.

STEWAR T, P. HOEY, WOG AN, E. CR OSS

MACELRATH, HIGLEY, WHITE,
KIDD, GRUEBeR, HILLARY,

M'KENLY, and MACEE.

M, DCC, LXXVII.

# BOOK VI.

THE
HI STORY

o F
AMERICA.

B 0 K VI.

F ROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- B O K
vered the great Southern Ocean, and received the VI.
firfi obscure hint concerning the opulent countries
with which it might open a communication, the Sche5s3for
wishes and schemes of every enterprising person in discovering
the colonies of Darien and Panama were turnedPer"
towards the wealth of those unknown regions. In
an age when the spirit of adventure was so ar-
duous and vigorous, that large fortunes were waft-
ed, and -the moftalarming dangers braved, in pur-
suit of discoveries merely possible, the faintest ray
of hope was followed with eager expectation, and
the slightest information was sufficient to inspire
such perfet confidence, as conduted men to the
most arduous undertakings a.

VOL. III. B ACCORDINGLY,

a See Note I.

B O OK AcCOR D I N GLY, several armaments were fitted

VI. out in order to explore and take possession of the
.' countries to the east of Panama, but under the
x523. nfuccefsful conduct of leaders whose talents and resources
for om were unequal to the attemptb. 'As their excursions

did not extend beyond the limits of the province
to which the Spaniards have given the name of
Tierra Firme, a mountainous region covered with
woods, thinly inhabited, and extremely unheal-
thy, they returned with dismal accounts concern-
ing the distresses to which they had been exposed,
and the unpromising aspet of. the places which
they had visited. Dahiped by these tidings, the
'rage for'difcove'ry in that diretion abated; 'drid'it
became the general opinion, that Balboa had
founded visionary hopes, on the tale of an igno-
rant Indian, ill understood, or calculated to de-
ceive.
Undertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama,

m, Piag , on whom the circumstances which deterred others
an'dLuque. made o little impression, that, at the very moment

1S24." when all confidered Balboa's expectations of disco-

vering a rich country, by fleering towards the east,
as chimerical, they resolved to attempt the execu-
tion of his scheme. The names of those extraor-
'dnary men were Francisco Pizarro, Diego de Al-
'magro, -and' Hernando Luque. Pizarro was the
natural son of a gentleman of an honourable fami-
ly by a very low woman, and, according to the
cruelfate which often attends the offspring of un-
lawful love, 'had been so totally neglected in lis
youth by the author of' his birth, that he seems to
have destined him never to rife beyond the conditi-
on ofhis mother. In consequence of this ungene-
rous idea, he set him, when bordering on manhood,

to
b Calaiicha!Corbnica, p. 0oo.

to keep hogs.But the aspiring mind of youngPizar- B 0 0 K
ro disdaining that ignoble occupation, he abruptly VI.
abandoned his charge, enlisted as a soldier, and after ''
serving some years in Italy, embarked for America, 1524.
which by: opening such a boundless range to ative
talents, allured every adventurer whose fortune was
not equal to his ambitious thoughts. There, Pizar-
ro early distinguished himself. With a temper of
mind no less daring than the constitution of his
body was robust, he was foremost in every danger,
patient under the greatest hardships, and unfub-
dued by any fatigue. Though so illiterate that he
could not even read, he was soon confidered as a
man formed to command. Every operation com-
mitted to his condut proved successful, as, by
a happy but rare conjuntion, he united perfeve-
rance with ardour, and was as cautious in execut-
ing, as he was bold in forming his plans. By en-
gaging early in active life, without -any resource
but his own talents and industry, and by depend-
ing on himself alone in his struggles to emerge
from obscurity, he acquired such a.thorough know-
ledge of affairs, and of men, that he was fitted
to assume a superior part in conduting the one,
and in. governing the other c.

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent

.as Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other..a
foundling. Bred like his companion, .in the camp,
he yielded not to him in any of the soldierly qua-
lities of intrepid valour, indefatigable-ativity,...r
insurmountable coniftancy in enduring .the hard-
lhips inseparable from military ferviee in the
New World. But in Almagro these virtues. were
accompanied with the .openness, generosity,

.B ..and

c Herrera; dec. i: & 2, paflim. dec. 4. lib. vi. c. o07. Goiara
Hit. c. 144. Zarate,: lib. iv. c..9.

B 0 0 K and candour natural to men whose profeflion is

VI. arms; inPizarro, they were united with the ad-
524. dress, the craft, and the diflimulation of a politi-

cian, with the art of concealing his own purposes,
and with sagacity to penetrate into those of other
men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclesiastic,

who aaed both as priest and schoolmaster at Pana-
ma, and, by means which the contemporary wri-
ters have not described, had amassed riches that
inspired him with thoughts of rising to greater
eminence.

Terms of SUCH were the men deffined to overturn one
their affoci.
ation. of the most extensive empires on the face of the

earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was
authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Pa-
nama. Each engaged to employ his whole for-
tune in the adventure. Pizarro, the least wealthy
of the three, as he could not throw so large a fum
as his afibciates into the common fock, engaged
to take the department of greatest fatigue and
danger, and to command in person the armament
which was to go firt upon discovery. Almagro
offered to conduct the supplies of provisions and
reinforcements of troops, of which Pizarro might
stand in need. Luque was to remain at Panama
to negociate with the governor, and superintend
whatever was carrying on for the general interest.
As the spirit of enthusiasm uniformly accompani-
ed that of adventure in the New World, and by
that strange union both acquired an increase of
force, this confederacy, formed by ambition and
avarice, was confirmed by the most solemn at of
religion. Luque celebrated mass, divided a con-
fecrated host into three, and reserving one part to
himself, gave the other two to his associates, of
which they partook; and thus, in name of the

Prince

Prince of Peace, ratified a contract of which plun- B o K
der and bloodihed were the objects d. V1.

THE attempt was begun with a force morefuit- 524.

ed to the humble condition of the three adventur- Their firt
ers, than to the greatness of the enterprise in which attempt,
they were engaged. Pizarro set fail from Panama Nov. 14.
with a ingle vessel, of small burden, and an hun-
dred and twelve men. But in that age, so little
were the Spaniards acquainted with the peculiarities
of climate in America, that the time which Pizar-
ro chose for his departure was the most improper in
the whole year; the periodical winds, which were
then set in, being directly adverse to the course
which he purposed to fteere. After beating about
for seventy days, with much danger and incessant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east 1525.
was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at fe-
veral places on the coast of Tierra Firme, but
found every where the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had described; the low
grounds converted into swamps by the overflow-
ing of rivers; the higher covered with impervious
woods; few inhabitants and those fierce and hof-
tile. Famine, fatigue, frequent rencounters with'
the natives, and above all, the diffempers of a
moist, sultry climate, combined in wafting his flen-
der band of followers. The undaunted resolution attended
of their leader continued, however, for some time, withlittle
to sustain their spirits, although no sign had yet ap-
peared of discovering those golden regions to
which he had promised to conduct them. At
length, he was obliged to abandon that inhofpi-

table

d Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 13. Zarate, lib. i. c. .
e Herrera, dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 8. Xerez .
p. 79

WO 0 table coast, and retire to Chuchama, opposite to

V the pearl islands, where he hoped to receive a sup-

ply of provisions and troops from Panama.

Bu T Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, flood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his as-
fociate. Not finding him there, he landed'his fol-
diers, who, in searching for their companions, un-
derwent the fame distresses, and were exposed to
the fame dangers, which had driven them out of
the country. Repulsed at length by the Indians
in a sharp conflict, in which their leader loft one of
his eyes by the wound of an arrow, they like--
wife were compelled to reimbark. Chance led
them to the place of Pizarro's retreat, where they
found some consolation in recounting their adven-
tures, and comparing their sufferings. As Alma-
June 24. gro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan, in

the province of Popayan, where both the country
and inhabitants appeared vith a more promising
aspet, that dawn of better fortune was sufficient
to determine such fangine projecors not to aban-
don their scheme, notwithstanding all that they
had suffered in persecuting it .

They re- ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of
undertak- recruiting their Ihattered troops. But what he and
ing. Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen such

an unfavourable idea of the service, that it was
with difficulty he could levy fourscore meng.
Feeble as this reinforcement was, they did not he-
'fitate about resuming theiroperations. After a long
series of difalters and difappolntments, not infe-
rior to those which they had already experienced,
part of the armament reached the Bay of St.

Matthew,

f Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. , 12. See NOTE II.
g Zarate, lib. i. c. i.

Matthew on the coaft.of Quito, and landing at BD C,
Tacamez, to the.foutliof tieriver'of.;Emeraulds, Vi
they beheld a countryi more champaign and fertile -,2
than any they had yet discovered in the Southern .
Ocean'; the natives clad int garments of woolien or'
cotton stuff, and :adiorned with several trinkets of.
gold and filer.

BUT notwithstanding those favourable appear-

ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the.
vanity of those who brought the report from Ta-
camez, and by the fond.imagination of. those 'who
listened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst not
venture to invade a country so populous with a
handful of men, enfeebled by fatigue and dif-
eases. They retired.to the small island of Gallo,
where Pizarro remained, with part of.the. troops,
and his associate returned to Panama, in hopes of
bringing such a reinforcement, as might enable
them to take pof{eflion of the opulent territories
whose existence seemed to be no longer doubtful h.

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising Pizarrore-

or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly governor of
conveyed.lamentable 'accounts of their sufferings Panam,
and lofdes to their 'friends at Panama, Almagro
met with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de
los Rios, who had succeeded Fedrarias' in thego-
vernment of that settlement. After weighing the
matter,with that cold oeconomical prudence, which
appears the first of all virtues to persons whose li-
mited faculties are incapable of conceiving or exe'-
cuting great designs, he concluded. an expedition,
attended with such certain waste of men, to be so
detrimental to an infant and feeble co16ny, that
he not only prohibited the raising of new levies,

but
h Xerez. 181. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 13.

B O K but dispatched a vessel to bring home Pizarro and

VI. his companions from the island of Gallo. Alma-
i526. gro and Luque, though deeply affected with these

measures, which they could not prevent and
durst not oppose, found means of communicat-
ing their sentiments privately to Pizarro, and ex-
horted him not to relinquish an enterprise which
was the foundation of all their hopes, and the only
means of re-establishing their reputation and for-
tune, that were both on the decline. Pizarro's
mind, bent with inflexible obstinacy on all its pur-
poses, needed no incentive to persist in the scheme.

Perfits in He peremptorily refused to obey the governor of
hisdeGgn. Panama's orders, and employed all his address

and eloquence in persuading his men not to aban-
don him. But the incredible calamities to which
they had been exposed were fill so recent in their
memories, and the thoughts of revisiting their fa-
milies and friends after a long absence, ruffed
with fuchjoy into their minds, that when Pizarro
drew a line upon the sand with his sword, permit-
ting such as Ywifhed to return home to pass over it,
only thirteen of all the daring veterans in his ser-
vice had refulution to remain with their command-
eri.

THIS small, but determined band, whose

names the Spanish historians record with deserved
praise, as the persons to whose persevering forti-
tude their country is indebted for the most valua-
ble of all its American possessions, fixed their re-
fidence in the island of Gorgona. This, as it was
farther removed from the coast than Gallo, and
uninhabited, they confidered as a more secure re-
treat, where, unmolested, they might wait for
supplies from Panama, which they trusted that the

,- 4- a^ activity

i Herrera, dec. 3.lib. x. c. 2, 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. z. Xerez,
81. Gomara Hilt. c. o19.

activity of their associates there would be able to BOOK
procure. Almagro and Luque were not inatten- Vl
tive or cold solicitors, and their incefant impor-
portunity was seconded by the general voice of 56
the colony, which exclaimed loudly againit the
infamy of exposing brave men, engaged in the
public service, and chargeable with no error but
what flowed from an excess of zeal and courage,
to perish like the most odious criminals in a defart
island. Overcome by those intreaties and expos-
tulations, the governor at last consented to fend
a small vessel to their relief. But that he might
not seem to encourage Pizarro to any new enter-
prise, he would not permit one land-man to em-
bark on board of it.

BY this time Pizarro and his companions had re- Hardlhips

mained five months in an island, infamous for the he endured.
moss unhealthy climate in that region of America ..
During all this period, their eyes were turned
towards Panama, in hopes of succour from their
countrymen; but worn out at length with fruitless
expectations, and dispirited with suffering hard-
ships of which they saw no end, they, in despair,
came to a resolution of committing themselves to
the ocean on a float, rather than continue ithat
detestable abode. But, on the arrival of the vef-
fel from Panama, they were transported with such
joy, that all their sufferings were forgotten. Their
hopes revived, and, with a rapid transition, not
unnatural among men accustomed by their mode
of life to sudden vicissitudes of fortune, high con-
fidence succeeding to extreme dejetion, Pizarro
easily induced them to resume their former scheme
with fresh ardour. Instead of returning to Pana-
ma, they fRood towards the south-east, and, more

fortunate
k See NOTE III.

.O OK fortunate in this: than in any of their pail efforts,
VI: they, on the twentieth day after their departure
` 'from Gorgona, discovered the coast of Peru.

Dir.Overs After touching at some places of less note, they
Peru. landed at Tumbez, a place of some note, above

three -egrees south of the line, distinguished for
its stately temple, and a palace of the Incas or so-
veigns of the country . There the Spaniards
feaited their eyes with the first view of the opu-
lence and civilization of the Peruvian empire.
They beheld a country fully peopled, and cultiva-
ted with an appearance of regular industry; the
natives decently clothed, and possessed of inge-
nuity so far furpaifing the other inhabitants of the
New World, as to have the use of tame do-
meftic animals. But what chiefly attra&ed their
notice, was such a show of gold and. silver, not
only in the ornaments of their persons and tem-
ples, but in several vessels and utensils for common
use, formed of the fame precious metals, as left
no room to doubt that they abounded with profufi-
on in the country. Pizarro and his companions
seemed now to have attained to the completion
of their most sanguine hopes, and fancied that all
their wishes and dreams of rich domains, and
inexhauffible treasures, would soon be realized.

Returns to BU T with the slender force then under his com-
Panama.

mand, Pizarro could only view the rich country
of which he hoped hereafter to obtain possession.
He ranged, however, for some time along the
527. coafl, maintaining every where a. peaceable inter-

course with the natives, no less astonished at their
new visitants, than the Spaniards were with the
uniform appearance of opulence and cultivation
which they beheld. Having explored the country

as
I Calancha, p. 103.

as far as was requisite to ascertain the importance. B-O O K
of thedifcovery, Pizarro.procured from the inha- VI.
bitants some of their. Llamas or. tame cattle, to,"
which the Spaniards gave the name of sheep, fonme '
vefels of gold and silver, as well as some fpeci-
mens of their other-works of ingenuity, and two
young men, whom he proposed. to inftrua in the.
Castilian language, that they might serve as. inter-
preters in the expedition. which he meditated.
With these. he arrived at Panama,. towards. the
close of the third year-from the time of his-depar-
ture thence-m. No adventurer of the age susser-
ed hardships or encounter dangers which equal;
those to which he was expofed.during this long pe-
riod. The patience with which he endured the
one, and the fortitude with which- he surmounted
the other, exceed whatever is recorded-in the his-
tory of the New World, where so many- roman--
tic displays of those virtues.occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro r128.

gave of the incredible opulence of the: country thfCheflo
which he had discovered,. nor his bitter com-ciates.
plaints on account of that unseasonable recall of
his. forces, which had, put it out. of his. power. to
attempt making any fettleme.atthere, could move
the governor of Panama.to swerve from his for-.
mer purpose. He. ftillcontended, that the colony
was not in a. condition to invade such. a mighty
empire, and refused to authorise an expedition
which he foresaw would: be so alluring that it
might ruin the province in.which he presided, by
an effort beyond itsftrength. His coldness, how-
ever, did not in any degree abate the. ardour of
the three associates; but. they perceived that they
could not carry their scheme into execution with-

out

m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3-6. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 7, 8.

Vega, 2. lib. i.c. io-i4,Zarate, lib. i. c. 2. Benzo Hit, Novi
Orbis, lib. iii. c. i.

BOOK out the countenance of superior authority, and

VI. must solicit their sovereign to grant that permission

g
2 which they could not extort from his delegate.

W ith this view, after adjusting among themselves
that Pizarro should claim the station of Governor,
Almagro that of lieutenant-governor, and Luque
the dignity of bishop in the country which they
purposed to conquer, they ent Pizarro as their
agent to Spain, though their fortunes were now
so much exhausted by the repeated efforts which
they had made, that they found ome difficulty in
borrowing the small fum requisite towards equip-
ping him for the voyage n.

Pizarro sent PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court, and,
toSp',into new as the scene might be to him, he appeared

before the emperor with the unembarraffed digni-
ty of a man, conscious of what his services me-
rited; and he conduced his negociations with an
insinuating dexterity of address, which could not
have been expected either from his education, or
former habits of life. His feeling description of
his own sufferings, and his pompous account of
the country which he had discovered, confirmed
by the specimens of its producions which he ex-
hibited, made such an impreflon both on Charles
and his ministers, that they not only approved of
the intended expedition, but seemed to be inter-

Neglecthis efted in the success of its leader. Presuming on
afociates, those dispositions in his favour, Pizarro paid little

attention to the interest of his associates. As the
pretensions of Luque did not interfere with his
own, he obtained for him, the ecclesiastical dig-
nity to which he aspired. For Almagro, he claim-
ed only the command of the fortress which should
be ereded at Tumbez. To himself he secured

whatever
nHerrera, dec. 14. lib. iii. c. . Vega, z. lib. . c. i4,

whatever his boundless ambition could desire. B O 0K
He was appointed governor, captain general, VI.
and adelantado of all the country which he had
discovered, and hoped to conquer, with supreme july 2.
authority, civil as well as military; and a full right ad procures
to all the privileges and emoluments usually grant- command to
ed to adventurers in the New World. His jurif- himelf.
dicion was declared to extend two hundred leagues
along the coast to the south of the river St. Jago,
to be independent of the governor of Panama;
and he had power to nominate all the officers who
were to serve under him. In return for those
concessions, which cost the court of Spain no-
thing, as the enjoyment of them depended upon
the success of his own efforts, Pizarro engaged
to raise two hundred and fifty men, and to pro-
vide the ships, arms, and warlike flores requisite
towards subjecting, to the crown of Castile, the
country of which the government was allotted him.

INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was Slender

hforce he

which Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds was able to
and credit were so low that he could hardly com- raire.
plete half the number; and after obtaining his 529.
patents from the crown, he was obliged to steal
privately out of the port of Seville, in order to
elude the scrutiny of the officers who had it in
charge to examine whether he had fulfilled the
stipulations in his contrat o. Before his departure,
however, he received ome supply of money from
Cortes, who having returned to Spain about this
time, was willing to contribute his aid towards ena-
bling an ancient companion, with whose talents
and courage he was well acquainted, to begin a
career of glory similar to that which he himself
finished P.

HE

0 Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9.
p Ibid. lib. vii. c. o.

-BO O K HE landed at Nombre de Dies, and marched

VI. across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by
w'"'. ~his three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gon-

529. zalo, of whom the firit was born in lawful wed-

lock, the two latter, like himself, were of illegi-
timate birth, and by Francisco de Alcantara, his
his mother's brother. They were all in the prime
·of life, and of such abilities and courage, as fit-
ted them to take a distinguished part in his sub-
sequent tranfaftions.

Z530. ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Al-.
inc'wni hmagro so much exasperated at the manner in
Almagro. which he had conducted his negociation, that he

not only refused to at any longer in concert with
a man by whose perfidy he had been excluded
-from the power and honours to which he had a
just claim, but laboured to form a new affociati-
on, in order to thwart or to rival his former con-
federate in his discoveries. Pizarro, however, had
'more wisdom and address than to susser a rupture
so fatal to all his schemes, to become irreparable.
'By offering voluntarily to relinquish the office of
adelantado, and promifingto concur in soliciting
:that title, with an independent government for Al-
:magro, he gradually mitigated the rage of an
-open-hearted soldier, which had been violent, but
was not implacable. Luque, highly satisfied with
:having been successful in all his own pretensions,
cordially seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A recon-
ciliation was effected; and the confederacy renew-
ed on its original terms, that the enterprise
'Ihould be carried on atthe common expence of
the -afociates, and the profits accruing from it
fihould be equally divided among them 1.

EVEN

q Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9 :Zarate, lib. x..c. 3. Vega,
2. lib . . 4.

EV EN after their re-union, and the utmofft es- B 0 0 K

forts of their:intereft, three small velfels, and a VI.
hundred.aid eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom --
were -horfimen, composed the armament which Thearma-
they -w.ee able to fit out. 'Bit the afflonifhingment.
progress of the Spaniards in America had infpird
tlhein'-iih such ideas of their own Superiority, that
Pizarro did nothefitate to fail with thiscontempti-
ble force to invade: agreat empire. Almagro "ws 1531.
was-:'left at-Panama, as formerly, to follow hhi February.
Witih x'hat reiiiforcement- of men he should be-able
to muster. As the season for embarking'was pro-
perly chosen, and the course of navigation be-
tveen Panama and Peru was now better known,
Pizarro compleated the voyage in thirteen days;
though, by the force of the winds.and currents,
he was carried above an hundred leagues to the
north of Tumbez, the place of his destination,
and obliged to land his-troops in the bay of St.
Matthew. Without losing a moment, he began Lais in
to advance towards the south, taking care, howe- Peru.
ver, not to depart far from the fea-hore, both
that he might easily effect ajunation with the sup-
plies which he expeAed from Panama, and feelre
a retreat:- in cafe of any disaster, by keeping as
near as possible to his ships. -But as the country in
'several parts on the coaff of Peru is barren, un-
healthful, and thinly peopled ;- as the Spaniards had
to pass all the rivers -near -their mouth, where the
body of water is greatest; and as the imprudence
of - Pizarro, in attacking - the - natives when he
should have studied to gain their confidence,- had
--forced them to abandon their habitations; fa-
mine, fatigue, and diseases. of various kinds,
-brought upon him :and his :,followers: calamities
hardly inferior-to those which they had'endured in
their former expedition. What they now expe-
rienced corresponded so ill with the alluring de-
scription of the country given by Pizarro, 'that

--nMany

B O K many began to reproach him, and every soldier

VI. muit have become cold to the service, if, even in
'1"3' this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met

with ome appearances of wealth and cultivation,
which seemed to justify the report of their leader.
April 14. At length they reached the province of Coaque;

and having surprised the principal settlement of
the natives, they seized there veflels and ornaments
of gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thou-
sand pesos, with other booty of such value, as
dispelled all their doubts, and inspired the most
desponding with sanguine hopes'.

Hismeafures PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with
for obtainingthis rich spoil, which he confidered as the first
,itent. fruits of a land flowing with treasure, that he in-

flantly dispatched one of his hips, to Panama,
with a large remittance to Almagro; and another
to Nicaragua, with a considerable fum to some per-
sons of influence in that province, in hopes of al-
luring adventurers, by this early display of the
wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdain-
ing to employ any means of reducing the natives
but force, he attacked them with such violence in
their scattered habitations, as compelled them ei-
ther to retire into the interior country, or to sub-
mit to his yoke. This sudden appearance of
invaders, whose aspet and manners were so
strange, and whose power seemed to be so irrefift-
ible, made the fame dreadful impression as in
other parts of America. Pizarro hardly met with
resistance until he attacked the island of Puna in
the bay of Guayquil. As that was better peopled
than the country through which he had passed,
and its inhabitants fiercer and less civilized than
those of the continent, they defended themselves
with such obstinate valour, that Pizarro spent fix

months
r Herrera, dec, 4. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. . Xerez, 18z.

months in reducing them to fubjetion. From B O K
Puna he proceeded to Tumbez, where the dif- VI.
tempers that raged among his men compelled him 2 .
to remain for three months s,

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to

reap advantage from his own attention, to spread
the fame of his first success at Coaque. Two Receives
different detachments arrived from Nicaragua, ome, ando
which, though neither exceeded thirty men, headvance.
confidered as a reinforcement of great confe-
quence to his feeble band, especially as the one
was under the command of Sebastian Benalcazar,
and the other of Hernando Soto, officers not in-
ferior in merit and reputation to any who had
served in America. From Tumbez he proceeded May i6.
to the river Piura, and, in an advantageous flati-
on near the mouth of it, he established the first
Spanish colony in Peru; to which he gave the
name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its affairs aL
that juncture. Without some knowledge of these
he could not have conduEted his operations with
propriety; and without a suitable attention to
these, it is impoflible to account for the progress
which the Spaniards had already made, or to un-
fold the causes of their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, Se f the

the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, empire.
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from east
to weft, was much less considerable; being uni-

VOL. III. C formly

s P. Sancho ap. Ramus. iii. p. 371, F. Herrera, dec. 4. lib.
,ii. c. 8. lib. ix, c. . Zarate, lib. ii. c. z, 3. Xeres, p. iS2, &c.

B O O K formly bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes,

V. firetching frcm its one extremity to the other.
vl Peru, like the reft of the New World, was ori-
1532. ginally possessed by small independent tribes, dif-

fering fiom each other in manners, and in their
forms of rude policy. All, however, were so
little civilized, that, if the traditions concerning
their mode of life, preserved among their defcen-
dants, deserve credit, they must be classed among
the most unimproved savages of America. Stran-
gers to every species of cultivation or regular in-
dufiry, without any fixed residence, and unac-
quainted with those sentiments and obligations
which form the first bonds of social union, they
are said to have roamed about naked in the forests,
with which the country was then covered, more
like wild beais than like men. After they had
itruggled for several ages with the hardships and
calamities which are inevitable in this barbarous
ifate, and when no circumstance seemed to indi-
cate the approach of any uncommon effort to-
wards improvement, we are told that there ap-
peared, on the banks of the lake Titiaca, a man
and woman of majestic form, and clothed in de-
cent garments. They declared themselves to be
the children of the Sun, sent by their beneficent
parent, who beheld with pity the miseries of the
human race, to inftrut and to reclaim them. At
their persuasion, enforced by reverence for the di-
vinity in whose name they were supposed to speak,
several of the dispersed savages united together,
and receiving their commands as heavenly injunc-
tions, followed them to Cuzco, where they set-
tled, and began to lay the foundations of a city.

MANCO CAP AC and Mama Ocollo, for such

were the names of those extraordinary personages,
having thus colleted ome wandering tribes,
formed that social union, which, by multiplying
the desires, and uniting the efforts of the human

species,

species, excites induflry, and leads to improve- O 0 K
ment. Manco Capac inftru&ed the men in Vi.
agriculture, and other useful arts. Mama Ocollo i
taught the women to spin and to weave. By the 532
labour of the one sex, subsistence became less pre-
carious; by that of the other, life was rendered
more comfortable. After securing the objects of
first necessity in an infant state, by providing food,
raiment, and habitations for the rude people of
whom he took charge, Manco Capac turned his
attention towards introducing such laws and policy
as might perpetuate their happiness. By his in-
ftitutions, which shall be more particularly ex-
plained hereafter, the various relations in private
life were established, and the duties resulting from
them prescribed with such propriety, as gradually
formed a barbarous people to decency of man-
ners. In public administration, the functions of
persons in authority were so precisely defined, and
the Subordination of those under their jurifdition
maintained with such a steady hand, that the focie-
ty in which he presided soon assumed the asped of
a regular and well-governed state.

THUS, according to the Indian tradition, was

founded the empire of the Incas or Lords of Peru.
At first, its extent was small. The territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eight leagues
from Cuzco. But within its narrow precincts, he
exercised absolute and uncontrolled authority.
His successors, as their dominions expanded, ar-
rogated a similar juriSdition over their fubje&ts:
the despotism of Asia was not more complete.
The Incas were not only obeyed as monarchs, but
revered as divinities. Their blood was held to be
sacred, and, by prohibiting intermarriages with
the people, was never contaminated by mixing
with that of any other race. The family, thus
separated from the reft of the nation, was diftin-

C 2 guiihed

B O O K gulihed by peculiarities in dress and ornaments,
,_i_. which ,it was unlawful for others to afume. The

132. monarch himself appeared with ensigns of royal-

ty reserved for him alone; and received from his
fubjeds marks of 6bfequious homage and refpeEt,
which approached almost to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs is said to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their subje&s. It was not the rage of conquest,
if we may believe the accounts of their country-
men, that prompted the Incas to extend their do-
minions, but the desire of diffusing the blessings
of civilization, and the knowledge of the arts
which they possessed, among the barbarous peo-
ple whom they reduced. During a succession of
twelve monarchs, it is said that not one deviated
from this beneficent character t.

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the tfate, was feated
on the throne. He is represented as a prince
diftinguilhed not only for the pacific virtues pecu-
liar to the race, but eminent for his martial talents.
By his vitorious arms the Kingdom of Quito was
subjected, a conquest of such extent and impor-
tance as almost doubled the power of the Peru-
vian empire. He was fond of residing in the ca-
pital of that valuable province, which he had add-
ed to his dominions; and, notwithstanding the
ancient and fundamental law of the monarchy
against polluting the royal blood by any foreign
alliance, he married the daughter of the vanquish-

ed

t Cieca de Leon, Chron. c. 44. Herreraj dec. 3. lib. x. c.
4. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 1. 7.

.ed monarch of Quito. She bore him a son nam- B O O K
ed Atahualpa, whqm, on his death at Quito, V_.
which seems to have happened about the year one I53
thousand five hundred and twenty-nine, he ap-
pointed his successor in that kingdom, leaving the
reft of his dominions to Huafcar, his eldest son,
by a mother of the royal race. Greatly as the
Peruvians revered the memory of a monarch who
had reigned with more reputation and splendour
than any of his predecessors, the destination of
Huana Capac concerning the fucceflion, appeared
f5 repugnant to a maxim coeval with the empire,
and funded on authority deemed sacred, that it
dvas no sooner known at Cuzco than it excited ge-
neral disgust. Encouraged by those sentiments of
his subjects, Huafcar required his brother to re-
nounce the government of Quito, and to ac-
knowledge him as his lawful superior. But it had
been the firit care of Atahualpa to gain a large body
of troops which had accompanied his father to
Quito. These were the flower of the Peruvian
warriors, to whose velour Huana Capac had been
indebted for all his vi&iories. Relying on their
support, Atahualpa firit eluded his brother's de-
mand, and then marched against him in hostile
array.

THUS the ambition of two young men, the

title of the one founded on ancient usage, and
that of the other asserted by the veteran troops,
involved Peru in civil war, a calamity, to which,
under a succession of virtuous princes, it had hi-
therto been a stranger. In such a contest, the issue
was obvious. The force of arms triumphed over
the authority of laws. Atahualpa remained vic-
torious, and made a cruel use of his victory. Con-
fcious of the defect in his own title to the crown,
he attempted to exterminate the royal race, by
putting to death all the children of the Sun de-
scended from Manco Capac, whom he could

seize

B O K seize either by force or stratagem. From a poli-

VI. tical motive, the life of his unfortunate rival Huaf-
1532. car, who had been taken prisoner in the battle

which decided the fate of the empire, was saved
for ome time, that, by issuing orders in his name,
the usurper might more easily effablifh his own au-
thority u.

Favourable WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat-
to the pro- thew, this civil war raged between the two bro-
zarro. thers in its greatest fury. Had he made any hof-

tile attempt in his former visit to Peru in the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-feven, he
mnufi then have encountered the force of a power-
ful itate, united under a monarch, possessed of
capacity and courage, and unembarraffed with
any care that could divert him from opposing his
progress. But at this time, the two competitors,
though they received early accounts of the arrival
and violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so
intent upon the operations of a war, which they
deemed more interesting, that they paid no atten-
tion to the motions of an enedy, too inconfidera-
ble in number to excite any great alarm, and to
whose career it would be easy, as they imagined,
to give a check, when more at leisure.

He avails BY this fortunate coincidence of events, where-
hims ad- of Pizarro could have no foresight, and of which,
vances. from his defective mode of intercourse with the

people of the country, he remained long igno-
rant, he was permitted to carry on his operations
unmoteited, and advanced to the centre of a
great empire before one effort of its power was
exerted to flop his progress. During their pro-
grefs, the Spaniards had acquired some imperfeEt
knowledge of this itruggle between the two con-

tending

u Zarate, lib.i. c. 15. Vega, . lib, ix. c. Z2. and 32-40.
Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. . ib. iii. c. I 7.

tending fations. The first complete information, B O 0 K
with refpea to it, they received from messengers .i.
whom Huafcar sent to Pizarro, in order to solicit 1532.
his aid against Atahualpa, whom he represented as
a rebel and an usurper . Pizarro perceived at
once the importance of this intelligence, and fore-
saw so clearly all the advantages which might be
derived from this divided state of the kingdom
which he had invaded, that, without waiting for
the reinforcement which he expected from Pana-
ma, he determined to push forward, while intef-
tine discord put it out of the power of the Peruvi-
ans to attack him with their whole force, and
while, by taking part, as circumstances hould in-
cline him, with one of the competitors, he might
be enabled with greater ease to crufl both. En-
terprifing as the Spaniards of that age were in all
their operations against Americans, and diftin-
guifhed as Pizarro was among his countrymen for
daring courage, we can hardly suppose, that after
having proceeded hitherto slowly, and with much
caution, he would have changed at once his system
of operation, and have ventured upon a measure
so hazardous, without some new motive or prospeCt
to justify it.

As he was obliged to divide his troops, in or- State of his

der to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sufficient to foces.
defend a fiation of equal importance as a place of
retreat in cafe of any disaster, and as a port for
receiving any supplies which hould come from
Panama, he began his march with a very slender
and ill-accoutred train of followers. They con-
sifted of fixty-two horsemen x, and an hundred
and two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were
armed with cross-bows, and three with muskets.
He direEted his course towards Caxamalca, a
small town at the distance of twelve days march

from
w Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3. x See N 0 T E IV.

B o 0 K from St. Michael, where Atahualpa was encamp.

vl. ed with a considerable body of troops. Before
1-2 he had proceeded far, an officer dispatched by

the Inca met him with a valuable present from that
prince, accompanied with a proffer of his alli-
ance, and assurances of a friendly reception at
Caxamalca. Pizarro, according to the usual arti-
fice of his countrymen in America, pretended to
come as the ambassador of a very powerful mo-
narch, and declared that he was now advancing
with an intention to offer Atahualpa his aid against
those enemies who disputed his title to the
throne Y.

Ideas of the As the objet of the Spaniards in entering their
Peruvians
concerning country was altogether incomprehensible to the
theirdefigns. Peruvians, they had formed various conjeEtures

concerning it, without being able to decide whe-
ther they should confider their new guests as be-
ings of a superior nature, who had visited them
from ome beneficent motive, or as formidable
avengers of their crimes, and enemies to their
repose and liberty. The continual professions of
the Spaniards, that they came to enlighten them
with the knowledge of truth, and lead them in
the way of happiness, favoured the former opini-
on; the outrages which they committed, their ra-
pacioulnefs and cruelty, were awful confirmations
of the latter. While in this state of uncertainty,
Pizarro's declaration of his pacific intentions so far
removed all the Inca's fears, that he determined
to give him a friendly reception. In consequence
of this resolution, the Spaniards. were allowed to
march in tranquillity across the sandy desert be-
tween St. Michael and Motupe, where the most
feeble effort of an enemy, added to the unavoid-
able distresses which they fufiered in passing through

that
y Herrera, dec. v. lib. i. c. Xerez, p. 189.

that comfortless region, muff have proved fatal B o K
to them z. From Motupe they advanced towards VI.
the mountains which encompass the low country ~
of Peru, and passed through a defile so narrow
and inacceflible, that a few men might have de-
fended it againt a numerous army. But here like-
wife, from the fame inconsiderate credulity of
the Inca, the Spaniards met with no opposition,
and took quiet possession of a fort erected for the
security of that important itation. As they now
approached near to Caxamalca, Atahualpa renew-
ed his professions of friendhip; and as an evi-
dence of his sincerity, sent them presents of great-
er value than the former,

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffefil- Atriveat

on of a large court, on one fide of which was a xama
house which the Spanish historians call a palace of
the Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun,
the whole surrounded with a trrong rampart or
wall of earth. When he had posted his troops in
this advantageous station, he dispatched Hernan-
do Soto, and his brother Ferdinand, to the camp
of Atahualpa, which was about a league diftarit
from the town. He instructed them to confirm
the declaration which he had formerly made of
his pacific disposition, and to desire an interview
with the Inca, that he might explain more fully
the intention of the Spaniards in visiting his coun-
try. They were treated with all the refpetful
hospitality usual among the Peruvians in the re-
ception of their most cordial friends, and Atahu-
alpa promised to visit the Spanish commander
next day in his quarters. The decent deportment
of the Peruvian monarch, the order of his court,
and the reverence with which his fubjeas ap-

proached
zSeeNOTE V.

B o K proached his person and obeyed his commands, as-

VI. tonfhed thoie Spaniards, who had never met in
>V32 America with any thing more dignified than the

petty cazique of a barbarous tribe. But their
eyes were fill more powerfully attracted by the
vast profusion of wealth which they observed in
the Inca's camp. The rich ornaments worn by
him and his attendants, the vessels of gold and
silver in which the repass offered to them was ferv-
ed up, the multitude of utensils of every kind
formed of those precious metals, opened prof-
pets far exceeding any idea of opulence that
a European of the sixteenth century could form.

Perfidious ON their return to Caxamalca, while their
scheme of
Pizarro minds were yet warm with admiration and desire

of the wealth which they had beheld, they gave
such a description of it to their countrymen, as
confirmed Pizarro in a resolution which he had al-
ready taken. From his own observation of Ame-
rican manners during his long service in the New
World, as well as from the advantages which
Cortes had derived from seizing Montezuma, he
knew of what consequence it was to have the Inca
in his power. For this purpose he formed a plan
as daring as it was perfidious. Notwithstanding the
character he had aflumed of an ambassador from a
powerful monarch, who courted an alliance with
the Inca, and in violation of the repeated offers
which he had made to him of his own friendship
and afiftance, he determined to avail himself of
the unfufpicious simplicity with which Atahualpa
relied on his profeflions, and to seize his person
during the interview to which he had invited him.
He prepared for the execution of his scheme with
the fame deliberate arrangement, and with as little
compunction, as if it had reflected no disgrace
on himself or his country. He divided his ca-

valry

valry into three small squadrons, under the com- B 0 0 K
mand of his brother Ferdinand; Soto, and Benal- VI.
cazar; his infantry was formed in one body, '"
except twenty of most tried courage, whom he 532
kept near his own person to support him in the
dangerous service which he reserved for himself;
the artillery, consisting of two field piecesa and
the crofs-bowmen, were placed opposite to the
avenue by which Atahualpa was to approach. All
were commanded to keep within the square, and
not to move until the signal for action was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was Nov. 6.

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to Viftted b
appear with the greatest splendour and magnifi-
cence in his firfi interview with the strangers, the
preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march.
Even then, left the order of the proceflion should
be deranged, he moved so slowly, that the Spani-
ards became impatient and apprehensive that some
suspicion of their intention might be the cause of
this delay. In order to remove this, Pizarro dif-
patched one of his officers with freh assurances of
his friendly disposition. At length the Inca ap-
proached. First of all appeared four hundred
men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to clear
the way before him. He himself, fitting on a
throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colours, and almost covered with plates of gold
and silver enriched with precious stones, was car-
ried on the shoulders of his principal attendants.
Behind him came some chief officers of his court,
carried in the fame manner. Several bands of
fingers and dancers accompanied this cavalcade;
and the whole plain was covered with troops
amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

As
a Xerez, p. 194.

B 00 K As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters, fa

VI. ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,
'J

- advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre-

1532.

Strange ha- viary in the other, and in a long discourse explain-
rangue of ed to him the doftrine of the creation, the fall of
father Val-
verde. Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and refur-

rection of Jesus Christ, the appointment of St;
Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranfmiffi-
on of his apostolic power by succession to the
popes, the donation made to the king of Castile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Christian faith, to ac-
knowledge the supreme jurifdition of the pope,
and to submit to the king of Castile as his lawful
sovereign; promising, if he complied intantly
with this requisition, that the Castilian monarch
would proteEt his dominions, and permit him to
continue in the exercise of his royal authority; but
if he should impiously refute to obey this fum-
mons, he denounced war against him in his
maRier's name, and threatened him with the mo(
dreadful effects of his vengeance.

Replyofthe THIS strange harangue, unfolding deep myf-
inca. teries, and alluding to unknown facts, of which

no power of eloquence could have conveyed at
once a diftint idea to an American, was so lamely
translated by an unskilful interpreter, little ac-
quainted with the idiom of the Spanish tongue,
and incapable of exprefling himself with proprie-
ty in the language of the Inca, that its general
tenor was altogether incomprehensible to Atahual-
pa. Some parts in it of more obvious meaning,
filled him with astonishment and indignation. His
reply, however, was temperate. He began with
observing, that he was lord of the dominions
over which he reigned by hereditary succession;
and added, that he could not conceive how a so-

reign

reign priest should pretend to dispose of territo- B 0 OK
ries which did not belong to him; that if such a VI.
preposterous grant had been made, he, who was the V
rightful possessor, refused to confirm it; that he 532.
had no inclination to renounce the religious infti-
tutions established by his ancestors; nor would
he forsake the service of the Sun, the immortal
divinity whom he and his people reverred, in or-
der to worship the God of the Spaniards,- who
was subjet to death; that with refpet to other
matters contained in his discourse, as he had ne-
ver heard of them before, and did not now' un-
deritand their meaning, he desired to know where
he had learned things so extraordinary. " In this
book," answered Valverde, reaching out to him
his breviary. The Inca opened it eagerly, and
turning over the leaves, lifted it to his ear: " This,"
fays he, "is silent; it tells me nothing;" and
threw it with disdain to the ground. The enraged
monk, running towards his countrymen, cried
out, "To arms, Christians, to arms, the woird
of God is insulted; avenge .this profanation on
those impious dogs b." ..

PIZA RRO, who, during this long conference; Piarro at-

had with difficulty restrained his soldiers, eager to Peruvians,
feize.the rich spoils of which they had now so near
a view, immediately gave the signal of afault.
Atonce the martial music struck up, the cannon
and muskets began to fire, the horse allied out
fiercely to the charge, the infantry rushed -on
sword in hand. The Peruvians, astonished at the
suddenness of an attack which they did not expeEt,
and dismayed with the deftruEtive effets of the
fire-arms, and the irresistible impression of the ca-
valry, fled with universal confiernation on every
fide, without attempting either to annoy the ene-
my, or to defend themselves. Pizarro, at the head

of
bSee NOTE VI.

BO K of his chosen band, advanced directly towards

VI. the Inca; and though his nobles crowded around

'*^
" him with officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his

153' *feet, while they vied one with another in facrific-

ing their own lives, that they might cover the fa-
cred person of their sovereign, the Spaniards soon

and seizes penetrated to the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing
the nca. the Inca by the arm, dragged him to the ground,

and carried him as a prisoner to his quarters.
The fate of the monarch increased the precipitate
flight of his followers. The Spaniards pursued
them towards every quarter, and with deliberate
and unrelenting barbarity continued to slaughter
wretched fugitives, who never once offered at re-
fiftance. The carnage did not cease until the
close of day. Above four thousand Peruvians
were killed. Not a tingle Spaniard fell, nor was
onewounded but Pizarro himself, whose hand was
slightly hurt by one of his own soldiers, while
struggling eagerly to lay hald on the Inca c.

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru; and they were so tran-
sported with the value of the acquisition, as well
as the greatness of their success, that they paned
the night in the extravagant exultation natural to
indigent adventurers on such an extraordinary
change of fortune.

Dejection AT firfi the captive monarch could hardly be-
. the Inca. lieve a calamity which he so' little expeted to be

real. But he soon felt all the misery of Hlis fatei
and the dejeation into which he funk was in pro-
portion to the height of grandeur from which he
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the ad-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the pof-
feflion of such a prisoner, laboured to console him

with
c See NOTE VII.

with professions of kindness and refpet, that cor- BOO K
responded ill with his actions. By residing among VI.
the Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovered their '
ruling paflion, which, indeed, they were no-wise 532-
solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that,
made an attempt to recover his liberty. He of- His offer of
sered as a ransom what astonished the Spaniards, ranom.
even after all they now knew concerning the o-
pulence of his kingdom. The apartment in which
he was confined was twenty-two feet in length
and sixteen in breadth; he undertook to fill it
with vessels of gold as high as he could reach. Pi-
zarro closed eagerly with this tempting proposal,
and a line wasdrawn upon the walls of the cham-
ber, to mark the itipulated height to which the
treasure was to rife.

AT A HU A LP A, transported with having obtain-

ed some prospect of liberty, took measures initantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by fend-
ing messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other pla-
ces, where gold had been amassed in largeft-quan-
tities, either for adorning the temples of their
gods, or the houses of the Inca, to bring what was
necessary for completing his ransom directly to
Caxamalca. Though Atahualpa was now in the
custody of his enemies, yet so much were the
Peruvians accustomed to refpet every mandate
issued by their sovereign, that his orders were ex-
ecuted with the greatest alacrity. Soothed with
hopes of recovering his liberty by this means, the
fubjets of the Inca were afraid of endangering
his life by forming any other scheme for his relief;
and though the force of the empire was still en-
tire, no preparations were made, and no army as-
fembled, to avenge their own wrongs or tho'e of
their monarch d.

The
d Xerez, 2o5.

BOOK The Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tran-

V. quil and unmoletled. Small detachments of their
i 32. number marched into remote provinces of the
The Spni- empire, and instead of meeting with any oppofi-
ards vift tion, were every where received with marks of
provinces the moll fubmiflive refpeate.
A!magro INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and
a r oceit- desirous as Pizarro might be to obtain some know-
a reln;ojce- ,t
ment. ledge of the interior state of the country, he

could not have ventured upon any diminution of
D-cemner. his main body, if he had not about this time

received an account of Almagro's having landed
at St. Michael with such a reinforcement as would
almoff double the number of his followers f.
The arrival of this long-expeted succour was not
more agreeable to the Spaniards, than alarming to
the Inca. He saw the power of his enemies in-
creae ; and as he knew neither the source whence
they derived their supplies, nor the means by
which they were conveyed to Peru, he could not
foresee to what a height the inundation that pour-

533. ed in upon his dominions might rife. While dif-
Huafear put

uo death. quieted with such apprehensions, he learned that

some Spaniards, in their way to Cuzco, had visit-
ed his brother Huafcar in the place where he kept
him confined, and that the captive prince had re-
presented to them the justice of his own cause,
and as an inducement to espouse it, had promised
them a quantity of treasure vastly exceeding what
he had engaged to pay for his ransom. If the
Spaniards should liften to this proposal, he per-
ceived his own deftruation to be inevitable; and
fufpeting that their insatiable thirst for gold would
tempt them to lend a favourable ear to it, he de-
termined to sacrifice his brother's life, that he
might fare his own ; and his orders for this purpose

were
e See NOTE VII.

Xerez, 204.. Herrera, dec 5. lib. iii. c. i, z.

executed, like all his other commands, with fcru- B O O K
pulous punEtuality g. Vi.

MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa- '533-

malca from different parts of the kingdom, load- The Spani-
ed with treasure. A great part of the stipulated ardvifinkeof
quantity was now amassed, and Atahualpa assured the spoil.
the Spaniards, that the only thing which prevent-
ed the whole from being brought in, was the re-
motenefs of the provinces where it' was deposited.
But such vast piles of gold, presented continually
to the view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed
their avarice, that it was impossible any longer to
restrain their impatience to obtain possession of
this rich booty. Orders were given for melting
down the whole, except some pieces of curious
fabric, reserved as a present for the emperor.
After setting apart the fifth due to the crown, and
a hundred thousand pesos as a donative to the fol-
diers which arrived with Almagro, there remained
one million five hundred and twenty-eight thou-
sand five hundred pesos to Pizarro and his follow-
ers. The festival of St. James, the patron faint July 25.
of Spain, was the day chosen for the partition of
this vast fum; and the manner of conducting it
strongly marks that firange alliance of fanaticism
with avarice, which I have more than once had
occasion to point out as a striking feature in the
character of the conquerors of the New World.
Though assembled to divide the spoils of an inno-
cent people, procured by deceit, extortion, and
cruelty, the tranfadion began with a solemn invo-
cation of the name of God h, as if they could
have expected the guidence of Heaven in difitri-
buting those wages of iniquity. In this division
above eight thousand pesos, at that time not infe-

VOL. III. D rior

g Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Gomara HiPt. c. 1 5. Herrera, dec.
lib. iii. c. 2.
b Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

B O O K rior in value to as many pounds sterling in the

VI. present century, fell to the share of each horse-
1^53 man, and half that fum to each footboldier. Pi-

5j3 zarro himielf, and his officers, received dividends

in proportion to the dignity of their rank.

The effet THERE is no example in history of such a fud-
of it den acquisition of wealth by military service, nor

was ever a um so great divided among so small a
number of soldiers. Many of them having received
a recompence for their services far beyond their
most sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire
from fatigue and danger in order to spend the re-
mainder of their days in their native country, in
ease and oppulence, that they demanded their dif-
charge with clamorous importunity. Pizarro, fen-
fible that from such men he could expet neither
enterprise in action nor fortitude in suffering, and
persuaded that wherever they went, the display
of their riches would allure adventurers, less
opulent but more hardy, to his itandard, granted
their suit without relutance, and permitted above
sixty of them to accompany his brother Ferdi-
nand, whom he sent to Spain with an account of
his success, and the present destined for the em-
peror i.

The Inca THE Spaniards having divided among them the
demands 'hi treasure anaffed for the Inca's ransom, he insisted
vain. with them to fulfil their promise of setting him at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. During his long service in the New
W\orld, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims
of his fellow soldiers, which led them to confider
itsinhabitants as an inferior race, neither worthy
of the name, nor intitled to the rights of men.
In his compact with Atahualpa, he had no other
object than to amuse his captive with such a prof-

pect
i Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. 2. lib. i. c. 38.

pet of recovering his liberty, as might induce BOO K
him to lend all the aid of his authority towards VI.
colleaing the wealth of his kingdom. Having
now accomplilhed this, he no longer regarded his 5
plighted faith; and at the very time when the
credulous prince hoped to be replaced on his
throne, he had secretly resolved to bereave him of
life. Many circumstances seem to have concur-
red in prompting him to this action, the moss cri-
minal and atrocious that slains the Spanish name,
amidst all the deeds of violence committed in car-
rying on the conquest of the New World.

THOU G H Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imi- He and the

tation of Cortes's conduct towards the Mexican Spanardsy
monarch, he did not possess talents for carrying jealous.
on the fame artful plan of policy. Deflitute of
the temper and address requisite for gaining the
confidence of his prisoner, he never reaped all
the advantages which might have been derived
from being mafler of his person and authority.
Atahualpa was, indeed, a prince of greater abili-
ties and discernment than Montezuma, and seems
to have penetrated more thoroughly into the cha-
racter and intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual
suspicion and difiruft accordingly took place be-
tween them. The firia attention with which it
was necessary to guard a captive of such impor-
tance, greatly increased the fatigue of military
duty. The utility of keeping him appeared
inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him as an in-
cumberance, from which he wished to be deli-
vered k.

ALMAGRO and his followers had made a de- Almagro
mand of an equal share in the Inca's ransom; and and his fol-

lowersde-

though Pizarro had beflowed upon the private rnand hi
men the large gratuity which I have mentioned, life

D and
k Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.

B 0 O K and endeavoured to ooth their leader by presents

VI. of great value, they ill continued dissatisfied.

3 They were apprehensive, that as long as Atahu-

alpa remained a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would
apply whatever treasure should be acquired, to
make up what was wanting of the quantity ftipu-
lated for his ransom, and under that pretext ex-
clude them from any part of it. They insisted
eagerly on putting the Inca to death, that all the
adventurers in Peru might thereafter be on an e-
qual footing'.

Motives P z A R Ro himself began to be alarmed with ac-
duced pi- counts of forces assembling in the remote provinces
zaro to of the empire, and fufpeded Atahualpa of hav-
consen. ing issued orders for that purpose. These fears

and suspicions were artfully increased by Philip-
pillo, one of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried
off from Tumbez in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty, and whom he employed as
an interpreter. The funaion which he perform-
ed admitting this man to familiar intercourse with
the captive monarch, he presumed notwithfiand-
ing the meanness of his birth, to raise his assec-
tions to a Coya, or descendant of the Sun, one
of Atahualpa's wives; and feeing no profpea of
gratifying that passion during the life of the
monarch, he endeavoured to fill the ears of the
Spaniards with such accounts of his secret designs
and preparations, as might awaken their jealousy
and incite them to cut him off.

WHI LE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo labour-
ed to ruin him by private machinations, that un-
happy prince inadvertently contributed to haften
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-

tached

l Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Vega, p. 2. lib. i . . Herrera, dec.
5. lib. iii. c. 4.

tached himself with peculiar affection to Ferdi- B 0 K
nand Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who, as they V.
were persons of birth and education superior to 33
the rough adventurers with whom they served,
were accustomed to behave with more decency
and attention to the captive monarch. Soothed
with this refpet from persons of such high rank,
he delighted in their society; but in the pretence
of the governor he was uneasy and over-awed.
This dread oon came to be mingled with con-
tempt. Among the European arts, what he ad-
mired most was that of reading and writing; and
he long deliberated with himself, whether he
should regard it as a natural or acquired talent.
In order to determine this, he desired one of the
soldiers, who guarded him, to write the name of
God. on the nail of his thumb. This he shewed
successively to several Spaniards, aiking its mean-
ing; and to his amazement, they all, without he-
fitation, returned the fame answer. At length
Pizarro entered; and on presenting it to him, he
blushed, and with ome confusion was obliged to
acknowledge his ignorance. From that moment,
Atahualpa confidered him as a mean person, less
instructed than his own soldiers; and he had not
address enough to conceal the sentiments with
which this discovery inspired him. To be the ob-
jet of a barbarian's scorn, not only mortified the
'pride of Pizarro, but excited such resentment in
his breast, as added force to all the other confide-
rations which prompted him to pat the Inca to
death .

BUT in order to give ome colour of justice to His ti

this violent ation, and that he himself might
be exempted from fianding singly responsible
for the commiflion of it, Pizarro resolved to try

D 3 the

m Hererra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. II. lib. i.
c.38.

B 0 0 K the Inca with all the formalities observed in the

VI. criminal courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and

,337 Almagro, with two afliftants, were appointed

judges, with full power to acquit or to condemn;
an attorney-general was named to carry on the
prosecution in the king's name; counsellors were
chosen to aflift the prisoner in his defence; and
clerks were ordained to record the proceedings of
court. Before this strange tribunal, a charge was
exhibited still more amazing. It consisted of vari-
ous articles; that Atahualpa, though a bastard,
had difpoffeffed the rightful owner of the throne,
and usurped the regal power; that he had put his
brother and lawful sovereign to death; that he was
an idolater, and had not only permitted, but
commanded the offering of human sacrifices;
that he had a great number of concubines; that
since his imprifonnent he had wafted and em-
bezzled the royal treasures, which now belonged
of right to the conquerors; that he had incited his
subjects to take arms against the Spaniards. On
there heads of accusation, tome of which are so
ludicrous, others so absurd, that the effrontery
of Pizarro, in making them the foundation of a
serious procedure, is not less surprising than his
injullice, did the court go on to try the sovereign
of a great empire, over whom it had no jurifdic-
tion. With respect to each of the articles, wit-
neffes were examined; but as they delivered their
evidence in their native tongue, Philippillo had it
in his power to give their words whatever turn
belt suited his malevolent intentions. To judges
predetermined in their opinion, this evidence ap-

Heiscon- peared sufficient. They pronounced Atahualpa
demnned, guilty, and condemned him to be burnt alive.

Friar Valverde prostituted the authority of his fa-
cred function to confirm this sentence, and by his
signature warranted it to be just. Astonished at
his fate, Atahualpa endeavoured to avert it by his

tears

tears, by promises and by intreaties, that he might B 0 0 K
be ent to Spain, where a monarch would be the vl.
arbiter of his lot. But pity never touched the un- 1
feeling heart of Pizarro. He ordered him to be
led instantly to execution; and what added to the
bitterness of his last moments, the fame monk
who had just ratified his doom, offered to console,
and attempted to convert him. The most pow-
erful argument Valverde employed to prevail with
him to embrace the Christian faith, was a promise
of a mitigation in his punishment. The dread of
a cruel death extorted from the trembling viAim
a desire of receiving baptism. The ceremony andexecut.
was performed; and Atahualpa, instead of being ed.
burnt, was strangled at the flake n.

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation, Several Spa-

even among the profligate adventurers which it rdspri
sent forth to conquer and desolate the New it.
World, there were persons who retained ome
tincture of the Castilian generosity and honour.
Though, before the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdi-
nand Pizarro had set out for Spain, and Soto was
sent on a separate command at a distance from
Caxamalca, this odious tranfaaion was not carried
on without censure and opposition. Several of-
ficers, and among those some of the greatest re-
putation and most refpeaable families in the ser-
vice, not only remonstrated, but protested against
this measure of their general, as disgraceful to
their country, as repugnant to every maxim of
equity, as a violation of public faith, and an
usurpation of jurifdiaion over an independent mo-
narch, to which they had no title. But their en-
deavours were vain. Numbers, and the opinion
of such as held every thing to be lawful which

they

n Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Xerez, p. 233. Vega, p. i. lib i.

e. 36, 37. Gomara Hist. c. 117. Herrera, dec. . lib. iii
c. 4.

B 0 K they deemed advantageous, prevailed. History,

VI. however, records even the unsuccessful exertions
'533- of virtue with applause; and the Spanish writers,

in relating events where the valour of their nation
is more conspicuous than its humanity, have not
failed to preferlve the names of those who made
this laudable effort to save their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated such a crime °.

Diolit;on ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invefred
of govern- one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hop-
nnt and mit
erder in Pe- ing that a young man without experience might
ru' prove a more paflive infirument in his hands, than

an ambitious monarch, who had been accurtom-
ed to independent command. The people of
Cuzco, and the adjacent country, acknowledged
Manco Capac, a brother of Huafcar, as Incap.
But neither posseTed the authority which belonged
to a overeign of Peru. The violent convulsions
into which the empire had been thrown, first by
the civil war between the two brothers, and then
by the invasion of the Spaniards, had not only
deranged the order of the Peruvian government,
but almost dissolved its frame. When they be-
held their monarch a captive in the power of firan-
gers, and at last suffering an ignominious death,
the people in several provinces, as if they had
been set free from every restraint of law and de-
cency, broke out into the most licentious excesses q.
So many descendants of the Sun, after being
treated with the utmost indignity, had been cut
off by Atahualpa, that not only their influence in
the state diminiihed with their number, but the
accustomed reverence for that sacred race sensibly
decreased. In consequence of this state of things,

ambitious

oVega, p. il. lib. i. c. 37. Xerez, i. 235. Herrera, dec.
. lib. iii. c. 5.

p Vega, p. I. lib. ii. c. 7.
q Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. lib. iii. c. 5.

ambitious men in different partk of the empire BO0OK
aspired to independent authority, and usurped ju- Vi.
rifdidion to which they had no title. The gene- 13
ral who commanded for Atahualpa in Quito, feiz-
ed the brother and children of his master, put them
to a cruel death, and disclaiming any connecion
with either Inca, endeavoured to eftablilf a fepa-
rate kingdom for himfelfr.

THE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the Pizarro ad-

spirit of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour ofCzco.
government relaxing among the Peruvians. They
confidered those disorders as symptoms of a ate
hastening towards its dissolution. Pizarro no
longer hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and
he had received such considerable reinforcements,
that he could venture, with little danger, to pene-
trate o far into the interior part of the country.
The account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca,
operated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his
brother Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers,
to whom he had given their discharge after the par-
tition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their afto-
nifhed countrymen, than fame spread the ac-
count with such exaggeration through all the Spa-
nifh settlements on the South Sea, that the go-
vernors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua,
could hardly restrain the people under their jurif-
dition, from abandoning their pofeflions, and
crowding to that inexhaustible source of wealth
which seemed to be opened in Peru . In spite of
every check and regulation, such numbers resort-
ed thither, that Pizarro began his march at the head

of

r Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. Vega, p. i i. lib. ii. c. 3, 4.
s Gomara Hist. C. 25. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. i. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5.

B 0 0 K of five hundred men, after leaving a confidera-

VI. ble garrison in St. Michael, under the command

of Benalcazar. The Peruvians had assembled
some large bodies of troops to oppose his pro-
grefs. Several fierce encounters happened. But
they terminated like all the actions in America;
a few Spaniards were killed or wounded; the
natives were put to flight with incredible slaughter.
At length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and
took quiet poffefiion of that capital. The riches
found there, even after all that the natives had
carried off and concealed, either from a fuperfti-
tious veneration for the ornaments of their tem-
ples, or out of hatred for their rapacious con-
querors, exceeded in value what had been receiv-
ed as Atahualpa's ransom. But as the Spaniards
were now accuitomed to the wealth of the coun-
try, and it came to be parcelled out among a
greater number of adventurers, this dividend did
'not excite the fame surprise either from novelty,
or the largeness of the fum that fell to the hare of
each individual .

Du RING the march to Cuzco, the son of Ata-

hualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died, and
as the Spaniards substituted no person in his place,
the title of Manco Capac seems to have been uni-
verfally recognized u.

Quito con- WHI LE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed,
quereLdby Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able

and enterprising officer, was ashamed of remain-
inginactive, and impatient to have his name dif-
tinguifhed among the difcoverors and conquerors
of the New World. The seasonable arrival of a
fresh body of recruits from Panama and Nicara-
gua, put it in his power to gratify this paflion.

Leaving

t See NOTE IX.
u Herrera, dec. 5. lib. v. c. 2.

Leaving a sufficient force to proteEt the infant set- B O 0 K
tlement entrusted to his care, he placed himself VI.
at the head of the reft, and set out to attempt
the reduction of Qito, where according to the re-
port of the natives, Atahualpa had left the greatell
part of his treasure. Notwithstanding the vast dif-
-tance of that city from St. Michael, the difficul-
ty of marching through a mountainous country
covered with woods, and the frequent and fierce
attacks of the belt troops in Peru, commanded
by a skilful leader, the valour, good conduct, and
perseverance of Benalcazar surmounted every ob-
flacle, and he entered Qito with his victorious
troops. But they met with a cruel mortification
there. The natives, now acquainted to their
sorrow, with the predominant passion of their
invaders, and knowing how to disappoint it, had
carried off all those treasures, the profpeEt of
which had prompted them to undertake this ardu-
ous expedition, and had supported them under all
the dangers and hardships wherewith they had to
itruggle in carrying it on x.

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish lead- Alvarado'

er who attacked the kingdom of Quito. Theexpedition-
fame of its riches attracted a more powerful ene-
my. Pedro de Alvarado, who had distinguished
himself so eminently in the conquest of Mexico,
having obtained the government of Guatimala as
a recompence for his valour, oon became dif-
gulted with a life of uniform tranquillity, and
longed to be again engaged in the bustle of mili-
tary service. The glory and wealth acquired by
the conquerors of Peru heightened this passion,
and gave it a determined direction. Believing,
or pretending to believe, that the kingdom of

Quito

X Zarate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. i . lib. ii. . 9. Herrera,
dec, 5. lib. iv. c. II, 2. lib. v. c. 2, 3. lib.vi.c. 3.

B OOK Quito did not lie within the limits of the province

VI. allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to invade it. The
. .3 high reputation of the commander allured vo-

lunteers from every quarter. He embarked
with five hundred men, of whom above two
hundred were of such diftinftion as to serve on
horseback. He landed at Puerto Viejo, and with-
out sufficient knowledge of the country, or pro-
per guides to conduct him, attempted to march di-
rectly to Quito, by following the course of the
river Guyaquil, and crofling the ridge of the An,
des towards its head. But in this route, one of
the most impracticable in all America, his troops
endured such fatigue in forcing their way through
forests and marshes on the low grounds, and susser-
ed so much from excessive cold when they began
to ascend the mountains, that before they reached
the plain of Quito, a fifth part of the men and
half of their horses died, and the reft were so
much dispirited and worn out, as to be almost
unfit for service Y. There they met with a body,
not of Indians, but of Spaniards, drawn up in
hostile array against them. Pizarro, having re-
ceived an account of Alvarado's armament, had
detached Almagro with some troops to oppose this
formidable invader of his jurifdition; and these
werejoined by Benalcazar and his victorious party.
Alvarado, though surprised at the fight of enemies
whom he did not expect, advanced boldly to the
charge. But by the interposition of ome mode-
rate men in each party, an amicable accommoda-
tion took place; and the fatal period, when Spa-
niards suspended their conquests to embrue their
hands in the blood of their countrymen, was
postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged to re-
turn to his government, upon Almagro's paying

him
Y See NOTE X.

him a hundred thousand pesos, to defray the ex- B O O K
pence of his armament. Most of his followers VI.
remained in the country; and an expedition, -~~
which threatened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, 1534
contributed to augment its strength z.

BY this time Fetdinand. Pizarro had landed in Honours
Spain. The immense quantities of gold and fil- coferredon

*

which he imported a il «*Pizarro and

ver which he imported a, filled the kingdom with Almagio.
no less astonishment than they had excited in Pa-
nama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was
received by the emperor with the attention due to
the bearer of a present so rich as to exceed any
idea which the Spaniards had formed concerning
the value of their acquisitions in America, even
after they had been ten years maiters of Mexico.
In recompence of his brother's services, his au-
thority was confirmed with new powers and privi-
leges, and the addition of seventy leagues, ex-
tending along the coast, to the southward of the
territory granted in his former patent. Almagro
received the honours which he had so long defir-
ed. The Title of Adelantado, or governor was
conferred upon him, with jurifdiAion over two
hundred leagues of country, firetching beyond
the southern limits of the province allotted to Pi-
zarro. Ferdinand himself did not go unrewarded.
He was admitted into the military order of St.
Jago, a diftinion always acceptable to a Spanish
gentleman; and soon set out on his return to Peru,
accompanied by many persons of higher rank,
than had yet served in that country b.

SOME

z Zarate, lib. 2.c. o--13. Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. , 2. 9,

&c. Gomara Hilt. c. 126, &c. Remefal. Hilt. Guatimal. lib.
iii. c. 6. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. , 2. 7, 8.

a See NOTE XI.
b Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega, p. i . lib. ii. c. 9. Herrera,
dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

BOO K SOME account of his negociations reached Pec

VI. ru before he arrived there himself. Almagro no
I'^ ifooner learned that he had obtained the royal grant

Beginningof of an independent government, than, pretend-
dilfentions ing that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the In-
between Pi.
_arroand cas, lay within its boundaries, he attempted to
Almagro. render himself maffter of that important fiation.

Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppose
him. Each of the contending parties was sup-
ported by powerful adherents, and the dispute
was on the point of being terminated by the
sword, when Francis Pizarro arrived in the capi-
tal. The reconciliation between him and Alma-
gro had never been cordial. The treachery of
Pizarro in engrossing to himself all the honours and
emoluments, which ought to have been divided
with his associate, was always present in both their
thoughts. The one, conscious of his own perfidy,
did not expet forgiveness; the other, feeling that
he had been deceived, was impatient to be aveng-
and though avarice and ambition had induced
them not only to dissemble their sentiments, but
even to a in concert while in pursuit of wealth
and power, no sooner did they obtain possession
of these, than the fame paflions which had form-
ed this temporary union, gave rife tojealoufy and
discord. To each of them was attached a small
band of interested dependents, who, with the
malicious art, peculiar to such men, heightened
their suspicions, and magnified every appearance
of offence. But with all those feeds of enmity
in their minds, and thus assiduously cherished,
each was so thoroughly acquainted with the abili-
ties and courage of his rival, that they equally
dreaded the confeqtences of an open rupture.
The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at Cuzco, and
-the address mingled with firmness, which he ma-
nifefied in his expostulations with Almagro and
his partizans, averted that evil for the present. A

new

new reconciliation took place; the chief article B O O K
of which was, that Almagro lhould attempt the vI.
conquest of Chili; and if he did not find in that --
province an eitablifhment adequate to his merit 534.
and expectations, Pizarro, by way of indemnifi-
cation, should yield up to him a part of Peru.
This new agreement was confirmed with the fame June 2.
sacred folemnities as their first contrat, and ob-
served witlh as little fidelity c.

SOON after he concluded this important tranf- Reulations

acion, Pizarro marched back to the countries on of Pizarro.
the sea coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval
of tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either
Spanish or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which diitinguifhes his cha-
raaer, to introduce a form of regular govern-
ment, into the extensive provinces subject to his
authority. Though ill qualified by his education
to enter into any disquisition concerning the prin-
ciples of civil policy, and little accustomed by his
former habits of life to attend to its arrangements,
his natural sagacity supplied the want both of
science and experience. He distributed the
country into various diftrits; he appointed pro-
per magistrates to preside in each; and establish-
ed regulations concerning the administration of
justice, the collection of the royal revenue, the
working of the mines, and the treatment of the
Indians, extremely simple but well calculated to
promote the public prosperity. But, though, for
the present, he adapted his plan to the infant state
of his colony, his aspiring mind looked forward
to its future grandeur. He confidered himself as Foundation
laying the foundation of a great empire, and-de- of Lima.
liberated long, and with much solicitude, in what
place he Ihould fix the feat of government. Cuzco,

the

c Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3. Vega, p. i i. lib. ii. c. 19. Benzo,
ib. iii. c. 6. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vii. c. 8.

B O O K the imperial city of the Incas, was situated in a

VI. corner of the empire, about four hundred miles

from the sea, and much farther from Quito; a
34 province of whose value he had formed an high

idea. No other settlement of the Peruvians was
so considerable as to merit the name of a town,
or to allure the Spaniards to fix their residence in
it. But, in marching through the country, Pi-
zarro had been firuck with the beauty and fertility
of the valley of Rimac, one of the moa extensive
and belt cultivated in Peru. There, on the banks
of a small river, of the fame name with the vale
which it waters and enriches, at the distance of
fix miles from Callao, the most commodious har-
bour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded a city
which he destined to be the capital of his govern-

53<. ment. He gave it the name of Ciudad de los
January 18. Reyes, either from the circumstance of having

laid the firfi stone, at that season when the church
celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or,
as is more probable, in honour of Juanna and
Charles, the sovereigns of Castile. This name it still
retains among the Spaniards, in all legal and for-
mal deeds; but it is better known to foreign-
ers by that of Lima, a corruption of the ancient
appellation of the valley, in which it is situated.
Under his inspeCtion, the buildings advanced with
such rapidity, that it soon assumed the form of a
city, which, by a magnificent palace that he e-
reded for himself, and by the fiately houses built
by several of his officers, gave, even in its infan-
cy, some indication of its subsequent grandeura.

Almagroin- IN consequence of what had been agreed with
vades Chili. Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards Chili;

and as he possessed in an eminent degree the vir-

tues

d Herrera, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 12. lib. vii. c. 13. Calancho
Coronica, lib. i. c. 37. Barnueuo, Lima fundada, ii. 294.

tues most admired by soldiers, boundless liberality B O O K
and fearless courage, his standard was followed VI.
by five hundred and seventy men, the greatest
body of Europeans that had hitherto been assem- 535
bled in Peru. From impatience to finish the ex-
pedition, or from that contempt of hardship and
danger acquired by all the Spaniards who had
served long in America, Almagro, inflead of ad-
vancing along the level country on the coast, chose
to march across the mountains by a route that was
shorter indeed, but almost impracticable. In this
attempt his troops were exposed to every calamity
which men can susser, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigour of the climate in those elevat-
ed regions of the torrid zone, where the degree
of cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the
survivors, when they descended into the fertile
plains of Chili, had new difficulties to encounter,
They found there a race of men very different
from the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, inde-
pendent, and their bodily constitution, as well as
vigour of spirit, nearly resembling the warlike
tribes in North America. Though filled with
wonder at the first appearance of the Spaniards,
and frill more aloonifhed at the operations of their
cavalry and the effets of their fire-arms, the Chi-
lefe oon recovered so far from their surprise, as
not only to defend themselves with obstinacy, but
to attack their new enemies with more determined
fierceness than any American nation had hitherto
discovered. The Spaniards, however, continued
to penetrate into the country, and colleAed some
considerable quantities of gold; but were so far
from thinking of making any settlement amidst
such formidable neighbours, that, in spite of all
the experience and valour of their leader, the
final issue of the expedition still remained ex-
tremely dubious, when they were recalled from

VOL. III. E it

BOOK it by an unexpected revolution in Peru c. The

vI. causes of this I hall endeavour to trace to their
1 f53 source.
J535.

An infur- So many adventurers had flocked to Veru from
the Peru- every Spanish colony in America, and all with
the Peru- ve .a.l ith
vians. such high expetations of accumulating indepen-

dent fortunes. at once, that, to men poffefied with
notions so extravagant, any mention of acquiring
wealth gradually, and by schemes of patient in-
duftry, would have been not only a disappoint-
ment, but an insult. In order to find occupati-
on for men who could not with safety be allowed
to remain inative, Pizarro encouraged some of
the mofi distinguished officers who had lately join-
ed him, to invade different provinces of the em-
pire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto visited.
Several large bodies were formed for this purpose;
and about the time that Almagro set out for Chili,
they marched into remote diftrits of the country.
its rife, No sooner did Manco Capac, the Inca, observe

the inconsiderate security of the Spaniards in thus
dispersing their troops, and that only a handful
of men remained in Cuzco. under Juan and Gon-
zalez Pizarro, than he thought that the happy pe-
riod was at length come for vindicating his own
rights, avenging the wrongs of his country, and
extirpating its oppressors. Though ftritly watch-
ed by the Spaniards, who allowed him to reside
in the palace of his ancestors at Cuzco, he found
means of communicating his scheme to the per-
sons who were entrusted with the execution of it.
Among people accustomed to revere their fove-
reign as a divinity, every hint of his will carries
the authority of a command; and they them-
selves were now convinced, by the daily increase

in

c Zarate, lib. iii. c. i. Gomara His c. . 131. Vega, p. a.

lib. ii. c. 20. Ovalle Hist. de Chile, lib. iv. c. 5, &c. Her-
rera, dec. 5. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. x. c. , &c.

in the number of their invaders, that the fond B O oK
hopes which they had long entertained of their VI.
voluntary departure were altogether vain. Ally"
perceived that a vigorous effort of the whole na-
tion was requisite to expel them, and the prepara-
tions for it were carried on with the secrecy and
silence peculiar to Americans.

AFTER ome unsuccessful attempts of the Inca andprogrefs.

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening ,536.
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per-
mission from him to attend a great festival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capital.
Under pretext of that solemnity, the great men
of the empire were assembled. As soon as the
Inca joined them, the standard of war was erect-
ed; and in a short time all the fighting men, from
the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely
on the settlements allotted them, were massacred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelessly
through a country which seemed to be tamely sub-
miillve to their dominion, were cut off to a man.
An army amounting (if we may believe the Spa-
nifh writers) to two hundred thousand men, at-
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothers endea-
voured to defend with only a hundred and seventy
Spaniards. Another formidable body invested
Lima, and kept the governor closely shut up.
There was no longer any communication between
the two cities; the numerous forces of the Pe-
ruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every messenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and
Lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worst concern-
ing the other, and imagined that they themselves
were the only persons who had survived the ge-
neral extinction of the Spanilh name in Peru d.

E Ir

d Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 28. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Cieca de

Leon, c. 8. Gomara Hist. c. 135. Herrera, dec*.lib. viii.
C. 5.

B OOK IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded

V .in person, that the Peruvians made their chief
53j. effort. During nine months they carried on the

Siege of siege with inceifant ardour, and in various forms;
uzc'. and though they displayed not the fame undaunt-

ed ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they con-
duAed some of their operations in a manner which
discovered greater sagacity, and a genius more
susceptible of improvement in the military art.
They not only observed the advantages which the
Spaniards derived from their discipline and their
weapons, but they endeavoured to imitate the
former, and turn the latter against them. They
armed a considerable body of their bravest war-
riors with the swords, the spears, and bucklers,
which they had taken from the Spanish soldiers
whom they had cut off in different paits of the
country. These they endeavoured to marshal in
that regular corpact order, to which experience
had taught them that the Spaniards were indebted
for their irresistible force in aion. Some appeared
in the field with Spanish mt.fkets, and had ac-
quired skill and resolution enough to use them. A
few of the boldest, among whom was the Inca
himself, were mounted on the horses which they
had taken, and advanced briskly to the charge
like Spanish cavaliers, with their lances in the relt.
It was more by their numbers, however, than by
those imperfect essays to imitate European arts,
and employ European arms, that the Peruvians
annoyed the Spaniards e. In spite of the valour,
heightened by despair, with which the three bro-
thers defended Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered
possession of one half of his capital; and before the
Spaniards could drive him out of it, they loft Juan
Pizarro,the belt beloved of all the brothers, together
with some other persons of note. Worn out with

the
e See NOTE XL.

the fatigue ofinceffant duty, diflrefed with want of B 0 0 K
provifiuns, and despairing of being able any longer VI.
to reflt an enemy whose numbers daily increased, .
the soldiers became impatient to abandon Cuzco,
in hopes either of joining their countrymen, if
any of them yet survived, or of forcing their
way to the sea, and finding ome means of es-
caping from a country which had been so fatal
to the Spanish name f. While they were brood-
ing over those desponding thoughts, which their
officers laboured in vain to dispel, Almagro ap-
peared suddenly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts transmitted to Almagro concern- Airival of

ing the general infurretion of the, Peruvians; Almagro,
were such as would have induced him, without
hesitation, to relinquish the conqueff of Chili,
and haften to the aid of his countrymen. But in and motives
this resolution he was confirmed by a motive-lefs of his con-

dua,

generous, but more interesting. By the fame
messenger who brought him intelligence of the
Inca's revolt, he received the royal patent creating
him governor of Chili, and defining the limits
of his jurifdition. Upon confidering the tenor
of it, he deemed it manifest beyond contradiai-
on, that Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his
government, and he was equally felicitous to pre-
vent the Feruvians from recovering possession of
their capital, and to wrest it out of the hands of
the Pizarros. From impatience to accomplish both,
he ventured to return by a new route; and in
marching through the sandy plains of the coast,
he suffered, from heat and drought, calamities
of a new species, hardly inferior to those in
which he had been involved by cold and famine
on the summits of the Andes.

His
f Herrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. 4.

B 0 0 K His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment.

VI. The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes up-
1537. on him with equal solicitude. The former, as he
His operati- did not study to conceal his pretensions, were at

s' ~ a loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or

to take precautions against him as an enemy. The
latter, knowing the points in contest between him
and his countrymen, flattered themselves that they
had more to hope than to dread from his operati-
ons. Almagro himself, unacquainted with the
detail of the events which had happened in his ab-
fence, and solicitous to learn the precise posture
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and with great circumfpedion. Various negoci-
ations with both parties were set on foot. The
Inca conduEted them on his part with much ad-
dress. At first he endeavoured to gain the friend-
ship of Almagro; and after many fruitless over-
tures, despairing of any cordial union with a Spa-
niard, he attacked him by surprise with a nume-
rous body of chosen troops. But the Spanish dif-
cipline and valour maintained their wonted fupe-
riority. The Peruvians were repulsed with such
slaughter, that a great part of their army difperf-
ed, and Almagro proceeded to the gates of Cuz-
co without interruption.

Takes of. THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make
f£cfion of
cuzc. head against the Peruvians, directed all their at-

tention towards their new enemy, and took mea-
fures to obstruCt his entry into the capital. Pru-,
dence, however, restrained both parties for some
time from turning their arms against one another,
while surrounded by common enemies, who
would rejoice in the mutual slaughter. Different
schemes of accommodation were proposed. Each
endeavoured to deceive the other, or to corrupt
his followers. The generous, open, affable temr
per of Almagro gained many adherents of the

Vizarros,

Pizarros, who were difguflted with their harsh do- B O O K
mineering manners. Encouraged by this defeti- VI.
on, he advanced towards the city by nights fur- 5-.-
prifed the centinels, or was admitted by them, 537.
and inverting the house where the two brothers re-
fided, compelled them, after an obstinate defence,
to surrender at discretion. Almagro's claim of
jurifdiation over Cuzco was univerially acknow-
ledged, and a form of adminiftratibn eflablihed
in his name g.

Two or three persons only were klled in this Civil wr,

firfr at of civil hostility; but it was soon follow- ass fiArAu
ed by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro hav- magro;
ing dispersed the Peruvians who had invested
Lima, and received some considerable reinforce-
ments from Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered
five hundred men, under the command of Alon-
so de Alvarado, to march to Cuzco, in hopes of
relieving his brothers, if they and their garrison
were not already cut off by the Peruvians. This
body, which, in the infancy of the Spanish power
in America, must be deemed a considerable forced
advanced near to the capital before they knew
that they had any enemy more formidable than In-
dians to encounter, It was with aftonilhment that
they beheld their countrymen posted on the banks
of the river Abancay to oppose their progress.
Almagro, however, wiffed rather to gain than to
conquer them, and by bribes and promises en-
deavoured to educe their leader. The fidelity
of Alvarado remained unshaken; but his talents
for war were not equal to his virtue. Almagro
amused him with various movements, of which
he did not comprehend the meaning, while a large July 12.

detach-

g Zarate, lib iii. c. 4. Vega, p ..i ii.. . 29, 31. Go-
mara Hist . c. 34. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. I-5.

B O O K detachment of chosen soldiers passed the river by

VI. night, fell upon his camp by surprise, broke his
137 r troops before they had time to form, and took
bu 537t him prisoner, together with his principal officers h.
advantages. BY.the sudden route of this body, the contest

between the two rivals must have been decided,
if Almagro had known as well how to improve
as how to gain a victory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
officer of great abilities, who having served un-
der the constable Bourbon, when he led the im-
perial army to Rome, had been accustomed to
bold and decisive coun!els, advised him instantly
to issue orders for putting to death Ferdinand and
Gonzola Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other per-
sons whom he could not hope to gain, and to
march directly with his victorious troops to Li-
ma, before the governor had time to prepare for
his deftnce. But Almagro, though he discerned
at once the utility of the counsel, and had cou-
rage to have carried it into execution, suffered
himself to be influenced by sentiments unlike those
of a soldier of fortune grown old in service, and
by scruples which suited not the chief of a party
who had drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings
of humanity restrained him from shedding the
blood of his opponents; and the dread of being
deemed a rebel deterred him from entering a pro-
vince which the iing had allotted to another.
Though he knew that arms must terminate the
dispute between him and Pizarro, and resolved
not to hun that mode of decision, yet, with a
timid delicacy preposterous at such a juncure, he
was so solicitous that his rival hould be confi-

dered

h Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gorn. Hilt. c 138. Vega, p. lI,
lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

dered as the agreffor, that he marched quietlyB OO K
back to Cuzco, to wait his approach i. V.

PIZARRO was fiill unacquainted with all thein- 1537.

teresting events that had happened near Cuzco. Pizarre o
The account of Almagro's return, of the loss of
the capital, of the death of one brother, of the
imprisonment of the other two, and of the defeat
of Alvarado, were brought to him at once.
Such a tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a
spirit which had continued firm and ereEt un-
der the rudest ihocks of adversity. But the
necessity of attending to his own safety, as well
as the desire of revenge, preserved him from
finking under it. He took measures for both with
his wonted sagacity. As he had the command Hs artful
of the sea-coast, and expected considerable fup-condua-
plies both of men and of military itores, it was
no less his interest to gain time, and to avoid ac-
tion, than it was that of Almagro to precipitate
operations, and bring the contest to a speedy
issue. He had recourte to arts which he had for-
merly pradifed with success, and Almagro was
again weak enough to susser himself to be amused
with a prospect of terminating their differences
by ome amicable accommodation. By varying
his overtures, and shifting his ground as often as
it suited his purpose, ometimes seeming to yield
every thing that his rival could desire, and then
retracting all that he had granted, Pizarro dexte-
roufly protrated the negociation to such a length,
that though every day was precious to Almagro,
several months elapsed without coming to any
final agreement. While the attention of Almagro,
and of the officers with whom he consulted, was
occupied in deteEting and eluding the fraudulent
intentions of the governor, Gonzola Pizarro and
Alvarado found means to corrupt the soldiers to

whose
i Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 1o, 1 i.

BOOK whose cultody they were committed, and not

VI. only made their escape themselves, but persuaded
''3 J' sixty of the men who formerly guarded them to

accompany their flight k. Fortune having thus
delivered one of his brother governor fcru-
pled not at one aft of perfidy more to procure the
release of the other. He proposed, that very
point in controversy between Almagro and him-
self should be submitted to the decifiot of their
sovereign; that until his award was known, each
should retain undisturbed poffeifion of whatever
part of the country he now occupied; that Ser-
dinand Pizarro Ihould be set at liberty, and return
instantly to Spain, together with the officers,
whom Almagro purposed to fend thither to repre-
sent the juice of his claims. Obvious as the de-
sign of Pizarro was in those propositions, and fa-
miliar as his artifices might now have been to his
opponent, Almagro, with a credulity approach-
ing to infatuation, relied on his sincerity, and
concluded an agreement on these terms1.

His prepa. THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recover-
rations for
war.n ed his liberty, the governor, no longer fettered

in his operations by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw off every disguise which his concern for it
had obliged him to assume. The treaty was for-
gotten; pacific and conciliating measures were no
more mentioned; it was in the field, he openly
declared, and not in the cabinet; by arms, and
not by negociation; that it must now be deter-
mined who hould be master of Peru. The rapi-
dity of his preparations suited such a decisive re-
solution. Seven hundred men were soon ready to
1538. march towards Cuzco. The command of these

was

k Zarate, lib. iii. c. 8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. I4.
1 Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 9. Gomata
Hilt. c. 140. Vega, p. I . lib. ii. c. 35.

was given to his two brothers, in whom he could B O O K
perfecly confide for the execution of his most vi- VI.
olent schemes, as they were urged on not only by
the enmity flowing from family rivalfhip, but ani- 1538.
mated with the desire of vengeance, excited by
recollection of their recent disgrace and sufferings.
After an unsuccessful attempt to cross the moun-
tains in the direct road between Lima and Cuzco,
they marched towards the south along the coast
as far as Nafca, and then turning to the left,
penetrated through the defiles in that branch of
the Andes which lay between them and the capi-
tal. Almagro, instead of hearkening to some of
his officers, who advised him to attempt the de-
fence of those difficult passes, waited the approach
of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco. Two rea-
sons seem to have induced him to take this refolu-
tion. His followers amounted hardly to five hun-
dred, and he was afraid of weakening such a
feeble body, by fending any detachment towards
the mountains. His cavalry far exceeded that of
the adverse party, both in number and discipline
and it was only in an open country that he could
avail himself of that advantage.

THE Pizarros advanced without any obftruc-His army

tion, but what arose from the nature of the desert mches to'
and horrid regions through which they marched.
As oon as they reached the plain, both factions
were equally impatient to bring this long-pro-
trafted contest to an issue. Though countrymen,
and friends, the fubjets of the fame sovereign,
and each with the royal standard displayed; and
though they heheld the mountains that surrounded
the plain in which they were drawn up covered
with a vast multitude of Indians, assembled to
enjoy the fpetacle of their mutual carnage, and
prepared to attack whatever party remained maf-
ter of the field; so fell and implacable was the

rancour

B 0 0 K rancour which had taken possession of every breast,

I. that not one pacific counsel, not a ingle over-

ture towards accommodation proceeded from ei-
ther fide. Unfortunately for Almagro, he was so
worn out with the fatigues of service, to which
his advanced age was unequal, that, at this cri-
sis of his fate, he could not exert his wonted ati-
vity; and he was obliged to' commit the leading
of his troops to Orgognez, who, though an offi-
cer of great merit, did not possess the fame afcen-
dant either over the spirit or affedtions of the fol-
diers, as the chief whom they had long been ac-
customed to follow and revere.

April 26. THE conflic was fierce, and maintained by each
A lmagro
datSd,, party with equal courage. On the fide of Almagro,

were more veteran soldiers, and a lai ger proportion
of cavalry; but these were counterbalanced by Pi-
zarro's superiority in numbers, and by two compa-
niesof well-dilciplined mufketeeis, which, on re-
ceiving an account of the insurrection of the In-
dians, the emperor had sent from Sain m. As
the use of fire-arms was not frequent among the
adventurers in America n, hastily equipped for ser-
vice, at their own expence, this small band of
soldiers, regularly trained and armed, was a no-
velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day.
Wherever it advanced, the weight of a heavy
and well-fuflained fire bore down horse and foot
before it; and Orgognez, while he endeavoured
to rally and animate his troops, having received a
dangerous wound, the rout became general. The
barbarity of the conquerors stained the glory which
they acquired by this complete vitory. The vi-
olence of civil rage hurried on some to flaugh-
ter their countrymen with indiscriminate cruel-
ty; the meanness of private revenge instigated
others to ingle out individuals as the objets

of

m Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 8.
n Zarate, lib. iii. c. 8.

of their vengeance. Orgognez and several officers B o K
of diffintion were massacred in cold blood; above VI.
a hundred and forty soldiers fell in the field; a158
large proportion, where the number of combatants 538.
was few, and the heat of the contest soon over.
Almagro, though so feeble that he could not bear
the motion of a horse, had infited on being car-
ried in a litter to an eminence which overlooked
the field of battle. From thence, in the utmost
agitation of mind, he viewed the various move-
ments of both parties, and at last beheld the total
defeat of his own troops, with all the paflionate
indignation of a veteran leader long accustomed
to victory. He endeavoured to save himself by and taken.
flight, but was taken priibner, and guarded with
the ftrideft vigilance .

THE Indians, instead of executing the refolu-

tion which they had formed, retired quietly after
the battle was over; and in the history of the New
World, there is not a more striking infiance of
the wonderful acendant which the Spaniards had
acquired over its inhabitants, than that after feeing
one of the contending parties ruined and difperf-
ed, and the other weakened and fatigued, they
'had not courage to fall upon their en: mies, when
fortune presented an opportunity of attac ing
them with such advantage P.

Cuzco was pillaged by the victorious troops,Newexpe-

who'found there a considerable booty, confiftingd"'i°ns
partly of the gleanings of the Indian treasures,
and partly of the wealth amassed by their antago-
nifts from the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far

did

o Zarate, lib. iii c. I , 12. Vega, p. 1 . lib. ii. c. 36-38.
Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. o--12. lib. iv. c. i-6.

1) Zarate, lib. iii. c. i . Vega, p. 1 . lib. ii. c. 38.

BO O K. did this, and whatever the bounty of their leader

VI. could add to it, fall below the high ideas of the
'-" '~recompence which they conceived to be due to

1538- their merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gra-

tify such extravagant expectations, had recourse
to the fame expedient which his brother had em-
ployed on a similar occasion, and endeavoured to
find occupation for this turbulent assuming spirit,
in order to prevent it from breaking out into open
mutiny. With this view, he encouraged his most
active officers to attempt the discovery and re-
duction of various provinces which had not hi-
therto submitted to the Spaniards. To every
standard erected by the leaders who undertook
any of those new expeditions, volunteers retorted
with the ardour and hope peculiar to the age. Se-
veral of Almagro's soldiers joined them; and thus
Pizarro had the fatisfation of being delivered both
from the importunity of his discontented friends,
and the dread of his ancient enemies q.

Alimagro ALMAGRO himself remained for several months
tried,

in custody, under all the anguilh of fufpence.
For although his doom was determined by the
Pizarros from the moment that he fell into their
hands, prudence constrained them to defer gra-
tifying their vengeance, until the soldiers who had
served under him, as well as several of their own
followers in whom they could not perfetly con-
fide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they set out
upon their different expeditions, Almagro was
impeached of treason, formally tried, and con-
codemned, demned to die. The sentence astonished him;

and though he had often braved death with an
undaunted spirit in the field, its approach, un-
der this ignominious form, appalled him so much,
that he had recourse to abject supplications,

unworthy

q Zarate, lib. iii. c. i2. Gom. Hilt. c. 141. Herrera,
dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

Jt-

tions, unworthy of his form fame. He besought B 6' K
the Pizarros to remember the ancient friendship VI.
between their brother and him, and how. mucft
he had contributed to tho ftecefs and prosperity of 53.
their family; he reminded them of the humanity
with. which, in oppofitidn to the repeated remoft-
Rrances of his own n'ft attached friends, he had
spared their lives whln he had them in his poer;
he conjured them tO pity his age and infirmities,
and- to susser him to pass the wretched remainder of
his days in bewmring his crimes, and in making
his peace with Heaven. The intreaties fays a
Spanish hiftorikn, of a man so much bl6ved,
touched many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears
from many a ardi eye. But the brothers iemain-
ed inflexible. As soon as Almagro knew his fate
to be inevitble, he met it with the dignity and
fortitude of a veteran. He was strangled in prifon,and put to
and afterWards publicly- beheaded. H suffered indath.
the feventy-fifth- year of his age, and left one fHi
by an lndian woman of Panama, whom, though
at that time a prisoner in Lima, he named asfuc-
ceffor to his government, purfuaitt to power
which the emperor had granted him.

As, during the civil dissensions of Feni, all in- 539.

ter¢ourfe with Spain was suspended, the detail of Dne the
the extraordinary transactions there did not fooncourt of
reach the court. Unfortunately for the vitoriEuscrnin the
fation, the first intelligence was brought thitherftate of
by some of Almagro's officers,. who left the:coun-Per
try upon the ruin of their cause; and they related
what had happened, with every circumstance un-
favourable- to Pizarro and his brothers. Their am-
bition, their breach of the. most solemn engage-
ments, their violence and cruelty, were painted

with

r Zarate, lib. iii. c. :z. Gom. Hist; . .41. Vega, p. I.
lib, ii. c. 39. Herrara, dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9. lib. v. c. I.

B 0 0 K with all the malignity and exaggeration of party

VI. hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who arrived oon as-
, 5 ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary

splendor, endeavoured to efface the impreflion
which their accusations had made, and to justify
his brother and himself, by representing Almagro
as the aggressor. The emperor and his ministers,
though they could not pronounce which of the
contending factions was most criminal, clearly
discerned the fatal tendency of their dissensions.
It was obvious, that while the leaders, entrusted
with the conduct of two infant colonies, employed
the arms which should have been turned againfi
the common enemy, in destroying one another,
all attention to the public good must cease; and
there was reason to dread that the Indians might
improve the advantage which their disunion pre-
sented to them, and extirpate both the vitors and
the vanquished. But the evil was more apparent
than the remedy. Where the information which
had been received was so defective and suspicious,
and the scene of ation so remote, it was almost
impossible to chalk out the line of conduct that
ought to be followed; and before any plan that
hould be approved of in Spain could be carried
into execution, the situation of the parties, and
the circumfiances of affairs, might alter so en-
tirely as to render its effects extremely pernici-
ou.

VacadeCa- NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a
ffro sent thi-
therwith person to Peru, vested with extensive and difcre-
amplepw-tionary power, who, after viewing deliberately

the posture of affairs with his own eyes, and en-
quiring upon the spot, into the conduct of the
different leaders, hould be authorised to establish
the government in that form which he deemed
most conducive to the interest of the parent fiate,
and the welfare of the colony. The man feleted

for

for this important charge was Chriftoval Vaca de B o'0 K
Castro5 a judge in the court of royal audience at VI.
Valladolid; and his abilities, integrity, and firm- '1"-v.
fiefs, justified the choice. His inftrutions, though 539
ample, were not such as to fetter him in his ope-
rations. According to the different aspet of as-
fairs; he had power to take upon him different
charaters. If he found the governor fill alive,
he was to assume only the title of judge, to main-
tain the appearance of acting in concert with him,
and to guard against giving any just cause of of-
fence to a man who had merited o highly of his
country. But if Pizarro was dead, he was entrust-
ed with a commission, that he might then pro-
duce, by which he was appointed his successor in
the government of Peru. This attention to Pi-
zarro, however, seems to have flowed rather from
dread of his power, than from any approbation
of his measures; for at the very time that the
court seemed so solicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and
confined to a prison, where he remained above
twenty years .

WHILE Vaca de Castro was preparing for his 1540.

voyage, events of great moment happened in Pe Pizarro di-
ru. The governor, confidering himself, upon the among his
death of Almagro, as the unrivalled possessor of followers
that valt empire, proceeded to parcel out its ter-
ritories among the conquerors; and had this divi-
sion been made with any degree of impartiality,
the extent of country which he had to bestow was
sufficient to have gratified his friends, and to have
gained his enemies. But Pizarro conduEted this
tranfaation not with the equity and candour of a
judge, attentive to discover and to eward merit,

VOL. III. F but

s GomaraHift. c, 142. Vega, p. r t. lib. ii. c. 40. Herre-
ra, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. o, . lib. x. c. i.

B O O K but with the illiberal spirit of a party leader. Large

VI. districts, in parts of the country most cultivated
540 and populous, were set apart as his own proper-

ty, or granted to his brothers, his adherents and;
favourites. To others, lots less valuable and inviting
were afligned. The followers of Almagro, amongit
whom were many of the original adventurers, to
whose valour and perseverance Pizarro was indebt-
ed for his success, were totally excluded from any
portion in those lands,. towards the acquisition of
which they had contributed so largely. As the
vanity of every individual set an immoderate va-
lue upon his own services, and the idea of each,
concerning the recompence due to them, rose gra-
dually to a more exorbitant height in proportion as
their conquefls extended, all who were disappoint-
ed in their expectations, exclaimed loudly against
the rapaciousness and partiality of the governor.
The partisans of Almagro murmured in secret,
and meditated revenge t

Progress of RA P i D as the progress of tle Spaniards in South
arms.pnih America had been since Pizarro landed in Peru,.

their avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied.
The fficers to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated
into several new provinces, and though some of
them were exposed to great hardships in the cold
and barren regions of the Andes, and others sus-
sered distress not inferior amidit the woods and:
marshes of the plains, they made discoveries and
conquests which extended their knowledge of the
country as well as added to their power. Pedro-
de Valdivia re-affumed Almagro's scheme of in-
vading Chili, and, notwithianding the fortitude
of the natives in defending their poffeflions, made-
such progress in the conquest of the country, that
he founded the city of St. Jago, and gave a be-
ginning to the eftablihment of the Spanilh do-

minion-
t Vega, p. 1. lib. ii.. .2. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c.

ninion there u. But of all the enterprises under- B 0 K
taken about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro VI.
was the mos remarkable. The governor, who "
seems to have resolved that no person in Peru Remarkable
hould possess any station of distinguished emi- pediio
nence or authority but those of his own family, Pizarro.
had deprived Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito
of his command in that kingdom, and appointed
his brother Gonzalo to take the government of it.
He inftruted him to attempt the discovery and
conquest of the country to the east of the Andes,
which, according to the information of the In-
dians, abounded with cinnamon and other valua-
ble spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to any of his
brothers in courage, and no less ambitious of ac-
quiring diitintion, eagerly engaged in this diffi-
cult ferviee. He set out from Quito at the. head
of three hundred and forty soldiers, near one half
of whom were horsemen, with four thousand In-
dians to carry their provisions. In forcing their
way through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of
which they were accuftbmedj proved fatal to the
greater part of the wretched attendants. TheHardfhirs
Spaniards, though more robift, and inured to a hey enure;
variety of climates, suffered considerably, and
loft ome men; but when they descended into
the low country, their distress encreafed. During
two months it rained incessantly, without any in-
terval of fair weather long enough to dry their
cloaths . The vast plains upon which they were
now entering, either altogether without inhabi-
tants, or occupied by the rudest and least indus-
trious tribes in the New World, yielded little sub-
fiftence. They could not advance a tfep but as
they cut a road through woods, or made it through
marshes. Such incetfant toil, and continual scar-

F 2 city

u Zarate, lib. iii. c. 13. Ovalle, lib. ii. c. i, &c.
x Zarat~, lib. iv. c. 2.

B O O K city of food, seem more than sufficient to have

V1. exhausted and dispirited any troops. But the for-
540. titude and perseverance of the Spaniards in the

sixteenth century were insuperable. Allured by
frequent but false accounts of rich countries be-
fore them, they persisted in struggling on, until
they reached the banks of the Coca or Napo, one
of the large rivers whose waters pour into the Ma-
ragnon, and contribute to its grandeur. There,
with infinite labour, they built a bark, which
they expected would prove of great utility, both
in conveying them over rivers, in procuring provi-
sions, and in exploring the country. This was
manned with fifty soldiers, under the command
of Francis Orellana, the officer next in rank to
Pizarro. The fiream carried them down with
such rapidity, that they were soon far a-head of
their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
difficulty by land.

Deserted by AT this distance from his commander, Orella-
Orellana. na, a young man of an aspiring mind, began to

fancy himself independent, and, transported with
the predominant paflion of the age, he formed
the scheme of distinguishing himself as a disco-
verer, by following the course of the Maragnon,
until it joined the ocean, and by surveying the
vast regions through which it flows. This scheme
of Orellana's was as bold as it was treacherous.
For, if he be chargeable with the guilt of having
violated his duty to his commander, and with
having abandoned his fellow-foldiers in a pathless
desert, where they had hardly any hopes of fuc-
cess, or even of safety, but what were founded
on the service which they expected from the bark,
his crime is, in some measure, balanced by the
glory of having ventured, upon a navigation of
near two thousand leagues, through unknown na-
tions, in a vessel haitily conftruted with green

timber,

timber, and by very unkilful hands, without pro- B o o K
visions, without a compass, or a pilot. But VI.
his courage and alacrity supplied every defe&t. 154
Committing himself fearlessly to the guidance of Sails down
the stream, the Napo bore him along to the south, the Marag-
until he reached the great channel of the Marag-nn
non. Turning with it towards the coast, he held
on his course in that diretion. He made frequent
descents on both fides of the river, sometimes feiz-
ing by force of arms the provisions of the fierce
savages feated on its banks, and sometimes pro-
curing a supply of food by a friendly intercourse
with more gentle tribes. After a long series of
dangers, which he encountered with amazing for-
titude, and of diftreres which he supported with
no less magnanimity, he reached the ocean ,
where new perils awaited him. These he likewise
surmounted, and got safe to the Spanish fettle-
ment in the island Cubagua; from thence he fail-
ed to Spain. The vanity natural to travellers
who visit regions unknown to the reft of mankind,
and the art of an adventurer, solicitous to magni-
fy his own merit, concurred in prompting him to
mingle an extraordinary proportion of the marvel-
lous in the narrative of his voyage. He pretend-
ed to have discovered nations so rich, that the
roofs of their temples were covered with plates of
gold; and described a republic of women so war-
like and powerful, as to have extended their domi-
nion over a considerable tract of the fertile plains
which he had visited. Extravagant as those tales
were, they gave rife to an opinion, that a region
abounding with gold, distinguished by the name
of El Dorado, and a community of Amazons,
were to be found in this part of the New World;
and such is the propensity of mankind to believe
what is wonderful, that it has been slowly, and

with
x See NOTE XIII,

B O O K with difficulty, that reason and observation have

Vl. exploded those fables. The voyage, however,
54. even when stripped of every romantic embellish-

ment, deserves to be recorded, not only as one of
the most memorable occurrences in that adven-
trous age, but as the first event that led to any
certain knowledge of those immense regions that
firetch eastward from the Andes to the ocean y.

Distress of No words can describe the consternation of Pi-
izarro. zarro, when he did not find the bark at the con-

fluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had
ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would not
allow himself to fufpet that a man, whom he had
entrufied with such an important command, could
be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him at
such a junture. But imputing his absence from
the place of rendezvous to some unknown acci-
dent, he advanced about fifty leagues along the
banks of the Maragnon, expeting every moment
to fee the bark appear with a supply of provisions.
1541. At length he came up with an officer whom Orel-

lana had left to perish in the desert, because he
had the courage to remonstrate against his perfidy.
From him he learned the extent of Qrellana's
crime; and his followers perceived at once their
own desperate situation, when deprived of their
only resource. The spirit of the stoutest hearted
veteran funk within him, and all demanded to be
led back instantly. Pizarro, though he assumed
an appearance of tranquillity, did not oppose their
inclination. But he was now twelve hundred
miles from Quito; and in that long march the
Spaniards encountered hardships greater than
those they had endured in their progress outward,
without the alluring hopes which then soothed

and

y Zarate, lib. iv. c. 4. Gomara Hilt, c. 86. Vega, p. i 1.

lib. iii. c. 4. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ix. c. ,-5. Rodriguez
El Maragnon y Amazonas, lib. i. c. 3.

.and animated them under their sufferings. Hun- B 0 0 K
:ger compelled them to feed on roots and berries, VI.
to eat all their dogs and horses, to devour the
most loathsome reptiles, and even to gnaw the
leather of their saddles and fword-belts. Four
thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten 'Spa-
niards, perished in this wild disastrous expedition,
which.continued near two years; and as fifty men
were aboard the bark with Orellana, only four-
score got back to Quito. These were naked like
savages, and so emaciated with famine, or worn
.out with fatigue, that.they had more the appear-
:ance of fpeetres than of men z.

BUT, instead .of returning to enjoy the repofeNumber of

which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering malcontents
Quito, received accounts of a fatal .event that
threatened calamities more dreadful to him than
those through which he had passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of
his conquefis which has been mentioned, the ad-
herents of Almagro, .confidering themselves as
proscribed .by the party in power, no longer enter-
tained any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in despair resorted to Lima, where
the house of young Almagro was always open to
them, and the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them subsistence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
served under the elder Almagro devoted himself
to his interefis, was quickly transferred to his son,
who was now grown up to the age of manhood,
and possessed all the qualities which captivate the

affections

z Zarate, lib. iv. c. z- . Vega, p. i . lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5,.

14. Herrera, dec. vi. lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lib. ix. c. 2-5. dec. vii'
lib. iii. c. 14. Pizar. Varones Illuftr. 349, &c.

B O O K affections of soldiers. Of a graceful appearance,

. dextrous at all martial exercises, bold, open, ge-

C54. nerous, he seemed to be formed for command
Confider and as his father, conscious of his own inferiority
youngAma- from the total want of education, had been ex-
gro as their .
leader. tremely attentive to have him infftruedin every

science becoming a gentleman; the accomplish-
ments which he had acquired, heightened the re-
spect of his followers, as they gave him diftintion
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a point of
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor was affeetion for Al-
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their own difireffes. Many of them, destitute
of common necessaries a and weary of loitering
away life, a burden to their chief, or to such of
their associates as had saved ome remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed impa-
tiently for an occasion to exert their activity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of all their misery.

Confprea- Their frequent cabals did not pass unobserved;
gainItthelife
of Pizarro, and the governor was warned to be on his guard

against men who meditated some desperate deed,
and had resolution to execute it. But either from
the native intrepidity of his mind, or from con-
tempt of persons whose poverty rendered their
machinations of little consequence, he disregard-
ed the admonitions of his friends. " Be in no
pain, said he carelessly, about my life; it is per-
fetly safe, as long as every man in Peru knows
that I can in a moment put him to death who
dares to harbour a thought againit it." This fe-
curity gave the Almagrians full leisure to digest
and ripen every part of their scheme; and Juan

de
aSee NOTE XIV.

de Herrada, an officer of great abilities, who had B 0 0 K
the charge of Almagrols education, took the lead VIl
in their consultations, with all the zeal which that "
connection inspired, and with all the authority 54
which the ascendant that he was known to have
over the mind of his pupil gave him.

ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid-and kill him

day, the season of tranquillity and repose in all
sultry climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
of the most determined conspirators, allied out
of Almagro's house in complete armour; and
drawing their swords, as they advanced hastily to-
wards the governor's palace, cried out, "Long
live the king, but let the tyrant die." Their as-
fociates, warned of their motions by a signal,
were in arms at different ltations ready to support
them. Though Pizarro was usually surrounded
by such a numerous train of attendants as suited
the magnificence of the most opulent fubje& of
the age in which he lived, yet as he wasjuft risen
from table, and most of his own domestics had
retired to their own apartments, the conspirators
pafled through the two outer courts of the palace
unobserved. They were at the bottom of the
flair-cafe, before a page in waiting could give the
alarm to his matter, who was converting with a
few friends in a large hall. The governor, whose
Rteady mind no form of danger could appal,
flarting up, called for arms, and commanded
Francisco de Chaves to make fait the door. But
that officer, who did not retain so much presence
of mind as to obey this prudent order, running
to the top of the stair-case, wildly alked the con-
fpirators what they meant, and whither they were
going ? Instead of answering, they stabbed him
to the heart, and burst into the hall. Some of
the persons who were there threw themselves from
the windows; others attempted to fly; and a few

drawing

B O K drawing their swords, followed their leader into

VI. an inner apartment. The conspirators, animated
L r'- with having the object of their vengeance now in

'54' view, ruffed forwards after them. Pizarro, with

no other arms than his sword and buckler, de.
fended the entry, and supported by his half-bro-
ther Alcantara, and his little knot of friends, he
maintained the unequal contest with intrepidity
worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigour
of a youthful combatant. " Courage, cried he,
companions, we are yet enow to make those trai-
tors repent of their audacity." But the armour of
the conspirators proteAed them, while every thrust
they made took effet. Alcantara fell dead at his
brother's feet; his other defendants were mortal-
ly wounded. The governor, so weary that he
could hardly wield his sword, and no longer able
to parry the many weapons furiously aimed at
him, received a deadly thrufl full in his throat,
funk to the ground, and expired.

Almagroac- As oon as he was slain, the assassins ran out
knowledged into the freets, and waving their bloody swords,
eruc. proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two

hundred of their associates having joined them,
they conduted young Almagro in solemn pro-
cefion through the city, and aembling the ma-
giftrates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge him as lawful successor to his father
in his government. The palace of Pizarro, to-
gether with the houses of several of his adherents,
were pillaged by the soldiers, who had the satis-
fafion at once of being avenged on their ene-
mies, and of enriching themselves by the spoils of
those through whose hands all the wealth of Peru
had passed b

THE

b Zarate, lib. iv. c. 6-8. Gomara Hist. c. 144, 145. Vega,

p. . lib. iii. c. 5-7. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x. c. 4-7. Pi-
zarro Var. Illust. p. 183.

TaE boldness and success of the conspiracy, asB O 0 K

well as the name and popular qualities of Alma- VL
gro, drew many foldicrs to his flandard. Every 1541
adventurer of desperate fortune, all who were dif- New ap-
satisfied with Pizarro, and, from the rapacious- pearancee of
ness of his government in the latter years of his
life, the number of malcontents was confider-
able, they declared without hesitation, in favour
of Almagro, and he was soon at the head of eight
hundred of the most gallant veterans in Peru.
As his youth and inexperience disqualified him
from taking the command of them himself, he
appointed Herrada to at as general. But though
Almagro speedily collected such a refpetable
force, the acquiescence in his government was far
from being general. Pizarro had left many
friends to whom his memory was dear; the bar-
barous assassination of a man to whom his country
was so highly indebted, filled every impartial per-
son with horror. The ignominious birth of Al-
magro, as well as the doubtful title on which he
founded his pretensions, led others to confider him
as an usurper. The officers who commanded in
some provinces refused to recognize his authority,
until it was comfirmed by the emperor. In
others, particularly at Cuzco, the royal flandard
was erected, and preparations made to revenge
the murder of their ancient leader.

THOSE feeds of discord, which could not have Arrivl of

lain long dormant, acquired greater vigour and ac- caltro,
tivity, when the arrival of Vaca de Caitro was
known. After a long and disastrous voyage, he
was driven by stress of weather into a small har-
bour in the province of Popayan; and proceeding
from thence by land, after a journey no les te-
dious than difficult, he reached Qito. In his
way he received accounts of Pizarro's death, and
of the events which followed upon it. He im-

mediately

B O O K mediately produced the royal commission appoint

VI. ing him governor of Peru, with the fame privi-
154I' leges and authority; and his jurifdistion was

who aiumes acknowledged, without hesitation, by Benalcazar,
the title o Adelantado, or lieutenant-general for the emperor

in Popayan, and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the
absence of Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of
the troops left in Quito. Vaca de Castro not only
aflumed the supreme authority, but ihewed that
he possessed the talents which the exercise of it at
that juncture required. By his influence and ad-
dress he soon assembled such a body of troops, as
not only set him above all fear of being exposed
to any insult from the adverse party, but enabled
him to advance from Quito with the dignity that
became his charater. By dispatching persons of
confidence to the different ettlements in Peru,
with a formal notification of his arrival and of his
commission, he communicated to his countrymen
the royal pleasure with refpet to the government
of the country. By private emissaries, he excited
such officers as had discovered their disapprobation
of Almagro's proceedings, to manifest their duty
to their sovereign, by supporting the person ho-
noured with his commission. Those measures
were productive of great effects. Encouraged by
the approach of the new governor, or prepared
by his machinations, the loyal were confirmed in
their principles, and avowed them with greater
boldness; the timid ventured to declare their fen-
timents; the neutral and wavering, finding it
necessary to chufe a fide, began to lean to that
which now appeared to be the safest as well as the
mos just c.

Condut of ALM A GRO observed the rapid progress of this
Almagro. spirit of difaffeEtion to his cause, and, in order to

give

c Benzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iv. c. 11. Gomara,
c. 146, 147. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x. c. i, 2, 3, 7, &c.

give an effectual check to it before the arrival of B O 0 K
Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head of his troops VI.
for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of
opponents had erected the royal standard, under X542.
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During
his march thither, Herrada, the skilful guide of
his youth and of his counsels, died; and from
that time his measures were conspicuous for their
violence, but concerted with little sagacity; and
executed with no address. Holguin, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de-
scending towards the coast at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco. By a very
simple firatagem, he deceived his unexperiencd
adversary, avoided an engagement, and effeqed
a junetion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who
had been the first to declare against Almagro as
an usurper.

SooN after, Vaca de Castro entered the camp Progress of

with the troops which he brought from Quito, and cac de
erecting the royal standard before his own tent,
he declared, that, as governor, he would dif-
charge in person all the functions of general of
their combined forces. Though formed by the
tenour of his past life to the habits of a sedentary
and pacific profeflion, he at once assumed the ati-
vity and discovered the dicifion of an officer long
accustomed to command. Knowing his strength
to be now far, superior to that of the enemy, he
was impatient to terminate the contest by a battle.
Nor did the followers of Almagro, who had no
hopes of obtaining pardon for a crime so atro-
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that
mode of decision. They met at Chupas, about Sept. 6.
two hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with
all the fierce animosity inspired by the violence of
civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the
eagerness of revenge, and the last efforts of de-

fpair.

BOO K fpair. Vitory, after remaining long doubtful

VI. declared at last for Vaca de Caitro. The superior
54A2 number of his troops, his own intrepidity, and
1542.

Defeats Al the martial talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a ve-
magro. teran officer formed under the great captain in the

wars of Italy, and who on that day laid the foun-
dation of his future fame in Peru, triumphed
over the bravery of his opponents, though led on
by young Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy
of a better cause, and deserving another fate.
The carnage was great in proportion to the num-
ber of the combatants. Many of the vanquish-
ed, especially such as were conscious that they
might be charged with being accessary to the affaf-
fination of Pizarro, rushing on the swords of the
enemy, chose to fall like soldiers, rather than wait
an ignominious doom. Of fourteen hundred men,
the total amount of combatants on both fides, five
hundred lay dead on the field, and the number
of the wounded was fiill greater d.

Severity of IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de
his proceed- Caitro, both in the council and in the field, fur-

-ins. prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were ill

more astonished at his conduct after the viEtory.
As he was by nature a rigid dispenser of justice,
and persuaded that it required examples of ex-
traordinary severity to restrain the licentious spirit
of soldiers so far removed from the feat of go-
vernment, he proceeded directly to try his pri-
foners as rebels. Forty were condemned to susser
the death of traitors, others were banished from
Peru. Their leader, who made his escape from the
battle, being betrayed by some of his officers, was

publicly

d Zarate, lib. iv. c. 12-1-9. Gomara, c. 148. Vega,

p. I i. lib. iii. c. i Ii- 8. Herrara, dec. 7. lib. i. c. I, 2, 3.
lib. iii. c. i--I.

publicly beheaded in Cuzco and in him the name Bo oO K
of Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was VI.
extinct e·

I542.

Du RNG those violent convulsions in Peru,. the conrultati-
emperor and his ministers were intently employed ons of the

byi ^ i- r . they hoped emperor con'

in preparing regulations, by which they hoped cerning his
not only to re-establish tranquillity there, but to dominions in
introduce a more perfet system of internal policy mri
into all their settlements in the New World. Ra-
pid and extensive as the Spanish conquefls in
America had been, they were not carried on by
any regular exertion of the national force, but by
the occasional efforts of private adventurers. After
fitting out a few of thefirft armaments for disco-
vering new regions, the court of Spain, during
the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V.
the former the most intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the most ambitious, was encum-
bered with such a multiplicity of schemes, arnd
involved in war with so many nations of Europe,
that it had not leisure to attend to distant and less
interesting objects. The care of' prosecuting dif-
covery,. or of' attempting conquest, was abandon-
ed to individuals; and with such ardour did men
push forward in this new career, on which novelty,
the spirit of adventure, avarice, ambition, and
and the hope of meriting heaven, prompted them.
with combined influence to enter, that inlefs than
half a century almost the whole of that extensive
empire which Spain now possesses in the New
World, was fubjeted to its dominion. As the
Spanish court contributed nothing towards the va-
rious expeditions undertaken in America, it was
not intitled to claim much from their success.
The sovereignty of the conquered provinces, with
the fifth of the gold and silver, was reserved for

the

e Zarate, lib. iv.c. zi. Gomara, c. 50. Herrera, dec.
7. lib. iii. c. I z. lib. vi. c. i.

B O O K the crown; every thing else was seized by the as-

Vi. fociates as their right. The plunder of the coun-

tries which they invaded served to indemnify them
142. for what they had expended in equipping them-

selves for the service, and the conquered territo-
ry was divided among them, according to rules
which custom had introduced; as permanent efta-
blifhments which their successful valour merited.
In the infancy of those settlements, when their
extent as well as their value were unknown, ma-
ny irregularities escaped observation, and it was
found neceflary to connive at many excesses. The
conquered people were pillaged with defiraive ra-
pacity, and their country parcelled out among its
new maiters in exorbitant shares, far exceeding the
highest recompence due to their services. The
rude conquerors of America, incapable of form-
ing their establishments upon any general or ex-
tensive plan of policy, attentive only to private
interest, unwilling to forego present gain from
the profpe& of remote or public benefit, seem to
have had no objet but to amass sudden wealth,
without regarding what might be the consequences
of the means by which they acquired it. But
when time at length discovered to the Spanish
court the importance of its American possessions,
the necessity of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
practices prevalent among military adventurers,
it was found requisite to substitute the institutions
of regular government.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the islands, and employed themfelvts
in searching for gold and silver with the fame in-
considerate eagerness. Similar effets followed.
The natives employed in this labour by masters,

who

who in imposing their talks had no regard either B O K
to what they felt or to what they were able to per- .
form, pined away and perished so fall, that there 54
was reason to apprehend that Spain, instead of
poffefling countries peopled to such a degree as to
be susceptible of progressive improvement, would
soon remain proprietor only of a vast uninhabited
defart.

THE emperor and his miniffers were so sensible

of this, and' so solicitous to prevent the extincti-
on of the Indian race, which threatened to render
their acquisitions of no value, that from time to
time various laws, which I have mentioned, had
been made for securing to that unhappy people
more gentle and equitable treatment. But the
difiance of America from the feat of empire, the
feebleness of government in the new colonies, the
avarice and audacity of soldiers unaccufsomed to
refiraint, prevented there salutary regulations from
operating with any considerable influence. The
evil continued to grow, and at this time the em-
peror found an interval of leisure from the affairs
of Europe to take it into attentive consideration.
He consulted not only with his minifiers and the e prons
members of the council of the Indies, but called he advises.
upon several persons who had resided long in the
New World, to aid them with the result of their
experience and observation. Fortunately for the
people of America, among these was Bartholo-
mew de las Casas, who happened to be then at
Madrid on a miflion from a chapter of his order at
Chiapa. Though, since the miscarriage of his
former schemes for the relief of the Indians, he
had continued hut up in his cloiffer, or occupied
;n religious funtions, his zeal in behalf of the
former objects of his pity was so far from abating,
that, from an increased knowledge of their susser-

VOL. III. G ings,

f Remefal Hist. de Chiapa, p. 146.

B 0 K ings, its ardour had augmented. He seized ea-

VI. gerly this opportunity of reviving his favourite
l5. maxims concerning the treatment of the Indians.

W5ith the moving eloquence natural to a man on
whose mind the scenes which he had beheld had
made a deep impreflion, he described the irrepa-
rable waste of the human species in the New
World, the Indian race almost totally swept away
in the islands in less than fifty years, and haften-
ing to extinction on the continent with the fame
rapid decay. Wiith the decisive tone of one
strongly prepossessed with the truth' of his own
system, he imputed all this to a tingle cause, to
the exactions and cruelty of his countrymen, and
contended that nothing could prevent the depopu-
lation of America, but the declaring of its na-
tives to be freemen, and treating them as fubjeas,
not as slaves. Nor did he confide for the success
of this proposal in the powers of his oratory alone.
In order to enforce them, he composed his famous
treatise concerning the deftruEion of Americag,
in which he relates, with many horrid circumfian-
ces, but with apparent marks of exaggerated de-
scription, the devastation of every province which
had been visited by the Spaniards.

Hisfo]ici- THE emperor was deeply afflicted with the reci-
ttdeuto- tal of so many ations shocking to humanity.
troduce a
general re- But as his views extended far beyond those of Las
ormJionf.Cafasl he perceived that relieving the Indians from

oppreilion was but one ftep towards rendering his
possessions in the New WVorld a valuable acquifiti-
on, and would be of little avail, unless he could
circumscribe the power and usurpations of his own
fubjeEs there. The conquerors of America, how-
ever great their merit had been towards their
country, were mostly persons of such mean birth,
and of such abject rank in society, as give no

diftintion
g Remefal, p. 192. 199.

diflindion in the eye of a monarch. The exor- B O O K
bitant wealth with which some of them returned, V.
gave umbrage to an age not accuffomed to fee men
in inferior condition elevated above their level,
and rising to emulate or to surpass the ancient no-
bility in splendour. The territories which their
leaders had appropriated to themselves were of
enormous extenth; and if the country should
ever be improved in proportion to the fertility of
the foil, they must grow too wealthy and too pow-
erful for fubjets. It appeared to Charles, that
this abuse required a remedy no less than the other,
and that the regulations concerning both must be
enforced by a mode of government more vigo-
rous than had yet been introduced into America.

WITH this view he framed a body of laws,New regu

lations for

containing many salutary appointments with re- thispurpofe.
fpeat to the conflitution and powers of the fu-
preme council of the Indies; concerning the flati-
on andjurifdiaion of the royal audiences in dif-
ferent parts of America, the adminifiration of
justice, the order of government, both ecclefi-
aftical and civil. These were approved of by all
ranks of men. But together with them were
issued the following regulations, which excited
universal alarm, and occasioned the most violent
convulsions: -" That as the repartisnientos or
lhares of land seized by several persons appear-
ed to be exceflive, the royal audiences are em-
powered to reduce them to a moderate extent:
That upon the death of any conqueror or planter,
the lands and Indians granted to him hall not de-
scend to his widow or children, but return to the
crown: That the Indians shall henceforth be
exempted from personal ervice, and shall not
be compelled to carry the baggage of travellers,
to labour in the mines, or to dive in the pearl fih-

G z cries:
h See N OTE XV.

B K eries: That the fiated tribute due by them to

Vi. their superior shall be ascertained, and they shall
^^" be paid as servants for any work they voluntarily
1542. perform : That all persons who are or have been

in pablic offices, ecclesiastics of every denomina-
tion, hospitals and monasteries, shall be deprived
of the lands and Indians allotted to them, and
these be annexed to the crown: That every per-
son in Peru, who had any criminal concern in the
in the contetis between Pizarro and Almagro,
should forfeit llis lands and Indians'i.

Hi imini- ALL the Spanish miniftets who had hitherto
fterarmon- been entrusted with the direction of American as-
them. fairs, and who were best acquainted with the state

of the country, remonstrated against those regula-
tions, as ruinous to their infant colonies. They re-
presented, that the number of Spaniards who had
hitherto emigrated to the New World was so ex-
tremely small, that nothing could be expected from
any effort of theirs towards improving the vast re-
gions over which they were scattered; that the fuc-
cess of every scheme for this purpose must depend
upon the ministry and service of the Indians,
whose native indolence and aversion to labour, no
profpeC of benefit or promise of reward could
surmount; that the moment the right of im-
posing a talk, and exacting the performance of
it, as taken from their masters, every work of
industry must cease, and all the sources from
which wealth begun to pour in upon Spain mull be
ftopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all times
of his own opinions, and o much impressed at
present with the view of the disorders which reign-
ed in America, that he was willing to hazard the
application even of a dangerous remedy, persisted
in his resolution of publishing the laws. That
they might be carried into execution with greater

vigour

i Herrara, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 5. Fernandez Hist. lib. i. c.
1, 2.

vigour and authority, he authorised Francisco Tel- B O O K
lo de Sandoval to repair to Mexico as viftador or V.
superintendent of that country, and to co-operate 5z.
with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy, in enforc- A viceroy
ing them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez Vela to foPeru.
be governor of Peru, with the title of Viceroy;
and in order to strengthen his adminiitration, he 1543.
eftablifled a court of audience in Lima, in which
four lawyers of eminence were to preside as judges k.

THE viceroy and superintendent failed at the 544.

fame time; and an account of the laws which tEffatif
they were to enforce reached America before them. on in New
The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed Spain.
as the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited
grant of liberty to the Indians affected every Spa-
niard in America without dillinaion, and there
was hardly one who might not on some pretext be
included under the other regulations, and susser
by them. But the colony in New Spain had now
been so long accustomed to the refiraints of law
and authority under the steady and prudent admi-
niftration of Mendoza, that how much soever the
spirit of the new statutes was deteffed and dreaded,
no attempt was made to obftrut the publication of
them by any act of violence unbecoming fubjets.
The magistrates and principal inhabitants, how-
ever, presented dutiful addresses to the viceroy
and superintendent, representing the fatal confe-
quences of enforcing them. Happily for them,
Mendoza, by long residence in the country, was
so thoroughly acquainted with its' state, that
he knew what was for its interest as well as
what it could bear; and Sandoval, though new
in office, displayed a degree of moderation fel-
dom possessed by persons just entering upon the
exercise of power. They engaged to suspend,
for some time, the execution of what was offen-

five

k Zarate, lib. iii. c. 24. Gomara, c. 151. Vega, p. z. lib.
i. C. 20.

B O O K five in the new laws, and not only consented that

Vi. a deputation of citizens hould be sent to Europe

to lay before the emperor the apprehensions of his
7:4 i fubjefts in New Spain with refpeEt to their tenden-

cy and effects, but they concurred with them in
supporting their sentiments. Charles, moved by
the opinion of men whose abilities and integrity
intitled them to decide concerning what fell im-
mediately, under their own view, granted such a
relaxation of the rigour of the laws as re-efta-
blifhed the colony in its former tranquillity .
In Peru. IN Peru the storm gathered with an afpe t Rill

more fierce and threatening, and was not so soon
dispersed. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
much inferior to those who had fubjeted Mexico
to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the
infpedion of the parent state, and intoxicated
with the sudden acquisition of wealth, carried on
all their operations with greater licence and irre-
gularity than any body of adventurers in the New
World. Amidst the general subversion of law
and order, occasioned by two fuccefive civil wars,
when each individual was at liberty to decide for
himself, without any guide but his own interest or
passions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
of subordination. To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the introduction of regular government,
the power of a viceroy, and the authority of a re-
fpeLtable court of judicature, would have appear-
ed formidable restraints, to which they would
have ubmitted \with reluctance. But they revolt-
ed with indignation against the idea of complying
with laws, by which they were to be firipped at
at once of all they had earned so hardly during
many years of service and suffering. As the ac-

count

1 Fernandez Hist. lib. i. c. 3, 4. Vega, p. ii. lib. iii. c. 21,

22. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7, lib. vii. c. 14, 15. Torquem.
Mon. Ind. lib. v . c. 13.

count of the new laws spread fucceflively through B O O K
the different settlements, the inhabitants run to- Vl.
gether, the women in tears, and the men exclaim-
ing against the injustice and ingratitude of their so- 54
vereign in depriving them, unheard and uncon-
victed, of their possessions. " Is this, cried they,
the recompence due to persons, who, without
public aid, at their own expence, and by their
own valour, have fubjeted to the crown of Castile
territories of such vat extent and opulence ? Are
these the rewards bestowed for having endured un-
paralleled distress, for having encountered every
species of danger in the service of their country ?
Whose merit is so great, whose conduct has been
so irreproachable, that he may not be condemned
by some penal clause in regulations, conceived in
terms as loose and comprehensive, as if it had
been intended that all should be entangled in their
snare ? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held
some public office, and all, without diftintion,
have been confirained to take an active part in the
contest between the two rival chiefs. Were the
former to be robbed of their property because
they had done their duty ? Were the latter to
be punished on account of what they could not
avoid ? Shall the conquerors of this great em-
pire, instead of receiving marks of diftinacion,
be deprived of the natural consolation of provid-
ing for their widows and children, and leave them
to depend for subsistence on the scanty supply they
can extort from unfeeling courtiers m ? We are
notable now, continued they, to explore unknown
regions in quest of more secure settlements; our
constitutions, debilitated with age, and'our bo-
dies covered with wounds, are no longer fit for
active service; but still we possess vigour fuffici-

ent
mHerrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, 15.

B O O K ent to assert ourjuf rights, and we will not tame-

VI. ly susser them to be wrefied from us n.
1544. BY discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe-

An inlurrec-
tion p.e- mence, and listened to with universal approbation,
venttd by their pailions were inflamed to such a pitch, that
tne modera-_
tion of they were prepared for the most violent measures;
Cafito. and began to hold consultations in different places,

how they might oppose the entrance of the viceroy
and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws. From
this, however, they were diverted by- the address
of Vaca de Caftio, who flattered them with hopes,
that, as oon as the viceroy and judges hould
arrive, and had leisure to examine their petitions
and remcilfrances, they would concur with them
in endeavouring to procure rome mitigation in the
rigour of lav.;s which had been framed without
due attention either to the slate of the country,
or to te sentiments of the people. A greater
degree of accommodation to there, and even
foli.e concessions on the part of government, were
now become requisite to compose the present ser-
ment, and to sooth the colonists into submission,
b\ inr:'ring :him with confidence in their fuperi-
ors. But without profound discernment, conci-
liating manners, and flexibility of temper, such a

The spirit plan could not be carried on. The viceroy pof-
of (!:'a fe fsed none of these. Of all the qualities that
on icreaftd
by the vice- fit man for high command, he was endowed only
roy. with integrity and courage; the former harsh and

uncomplying, the latter bordering so frequently
on rafinefs or obstinacy, that in his situation they
March 4. were defects rather than virtues. From the mo-

ment that he landed at Tumbez, Nugnez Vela

seems

n Gomara, c. 52. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. o, II. Vega,
p. 11. lib. iii. c. 20. 22. lib. iv. c. 3, 4.

seems to have confidered himself merely as an B O° K
executive officer, without any discretionary pow- VI.
er; and, regardless of whatever he observed or 1
heard concerning the itate of the country, he ad-
hered to the letter of the regulations with unre-
lenting rigour. In all the towns through which
he passed, the natives were delared to be free,
every person in public office was deprived of his
lands and servants; and as an example of obedi-
ence to others, he would not susser a tingle Indian
to be employed in carrying his baggage in his
march towards Lima. Amazement and confter-
nation went before him as he approached; and so
little solicitous was he to prevent them from aug-
menting, that on entering the capital, he .openly
avowed that he came to obey the orders of his so-
vereign, not to dispense with his laws. This
harsh declaration was accompanied with what ren-
dered it fill more intolerable, haughtiness in de-
portment, a tone of arrogance and decision in
discourse, and an insolence of office grievous to
men little accustomed to hold civil authority in
high refpet. Every attempt to procure a fufpen-
sion or mitigation of the new laws, the viceroy
confidered as flowing from a spirit of disaffection
that tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank
were confined, and some put to death, without
any form of trial. Vaca de Cafiro was ar-
relied, and notwithstanding the dignity of his
former rank, and his merit in having prevented a
general insurrection in the colony, he was loaded
with chains, and shut up in the common jailo.

Bu T however general the indignation was a-The mal-

gainfl such proceedings, it is probable that the "huotn.
hand of authority would have been strong enough zaloPizarro

to be their

to leader.

o Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, 24, 25. Gomara, c. 153--15. Ve-
ga, p. 11. lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Fernandez, lib. i. c, 6- o.

B 0 O K to suppress it, and to prevent its burlting out with

VI. open violence, if the malcontents had not been

4 provided with a leader of credit and eminence to
544. unite and to direL their efforts. From the time

that the purport of the new regulations was
known in Peru, every Spaniard there turned his
eyes towards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only person
able to avert the ruin with which they threatened
the colony. From all quarters, letters and ad-
dresses were sent to him, conjuring him to fland
forth as their common protector, and offering to
support him in the attempt with their lives and for-
tunes. Gonzalo, though inferior in talents to his
other brothers, was equally ambitious, and of
courage no less daring. The behaviour of an un-
grateful court towards his brothers and himself,
dwelt continually on his mind, Ferdinand a state
prisoner in Europe, the children of the governor
in custody of the viceroy, and ent aboard his
fleet, himself reduced to the condition of a pri-
vate citizen in a country, for the discovery and
conquest of which Spain was indebted to his family.
These thoughts prompted him to seek for venge-
ance, and to aert the rights of his family, of
which he now confidered himself as the guardian
and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily fur-
mount that veneration for his sovereign which is
interwoven in his frame, the idea of marching in
arms against the royal ifandard filled him with hor-
ror. He hesitated long, and was still unresolved,
when the violence of the viceroy, the universal
call of his countrymen, and the certainty of be-
coming loon a victim himself to the severity of the
new laws, moved him to quit his residence at Chu-
quifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All the
inhabitants went out to meet him, and received
him with transports of joy, as the deliverer of the
colony. In the fervour of their zeal, they eleced
him procurator general of the Spanish nation in

Peru,

Peru, to solicit the repeal of the late regulati-B O O K
ons. They authorised him to lay their re- VI.
monstrances before the royal audience in Lima, '
and upon pretext of danger from the Indians, au- 44
thorifed him to march thither in arms. Under
fanaion of this nomination, Pizarrro took poffeffi-
on of the royal treasure, appointed officers, levied
soldiers, seized a large train of artillery which
Vaca de Cafiro had deposited in Guamanga, and
set out for Lima, as if he had been advancing
against a public enemy, Difaffeaion having now
alfumed a regular form, and being united under
a chief of such a diftinguihed name, many per-
sons of note resorted to his fandard; and a con-
fiderable part of the troops raised by the viceroy
to oppose his progress, deserted to him in a
body p.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had Dissentions

happened there, which encouraged him to pro- the vice
ceed with almost certainty of success. The vio- court of au.
lence of the viceroy's administration was not more dicnce.
formidable to the Spaniards of Peru than his
overbearing haughtiness was odious to his affoci-
ates, the judges of the royal audience. During
their voyage from Spain, some symptoms of
coldness began to appear q. But as oon as they
entered upon the exercise of their respective offices,
both parties were so much exasperated by frequent
contests, arising from interference of jurifdiation
and contrariety of opinion, that their mutual dif-
gust oon grew into open enmity. The judges
thwarted the viceroy in every measure, set at li-
berty prisoners whom he had confined, justified
the malcontents, and applauded their remon-
itrances. At a time when both departments of

government

P Zarate, lib. v. c. i. Gomara, c. 156, 157. Vega, p. i.

lib. iv. c. 4-12. Fernandez, lib. I. c. 12-17. Herrera, dec.
7. lib. vii. c. 18, &c. lib. viii. c. -5.

q Gomara, c. 171.

BOOK government should have united against the ap-

VL. preaching enemy, they were contending with each
1~% - other for superiority. The judges at length pre-

1544.

The vicroy vailed. The viceroy, univerlally odious, and
imprisoned. abandoned even by his own guards, was seized

Sept. I8.

in his palace, and carried to a desert island on the
coast, to be kept there until he could be sent home
to Spain.
Views of THE judges, in consequence of this, having

izarr. afumed the supreme direction of affairs into their

own hands, issued a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a mef-
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to dismiss his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or twen-
ty attendants. They could hardly expeEt that a
man so daring and ambitious would tamely com-
ply with this requisition. It was made, probably
with no such intention, but only to throw a de-
cent veil over their own conduct; for Cepeda, the
president of the court of audience, a pragmatical
and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret
correspondence with Pizarro, and had already
formed the plan, which he afterwards executed,
of devoting himself to his service. The impri-
fonment of the viceroy, the usurpation of the
judges, together with the universal confusion and
anarchy consequent upon events so singular and
unexpected, opened- new and vast profpeats to
Pizarro. He now beheld the supreme power
within his reach. Nor did he want courage to
push on towards the object which fortune present-
ed to his view. Carvajal, the prompter of his
resolutions, and guide of all his actions, had long
fixed his eye upon it as the only end at which Pi-
zarro ought to aim. Instead of the inferior func-
tion of procurator for the Spanish settlements in
Peru, he openly demanded to be governor and cap-

tair

tain general of the whole province, and required B 00 K
the court of audience to grant him a commilfion VI.
to that effet. At the head of twelve hundred '.-
men, within a mile of Lima, where there was 544
neither leader nor army to oppose him, such a re-
quest carried with it the authority of a command.
But the judges, either from unwillingness to relin-
quifh power, or from a desire of preserving some
attention to appearances, hesitated, or seemed to
hesitate, about complying. Carvajal, impatient He afrumes
of delay, and impetuous in all his operations,th gover
marched into the city by. fight, seized several of-
ficers of distinction obnoxious to Pizarro, and
hanged them without the formality of a trial.
Next morning the court of audience issued a com-
mission in the emperor's name,' appointing Pizarro
governor of Peru, with full powers, civil as well
as military, and he entered the town that day with
extraordinary pomp, to take poffeflon of his new
dignity r.

BUT amidst the disorder and turbulence that ac- o. 28.

companied this total dissolution of the frame ofTheversy
government, the minds of men set loose from the liberty.
ordinary restraints of law and authority, ated
with such capricious irregularity, that events no
less extraordinary than unexpected followed in a
rapid fucceflion. Pizarro had scarcely begun to
exercise the new powers with which he was invest-
ed, when he beheld formidable enemies rife up
to oppose him. The viceroy had been put on
board a vessel by the judges of the audience, in
order that he might be carried to Spain under cuf-
tody of Juan Alvarez, one of their own number:
as soon as they were out at sea, Alvarez, either
touched with remorse or moved by fear, fell at
the feet of his prisoner, declaring him from that

moment

r Zarate, lib. v. c. 8-io. Vega, p. xl.lib. iv. c. 13-19.

Gomara, c. 159-163. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 18-25. Her-
rera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 10 -o.

B 00K moment to be free, and that he himself, and

Vl. every person in the ship, would obey him as the

1 rlegal representative of their sovereign. Nugnez
1* Vela ordered them to fleer to Tumbez, and land-

ing there, ereted the royal fiandard, and refum-
ed his funcions of viceroy. Several persons of
note, to whom the contagion of the seditious spirit
which reigned at Cuzco and Lima had not reached,
infrantly avowed their resolution to support his au-
thority s. The violence of Pizarro's government,
who observed every individual with the timid jea-
lousy natural to usurpers, and punished every
appearance of difaffetion with rigour, oon aug-
mented the number of his adherents, as it forced
some leading men in the colony to fly to him for
refuge. While he was gathering such strength at
Tumbez, that his forces began to assume the ap-
pearance of what was confidered as an army in
America, Diego Centeno, a bold and active of-
sicer, exasperated by the cruelty and oppression
of Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in the province of
Charcas, formed a conspiracy again ft his life, cut
him off, and declared for the viceroy t.

1545. PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear-
Piarco ances of hostility in the opposite extremes of the
marches
againtt hm. empire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to as-

fert the authority to which he had attained, with
the spirit and conduct of an officer accustomed to
command, and marched diretly againfi the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as moRi
formidable. As le was malter of the public revenues
in Peru, and roft of the military men were attach-
ed to his family, his troops were so numerous, that
the viceroy unable to face them retreated towards

Qito.

5 Zarate, lib. v. c. 9. Gomara, c. 165. Fernandez, lib. i. c.
23. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 15.

t Zarate, lib. v. c. i8. Gomara, c. 169. Herrera, dec. 7.
lib. ix. c. 27.

Quito. Pizarro followed him, and in that long B OO K
march, through a wild mountainous country, both VI.
suffered hardships and encountered difficulties, "v
which no troops, but those accustomed to serve in 45
America, could have endured or surmounted u. The
viceroy had scarcely reached Quito, when the
van-guard of Pizarro's forces appeared, led by Car-
vajal, who, though near fourscore, was as hardy
and active as any young soldier under his command.
Nugnez Vela infiantly abandoned a town inca-
pable of defence, and with a rapidity more refem-
bling a flight than a retreat, marched into the
province of Popayan. Pizarro continued to pur-
sue, but finding it impossible to overtake him, re-
turned to Quito. From thence he dispatched
Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who was growing
formidable in the southern provinces of the em-
pire, and he himself remained there to make head
againit the viceroy x.

BY his own ativity, and the assistance of Be- The viceroy

nalcazar, Nugnez Vela oon assembled four hun-deftated,
dred men in Popayan. As he retained, amidst
all his difaffers, the faffie elevation of mind, and
the fame high sense of his own dignity, he rejeEt-
ed with disdain the advice of some of his fol-
lowers, who urged him to make overtures of ac-
commodation to Pizarro, declaring that it was
only by the sword that a contest with rebels could
be decided. With this intention he marched back 545.
to Quito. Pizarro, relying on the superior num-
ber, and still more on the discipline and valour of
his troops, advanced resolutely to meet him. The january 8.
battle was fierce and bloody, both parties fighting
like men who knew that the poffefion of a great

empire,

u See NOTE XVI. x Zarate, lib. v. c. i5, 6-24.

Gomara, c. 167. Vega, p. il. lib. iv. c. S2-8. Fernan-
dez, lib. . c. 34. 40. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 6. 20-27.

B O O K empire, the fate of their leaders, and their own

Vl. future fortune, depended upon the issue of that
" 7 day. But Pizarro's veterans pushed forward with

such regular and weli-directed force, that they
soon began to make impreflion on their enemies.
The viceroy, by extraordinary exertions, in
v.'hich the abilities of a commander and the cou-
rage of a soldier were equally displayed, held vic-
and slain. tory for ome time in suspense. At length he fell,

pierced with many wounds; and the rout of his--
followers became general. They were hotly pur-
sued. His head was cut off, and placed on the
public gibbet in Quito, which Pizarro entered in
triumph. The troops assembled by Centeno were
dispersed oon after by Carvajal, and he himself
compelled to fly to the mountains, where he re-
mained for several months concealed in a cave.
Every person in Peru, from the frontiers of Po-
payan to those of Chili, submitted to Pizarro;
and by his fleet, under Pedro de Hinojofa, he had
not only the unrivalled command of the South-
Sea, but had taken poffeflion of Panama, and
placed a garrison in Nombre de Dios, on the op-
pofite fide of the isthmus, which rendered him
master of the usual avenue of communication be-
tween Spain and Peru .

Pizarro ad- AFTER this decisive victory, Pizarro and his
ifumdthefoj- followers remained for ome time at Qito, and
vereignty of during the firfi transports of their exultation, they
Peru. ran into every excess of licentious indulgence,

with the riotous spirit usual among low adven-
turers upon extraordinary success. But, amidst
this dissipation, their chief and his confidents were
obliged to turn their thoughts sometimes to what

was

y Zarate, lib. v. c. 31, 32. Gomara, c. 70o. Vega, p. I.

lib. iv. c. 33, 34. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 51-54. Herrera,
dec. 7. lib. x. c. 12. 19-22. dec. 8. lib. i. c. I-3. Benzo,
lib. iii. c. 12.

Was serious, and deliberated with much solicitude B o 0 IC
concerning the part that he ought now to take. VI.
Carvajal, no less bold and decisive in counsel than '
ii the field, had from the beginning warned Pi- 546
zarro, that in the career on which he was entering,
it was in vain to think of holding a middle course
that he rmuft either boldly aim at all, or attempt
nothing. From the time that Pizarro obtained
possession of the government of Peru, he inculcat-
ed the fame maxim with greater earnestness.
Upon receiving an account of the victory at Qito,
he remonstrated with him in a tone still more per-
emptory. "You have usurped (said he, in a let-
ter written to Pizarro on that occasion) the fu-
preme power in this country, in contempt of the
emperor's commiflion to another. You have
marched, in hoflile array, againfi the royal stand-
ard; you have attacked the representative of your
sovereign in the field, have defeated him, and
cut offhis head. Think not that ever a monach will
forgive such insults on his dignity, or that any re-
conciliation with him can be cordial or sincere.,
Depend no longer on the precarious favour of
another. Assume yourself the sovereignty over a
country, to the dominion of which your fatnily
has a title founded on the rights bosh of disco-
very and conquest. It is in your power to attach
every Spaiiard in Peru of any consequence invio-
lably to your interest by liberal grants of lands and
of Indians, or by infituting ranks of nobility,
ofr creating titles of honour similar to those which
are courted with so much eagerness in Europe.
By eftablilhing orders of knighthood, with pri-
vileges and diftindions resembling those in Spain,
you may bestow a gratification upon the officers in
your service, suited to the ideas of military men.
Nor is it to your countrymen only that you ought
to attend; endeavour to gain the natives. By
marrying the Coya, or daughter of the Sun next in

VOL. III. H fuccef-

B OOK fucceflion to the crown, you will induce the In-

vl. dians, out of veneration for the blood of their an-
'7, cient princes, to unite with the Spaniards in sup-

port of your authority. Thus, at the head of the
principal inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the
new settlers there, you may set at defiance the
power of Spain, and repel with ease any feeble
force which it can fend at such a distance." Ce-
peda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's confi-
dential counsellor, warmly seconded Carvajal's ex-
hortations, and employed whatever learning he
poffefled in demonfirating, that all the founders
of great monarchies had been raised to pre-emi-
nence, not by the antiquity of their lineage, or
the validity of their rights, but by their own en-
terprifing valour and personal merit a.

But chufes PI Z A R RO listened attentively to both, and could
to negoite not conceal the fatisfadion with which he contem-
court of plated the object that they presented to his view.
Spain. But happily for the tranquillity of the world, few

men possess that superior strength of mind, and
extent of abilities, which are capable of forming
and executing such daring schemes, as cannot be
accomplished without overturning the established
order of society, and violating those maxims of
duty which men are accustomed to hold sacred.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed
his ambition within more narrow limits. Infsead
of aspiring at independent power, he confined
his views to the obtaining from the court of Spain
a confirmation of the authority which he now
possessed; and for that purpose, he sent an officer
of diftinaion thither, to give such a reprefenta-
tion of his conduct, and of the state of the coun-

try,

z Vega, p. 1 . lib. iv. c. 40. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 34 lib. ii.
c. 13. 49. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. ii. c. o0.

try, as might induce the emperor and his mi-B O OK
niffers, either from inclination or from necessity, VI
to continue him in his present station. ic

1546.

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refpet Cofultati-

to the part which he hould take, consultations ons ofthe
were held in Spain, with no less solicitude, con- niaer,.
cerning the measures which ought to be pursued
in order to re-establish the emperor's authority
in Peru. Though unacquainted with the last ex-
cesses of outrage to which the malcontents had
proceeded there, the court had received an ac-
count of the infurre&ion againff the viceroy, of
his imprisonment, and the usurpation of the go-
vernment by Pizarro. A revolution so alarming,
called for an immediate interposition of the em-
peror's abilities and authority. But as he was
fully occupied at that time in Germany, in con-
ducting the war againfl the famous league of
Smalkalde, one of the most interesting and ar-
duous enterprises in his reign, the care of provid-
ing a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved
upon his son Philip, and the counsellors whom
Charles had appointed to assist him in the govern-
ment of Spain during his absence. At first view,
the ations of Pizarro and his adherents appeared
so repugnant to the duty of fubjets towards their
sovereign, that the greater part of the ministers
insisted on declaring them infiantly to be guilty
of rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them
with exemplary rigour. But when the fervour
of their zeal and indignation began to abate, in-
numerable obstacles to the execution of this mea-
sure presented themselves. The veteran bands
of infantry, the strength nd glory of the Spa-
nifh armies, were then employed in Germany.
Spain, exhausted of men and money by a long
series of wars, in which he has been involved by

H 2 the

B 0 K the restless ambition of two fucceflive monarchs,

VI. could not easily equip an armament of sufficient
<h6' Cforce to reduce Pizarro. To transport any re-

156. fpetable body of troops to a country so remote as

Peru, appeared almost impossible. While Pizar-
ro continued master of the South-Sea, the direc
route by Nombre de Dios and Panama was m-
practicable. An attempt to march to Qito by
land through the new kingdom of Granada, and
the province of Popayan, across regions of vast
extent, desolate, unhealthy, or inhabited by fierce
and hoitile tribes, would be attended with unfur-
mountable danger and hardships. The passage
to the South-Sea by the Straits of Magellan was
so tedious, so uncertain, and so little known in
that age, that no confidence could be placed in
any effort carried on in a course of navigation so
remote and precarious. Nothing then remained
but to relinquish the system which the ardour of
their loyalty had first suggested, and to attempt
by lenient measures what could not be effeced
by force. It was manifest from Pizarro's folici-
tude to represent his conduEt in a favourable light
to the emperor, that, notwithstanding the excesses
of which he had been guilty, he frill retained fen-
timents of veneration for his sovereign. By a
proper application to these, together with some
such conceflions as should discover a spirit of mo-
deration and forbearance in government, he might
be yet reclaimed, or the ideas of loyalty natural
to Spaniards might so far revive among his fol-
lowers, that they would no longer lend their aid
to uphold his usurped authority.

Cas.a p- THE success, however, of this negociation, no
poeintedt less delicate than it was important, depended en-
repair to Peru
as president. tirely on the abilities and address of the person to

whom it hould be committed. After weighing
with much attention the comparative merit of

various

various persons, the Spanish ministers fixed with B 0 0
unanimity of choice, upon Pedro de la Gafca, a VI.
priest in no higher station than that of counsellor , 46.
to the inquisition. Though in no public office,
he had been occasionally employed by govern-
ment in affairs of trust and consequence, and had
condu&ced them with no less skill than success;
displaying a gentle and insinuating temper, ac-
companied with much firmness; probity, fipe-
rior to any feeling of private interest; and a cau-
tious circumfpeaion in concerting measures, fol-
lowed by such vigour in executing them, as is
rarely found in alliance with the other. These
qualities marked him out for the funcion to
which he was destined. Tie emperor, to whom
Gafca was not unknown, warmly approved of the
choice, and communicated it to him in a letter,
containing expressions of good-will and confi-
dence, no less honourable to the prince vYho
wrote, than to the subjet who received it. Gas-
ca, notwithtfanding his advanced age and feeble
confitution, and though, from the apprehensions
natural to a man, who, during the course of his
life, had never been out of his own country, he
dreaded the effets .of a long voyage, and of an
unhealthy climate,, did not hesitate a moment
about complying with the will of his sovereign.
In order to fwew that it was from this principle His mode-
alone that he ated, he refused a bishopric which ration.
was offered to him, in order that he might bear a
more dignified character; he would accept of no
higher title than that of president of the court of
audience in Lima; and declared that he' would-
receive no salary on account of his discharging the
duties of that office. All he required was, that
the expence of supporting his family should be
defrayed by the public, and as he was to go like

a minister
a Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 17.

B 0 K a minister of peace with his gown and breviary,

VI. and without any retinue but a few domestics, this
6-'g would not load the revenue with any enormous

burden b

The powers B T while he discovered such disinterested mo-
committed
to him. deration with refpeLt to whatever related person-

ally to himself, he demanded his official powers in
a very different tone. He infiffed, as he was to
be employed in a country so remote from the feat
of government, where he could not have recourse
to his sovereign for new inftruations on every
emergence; and as the whole success of his ne-
gociations mufl depend upon the confidence
which the people with whom he had to treat
could place in the extent of his powers, that he
ought to be invested with unlimited authority,
that hisjurifdiaion must reach to all persons and
to all causes; that he must be empowered to par-
don, to punish, or to reward, as circumstances
and the behaviour of different men might require;
that, in cafe of resistance from the malcontents,
he might be authorised to reduce them to obe-
dience by force of arms, to levy troops for that
purpose, and to call for affiflance from the go-
vernors of all the Spanish settlements in America.
These powers, though manifefily conducive to
the great objects of his miflion, alppeared to the
Spaniih minifiers to be inalienable prerogatives
of royalty, which ought not to be delegated to a
subjed, and they refused to grant them. But the
emperor's views were more enlarged. As from
the nature of his employment, Gafca must be en-
trusted with discretionary power in several points,
and all his efforts might prove ineffetual if he was

circum-

b Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, c. 174. Fernandez, lib. ii.

c. 4-16. Vega, p. i. lib. v. c. i. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. i
C.4, &c.

circumscribed in any one particular, Charles fcru- B OI
pled not to invest him with authority to the full VI.
extent that he demanded. Highly satisfied with N
this fresh proof of his mater's confidence, Gafca
hatened his departure, and without either money
or troops, set out to quell a formidable rebellion c. May 26.

ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, lie found ,I'Y ,7a

Hernan Mexia, an officer of note, posted there, at Panama.
by order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of
men, to oppose the landing of any hostile forces.
But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
train so little formidable, and with a title of no such
dignity as to excite terror, that he was received
with much refpe&. From Nombre de Dios he
advanced to Panama, and met with a similar re-
ception from Hinojofa, whom Pizarro had en-
trusted with the government of that town, and
the command of his fleet stationed there. In
both places he held the fame language, declaring
that he was sent by their Sovereign as a messenger
of peace, not as a minister of vengeance; that
he came to redress all their grievances, to revoke
the laws which had excited alarm, to pardon past
offences, and to re-eflablifh order and justice in
the government f Peru. His mild deportment,
the simplicity of his manners, the fanaity of his
profession, and a winning appearance of candour,
gained credit to his declarations. The veneration
due to a person clothed with legal authority, and
acting in virtue of a royal commission, began to
revive among men accustomed for ome time to
nothing more refpetable than an ufurpedjurifdic-
tion. Hinojofa, Mexia,\ and several other of-
ficers of diftindion, to each of whom Gafca ap-
plied separately, were gained over to his interest,

and
c Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 6-18.

B O 0 K and waited only for some decent occasion of de-

VI. daring Qpenly n his favour d
T546.'

Violentpro- THIS the violence of Pizarro oon afforded
peedings of them. As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival at

Panama, though he received at the fame time an
account of the nature of his commiflion, and was
informed that he offered to render every Spaniard
in Peru easy concerning what was past, by an
act of general oblivion; and secure with refpet
to the future, by repealing the obnoxious laws
instead of accepting with gratitude his sovereign's
gracious concefiions, he was so much exafperat-
ed on finding that he was not to be continued in
his flation as governor of the country, that he
inflantly resolved to oppose the president's entry
into Peru, and to prevent his exercising anyju-
rifdiction there. To this desperate resolution he
added another highly preposterous. He ent a
new deputation to Spain to justify this condut,
and to insist, in name of all the communities in
Peru, for a confirmation of the government to him-
self during life, as the only means of preserving
tranquillity there. The persons entrusted with
this firange commission, intimated the intention
of Pizarro to the president, and required him, in
his name, to depart from Panama and return to
Spain. They carried likewise secret iniruCtions
to Hinojofa, directing him to offer Gafca a pre-
sent of fifty thousand pesos, if he would comply
voluntarily with what was demanded of him; and
if he should continue obstinate, to cut him off ei-
ther by assassination or poison e.

MANY

d Fernandez, lib. ii. c. zi, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6, 7.

Gomara, c. 175. Vega, p. i i. lib. v. c. 3. e Zarate, lib. vi.
c. 8. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. ii,
C. 9, 10.

MANY circumfiances concurred in pushing on B 0 0 K

Pizarro to those wild measures. Having been VI.
once accustomed to the pre-eminence of supreme 16
command, he could not bear the thoughts of Gafca gains
descending to a private flation. Conscious of his his fleet.
own demerit, he fufpe&ed that the emperor flu-
died only to deceive him, and would never par-
don the outrages which he had committed. His
chief confidents, no lets guilty, entertained the
fame apprehensions. The approach of Gafca
without any military force excited no terror.
There were now above fix thousand Spaniards
fettled in Peru ; and at the head of these he
doubted not to maintain his own independence,
if the court of Spain mhould refute to grant what
he required. But he knew not that a spirit of de-
section had already begun to spread among those
whom he trusted molt. Hinojofa, amazed at his
precipitate resolution of setting himself in oppo-
fition to the emperor's commillion, and disdain-
ing to be his instrument in executing the odi-
ous crimes pointed out in his secret infirutions,
publicly recognized the president as his only law-
ful superior. The officers under his command did
the fame. Such was the contagious influence of
the example, that it reached even the deputies
who had been ent from Peru; and at the time
when Pizarro expected to hear either of Gafca's
return to Spain, or of his death, he received an
account of his being mailer of the fleet, of Pa-
trama, and of the troops stationed there.

IRRITA TED almost to madness by an event Pizarro re-

so unexpected, he openly prepared for war; and so o
in order to give ome colour of justice to his 1547.
arms, he appointed the court of audience in Li-

ma -
f Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. i.

B O O K ma to proceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes

vI. of having seized his ships, seduced his officers,
V-- and prevented his deputies from proceeding on
'547 their voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though ai'ng

as a judge in virtue of the royal commifion, did
not scruple to prostitute the dignity of his function
by finding Gafca guilty of treason, and condemn-
ing him to death on that account g. Wild, and
even ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it im-
posed on the low illiterate adventurers, with
whom Peru was filled, by the semblance of a
legal fanEtion, warranting Pizarro to carry on
hoftilitiesagainft a convited traitor. Soldiers ac-
cordingly resorted from every quarter to his ftan-
dard, and he was soon at the head of a thousand
men, the best equipped that had ever taken the
field in Peru.

Preparations G ASC A, on his part, perceiving that force muff
of Gafca. be employed in order to accomplish the purpose

of his mifion, was no less afliduous in collecting
troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
settlements on the continent and with such fuc-
cess, that he was soon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet with a considerable body of
April. soldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance

excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did
not attempt for rome time to make any descent,
they did more effectual service, by setting ashore
in different places, persons who dispersed copies
of the aO of general indemnity, and the revoca-
tion of the late edits; and who made known
every where the pacific intentions, as well as mild
temper of the president. The effect of spreading
this information was wonderful. All who were
dissatisfied with Pizarro's violent administration,

all

E Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 55. Vega, p. i. lib. v. c. 7. Her-
rera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

all who retained any sentiments of fidelity to their B o O K

VI.

Sovereign, began to meditate revolt. Some open- I
ly deserted a cause which they now deemed to be 157
unjust. Centeno, leaving thecave in which he lay Infurreion
concealed, assembled about fifty of his former ad- of Centcno;
herents, and with this feeble half-armed band ad-
vanced boldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in
the night-time, in which he displayed no less mili-
tary kill than valour, he rendered himself matter
of that capital, though defended by a garrison of
five hundred men. Molf of these having ranged
themselves under his banners, he had soon the
command of a refpetable body of troops 4.

PIZ4RRo, though astonished at beholding one againf

enemy approaching by sea, and another by land, zarro matPch-
at a time when he trusted to the union of all Perues,
in. his favour, was of a spirit more undaunted,
and more accustomed to the vicissitudes of for-
tune, than to be disconcerted or appalled. As
the danger from Centeno's operations was the
most urgent, he instantly set out to oppose him.
Having provided horses for all his soldiers, he
marched with amazing rapidity. But every morn-
ing he found his force diminithed by numbers who
had left him during the night; and though he be-
came suspicious to excess, and punished without
mercy all whom he fufpe&ed, the rage of defer-
tion was too violent to be checked. Before he
got within fight of the enemy at Huarina, near
the lake Titiaca, he could not muster more than
four hundred soldiers. But these he justly con-
fidered as men of tried attachment, on whom he
might depend. They were indeed the boldest
and most desperate of his followers, conscious
like himself of crimes for which they could hardly

expe&

h Zarate, lib. vi. c. 13-i 6. Gomara, c. 180, 1 8 1. Ser-
nandez, lib. ii. c. 28. 64, &c.

B O 0 K expet forgiveness, and without any hope but in

VI. the success of their arms. With Ihefe he did not
,'"^ hesitate to attack Centeno's troops, though double
Oaoer 20. to his own in number. The royalifis did not de-

cline the combat. It was the most obstinate and

.nd defeas bloody that had hitherto been fought in Peru. At
him, length the intrepid valour of Pizarro, and the fu-

periority of Carvajal's military talents, triumphed
over numbers, and obtained a complete victory.
The booty was immense i, and the treatment of
the vanquished cruel. By this signal success the
reputation of Pizarro was re-established, and
being now deemed invincible in the field, his
army increased daily in number k.

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the splendid
victory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Li-
ma, when the citizens, weary of his oppressive
dominion, ereted the royal standard, and Alda-
na, with a detachment of soldiers from the fleet,

Garca lands took poffefion of the town. About the fame
in Pru. time ', the president landed at Tumbez with five

hundred men. Encouraged by his pretence, eve-
ry settlement in the low country declared for the
king. The situation of the two parties was now
perfectly reverted; Cuzco and the adjacent pro-
vinces were possessed by Pizarro; all the reft of
the empire, from Quito outhward, acknowledg-
ed the jurifdition of Gafca. As his numbers
augmented fall, Gafca advanced into the interior
part of the country. His behaviour still conti-
nued to be gentle and unassuming; he expressed,
on every occasion, his ardent with of terminating
the contest without bloodshed. More solicitous to

reclaim

i See NOTE XVII. k Zarate, lib. vii. c. 2, 3.

Gomara, c. 181. Vega, p. 1 I. lib. v. c. 8, &c. Fernandez,
lib. ii. c. 79. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. i, 2. Zarate,
lib. vi. c. 1 7.

reclaim than to punish, he upbraided no man for B OO K
past offences, but received them as a father re- vl.
ceives penitent children returning to a sense of'
their duty. Though desirous of peace, he did 1547
not flaken his preparations for war. He appoint-
ed the general rendezvous of his troops in the
fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco m.
There he remained for some months /not only Advans
that he might have time to make another attempt towards
towards an accommodation with Pizasro, but that uzcO'
he might train his new soldiers to the use of arms,
and accustom them to the discipline of a camp,
before he led them againit a body of victorious
veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with the success
which had hitherto accompanied his arms, and
elated with having again near a thousand men un-
der his command, refused to liften to any terms,.
although Cepeda, together with several of his.of-
ficers, and even Carvajal himself", gave it as
their advice to close with the president's offer of a
general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious lawso. Gafca having tried in vain every Dec. 29.
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the blood
of his countrymen, began to move towards Cuzco
at the head of sixteen hundred men.

«*i ' .1

PIZARRO, confident of victory, suffered the oth parties

royalists to pass all the' rivers that lie between rere so
Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and to
advance within four leagues of that capital, flat- 54
tering himself that a defeat in such a situation as
rendered a retreat impracticable would at once
terminate the war. He then marched out to
meet the enemy, and Carvajal chore his ground, Apr
and made the disposition of the troops with the
discerning eye, and profound knowledge in the

art

m Zarate, lib v. vi. c. . Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 77. 82.
n See NOTE XVIII. o Zarate, lib. vii c. 6.
Vega, p. it. lib. v. c. 27.

B 0 0 K art of war, conspicuous in all his operations. As

VI. the two armies moved forward slowly to the

charge, the appearance of each was singular. In
54' that of Pizarro, composed of men enriched with

the spoils of the mofft opulent country in America,
every officer, and almost all the private men were
clothed in susss of silk, or brocade, embroidered
with gold and silver; and their horses, their arms,
their tfandards, were adorned with all the pride
of military pomp P. That of Gafca, though not
so splendid, exhibited what was no less firiking.
He himself, accompanied by the archbishop of
Lima, the bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a great
number of ecclesiastics, marching along the lines,
blefling the men, and encouraging them to a re-
solute discharge of their duty.

Pizarrode- WHEN both were just ready to engage, Cepeda
fcrt.d by his let spurs to his horse, galloped off, and surrender-

ed himself to the president. Garcilaffo de la Ve-
ga, and other officers of note, followed his exam-
ple. The revolt of persons in such high rank
firuck all with amazement. The mutual confi-
dence on which the union and firength of armies
depend, ceased at once. Difiruft and confierna-
tion spread from rank to rank. Some silently
flipped away, others threw down their arms, the
greatest number went over to the royalists. Pi-
zarro, Carvajal, and some leaders, employed au-
thority, threats, and entreaties to flop them, but
in vain. In less than half an hour, a body of
men, which might have decided the fate of the
Peruvian empire, was totally dispersed. Pizarro,
feeing all irretrievably loft, cried out in amaze-
ment to a few officers who frill faithfully ad-
hered to him, "' What remains for us to do ?"
" Let us ruih, replied one of them, upon the
enemy's firmest battalion, and die like Romans."
DejeAed with such a reverse of fortune, he

had
P Zarate, lib. vi. c. x1.

had not spirit to follow this soldiery counsel, and B O K
with a tameness disgraceful to his former fame, he VL.
surrendered to one of Gafca's officers. Carvajal, 548.
endeavouring to escape, was overtaken and seized. taken,

GASCA, happy in this bloodless vietory, didand put to

not stain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and dech.
a small number of the most distinguished or noto-
rious offenders, were punished capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he surrendered.
He submitted to his fate with a composed dignity,
and seemed desirous to atone by repentance for
the crimes which he had committed. The end
of Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his trial
he offered no defence. When the sentence ad-
judging him to be hanged was pronounced, he
carelessly replied, " One can die but once." Dur-
ing the interval between the sentence and execu-
tion, he discovered no sign either of remorse for
the past, or of solicitude about the future; scoff-
ing at all who visited him, in his usual sarcastic
vein of mirth, with the fame quickness of repar-
tee and gross pleasantry as at any other period of
his life. Cepeda, more criminal than either,
ought to have fared the fame fate; but the me-
rit of having deserted his associates at such a cri-
tical moment, and with such decisive effect, saved
him from immediate punishment. He was sent,
however, as a prisoner to Spain, and died in con-
finement q.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

historians have given of the civil dissensions that
raged in Peru, with little interruption, during ten
years, many circumstances occur so striking, and

which

q Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6. 7, 8. Gomara, c. 185, 186. Vega,

p. . lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 86, &c. Her-
rera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &c.

B o O K which indicate such an uncommon state of man.-

VI_ ners, as to merit particular attention.
1548. THOUGH the Spaniards who first invaded Pe-
ay foldiesru were of the lowest order in society, and the
in the civil greater part of those who afterwards joined them

ar of P' were persons of desperate fortune, yet in all the

bodies of troops brought into the field by the dif-
ferent leaders who contended for superiority, not
one man acted as a hired soldier, that follows his
flandard for pay. Every adventurer in Peru con-
fidered himself as a conqueror, entitled, by his ser-
vices, to an establishment in that country which
had been acquired by his valour. In the contests
between the rival chiefs, each chose his fide as he
was directed by his own judgment or affections.
He joined his commander as a companion of his
fortune, and disdained to degrade himself by re-
ceiving the wages of a mercenary. It was to
their swords, not to pre-eminence in office, or no-
bility of birth, that most of the leaders whom
they followed were indebted for their elevation
and each of their adherents hoped, by the fame
means, to open a way for himself to the possession
of power and wealth r.

Armies im- BUT though the troops in Peru served without
menely ex- any regular pay, they were raised at immense ex-,

pence. Among men accustomed to divide the
spoils of an opulent country, the desire of ob-
taining wealth acquired incredible force; The ar-
dour of pursuit augmented in proportion to the
hope of success. Where all were intent on the
fame objeEt, and under the dominion of the fame
passion, there was but one mode of gaining men,
or of securing their attachment. Officers of name
and influence, betides the promise of future efta-
blifhments, received in hand large gratuities from

the
rVega, p. . lib. iv. c. 38.41.

the chief with whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pi- B O O K
zarro, in order to raise a thousand men, advanc- VI.
ed five hundred thousand pesoss. Gafca expend- 58.'
ed on the troops which he led against Pizarro nine
hundred thousand pefost. The distribution of
property, bestowed as the reward of success, was
still more exorbitant, Cepeda, as the recompence And im-
of his perfidy and address, in persuading the court menr:e e
of royal audience to give the fantion of its autho- dividuals.
rity to the usurped jurifdition of Pizarro, received
a grant of lands which yielded an annual income
of a hundred and fifty thousand pesos . Hino-
jofa, who, by his early defection from Pizarro,
and surrender of the fleet to Gafca, decided the
fate of Peru, obtained a diftria of country as-
fording two hundred thousand pesos of yearly
valuex. While such rewards were dealt out to
the principal officers, with more than royal muni-
ficence, proportional shares were conferred upon
those of inferior rank.

SU c H a rapid change of fortune produced its na- Theirprofu-

tural effects. It gave birth to new wants, and ion andlux-
new desires. Veterans long accustomed to hard- ur
hip and toil, acquired of a sudden a taste for pro-
fuse and inconsiderate diflipation, and indulged
in all the excesses of military licentiousness. The
riot of low debauchery occupied some; a relish
for expensive luxuries spread among others Y.
The meanest soldier in Peru would have thought
himself degraded by marching on foot, and at a
time when the prices of horses in that country
were exorbitant, each insisted on being furnished
with one before he would take the field. But

VOL. III. I though

Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 54.
t Zarate, lib. vii. c. io. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
u Gomara, c. 64.
x Vega, p. I . lib. vi.c.3.
Y Herrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. viii. c. to.

B OOK though less patient under the fatigue and hard-

VI. hipsof service, they were ready to face danger
548 and death with as much intrepidity as ever, and

an'mated by the hope of new rewards, they ne-
ver failed, on the day of battle, to display all
their ancient valour.

Ferocity TOGETHER with their courage, they retained
their con all the ferocity by which they were originally dif-
teass were tinguifhed. Civil discord never raged with a more
Carriedon.

fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To
all the paflions which usually envenom contefis
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expected upon the
death of every opponent, shut the door against
mercy. To be wealthy, was of itself sufficient
to expose a man to accusation, or to fubje& him to
punishment. On the slightest suspicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching for
any pretext to justify his cruelty, cut off many
more. The number of those who suffered by the
hand of the executioner, was not much inferior to
what fell in the field z; and the greater part was
condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.
Andwan.t of THE violence with which the contending par-

ties treated their opponents was not accompanied
with iLS usual attendants, attachment and fidelity to
those with whom they aed. The ties of honour
which a-e held sacred among soldiers, and the prin-
ciple of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly in
the Spanish charater as in that of any nation,
seem to have been equally forgotten. Even re-
gard for decency, and the sense of shame, were

totally
zSee NOTE XIX.

totally lolt. During their dissensions, there was BOOK
hardly a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon VL.
the party which he had originally espoused, betray '48
the affocates with whom he had united, and vio-
late the engagements under which he had come,
The viceroy Nugnez Vela, was ruined by. the
treachery of Cepeda and the other judges of the
royal audience, who were bound by the duties of
their funtion to have upported his authority.
The chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo
Pizarro's revolt, were the first to forsake him, and
iubmit to his enemies. His fleet was given up to
Gafca, by the man whom he had singled out a-
mong.his officers to entrust with that important
command. On the day that was to decide his
fate, an army of veterans, in fight of the enemy,
threw down their arms without Rfriking a blow,
and deserted a leader who had often conduted
them to vitory. Irftance of such general and
avowed contempt of the principles and obligati-
ons which attach man to man, and bind them to-
gether in social union, rarely occur in history. It
is only where men are far removed from the feat
of government, where the restraints of law and
order are little felt, where the profped of gain is
unbounded, and immense wealth may cover the
crimes by which it is acquired, that we can find
any parallel to the levity, the rapaciousness the
perfidy and corruption prevalent among the Spa-
niards in Peru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in Gacade-

every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and voyme foe
tranquillity seemed to be perfectly re-eftablihed. hisfoldiers.
But two very interesting objects still remained to
occupy the president's attention. The one was
to find immediately such employment for a multi-
tude of turbulent and daring adventurers with

I 2 which

. >"

B O 0 K which the country was filled, as might prevent

Vl. them from exciting new commotions. The
L"^"' other to betRow proper gratifications upon those to

whole loyalty and valour he was indebted for his
success. The former ofthefe was in some measure
accomplished, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia
to prosecute the conquest of Chili; and by em-
powering Diego Centeno to undertake the disco-
very of the vast regions bordering on the river
De la Plata. The reputation of those leaders,
and the hopes of bettering their condition in a
new country, alluring many of the most indigent
and desperate soldiers to follow their standards,
drained off no inconsiderable portion of that mu-
tinous inflammable spirit which Gafca dreaded.

HisS div'ifn THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty,
of the coun-
try among and to be adjusted with a more attentive and deli-
his follow- cate hand. The reprrtimientos, or allotments of

lands and Indians which fell to be distributed,
in consequence of the death or forfeiture of the
former possessors, exceeded two millions of pesos
of yearly rent a. Gafca, when now absolute maf-
ter of this immense property, retained the fame
disinterested sentiments which he had originally
professed, and refused to reserve the smallest por-
tion of it for himself. But the number of claim-
ants was great; and whilst the vanity or avarice
of every individual fixed the value of his own
services, and estimated the recompence which he
thought due to him, the pretensions of each were
so extravagant, that it was impoftible to satisfy all.
Gafca listened to them one by one, with the most
patient attention, and that he might have leifureto
weigh the comparative merit of their several claims
with accuracy, he retired, with the archbishop of
Lima and a ingle ecretary, to a village twelve

leagues
3 Vega, p. . lib. vi. c. 4.

leagues from Cuzco. There he spent several days B O O K
in allotting to each a diftri&t of lands and number VL.
of Indians, in proportion to his idea of their pafRt "
services, and future importance. But that he
might get beyond the reach of the fierce storm of
clamour and rage, which he foresaw would burst
out on the publication of his decree, notwith-
flanding the impartial equity with which he had
framed it, he set out for Lima, leaving the in-
ftrument of partition fealed up, with orders not
to open it for some days after his departure.

THE indignation excited by publishing the de- Aug. 24.

cree of partition was not less than Gafca had ex- tentit IOca-
peted. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, shame, sons.
rage, and all the other passions that mofd vehe-
mently agitate the minds of men when both their
honour and their interest are deeply affected, con-
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out
with all the fury of military insolence. Calumny,
threats, and curses were poured out openly upon
the president. He was accused of ingratitude, of
partiality, and of injustice. Among soldiers prompt
to ation, such seditious discourse would have been
soon followed by deeds no less violent, and they
already began to turn their eyes towards rome dif-
contented leaders, expeEting them to stand forth in
redress of their wrongs. By ome vigorous inter-
positions of government, a timely check was giv-
en to this mutinous spirit, and the danger of ano-
ther civil war was averted for the present b

GASC A, however, perceiving that the flame was I549-

suppressed rather than extinguished, laboured with blifhe, or,,
the utmost afliduity to soothe the malcontents, by and govetc-

bestow- ment,

b Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara, c. 187. Vega, p. I. lib.

vii. c. , &c. Fernandez, p. . lib. i. c. , &c. Herrera,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &c.

Bs K bestowing large gratuities on some, by promising

VI. repartimientos, when they fell vacant, to others,

and by carefling and flattering all. But that the
549' public security might reft on a foundation more

hable than their good affection, he endeavoured
to strengthen the hands of his successors in office,
by re-establishing the regular administration of
justice in every part of the empire. He introduc-
ed order and simplicity into the mode of collecting
the royal revenue. He issued regulations concern-
ing the treatment of the Indians, well calculated
to protect them from oppreflion, and to provide
for their inftruEtion in the principles of religion,
without depriving the Spaniards of the benefit ac-
150o. cruing from their labour. Having now accom-

plifhed every object of his miflion, Gafca, long-
ing to return again to a private Ration, commit-
ted the government of Peru to the court of audi-

Feb. I. ence, and set out for Spain. As, during the a-

and sets out
for Spain. narchy and turbulence of the four last years, there

had been no remittance made of the royal revenue,
he carried with him thirteen hundred thousand pe-
sos of public money, which the economy and
order of his administration enabled him to save
after paying all the expences of the war.

His recepti- HE was received in his native country with uni-
on the. versal admiration of his abilities, and of his

virtue. Both were, indeed, highly conspicuous.
Without army, or fleet, or public funds; with
a train so simple, that only three thousand ducats
were expended in equipping him c he set out to
oppose a formidable rebellion. By his address
and talents he upplied all those defeCts, and
seemed to create instruments for executing his de-
signs He acquired iuch a naval force, as gave
him the command of the sea. He raised a body
of men able to cope with the veteran bands which

gave
c Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 18.

gave law to Peru. He vanquished their leader, on B o0 K
whose arms victory had hitherto attended, and in VI.
place of anarchy and ufuipation, he eftablilhed ''
the government of laws, and the authority of I550.
the rightful sovereign. But the praise belfowed
on his abilities was exceeded by that which his vir-
tue merited. After residing in a country where
wealth presented allurements which had seduced
every person who had hitherto poifeffed power
there, he returned from that trying Ration ith
integrity not only untainted but unfufpeted. As-
ter diffributing among his countrymen poffefions
of greater extent and value than had ever been
in the disposal of a fubjett in any age or nation,
-le himself remained in his original state of pover-
ty; and at the very time, when he brought such
a large recruit to the royal treasury, he wasp bliged
to apply by petition for a small fum to difchai-ge
some petty debts which he had contrated during
·the co.urse of his serviced. Charles was not in-
sensible to such disinterested merit. Gafca was re-
.ceived by him with the moit ditinguifhing ma;ks
.of esteem, and being promoted to the bifncpic
of Palencia, he passed the remainder of his days
in the tranquillity of retirement, refpe&ed by his
country, honoured by his overeign, and beloved
by all.

NOTWITHSTANDING all Gafca's wife regula-

tions, the tranquillity of Peru was not of long con-
tinuance. In a country, where the authority of
government was almost forgotten during the long
prevalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there
were disappointed leaders ripe for revolt, and fe-
ditious soldiers ready to follow them, it was not
difficult to kindle combustion. Several successive
infurredions desolated the country for ome years.
But as those, though fierce, were only transient

storms,
d MS. penes me.

B o 0 K forms, excited rather by the ambition and tur-

VI. bulence of particular men, than by general or

public motives, the detail of them is not the ob-
55 jet of this history. These commotions in Peru,

like every thing of extreme violence, either in the
natural or political body, were not of long dura-
tion, and by carrying off the corrupted humours
which had given rife to the disorders, they contri-
buted in the end to strengthen the society which
at first they threatened to destroy. During their
fierce contests, several of the first invaders of Peru,
and many of those licentious adventurers whom
the fame of their success had allured thither, fell
by each other's hands. Each of the parties, as
they alternately prevailed in the struggle, cleared
the country of a greater number, by executing,
proscribing, or banishing their opponents. Men
less enterprising and desperate, and more accuf-
tomed to move in the path of fober and peaceable
industry, fettled in Peru; and the royal authority
was gradually eftabliihed as firmly there as in the
other Spanish colonies.

THE

# BOOK VII.

THE
HIS TORY

o F
AMERICA.

B O O K VII.

As the conquest of the two great empires of 0 o K
Mexico and Peru forms the noft splendid and VII.
interesting period in the history of America, a
view of their political infiitutions, and a defcrip-
tion of their national manners, will exhibit the hu-
man species to the contemplation of intelligent
observers in a very singular stage of its progress a.

WHEN compared with other parts of the New Mexico and

World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as Pru more
polished fiates. Intfead of small, independent, other parts
hoitile tribes, struggling for subsistence amidsts America.
woods and marshes, itrangers.to induitry and arts,
unacquainted with subordination, and alroi with-
out the appearance of regular government, we

find
aSee NOTE XX.

B o o K find countries of great extent fubjeted to the do-

VIL minion of one sovereign, the inhabitants collected

t-ogether in cities, the wisdom and foresight of
rulers employed in providing for the maintenance
and security of the people, the empire of laws
in ome measure eflablifhed, the authority of re-
ligion recognized, many of the arts essential to life
brought to ome degree of maturity, and the
dawn of such as are ornamental beginning to ap-
pear.

Their infe- BUT if the comparison be made with the peo-
rorit totheple of the ancient continent, the inferiority of
the ancient America in improvement will be conspicuous, and
contint. neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be entitled

to rank with those nations which merit the name
of civilized. They, like the rude tribes around
them, were totally unacquainted with the useful
metals, and the progress which they had made in
extending their dominon over the animal creation
was inconsiderable. The Mexicans had gone no
farther than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a
species of small dogs, and rabbits b. By this fee-
ble essay of ingenuity, the means of subsistence
were rendered somewhat more plentiful and fe-
cure, than when men depend solely on hunting;
but they had no idea of attempting to subdue the
more robuff animals, or of deriving any aid
from their ministry in carrying on works of labour.
The Peruvians seem to have negleted the inferior
animals, and had not rendered any of them do-
meflic except the duck; but they were fortunate
in taming the Llama, an animal peculiar to their
country, in form resembling a camel, and of a
size somewhat larger than a heep. Under the
protection of man, this species multiplied greatly.
Its wool furnished the Peruvians with clothing, its
flesh with food. It was even employed as a beast

of
b Herrera, dec. i . lib. vii. c. x 2.

of burden, and carried a moderate load with much B o o K
patience and docilityc. It was never ued for VII.
draught; and the breed being confined to thev
mountainous country, its service, if we may judge
by incidents that occur in the early Spanith writers,
was not very extensive among the Peruvians in
their original state.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed to-

wards civility, the discovery of the useful metals,
and the acquisition of dominion over the animal
creation, have been marked as fleps of capital im-
portance in their progress, In our continent, so-
ciety continued in that fRate which is denominated
barbarous, long after men had attained both.
Even with all that command over nature which
there confer, many ages elapse, before industry
becomes Co perfect as to render fubfiRence secure,
before the arts that supply the wants and frnifh
the accommodations of life are invented, and be-
fore any idea is conceived of the various inftituti-
ons requisite in a well ordered society. The Mex-
icans and Peruvians, without knowledge of the
-useful metals, or the aid of domestic animals, la-
boured under disadvantages which must have
greatly retarded their progress, and in their high-
eft state of improvement, their power was so li-
mited, and their operations so feeble, that they
can hardly be confidered as having advanced be-
yond the infancy of life.

AFTER this general observation concerning the iew ofthe

mot singular and distinguishing circumslance intrianncrs
the itate of both the great empires in America, I of each.
shall endeavour to give fiuch a view of the confti-
tution and interior police of each, as may enable
us to ascertain their place in the political scale, to

allot
c Vega, p. . lib. viii. c. 16. Zarate, lib. i.c. 14.

B O0 K allot them their proper flation between the rude

VIi. tribes in he New World, and the polished fRates
'3 of the ancient, and to determine how far they

had risen above the former, as well as how much
they fell below the latter.

imperfect MEXICO was firt fubjeted to the Spanish
information crown. But our acquaintance with its laws and
concerning
those of manners is not, from that circumitance more com-
lexico. plete. What I have remarked concerning the de-

fective and inaccurate information on which we
mufft rely with refpea to the condition and cuf-
toms of the savage tribes in America, may be ap-
plied likewise to our knowledge of the Mexican
empire. Cortes, and the rapacious adventurers
who accompanied him, had not leisure or capacity
to enrich either civil or natural history with new
observations. They undertook their expedition in
quest of one object, and seem hardly to have turn-
ed their eyes towards any other. Or, if during
some short interval of tranquillity, when the occu-
pations of war ceased, and the ardour of plunder
was suspended, the intlitutions and manners of
the people whom they had invaded drew their at-
tention, the inquiries of illiterate soldiers were
conducted with so little sagacity and precision, that
the accounts given by them of the policy and or-
der established in the Mexican monarchy are fu-
perficial, confused, and inexplicable. It is ra-
ther from incidents which they relate occasionally,
than from their own deducions and remarks, that
we are enabled to form ome idea of the genius
and manners of that people. The obscurity in
which the ignorance of its conquerors involved
the annals of Mexico, was augmented by the fu-
perftition of those who succeeded them. As the
memory of past events was preserved among the
Mexicans by figures painted on skins, on cotton

cloth,

cloth, or on the bark of trees, the early milfio-B OO K
naries, unable to comprehend their meaning, and VII.
struck with their uncouth forms, conceived them ^^
to be monuments of idolatry which ought to be
destroyed, in order to facilitate the conversion of
the Indians. In obedience to an ediCt issued by
Juan de Zummaraga, a Franciscan monk, the
first bishop of Mexico, all those records of the
ancient Mexican story were collected and com-
mitted to the flames. In consequence of this fa-
natical zeal of the monks who first visited New
Spain, and which their successors soon began to
lament, whatever knowledge of remote events
such rude monuments contained was entirely loft,
and no information remained concerning the an-
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but
what was derived from tradition, or from some
fragments of their historical paintings that escaped
the barbarous researches of Zummaraga d. From
the experience of all nations it is manifest, that
the memory of pall tranfaaions can neither be
long preserved, nor be transmitted with any fide-
lity by tradition. The Mexican paintings which
are supposed to have served as annals of their em-
pire, are few in number, and of ambiguous mean-
ing. Thus amidsi the uncertainty of the former,
and the obscurity of the latter, we must glean
what intelligence can be collected from the scanty
materials scattered in the Spanish writers.

ACCORDING to the account of the Mexicans Org;n f

themselves, their empire was not of long durati- heMic."
on. Their country, as they relate, was origi-
nally possessed, rather than peopled, by small in-
.dependent tribes, whose mode of life and man-
ners resembled those of the rudest savages which
we have described. But about a period corre-
fponding to the beginning of the tenth century in

the

d Acofta, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquem. Proem. lib. ii. lib. iii. c. 6.
lib. xiv. c. 6.

B 0 K the Christian ra, several tribes moved in fuc-

VII. celfive migrations from unknown regions towards

the north and north-west, and fettled in different
provinces of Anabac, the ancient name of New
Spain. These, more civilized than the original
inhabitants, began to form them to the arts of so-
cial life. At length, towards the commencement
of the thirteenth century, the Mexicans, a peo-
ple more polished than any of the former, ad-
vanced from the border of the Californian gulf,
and took poffeflion of the plains adjacent to a
great lake near the centre of the country. After
residing there about fifty years, they founded a
town, since diflinguifhed by the name of Mexico,
which from humble beginnings soon grew to be the
most considerable city in the New World. The
Mexicans, long after they were eflablifhed in their
new poleflions, continuied, like other martial
tribes in America, unacquainted with regal do-
minion, and were governed in peace and con-
ducted in war by such as were entitled to pre-emi-
nence by their wisdom or their valour. But a-
mong them, as in other Rates whose power and
territories become extensive, the fupremne authority
centred at last in a single person; and when the
Spaniards under Cortes invaded the country, Mon-
tezuma was the ninth monarch in order who had
swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary
right, but by election.
Veryiecent. Su c H is the traditional tale of the Mexicans con-

cerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very short.
From the first migration of their parent tribe, they
can reckon little more than three hundred years.
From the eftabliihment of monarchical govern-
ment, not above ahundred and thirty years, accord-
ing to one account e, or a hundred and ninety fe-

ven,
s Acoft. Hist. lib. vii. c. 8, &c.

ven, according to another computations had elapf- B OO K
ed. If, on one hand, we suppose the Mexican state VII.
to have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub- "^
sifted during such a length of time as the Spa-
nifh accounts of its civilization would naturally
lead us to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how,
among a people who possessed the art of recording
events by pictures, and who confidered it as an
essential part of their national education, to teach
their children to repeat the historical songs which
celebrated the exploits of their ancestors , the
knowledge of past tranfations hould be so
slender and limited. If, on the other hand, we
adopt their own fyitem with refpet to the anti-
quities of their nation, it is no less difficult to ac-
count either for that improved tiate of society, or
for the extensive dominion to which their empire
had attained, when first visited by the Spaniards.
The infancy of nations is so long, and, even when
every circumstance is favourable to their progress,
they advance so slowly towards any maturity of
firength or policy, that the recent origin of the
Mexicans seems to be a strong presumption of ex-
aggeration, in the splendid descriptions which have
been given of their government and manners.

BUT it is not by theory or conjectures that his- Faas which
tory decides, with regard to the state or character prove thir

_ progress in

of nations. It produces faas. as the foundation civilization.
of every judgment which it ventures to pronounce.
In collecting those which must regulate our opini-
on in the present inquiry, some occur that fuggefi
an idea of confiderabie progress in civilization in
the Mexican empire, and others which seem to
indicate that it had advanced but little beyond the
savage tribes around it; Both ihall be exhibited
to the view of the reader, that, from comparing
them, he may determine on which fide the evi-
dence preponderates.

THE
f Purchas Pilgr. iii. p. o168, &c.

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18.

B OOK THE right of private property was perfectly

VII. understood, and efablifhed in its full extent.

^^s" O Among several savage tribes, we have seen, that
The right of
property the idea of a title to the separate and exclusive
ily efta- possession of any objeEt was hardly known; and
blithed.

that among all, it was extremely limited and ill-
defined. But in Mexico, where agriculture and
industry had made ome progress, the diffintion
between real and moveable possessions, between
property in land and property in goods, had taken
place. Both might be transferred from one per-
son to another by sale or barter, both might de-
scend by inheritance. Every person who could
be denominated a freeman had property in land.
This, however, they held by various tenures.
Some possessed it in full right, and it descended
to their heirs. The title of others to their lands
was derived from the office or dignity which
they enjoyed; and when deprived of the lat-
ter, they loft poffeflion of the former. Both
there modes of occupying land were deem-
ed noble, and peculiar to citizens of the
highest class. The tenure, by which the great
body of the people held their property, was very
different. In every diftria a certain quantity of
land was measured out, in proportion to the num-
ber of families. This was cultivated by the joint
labour of the whole; its produce was deposited in
a common fiorehoufe, and divided among them
according to their refpetive exigencies. The
members of the Calpullee, or associations, could
not alienate their hare of the common estate; it
was an indivisible permanent property, destined
for the support of their families h. In consequence
of this difiribution of the territory of the state,
every man had an interest in its welfare, and the
happiness of the individual was connected with
the public security.

THE

h Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Torquem. Mon. Ind. lib,
xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.

THE number and greatness of the cities in the B O O K

Mexican empire is one of the most striking cir- VII.
cumftances, that distinguish it from those nations The ner
in America which we have already described. andgreatnefr
While society continues in a rude fiate, the wants fh'ei
of men are so few, and they ftancd To little in need
of mutual assistance, that their inducements to
crowd together are extremely feeble. Their indus-
try at the fame time is so imperfec, that it cannot
secure subsistence for any considerable number of
families fettled in one spot. They live dispersed, -
at this period from choice as well as from necef-
fity, or at the utmost assemble in small hamlets
on the banks of the river which supplies them
with food, or on the border of Come plain left
open by nature, or cleared by their own labour,
The Spaniards, accustomed to this. mode of ha-
bitation among all the savage tribes with which
they were then acquainted, were faftonifhed, on
entering New Spain, to find the natives residing
in towns of such extent as resembled those of Eu-
rope. In the first fervour of their admiration,
they compared Zempoalla, though a town only
of. the second or third size, to the cities of great-
eft note in their own country. When, after-
wards, they visited in succession Tlafcala, Cho-
lula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico itself, their
amazement increascd so much, that it led them
to convey ideas of iheirmagnitude and populous-
ness bordering on what is incredible. Even where
there is leisure for observation, and no interest
that leads to deceive, conjectural estimates of the
number of people in cities are extremely loose,
and usually much exaggerated. It is not furprif-
ing, then, that Cortes and his companions, little
accustomed to such computations, and powerfully
tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merit
of their own discoveries and conquests, should
have been betrayed into this common error, and

VOL. III. K have

B O O K have raised their descriptions considerably above

VII. truth. For this reason, some considerable abate-

ment ought to be made from their calculation of
the number of inhabitants in the Mexican cities,
and we may fix the standard of their population
much lower than they have done; but fill they
will appear to be cities of such consequence, as are
not to be found but among people who have made
some considerable progress in the arts of social lifeg.

The fepara. THE separation of professions among the Mex-
tio of lpro cians is a symptom of improvement no less re-

markable. Arts, in the early ages of society, are
so few and so simple, that each man is sufficiently
master of them all, ~e-gatify every demand of
his own limited dfires. 'The savage can form
his bow, point his arrows, r.ar his hut, and hol-
low his canoe, withoutcalling in the aid of any
hand more skilful than his-own. Time must have
augmented the wants of men, and ripened their
ingenuity, before the productions of art become
so complicated in their ftruauire, or so curious in
their fabric, that a particular course of education
is requisite towards forming the artificer to ex-
pertness in contrivance and workmanship. In
proportion as refinement spreads, the distinction
of profeflions increases, and they branch out into
more numerous and minute subdivisions. Among
theMexicans, this separation of the arts necessary in
life had taken place to a considerable extent. The
funtions of the mason, the weaver, the goldsmith,
the painter, and of several other crafts, were
carried on by different persons. Each was regularly
inftruaed in his calling. To it alone his industry
was confined; and by assiduous application to one
object, together with the persevering patience pe-
culiar to Americans, their artizans attained to a

degree
See NOTE XXI.

degree of neatness and perfection in work far be-B O O K
yond what could have been expeted from the VIl.
rude tools which they employed. Their various ''
productions were brought into commerce; and by
the exchange of them in the flated markets held
in the cities, their mutual wants were supplied h,
in such orderly intercourse as charaterizes an im-
proved state of society.

THE diftfinion of ranks eftabliihed in the The difinc-

tion of ranks

Mexican empire is the next circumstance that me-
rits attention. In surveying the avage tribes of
America, we observed, that consciousness of equa-
lity, and impatience of ubordination, are senti-
ments natural to man in the infancy civil of life.
During peace, the authority of a superior is hardly
felt among them, and even in war it is but little
acknowledged. Strangers to the idea of proper-
ty, the difference in condition resulting from it is
unknown. Birth or titles confer no pre-emi-
nence; it is only by personal merit and accom-
plifhments that it can be acquired. The form of
society was very different among the Mexicans.
The great body of the people were in a most hu-
miliating state. A considerable number, known
by the name of Mayeques, nearly resembled in
condition those peasants who, under various de-
nominations, were confidered, during the preva-
lence of the feudal system, as instruments of la-
bour attached to the foil. The MIzyeques could not
change their place of residence without permission
of the superior on whom they depended. They
were conveyed, together *with the lands on which
they were fettled, from one proprietor to another;
and were bound to cultivate the ground, and to
perform several kinds of servile work . Others

K 2 were

h Cortes Relat. ap Ramus. iii. 239, &c. Gom. Cron. c. 79.
Torquem. lib. xiii. c. 34. Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 15, &c.

i Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. Corita, MS.

BOO K were reduced to the lowest form of fubjeftion,

VIi. that of domestic servitude, and felt the utmost
'-"'- rigour of that wretched fRate. Their condition

was held to be so vile, and their lives deemed to
be of so little value, that a person who killed one
of those slaves was not subjeCted to any punish-
ment k. Even those confidered as freemen were
treated by their haughty lords as beings of an in-
ferior species. The nobles, possessed of ample
territories, were divided into various clafles, to
each of which peculiar titles of honour belonged.
Some of there titles, like their lands, descended
from father to son in perpetual fucceflion. Others
were annexed to particular offices, or conferred
during life as marks of personal diftintion 1. The
monarch, exalted above all, enjoyed extensive
power, and supreme dignity. Thus the diftinc-
tion of ranks was completely eftablifled, in a
line of regular subordination, reaching from the
highest to the loweR member of the community.
Each of theie knew what he could claim, and
what he owed. The people, who were not al-
lowed to wear a dress of the fame fashion, or to
dwell in houses of a form similar to those of the
nobles, accolted them with the most submissive
reverence. In the pretence of their sovereign,
they durst not lift their eyes from the ground, or
look him in the face M. The nobles themselves,
when admitted to an audience of their sovereign,
entered bare-footed, in mean garments, and, as
his fiaves, paid him homage approaching to ado-
ration. This refpec due from inferiors to those
above them in rank, was established with such
ceremonious accuracy, that it incorporated with
their language, and influenced its genius and
idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded in ex-
prefions of reverence and courtesy. The tile

and

k Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7. I Herrera, dec. 3.

lib. iv. c. 15. Corita, MS. m Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii.
c. 14.

and appellations, used in the intercourse between B O K
equals, would have been so unbecoming in the VII
mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accost-
ed a person in higher rank, as to be deemed an in-
fult n. It is only in societies, which time and the
institution of regular government have moulded
into form, that we find such an orderly arrange-
ment of men into different ranks, and such nice
attention paid to their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized Their politi-

and bended to subordination, was prepared for nc"titu
submitting to monarchical government. But the
descriptions of their policy and laws, by the Spa-
niards who overturned them, are so inaccurate
and contradictory, that it is difficult to delineate
the form of their constitution with any precision.
Sometimes they represent the monarchs of Mexico
as absolute, deciding according to their pleasure,
with refpet to every operation of the fate. On
other occasions, we discover the traces of efta-
blifhed cufioms and laws, framed in order to cir-
cumfcribe the power of the crown, and we meet
with rights and privileges of the nobles which
seem to be opposed as barriers against its encroach-
ments. This appearance of inconsistency has
arisen from inattention to the innovations of Mon-
tezuma upon the Mexican policy. His aspiring
ambition subverted the ancient system of govern-
ment, and introduced a pure despotism. He dif-
regarded their laws, violated their privileges, and
reduced his fubjets of every order to the level of
flaveso. The chiefs, or nobles of the first rank,
submitted o the yoke with such reluctance, that,
from impatience to hake it off, and hope of re-
covering their original rights, many of them

courted

n See NOTE XXII. o Herrera, dec. 3. lib, ii. c. 14.
Torqueri. lib. ii. c. 69.

BOQ K courted the protection of Cortes, andjoined a so

vi}. reign power againfi their domestic oppressor p. It

is not then under the reign of Montezuma, but
under those of his predecessors, that we can dif-
cover what was the original form and genius of
Mexican policy. From the foundation of the mo-
narchy to the eledtion of Montezuma, it seems
to have subsisted with little variation. That body
of citizens, which may be distinguished by the
name of nobility, formed the chief and most
refpedable order in the state. They were of va-
rious ranks, as has already been observed, and
their honours were acquired and transmitted in
different manners. Their number seems to have
been great. According to an author accustomed
to examine with attention what he relates, there
were in t e Mexican empire thirty of this order,
each of whom had in his territories about a hun-
dred thousand people, and Subordinate to there,
there were about three thousand of a lower clafsq.
The territories belonging to the chiefs of Tuzeuco
and Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to
those of the-Mexican monarch r. Each of these
pofieffed complete territorial jurisdiction, and le-
vied taxes from their own vassals. But all fol-
lowed the standard of Mexico in war, serving
with a number of men in proportion to their do-
main, and most of them paid tribute to its mo-
narch as their superior lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican con-

ftitution, an image of feudal policy in its molt
rigid form rifes to view, and we discern its three
difiinguifhing charaAeriftics, a nobility poffefiing
almost independent authority, a people depressed

into

p Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. o, I . Torquem. lib. iv. c. 49.
1 Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii . . 12. r Torquem. lib. i,
c. 57. Corita, MS.

into the lowest state of fubjetion, and a king en- B o K
trusted with the executive power of the state. Its VII.
spirit and principles seem to have operated in the - -
New World in the fame manner, as in the an-
cient. The jurifdi&ion of the crown was ex-
tremely limited. All real and effetive authority
was retained by the Mexican nobles in their own
hands, and the Ihadow of it only left to the king.
Jealous to excess of their own rights, they guard-
ed with most vigilant anxiety against the encroach-
ments of their sovereigns. By a fundamental law
of the empire, it was provided, that the king
(hould not determine concerning any point of ge-
neral importance, without the approbation of a
council composed of the prime nobility s. Unless
he obtained their content he could not engage the
nation in war, nor could he dispose of the most
considerable branch of the public revenue at plea-
fuire, it was appropriated to certain purposes from
which it could not be delivered by the regal au-
thority t. In order to secure full effect to those
constitutional retraints, the Mexican nobles did
not permit their crown to decfend by inheritance,
but disposed of it by election. The right of elec-
tion seems to have been originally veited in the
whole body of nobility, but afterwards commit-
ted to fix electors, of whom the chiefs of Tezeu-
co and Tacuba were always two. From respect
for the family of their monarchs, the choice fell
generally upon ome person sprung from it. But
as the activity and valour of their prince was of'
greater moment to a people perpetually engaged
in war, than a ftrit adherence to the order of
birth, collaterals of mature age or distinguished
merit were often preferred to those who were

nearer

Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib, iv. c. 6,
Corita, MS. t Ibid. c. 17.

BO O K nearer the throne in direct defcentu. To this

VII. maxim, in their policy, the Mexicans appear to
-~~ be indebted for such a succession of able and war-

like princes, as raised their empire in a hort pe-
riod to that extraordinary height of power, which
it had attained when Cortes landed in New Spain.

Power and WHILE the jurifdiaion of the Mexican mo-
pendourof narchs continued to be limited, it is probable that
narchs. it was exercised with little ostentation. But as

their authority became more extensive, the fplen-
dour of their government augmented. It was in
this last Rate that the Spaniards beheld it, and
itruck with the appearance of Montezuma's court,
they describe its pomp at great length, and with
much admiration. The number of his attendants,
the order, the silence, and the reverence with
which they served him; the vast extent of his
royal mansion, the variety of its apartments .al-
lotted to different officers, and the ostentation
with which his grandeur was displayed, when.
ever he permitted his fubjets to behold him,
seem to resemble the magnificence of the ancient
monarchies in Aria, rather than the simplicity of
the infant Rates in the New World.

Orderoftheir BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty
government. that the Mexican potentates exhibited their power,

they manifeted it more beneficially in the order
and regularity with which they conduted the in-
ternal administration and police of their domi-
nions. Complete jurifdition, civil as well as
criminal, over its own immediate vassals, was
vested in the crown. Judges were appointed for
each department, and if we may rely on the
account which the Spanish writers give of the

maxims

u Acofta, lib. vi. c. 24. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 13.
Corita, MS.

maxims and laws upon which they founded their B 0 O K
decisions with refpe& to the difiribution of pro- VII.
perty and the punihment of crimes, justice was
adminifiered in the Mexican empire, with a de-
gree of order and equity, resembling what takes
place in societies highly civilized.

THEIR attention in providing for the support Provision for

the support

of government was not less agacious. Taxes of it.
were laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of in-
duftry, and upon commodities of every kind ex-
posed to sale in the public markets. These du-
ties, though considerable, were not arbitrary, or
unequal. They were imposed according to efla-
blifhed rules, and each knew what ihare of the
common burden he had to bear. As the use of
money was unknown, all the taxes were paid in
kind, and thus not only the natural producions
of all the different provinces in the empire, but
every species of-manufaCture, and every work of
ingenuity and art were collected in the public
store-houses. From those the emperor supplied
his numerous train of attendants in peace, and
his armies during war, with food, with cloaths,
and ornaments. People of inferior condition,
neither possessing land nor engaged in commerce,
were bound to the performance of various services.
By their itated labour the crown-lands were cul-
tivated, public works were carried on, and the
various houses belonging to the emperor were
built, and kept in repair u.

THE improved itate of government among the Therpolice.

Mexicans is conspicuous not only in points effen-
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but
in several regulations of inferior consequence with

- respect

u Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. Iib. iv. c. 6, 17.
See NOTE XXIII,

B OOK refpea to police; The institution, which I have
Vii. already mentioned, of public couriers, Rlationed

at proper intervals, to convey intelligence from
one part of the empire to the other, was a refine-
ment in police not introduced into any kingdom
of Europe at that period. The fruture of the
capital city in a lake, with artificial dykes, and
causeways of great length, which served as ave-
nues to it from different quarters, ereted in the
water with no less ingenuity than labour, seems
to be an idea that could not have occurred to any
but a civilized people. The fame observation
may be applied to the ftruture of the aqueduts,
or conduits, by which they conveyed a stream of
fresh water, from a considerable distance, into the
city, along one of the caufewaysx. The ap-
pointment of a considerable number of persons
to clean the fireets, to light them by fires kindled
in different places, and to patrole as watchmen
during the night Y, discovers a degree of attention
which even polished nations are late in acquiring.
Their arts. THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts

is confidered as the most decisive proof of their
superior refinement. Cortes, and the early Spa-
nith authors, describe this with rapture, and main-
tain, that the most celebrated European artists
could not surpass or even equal them in ingenui-
ty and neatness of workmanship. They repre-
sented men, animals, and other objects, by such
a disposition of various coloured feathers, as is
said to have produced all the effects of light and
shade, and to have imitated nature with truth and
delicacy. Their ornaments of gold and silver
have been described to be of a fabric no less
curious. But in forming any idea, from general

descriptions,

x See NOTE XXIV. y Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. $.
Torribio, MS.

descriptions, concerning the state of arts among B 0O K
nations imperfectly polished, we are extremely VII.
ready to err. In examining he works of people v
whose advances in improvement are nearly the
fame with our own, we view them with a critical,
and often with a jealous eye. Whereas, when
conscious of our own superiority, we survey the
arts of nations comparatively rude, we are afto-
nifhed at works executed by them under such ma-
nifeft disadvantages, and in the warmth of our
admiration, are apt to represent them as produce
tions more finished than they really are. To the
influence of this illusion, without supposing any
intention to deceive, we may impute the exagge-
ration of some Spanish authors, in their accounts
of the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from con-

fidering such specimens of their arts as are itll
preserved, that we muff decide concerning their
degree of merit. As the ship in which Cortes
sent to Charles V. the moll curious productions
of the Mexican artisans, which were collected by
the Spaniards when they first pillaged the em-
pire, was taken by a French corfairz, the re-
mains of their ingenuity are less numerous than
those of the Peruvians. Whether any of their
works with feathers, in imitation of painting, be
still extant in Spain, I have not learned; but ma-
ny of their ornaments in gold and silver, as well
as various utensils employed in common life, are
deposited in the magnificent cabinet of natural
and artificial productions, lately opened by the
king of Spain; and I am informed by persons on
whose judgment and taste I can rely, that these
boasted efforts of their art are uncouth reprefen-
tations of common objecs, or very coarse images

of
2 Relac. de Cort, RarPamuf. iil, 294 F.

B o 0 K of the human and ome animal forms, destitute

VIL. of grace and propriety a. The jufnefs of these
L'^c observations is confirmed by infpeaing the wood-

en prints or copper-plates of their paintings, which
have been published by various authors. In them
every figure of men, of quadrupeds, or birds,
as well as every representation of inanimated na-
ture, is extremely rude and aukward. The hard-
efR Egyptian stile, sRiss and imperfect as it was,
is more elegant. The scrawls of children deli-
neate objects almost as accurately.

BuT however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different station belongs to them, when
confidered as the records of their country, as
historical monuments of its policy and tranfac-
tions; and they become curious as well as inte-
refting bjects of attention. The noblest and
most beneficial invention of which human inge-
nuity cn boast, is that of writing. But the first
essays of this art, which hath contributed more
than all others to the improvement of the species,
were very rude, and it advanced towards perfec-
tion slowly, and by a gradual progreflion. When
the warrior, eager for fame, wished to transmit
some knowledge of his exploits to succeeding
ages; when the gratitude of a people to their so-
vereign prompted them to hand down an account
of his beneficent deeds to posterity; the first me-
thod of accomplishing this, that seems to have
occurred to them, was to delineate, in the belt
manner they could, figures representing the ac-
tion of which they were solicitous to preserve the
memory. Of this, which has very properly been
called pitture-writing b, we find traces among some
of the most savage tribes of America. When a
leader returns from the field, he strips a tree of its

bark,
a See NOTE XXV. b Divine Legat. of Moses, iii. 73.

bark, and with red paint scratches upon it some B 0o K
uncouth figures, which represent the order of his VII.
march, the number of his followers, the enemy
whom he attacked, the scalps and captives which
he brought home. To those simple annals he trusts
for renown, and soothes him self with hope that
by their means he shall receive praise from the
warriors of future times c.

COMPARED with those aukward essays of their

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans
may be confidered as works of composition and
design. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording tranfadcions, than
that of delineating the objects which they wiffied
to represent. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex series of events in progrefive order, and
describe, by a proper disposition of figures, the
occurrences of a king's reign from his accession
to his death; the progress of an infant's educa-
tion from its birth until it attained to the years
of maturity; the different recompences and marks
of diltinction conferred upon warriors, in pro-
portion to the exploits which they had performed.
Some singular specimens of this picture-writing
have been preserved, which are jutly confidered
as the most curious monuments of art brought
from the New World. The most valuable of these
was publihed by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is
divided into three parts. The first contains the
history of the Mexican empire under its ten mo-
narchs. The second is a tribute-roll, represent-
ing what each conquered town paid into the royal
treasury. The third is a code of their institutions,
domestic, political, and military. Another fpe-
cimen of Mexican painting has been published in

thirty-

c Sir W. Johnson Philof. TransaCt. vol. lxiii. p.: 143. Mem. de
la Hontan. ii. 1 9 . Lafitau, Mceurs de Sauy. ii. 43.

BOOK thirty-two plates, by the present archbishop of

VII. Toledo. To both are annexed a full explana.

tion of what the figures were intended to repre-
sent, which was obtained by the Spaniards from
Indians well acquainted with their own arts. The
style of painting in all these is the fame. They
represent things, not words. They exhibit images
to the eye, not ideas to the understanding. They
may, therefore, be confidered as the earliest and
most imperfet essay of men in their progress to-
wards discovering the art of writing. The defets
in this mode of recording tranfations must have
been early felt. To paint every occurrence was,
from its nature, a very tedious operation; and as
affairs became more complicated, and events mul-
tiplied in any society, its annals must have swelled
to an enormous bulk. Betides this, no obje&ts
could be delineated but those of sense; the con-
ceptions of the mind had no corporeal form, and
as long as piture-writing could not convey an
idea of these, it must have been a very imperfect
art. The necessity of improving it muff have
rouzed and fliarpened invention, and the human
mind holding the fame course in the New World
as in the Old, might have advanced by the fame
fucceflive steps, first from an actual picture to the
plain hieroglyphic; next, to the allegorical sym-
bol, then to the arbitrary character; until, at
length, an alphabet of letters was discovered,
capable of expressing all the variety of combina-
tions of found employed in speech. In the paint-
ings of the Mexicans we, accordingly, perceive,
that this progress was begun among them. Upon
an attentive infpeaion of the plates, which I
have mentioned, we may observe some ap-
proach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic, where
some principal part or circumstance in the sub-
jet js made to sand for the whole. In the

annals

annals of their kings, published by Purchas, BOO K
the towns conquered by each are uniformly repre- Vii
sented in the fame manner by a rude delineation '"
of a house; but in order to point out the particu-
lar towns which submitted to their victorious arms,
peculiar emblems, ometimes natural objets, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbishop of Tole-
do, the house, which was properly the piture of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. They seem even to
have made ome advances beyond this, towards
the use of the more figurative and fanciful hiero-
glyphic. In order to describe a monarch, who
had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
subdued. But it is only in one instance, the notation
of numbers, that we discern any attempt to ex-
hibit ideas which had no corporeal form. They
had invented artificial marks, or signs of conven-
tion, for this purpose. By means of these, they
computed the years of their kings reigns, as well
as the amount of tribute to be paid into the royal
treasury. The figure of a circle represented unit,
and in small numbers, the computation was made
by repeating it. Larger numbers were expressed
by a peculiar mark, and they had such as deno-
ted all integral numbers from twenty to eight
thousand. The Ihort duration of their empire
prevented the Mexicans from advancing farther
in that long course which conducts men from the
labour of delineating real objects, to the fimplici-
ty andeafe of alphabetic writing. Their records,
notwithstanding some dawn of such ideas as might
have led to a more perfet style, can be confidered
as nothing more than a species of piture-writing,
so far improved as to mark their superiority over
the savage tribes of America, but still so defective

as

B o K as to prove that they had not proceeded far be-

VII· yond the sirs iftage in that progress which must be
LcJcompleted, before any people can be ranked a-

mong polished nations d.

Their mode THEIR mode of computing time may be con-
igtine'. fidered as a more decisive evidence of their pres

grefs in improvement. They divided their year
into eighteen months, each confiling of twenty
days, amounting in all to three hundred and sixty.
But as they observed that the course of the fun
was not completed in that time, they added five
days to the year. These, which were properly
intercalary days, they termed supernumerary or
'wafZe; and as they did not belong to any month,
no work was done, and no sacred rite performed
on them; they were devoted wholly to festivity
and paftimee. This near approach to philofophi-
cal accuracy is a remarkable proof that the Mex-
icans had bestowed ome attention upon inquiries
and speculations, to which men in a very rude
state never turn their thoughts.

Fast indi- SUCH are the most firiking particulars in the
cating a
nmall pro- manners and policy of the Mexicans, which exhi-
grefs incivi- bit them to view as a people considerably refined.

From other circumstances, one is apt to fufpe
that their character, and many of their inflituti-
ons, did not differ greatly from those of the
other inhabitants of America.

Thir wars LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mex-
continual icans were incessantly engaged in war, and the
and feroci.
ous. motives which prompted them to hostility seem

to have been the fame. They fought, in order to
gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood
of their enemies. In battle they were chiefly in-
tent on taking prisoners, and it was by the num-

ber
d See N O T E XXVI. e Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2.

ber of these that they estimated the glory of vic- B o o K
tory. No captive was ever ransomed or spared. VII.
All were sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh
devoured with the fame barbarous joy as among
the fiercest savages. On some occasions it rose
ven to wilder excesses. Their principal warriors
covered themselves with the kins of the unhappy
victims which they had slain, and danced about
the streets, boasting of their own valour, and
exulting over their enemies f. Even in their civil
institutions we discover traces of that barbarous
disposition which their system of war inspired.
The four chief counsellors of the empire were dif-
tinguifhed by atrocious titles, which could have
been assumed only by a people who delighted in
blood . This ferocity of character prevailed a-
mong all the nations of New Spain. The Tlaf-
calans, the people of Mechoacan, and other
flates at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted
equally in war, and treated their prisoners with
the fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind com-
bine in social union, and live under the influence
of equal laws and regular policy, their manners
soften, sentiments of humanity arise, and the
rights of the species come to be understood. The
fierceness of war abates, and even while engag-
ed in hostility, men remember what they owe
one to another. The savage fights to destroy,
the citizen to conquer. The former neither pities
nor spares, the latter has acquired sensibility that
tempers his rage. To this sensibility the Mexi-
cans seem to have been perfet frangers, and
among them war was carried on with so much of
its original barbarity, that we cannot but fufpea
their degree of civilization to have been very im-
perfect.

VOL. III. L THEIR

f Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 15. Gom. Chron. c. 217.
g See NOTE XXVII.

B OOK THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than

V1I. those of the moit savage tribes. On the death of

Theirfune- any diftinguill.ed perionage, epecially of the em-
ral rites. peror, a certain number of his attendants were

chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate viAcims were put to death with-
out mercy, and buried in the fame tomb h.

T ire ri- THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive
pt si' 1 than that of the roving tribes who trusted chiefly

to their bow for food, it seems not to have sup-
plied them with such subsistence as men require
when engaged in efforts of active industry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been struck with any

ifuperiority of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their observation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give
firmness to the conflitutioni. Such a remark
could hardly have been made with respect to any
people frnifhed plentifully with the necessaries
of life. The difficulty which Cortes found in
procuring fubfittence for his small body of soldi-
ers, who were often constrained to live on the
spontaneous produtions of the earth, seems to
confirm the remark of the Spanish writers, and
gives no high idea of the fiate of cultivation in
Mexican empire.

A fa'-ter A PR AC T ICE that was universal in New Spain
P-s Pappears to favour this opinion. The- Mexican

women gave ufck to their children for several

years,

h Herrera, ec. 3. lib. ii. c. 8. Gom. Chron. c. 202.
i Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 306. A. Herrera, dec, 3 lib. iv . c. 17
dec. 2. lib. vi c. 16.

years, and during that time they did not cohabit B-O 0 K
with their hufbandsk. This precaution againt a VII.
burdensome increase of progeny, though necelfa-
ry as I have already observed, among savages,
who, from the hardships of their condition, and
the precariousness of their subsistence, find it im-
poflible to rear a numerous family, can hardly be
supposed to have continued among a people who
lived at ease and in abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, which Doubts con-

has been confidered, and with justice, as the mos extent of the
decisive proof of a considerable progress in regu-empire.
lar government and police, is one of those fats in
the history of the New World which seems to
have been admitted without due examination or
sufficient evidence. The Spanish historians, in
order to magnify the valour of their countrymen,
are accuflomed to represent the dominion of Mon-
tezuma as firetching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the North to the Southern Ocean. But
a great part of the mountainous country was
possessed by the Otomies, a fierce uncivilized peo-
ple, who seem to have been the residue of the
original inhabitants. The provinces towards the
north and weft of Mexico were occupied by the
Chicheinecas, and other tribes of hunters. None
of these recognized the Mexican monarch as their
superior. Even in the interior and more level
country, there were several cities and provinces
which had never submitted to the Mexican yoke.
Tlafcala, though only twenty-one leagues from
the capital of the empire, was an independent
and hostile republic. Cholula, though frill nearer,
had been fubjeEted only a short time before the ar-
rival of the Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the distance

L 2 of
k Gom. Chron. c. 2o8. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

B 0 0 K of thirty leagues from Mexico, seems to have

V1I. been a eparate state, governed by its own laws .

N Mechoacan, the frontier of which extended with-

in forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful king-
dom, remarkable for its implacable enmity to the
Mexican namem. By these hostile powers the
Mexican empire was circumscribed on every quar-
ter, and the high ideas which we are apt to form
of it from the description of the Spanish historians,
should be considerably moderated.

Little inter- IN consequence of this independence of feve-
oung its fe- ral fiates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire,
veral pro- there was not any considerable intercourse between

vce its various provinces. Even in the interiour coun-

try, not far distant from the capital, there feemr
to have been no roads to facilitate the communi-
cation of one diftrit with another; and when the
Spaniards sirs attempted to penetrate into it, they
had to open their way through foreffs and marfhesn.
Cortes, in his adventrous march from Mexico to
Honduras in 525, met with obstructions and en-
dured hardships little inferior to those with which
he muff have struggled in the most uncivilized re-
gions in America. In some places, he could
hardly force a passage through impervious woods,
and plains overflowed with water. In others, he
found so little cultivation, that his troops were
frequently in danger of perishing by famine.
Such facts correspond ill with the pompous defcrip-
tion which the Spanish writers give of Mexican
police and industry, and convey an idea of a
country nearly imilar to that possessed by the In-.
dian tribes in North America. Here and there

a trading

1 Herrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. . 21. B. Diaz. c. 130.
m Herrera, dec. 3. li ii. c, o.
"B. Diaz. c. 166. c. 176.

a trading or a war-path, as they are called in B K
North America, led from one settlement to ano- VII.
thero, but generally thereappeared no sign of any
established communication, few marks of in-
duftry, and no monument of art.

A NO less firiking proof of this imperfection Farther

in their commercial intercourse is their want of p'ooff this.
money, or some universal standard by which to
etimate the value of commodities. The disco-
very of this is among the steps of greatest confe-
quence in the progress of nations. Until it has
been made, all their tranfaaions must be so auk-
ward, so operose, and so limited, that we may
boldly pronounce that they have advanced but a
little way in their career. The invention of such
a commercial flandard is of such high antiquity in
our hemisphere, and rites so far beyond the ara of
authentic hiitory, as to appear almost coeval with
the existence of society. The precious metals
seem to have been early employed for this pur-
pose, and from their permanent value, their divi-
fibility, and many other qualities, they are better
adapted to serve as a common standard, than any
other substance of which Nature has given us the
command. But in the New World, where these
metals abound moit, this use of them was not
known. The exigencies of rude tribes, or of
monarchies imperfedtly civilized, did not call for
it. All their commercial intercourse was carried
on by barter, and their ignorance of any com-
mon flandard by which to facilitate that exchange
of commodities which contributes so much to-
wards the comfort of life, may be justly menti-
oned as an evidence of the infant state of their po-
licy. But even in the New World the inconveni-
ence of wanting some general infirument of corm-
merce began to be felt, and ome efforts were

made
Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

B o ) K made towards supplying that defet. The Mex-

VII. icans, among whom the number and greatness of
'- their cities gave rife to a more extended commerce,

than in any part of America, had begun to em-
ploy a common standard of value, which render-
ed smaller tranactions much more easy. As cho-
colate was the favourite drink of persons in every
rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao, of
which it is composed, were of such universal con-
fumption, that, in their flated markets, these
were willingly received in return for commodities
of small price. Thus they came to be confidered
as the instrument of commerce, and the value of
what one wished to dispose of, was estimated by
the number of nuts of the cacao, which he might
expet in exchange for it. This seems to be the
utmost length which the Americans had advanced
towards the discovery of any expedient for sup-
plying the use of money. And if the want of
it is to be held, on one hand, as a proof of their
barbarity, this expedient for supplying that want,
should be admitted on the other, as an evidence no
less satisfying, of the superior progress which the
Mexicans had made in refinement and civilization.

Doubes con- IN fich a rude slate were many of the Mexican
Cte":rg lhe provinces when firfl visited by their conquerors.
their cities. Even their cities, extensive and populous as they

were, seem rather to be the habitation of men jut
emerging from barbarity, than the residence of
a polilhed people. The description of Tlafcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low firaggling huts, Scattered about ir-
regularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prietor, built with turf and stone, and thatched
with reeds, without any light but what they re-
ceived by a door, so low that it could not be en-
tered upright P. In Mexico, though from the pe-

culiarity
Pi HS rrera, dec. z. lib. vi. c. 2.

culiarity of its situation, the disposition of the B O O K
houses was more orderly, the ftrulure of the VII.
greater part was equally mean. Nor does the fa- TCX'
bric of their temples and other public edifices seem
to have been such as entitled them to the high
praises bestowed upon them by many Spanish au-
thors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
fcure and inaccurate descriptions, the great temple
of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, which
has been represented as a magnificent building,
raised to such a height, that the ascent to it ;;as
by a flair-cafe of a hundred and fourteen fleps,
was a solid mass of earth of a square form faced
partly with ltone. Its base on each fide extendced
ninety feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanc-
ed in height, it terminated in a quadrangle of a-
bout thirty feet, where were placed a shrine of
the deity and two altars on which the victims were
sacrificed q. All the other celebrated temples of
New Spain exadly resembled that of Mexicor.
Such ftru'ures convey no high idea of progress
in art and ingenuity; and one can hardly con-
ceive that a form more rude and simple could have
occurred to a nation, in its firif efforts towards
erecting any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were difplayed,and o:her

public build-

if we may believe the Spanish historians, in the ings.
houses of the emperor and in those of the prin-
cipal nobility. There, some elegance of design
was visible, and a commodious arrangement of
the apartments was attended to. But if build-
ings corresponding to such descriptions had ever
existed in the Mexican cities, it is probable that
some remains of them would frill be visible.
From the manner in which Cortes conducted the

siege
q Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 17.

See NOTE XXVIII,

BOOK siege of Mexico, we can indeed easily account

VII1 for the total deftrution of whatever had any ap-
.Ve. pearance of splendor in that capital. But as only

two centuries and a half have elapsed since the
conquelt of New Spain, it seems altogether incre-
dible that in a period so short, every vestige of this
boasted elegance and grandeur should have difap-
peared; and that in none of the other cities,
particularly in those which did not susser by the
defirutive hand of the conquerors, there are not
any ruins, which can be confidered as monuments
of their ancient magnificence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling-houfes. Those which are de-
itined for holding the council of the tribe, and in
which all assemble on occasions of public festivity,
may be called flatel yedifices when compared with
the reft. As among the Mexicans the diftinc-
tion of ranks was established, and property was
unequally divided, the number of distinguished
ftruAures in their towns would of course be greater
than in other parts of America. But there seem
not to have been either so solid or magnificent as
to merit these pompous epithets which some Spa-
nifh authors employ in describing them. It is pro-
bable that, though more ornamented, and built
on a larger scale, they were erected with the fame
flight materials which the Indians employed in their
common buildings s, and Time, in a space much
less than two hundred and fifty years, may have
swept away all remains of them .

FROM this enumeration of facts, it seems, up-
on the whole, to be evident that the Rfate of society

e N O TE

XIX. t See N T XXX.
^-Sce NOTE XXIX. tSee NOTE XXX.

in Mexico was considerably advanced beyond that B 0 0 K
of the savage tribes which we have delineated. VII.
But it is no less manifest, that with refpea to many
particulars, the Spanish accounts of their progress
appear to be highly embellished. There is not a
more frequent or a more fertile source of decepti-
on in describing the manners and arts of avage
nations, or of such as are imperfecly civilized,
than that of applying to them the names and
phrases appropriated to the institutions and refine-
ments of polished life. When the leader of a
small tribe, or the head of a rude community, is
dignified with the title of king or emperor, the
place of his residence can receive no other name
but that of his palace; and whatever his attend-
ants may be, they must be called his court. Un-
der such appellations they acquire an importance
and dignity which does not belong to them. The
illusion spreads, and giving a false colour to every
part of the narrative, the imagination is so much
carried away with the resemblance, that it be-
comes difficult to discern obje&ts as they really are.
The Spaniards, when they first touched on the
Mexican coast, were so much firuck with the ap-
pearance of attainments in policy and in the arts
of life, far superior to those of the rude tribes
with which they were hitherto acquainted, that
they fancied they had at length discovered a civi-
lized people in the New world. This comparison
between the people of Mexico and their unculti-
vated neighbours they seem to have kept constant-
ly in view, and observing with admiration many
things which marked their pre-eminence, they
employ in describing their imperfect policy and in-
sant arts, such terms as are applicable to the infti-
tutions of men far beyond them in improvement.
Both these circumitances concur in detrating
from the credit due to the early Spanish defcripti-
ons of Mexican manners. By drawing a parallel

between

B O K between them and those of people so much lets

ViL. civilized, they raised their own ideas too high.

By their mode of describing them, they convey-
ed ideas to others no less exalted above truth.
Later writers have adopted the style of the origi-
nal historians, and improved upon it. The co-
lours with which De Solis delineates the characer
of Montezuma, the splendor of his court, the
laws and policy of his empire, are the fame that
he muf have employed in exhibiting to view the
monarch and inititutions of an highly polished
people.

BUT though we may admit, that the warm

imagination of the Spanish writers has added ome
embellishment to their descriptions, this will not
justify the decisive and peremptory tone, with
which several authors pronounce all their accounts
of the Mexican power, policy, and laws, to be
the fitions of men who wished to deceive, or
who delighted in the marvellous. There are few
historical fats that can be ascertained by evidence
more unexceptionable, than may be produced in
support of the material articles, in the description
of the Mexican constitution and manners. Eye-
witnesses relate what they had beheld, men who
had resided among the Mexicans both before and
after the conquest, describe institutions and cuf-
toms which were familiar to them, persons of such
different professions that obje&s must have pre-
sented themselves to their view under every various
afpeEt, soldiers, prieffts, and lawyers, all concur
in their testimony. Had Cortes ventured to im-
pose upon his sovereign, by exhibiting to him a
picture of imaginary manners, there wanted not
enemies and rivals who were qualified to detet
his deceit, and wvho would have rejoiced in expos-
ing it. But according to the just remark of an
author, whose ingenuity has illustrated and whose

eloquence

eloquence has adorned the history of America , B O O K
this supposition is in itself as improbable, as the VII.
attempt would have been audacious. Who among
the destroyers of this great empire was so en-
lightened by science, or so attentive to the pro-
grefs and operations of men in social life, as to
frame a fictitious system of policy, so well com-
bined and so consistent, as that which they deline-
ate, in their accounts of the Mexican govern-
ment ? Where could they have borrowed the
idea of many institutions in legislation and po-
lice, to which, at that period, there was nothing
parallel in the nations with which they were ac-
quainted ? There was not at the beginning of
the sixteenth century, a regular eflablifhment of
pofis for conveying intelligence, to the overeign
of any kingdom in Europe. The fame obferva-
tion will apply to what they relate, with refped
to the ftrucEure of the city of Mexico, the re-
gulations concerning its police, and various laws
established for the administration of juflice, or
securing the happiness of the community. Who-
ever is accustomed to contemplate the progress of
nations, will often, at very early flages of it,
discover a premature and unexpected dawn of
those ideas, which give rife to institutions, that
are the pride and ornament of its most advanced
period. Even in a state as imperfecly polished as
the Mexican empire, the happy genius of ome
sagacious observer, excited or aided by circum-
stances unknown to us, may have introduced in-
ftitutions which are seldom found but in societies
highly refined. But it is almost impofiible that
the illiterate conquerors of the New World should
have formed in any one instance a conception of
customs and laws, beyond the standard of im-
provement in their own age and country. Or
if Cortes and his followers had been capable of

this,
uM. l'Abb( Raynal Hilt. philof. &. polit. &c. iii. 2z7.

B O K this, what inducement had those by whom they

Vli. were superseded to continue the deception ? Why
-v'" f hould Corita, or Motolinea, or Acofta, have

amused their sovereign or their fellow-citizens
with a tale purely fabulous?

Religion of IN one particular, however, the guides whom
the Mexi.
cans.e we must follow have represented the Mexicans to

be more barbarous perhaps than they really were.
Their religious tenets, and the rites of their wor-
ship, are described by them as wild and cruel in an
extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no
considerable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any superior power are ob-
fcure, and his sacred rites few and simple, was
formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular sys-
tern, with its complete train of priests, temples,
victims, and festivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the ltate of the Mexicans was very dif-
ferent from that of the ruder American tribes.
But from the extravagance of their religious noti-
ons, or the barbarity of their rites, no conclusion
can be drawn with certainty concerning the de-
gree of their civilization. For nations, long as.
ter their ideas begin to enlarge, and their man-
ners to refine, adhere to systems of superstition
founded on the rude conceptions of early ages.
From the genius of the Mexican religion we may,
however, form a most just conclusion with refpeat
to its influence upon the character of the people.
Theafpet of superstition in Mexico was gloomy
and atrocious. Its divinities were clothed with
terror, and delighted in vengeance. They were
exhibited to the people under detestable forms that
created horror. The figures of serpents, of ty-
gers, and of other deftrutive animals, decorated
their temples. Fear was the only principle that in-
spired their votaries. Fasts, mortifications, and
penances, all rigid and many of them excruciat-

ing

ing to an extreme degree, were the means which B 0 o K
they employed to appease their wrath, and they ne- V1.
ver approached their altars without sprinkling them
with blood drawn from their own bodies. But,
of all offerings, human sacrifices v ere deemed the
most acceptable. This religious belief, mingling
with the implacable spirit of vengeance, and ad-
ding new force to it, every captive taken in war
was brought to the temple, was devoted as a vic-
tim to the deity, and sacrificed with rites no less
solemn than cruel . The heart and head were
the portion consecrated to the gods; the warrior
by whose prowess the prisoner had been seized,
carried off the body to feast upon it with his
friends. Under the imprefion of ideas so dreary
and terrible, and accustomed daily to scenes of
bloodshed rendered awful by religion, the heart
of man mufft harden, and be fleeled to every fen-
timent of humanity. Tile spirit of the Mexicans
was accordingly unfeeling and atrocious. The
genius of their religion so far counterbalanced the
influence of policy and arts, that, notwithftand-
ing their progress in both, their manners, instead
of softening, became more fierce. To what cir-
cumftances it was owing that fuperflition assumed
such a dreadful form among the Mexicans, we
have not sufficient knowledge of history to deter-
mine. But its influence is visible, and produced an
effea that is singular in the history of the human
species. The manners of the people in the New
World who had made the greatest progress in the
arts of policy, were the most ferocious, and the
barbarity of some of their customs exceeded e-
ven those of the savage state.

THE empire of Peru boasts of an higher anti- Pretensions
quity than that of Mexico. According to thegf Perg to

tradi-tiquity.

x Cort. Relat. ap. Ramus. ii. 240, &c. B. Diaz. c. 82.

Acofta, lib. v. c. 13, &c. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 15, &c.
Gomara Chron. c. 80. &c, See N 0 T E XXXI.

B O O K traditionary accounts collected by the Spaniards,

VII. it had subsisted four hundred years, under twelve
' *
' successive monarchs. But the knowledge of their

ancient story, which the Peruvians could commu-
nicate to their conquerors, must have been both
uncertain. imperfect and uncertain . Like the other Ame-

rican nations, they were totally unacquainted
with the art of writing, and destitute of the only
means by which the memory of past tranfations
can be preserved with any degree of accuracy.
Even among people to whom the use of letters is
known, the era where the authenticity of history
commences, is much posterior to the introduction
of writing. That noble invention continued long
subservient to the common business and wants of
life, before it was employed in recording events,
with a view of conveying information from one
age to another. But in no country did ever tra-
dition alone carry down historic knowledge, in
any full continued stream during a period of half
the length that the monarchy of Peru is said to
have subsisted.

ncreas in THE uipos, or knots on cords of different co-
ther reod lours, which are celebrated by authors fond of the

marvellous, as if they had been regular annals of
the empire, imperfectly supplied the place of writ-
ing. According to the obscure description of
them by Acofta a, which Garcilaffo de la Vega has
adopted with little variation and no improvement,
the quipos seem to have been a device for render-
ing calculation more expeditious and accurate.
By the various colours different objects were de-
noted, and by each knot a diftint number. Thus
an account was taken, and a kind of register
kept, of the inhabitants in each province, or of
the several produtions collected there for public
use. But as by these knots, however varied or com-

bined,
z See NOTE XXXII. a Hil. lib. vi. c. 8.

bined, no moral or abftraa idea, no operation or B 0 o K
quality of the mind could be represented, they Vir.
contributed little towards preserving the memory --
of ancient events and inflitutions. The Mexican
paintings and symbols, rude as they were,conveyed
to them more knowledge of remote transactions,
than the Peruvians could derive from their boasted
quipos. Had they been even of more extensive
use, and better adapted to supply the place of
written records, they perished so generally, toge-
ther with the other monuments of the Peruvian
ingenuity, in the general wreck occasioned by the
Spanish conquest, and the civil wars subsequent
to it, that no accession of light or knowledge
comes from them. All the zeal of Garcilaffo de
la Vega for the honour of that race of monarchs
from whom he descended, all the industry of his
researches, and the superior advantages with which
he carried them on, opened no source of informa-
tion unknown to the Spanish authors who wrote
before him. In his Royal Commentaries, he con-
fines himself to illuflrate what they had related
concerning the antiquities and inflitutions of Pe-
rub; and his illustrations, like their accounts, are
derived entirely from the traditionary tales current
among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de-

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private charater of
the early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon
nothing in their fory, as authentic, but a few
facts, so interwoven in the system of their religion
and policy, as preserved the memory of them
from being loft; and upon the description of
such customs and institutions as continued in force
at the time of the conquest, and fell under the

immediate
b Lib. i. c. o.

B O K immediate observation of the Spaniards. By at-

VII. tending carefully to there, and endeavouring to e-
vh parate them from what appears to be fabulous,

or of doubtful authority, I have laboured to form
an idea of the Peruvian government and man-
ners.

Origin of THE people of Peru, as I have already obferv-
theircivil edc, had not advanced beyond the rudest form of
policy. favagelife, when Manco Capac, and his consort

Mama Ocollo, appeared to initrua and civilize
them. Who these extraordinary personages were,
whether they imported their system of legislation
and knowledge of arts from ome country more
improved, or, if natives of Peru, how they ac-
quired ideas so far superior to those of the people
whom they addressed, are circumstances with re-
fpet to which the Peruvian tradition conveys no
information. Manco Capac and his consort,
taking advantage of the propensity in the Peru-
vians to superstition, and particularly of their ve-
neration for the Sun, pretended to be children of
that glorious luminary, and to deliver their in-
ftruaions in his name and authority. The multi-
tude lifiened and believed. What reformation
in policy and manners the Peruvians ascribe to
those founders of their empire, and how, from
the precepts of the Inca and his consort, their an-
ceftors gradually acquired some knowledge of
those arts, and ome relih for that industry,
which render subsistence secure and life comforta-
ble, hath been formerly related. Those blessings
were originally confined within narrow precincts
for the authority of the first Inca did not reach
many leagues beyond Cuzco. But, in process of
time, his successors extended their dominion over

all
< Bookvi. p. 17, &c

all the regions that firetch to the weft of the An- B O O K
des from Chili to Quito, establishing in every pro- VII
vince their peculiar policy and religious inftituti-
ons.

THE most singular and firiking circumstance Foundedin

in the Peruvian government, is the influence ofreliion'
religion upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas
make such a feeble impreflion on the mind of a
savage, that their effe& upon his sentiments and
manners are hardly perceptible. Among the
Mexicans, religion, reduced into a regular system,
and holding a considerable place in their public in-
ftitutions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in
forming the peculiar charater of that people.
But in Peru, the whole fyiem of civil policy
was founded on religion. The Inca appeared
not only as a legislator, but as the mefenger
of Heaven. His precepts were received not
merely as the injunctions of a superior, but as
the mandates of the Deity. His race was held
to be sacred; and in order to preserve it difiindt,
without being poluted by any mixture of inferior
blood, the sons of Manco Capac married their
own sifters, and no person was ever admitted to
the throne who could not claim it by such a pure
descent. To those Children of the Sln, for that was
the appellation bellowed upon all the offspring
of the firit Inca, the people looked up with the
reverence due to beings of a fuiperior older. They
were deemed to be under the immediate proteCti-
on of the deity from whom they issued, and by
him every order of the reigning Inca was fuppofd
to be dictated.

FROM those ideas two consequences resulted. Twore-

The authority of the Inca was unlimited and ab- .so~:
solute, in the most extensive meaning of the this.
words. Whenever the decrees of a prince are
confidered as the commands of the Divinity, it is

VOL. III. nI not

B O O Knot only an a of rebellion but of impiety, to

VII. dispute or oppose his will. Obedience becomes a

The abt- duty of religion; and as it would be profane to
lute power controul a monarch under the guidance of FHea-
f the nca. ven, and presumptuous to advise him, nothing re-

mains but to submit with implicit refpet. This
must necessarily be the effect of every government
eftabliihed on pretensions of intercourse with fupe-
rior powers. Such accordingly was the blind sub-
miflion which the Peruvians yielded to their so-
vereigns. The persons of highest rank and great-
efi power in their dominions acknowledged them
to be of a more exalted nature; and in testimony
of this, , hen admitted into their presence, they
entered with a burden upon their houlders, as an
emblem of their servitude, and willingness to
bear whatever the Inca was pleated to impose.
Among their fubjets force was not requisite to fe-
cond their commands. Every officer entrusted
with the execution of them was revered, and,
according to the account of an intelligent observer
of Peruvian mannersd, might proceed alone from
one extremity of the empire to another, without
meeting opposition; for, on producing a fringe
from the royal Borla, an ornament peculiar to the
reigning Inca, the lives and fortunes of the peo-
ple were at his disposal.
All crimes ANOTHER consequence of establishing govern-

psi. d ment in Peru on the foundation of religion, was,

that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were not confidered as transgressions of human
laws, but as insults offered to the Deity. Each,
without any diftindion between such as were
flight and such as were atrocious, called for venge-
ance, and could be expiated only by the blood
of the offender. Consonantly to the fame ideas,
punishment followed the trespass with inevitable

certanty,
d Zarate, lib. i. c. 13.

certainty, because an offence againil Heaven was B o O K
deemed such an high enormity as could not be VII.
pardonede. Among a people of corrupted mo-
rals, maxims of jurisprudence so evere and un-
relenting, by rendering men ferocious and defpe-
rate, would be more apt to multiply crimes than
to restrain them. But the Peruvians, of simple
manners and unfufpicious faith, were held in such
awe by this rigid discipline, that the number of
offenders were extremely small. Veneration for
monarchs, enlightened and directed, as they be-
lieved, by the divinity whom they adored, prompt-
ed them to their duty; the dread of punirhment,
which they were taught to confider as unavoidable
vengeance inflicted by offended Heaven, withheld
them from evil.

THE system of fuperffition on which the IncasMild genius

ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority, fhir ore-
was of a genius very different from that establish-
ed among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned
the veneration of his followers entirely towards
natural objects. The Sun, as the great source of
light, of joy, and fertility in the creation, at-
tracted their principal homage. The Moon and
Stars, as co-operating with him, were entitled to
secondary honours. Wherever the propensity in
the human mind to acknowledge and to adore
some superior power, takes this direction, and is
employed in contemplating the order and bene-
ficence that really exist in nature, the spirit of
superstition is mild. Wherever imaginary beings,
created by the fancy and the fears of men, are
supposed to preside in nature, and become the ob-
jeds of worship, superstition always assumes a
wilder and more atrocious form. Of the latter

M z we
eVega, lib. ii. c. 6.

. .

BOOK we have an example among the Mexicans, of

VII. the former among the people of Peru. They had
L^/ not, indeed; made such progress in observation

or inquiry, as to have attained jufi conceptions of
the Deity; nor was there in their language any
proper name or appellation, of the Supreme Pow-
er, which intimated that they had formed any idea
of him as the Creator and Governor of the
World f. But by directing their veneration to that
glorious luminary, which, by its universal and
vivifying energy, is the best emblem of divine
beneficence, the rites and observances which they
deemed acceptable to him were innocent and hu-
mane. They offered to the Sun a part of those
producions which his genial warmth had called
forth from the bosom of the earth, and reared to
maturity. They sacrificed, as an oblation of
gratitude, some of the animals who were indebt-
ed to his influence for nourishment. They pre-
sented to him choice specimens of those works
of ingenuity which his light had guided the hand
of man in forming. But the Incas never tained
his altars with human blood, nor could they con-
ceive that teir beneficent father the Sun would
be delighted with such horrid victimsg. Thus
the Peruvians, unacquainted with those barbarous
rites which extinguish sensibility, and suppress
the feelings of nature at the fight of human sus-
ferings, were formed, by the spirit of the super-
flition which they had adopted, to a national cha-
rater more gentle than that of any people in
America.

rts infl- i ITS influence operated even upon their civil in-
vil policy, fitutions, and tended to correct in them any thing

that was adverse to gentleness of character. The
dominion of the Incas, though the most absolute
of all despotisms, was mitigated by its alliance

with
f Acota, lib. v. c. 3. g See N O T E XXXII.

with religion. The mind was not humbled and B O O K
suppressed by the idea of a forced fubjedion to VII.
the will of a superior; obedience, paid to one who '
was believed to be clothed with divine authority,
was willingly yielded, and implied no degradation.
The sovereign, conscious that the submissive re-
verence of his people flowed from their belief of
his heavenly descent, was continually reminded
of a distinction which prompted him to imitate
that beneficent power which he was supposed to
represent. In consequence of those impressions,
there hardly occurs in the traditional history of
Peru, any instance of rebellion againit the reign-
ing prince, and, among twelve successive mo-
narchs, there was not one tyrant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, and ue on

were carried on with a spirit very different from their miita
that of other American nations. They fought
not, like savages, to destroy and exterminate;
or, like the Mexicans, to glut blood-thirfiy divi-
nities with human sacrifices. They conquered,
in order to reclaim and civilize the vanquished,
and to diffuse the knowledge of their own infti-
tutions and arts. Prisoners seem not to have
been exposed to the insults and tortures, which
were their lot in every other part of the New
World. The Incas took the people whom they
subdued under their protection, and admitted them
to a participation of all the advantages enjoyed by
their original fubjeAs. This practice, so repug-
nant to American ferocity, and resembling the
humanity of the molt polished nations, must be
ascribed, like other peculiarities which we have
observed in the Peruvian manners, to the genius
of their religion. The Incas, confidering the
homage paid to any object but the heavenly pow-
ers which they adored, as impious, were fond
of gaining proselytes to their favourite system.

The

3 0 0 K The idols of every conquered province were car-

VI. ried in triumph to the great temple at Cuzcoh, and
'' placed there as trophies of the superior power of

the divn;-it wl'o was the protector of the empire.
The peoiple were treated with lenity, and in-
struted in the religious tenets of their new maf-
ters i, that the conqueror might have the glory of
-having added to the number of the votaries of his
father the Sun.

peculiar THE slate of property in Peru was no less fin-
tateof gularthan that of religion, and contributed like-
property wife, towards giving a mild turn of character to

the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three shares. One was confe-
crated to the Sun, and whatever it produced was
applied towards the erection of temples, and fur-
nifhing what was requisite towards celebrating the
public rites of religion. The other belonged to
the Inca, and as set apart as the provision
made by the community for the support of go-
vernment. The third and largest hare was re-
served for the maintenance of the people, among
whom it was parcelled out. No person, however,
had a right of exclusive property in the portion
allotted to him. He possessed it only for a year, at
the expiration of which a new division was made
in proportion to the rank, the number, and exi-
gencies of each family. All those lands were cul-
tivated by the joint industry of the communi-
ty. The people, summoned by a proper officer,
repaired in a body to the fields, and performed
their common task, while songs and musical in-
F.,rcsr of firuments cheered them to their labour k. By this

iis singular difiribution of territory, as well as by the

mode of cultivating it, the idea of a common in-

terest,

h Herrera, dec. . lib. iv c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. 12.
' Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c 8. k Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iv.
C. 2. Vega, lib. v. c. 5.

terest, and of mutual subserviency was continually B O O K
inculcated. Each individual felt his connection VII.
with those around him, and knew that he de-
pended on their friendly aid for what increase he
was to reap. A state thus constituted may be con-
fidered as one great family, in which the union
of members was so complete, and the exchange
of good offices so perceptible, as to create ifronger
attachment, and to bind man to man in closer in-
tercourfe, than subsisted under any form of foci-
ety established in America. From this resulted
gentle manners, and mild virtues unknown in the
savage state, and with which the Mexicans were
little acquainted.

BuT, though the institutions of the Incas were Inequality

so framed as to strengthen the bonds of affection "f rLk".
among their fubjeas, there was great inequality
in their condition. The distinction of ranks was
fully established in Peru. A great body of the
inhabitants, under the denomination of ranaconas,
were held in a state servitude. Their garb and
houses were of a form different from those of
free-men. Like the T'amemes of Mexico, they
were employed in carrying burdens, and in per-
forming every other work of drudgery . Next
to them in rank, were such of the people as were
free, but distinguished by no official or hereditary
honours. Above them were raised, those whom
the Spaniards call Orejones, from the orna-
ments worn in their ears. They formed what
may be denominated the order of nobles, and in
peace, as well as war, held every office of power
or trust m. At the head of all were the children
of the Sun, who, by their high descent, and pe-

culiar

i Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8.
m Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. i.

B O O K culiar privileges, were as much exalted above the

VII. Orejones, as thfe were elevated beyond the
a'" v people.
State ofarts. SUC H a form of society, from the union of its

members, as well as from the diftintion in their
ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts. But
the Spaniards having been acquainted with the im-
proved fiate of various arts in Mexico, several
years before they discovered Peru, were not so
much struck with what they observed in the latter
country, and describe the appearances of inge-
nuity there with less warmth of admiration.
The Peruvians, nevertheless, had advanced far
beyond the Mexicans, both in the necessary arts
of life, and in such as have some title to the name
of elegant.

Improved IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary ne-
!tae .lgri- ceflity in social life, v; as more extensive, and car-

ried on with greater fic'll than in any part of Ame-
rica. The Spaniards, ini tcir proorefs through
the country, were so fully supplied with provifi-
ons of every kind, that in the relation of their
adventures e meet vitih none of those dismal
icenes of diftrei: occasioned by famine, in which
the conquerors of Mexico were so often involved.
The quantity of iil under cultivation was not
left to. the diicretion of individuals, but regulated
by public authority in p-oportion to the exigencies
of the community. Even the calamity of an un-
fruitful season wa. but little felt, for the product
of the lands consecrated to the Sun, as well as
those set apart for the nca, being deposited in the
nTamos, or public store-houses, it remained there
as a iated provilion for times of scarcity ". As
the extent of cultivation was determined with

such
" Zarate, lib. . c. 14. Vega, lib, i. c. 8.

such provident attention to the demands of the B O O K
state, the inventions and industry of the Peruvi- VII.
ans were called forth to extraordinary' exertions, '
by certain defers peculiar to their climate and
foil. All the vast rivers that flow from the Andes
take their course eatlward to the Atlantic Ocean.
Peru is watered only by some streams which rush
down from the mountains like torrents. A great
part of the low-country is sandy and barren, and
never refreshed with rain. In order to render such
an unpromising region fertile, the ingenuity of
the Peruvians had recourse to various expedients.
By means of artificial canals conducted, with
much patience and considerable art, from the tor-
rents that poured across their country, they con-
veyed a regular supply of moisture to their fields °.
They enriched the foil by manuring it with the
dung of sea-fowls, of which they found an inex-
hauitible store on all the islands scattered along
their coaffs p. In describing t customs of any
nation thoroughly civilized, such practices would
hardly draw attention, or be mentioned as in any
degree remarkable, but in the history of the im-
provident race of men in the New World, they
are entitled to notice as singular proofs of induffry
and of art. The use of the plough, indeed,
was unknown to the Peruvians. They turned up
the earth with a kind of mattock of hard wood q.
Nor was this labour deemed so degrading as to
be devolved wholly upon the women. Both sexes
joined in performing this necessary work. Even
the children of the Sun set an example of industry,
by cultivating a field near Cuzco with their own
hands, and they dignified this function by deno-
minating it their triumph over the earth r.

THE
0 Zarate, lib. i. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. i. & 24.

Acofta, lib. iv. c. 37. Vega, lib. v. c. 3. See NOTE
XXXIV. q Zarate, lib. i. c 8. r Vega, lib. . c. 2.

B O O K THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob-

VI. vious, likewise, in the confiruction of their houses

The an public

build- an p c ings. In the extensive plains
ings, which tretch along the Pacific Ocean, where the

ky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,
their houses were very properly of a fabric ex-
tremely flight. But in the higher regions, where
rain falls, where the vicissitude of seasons is
known, and their rigour felt, they were con-
ftructed with greater solidity. They were gene-
rally of a square form, the walls about eight feet
high, built with bricks hardened in the fun, the
door low and strait, and without any windows.
Simple as there ftrudures were, and rude as the
materials may seem to be of which they were
formed, they were so durable, that many of them
still fubfii in different parts of Peru, long after
every monument that might have conveyed to us
any idea of the domestic state of the other Ame-
rican nations has vanished from the face of the
earth. But it was in the temples consecrated to
the Sun, and in the buildings destined for the refi-
dence of their monarchs, that the Peruvians dif-
played the utmost extent of their art and contriv-
ance. The descriptions of them by such of the
Spanish writers as had an opportunity of con-
templating them while, in ome measure, entire,
might have appeared highly exaggerated, if the
ruins which still remain, did not vouch the truth
of their relations. These ruins of sacred or royal
buildings are found in every province of the em-
pire, and by their frequency demonfirate that
they are monuments of a powerful people, who
must have subsisted, diring a period of rome ex-
tent, in a state of no inconsiderable improvement.
They appear to have been edifices various in their
dimensions. Some of a moderate size, many of
immense extent, all remarkable for solidity, and
resembling each other in the file of architecture.

The

The temple of Pachacamac, together with a pa- B 00 K
lace of the Inca, and a fortress, were so connet- VII.
ed together as to form one great ftruture, above
half a league in circuit. In this prodigious pile,
the fame singular taste in building is conspicuous
as in other works of the Peruvians. As they were
unacquainted with the use of the pulley, and other
mechanical powers, and could not elevate the large
stones and bricks which they employed in build-
ing to any considerable height, the walls of this
edifice, in which they seem to have made their
greatest effort towards magnificence, did not rife
above twelve feet from the ground. Though they
had not discovered the use of mortar or of any
other cement in building, the bricks or stones
were joined with so much nicety, that the eams
can hardly be discerneds. The apartments, as
far as the difiribution of them can be traced in
the ruins, were ill-difpofed, and afforded little
accommodation. There was not a ingle window
in any part of the building, and as no light could
enter but by the door, all the apartments of larger
dimension must either have been perfectly dark,
or illuminated by some other means. But with all
there and many other imperfections that might
be mentioned, in their art of building, the works
of the Peruvians which still remain must be con-
fidered as ftupenduous efforts of a people unac-
quainted with the ue of iron, and convey to us
an high idea of the power poffiffed by their anci-
ent monarchs.

THESE, however, were not the noblest or most Their pub.

useful works of the Incas. The two great roads lic roads
from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter-
rupted firetch above five hundred leagues, are
entitled to still higher praise. The one was con-

duaed
s See NOTE XXXV.

BOOK duEted through the interior and mountainous

VI. country, the other through the plains on the sea-
coacoaft. From the language of admiration in

which some of the early writers express their afto-
nifhment when they first viewed those roads, and
from the more pompous descriptions of later wri-
ters, who labour to support some favourite theory
concerning America, one might be led to com-
pare this work of the Incas to the famous military
ways which remain as monuments of the Roman
power: But in a country where there was no
tame animal except the Llama, which was never
tfed for draught, and but little as a beast of bur-
den, where the high roads were seldom trod by
any but a human foot, no great degree of labour
and art was requisite in forming them. The Pe-
ruvian roads were only fifteen feet in breadth ,
and in many places so slightly formed, that time
soon effaced every vestige of the course in which
they ran. In the low country little more seems to
have been done, than to plant trees or to fix posts
at certain intervals, in order to mark the proper
route to travellers. To open a path through the
mountainous country was a more arduous talk.
Eminencies were levelled, and hollows filled up,
and for the preservation of the road, it was fenc-
ed with a bank of tuif. At proper distances,
Tambos, or fiorehoufes, were ereEted for the ac-
commodation of the Inca and his attendants, in
their progress through his dominions. From the
manner in which the road was originally formed
in this higher and more impervious region, it has
proved more durable; and though, from the in-
attention of the Spaniards to every object but
that of working their mines, nothing has been
done towards keeping it in repair, its course may
still be traced u. Such was the celebrated road of the

Incas;
t Cieca, c. 60. u Xerez, p. 189, I91. Zarate, lib.

i, c. 13,

Incas; and even from this description, diverted of B 0 0 K
every circumstance of manifest exaggeration, or of VI.
suspicious afpedt, it must be confidered as a firik-
ing proof of an extraordinary progress in improve-
ment and policy. To the avage tribes of Ame-
rica, the idea of facilitating communication with
places at a distance had never occurred. To the
Mexicans it was hardly known. Even in the
most civilized countries of Europe, men had ad-
vanced far in refinement, before it became a re-
gular object of national police to form such roads
as render intercourse commodious.

THE formation of those roads introduced ano- andbridges,

ther improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the reft of America. In its course from south
to north, the road of the Incas was interfeted by
all the torrents which roll from the Andes towards
the Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their
course, as well as from the frequency and violence
of their inundation, there were unnavigable. Some
expedient was to be found for pafling them. The
Peruvians, from their unacquaintance with the use
of arches, and their inability to work in wood,
could not conftrud bridges either of stone or tim-
ber. But necessity, the parent of invention, fug-
gested a device which supplied that defect. They
formed cables of great strength, by twisting to-
gether ome of the pliable withs or osiers, with
which their country abounds; fix of which they
stretched across the stream parallel to one an-
other, and made them fall on each fide.
These they bound firmly together by interweav-
ing smaller ropes so close, as to form a compact
piece of net-work, which being covered with
brances of trees and earth, they passed along it

with

i. c. 13, 14. Vega, lib. ix. c. 13. ouguer Voyage, p. ioS.
Ulloa Entretenemientos, p. 365.

B 0 O K with tolerable security. Proper persons were

VII. appointed to attend at each bridge, to keep them

in repair, and to aflift passengers r. In the level
country, where the rivers became deep and broad
and still, they are passed in Balzas, or floats; in
the conftrution, as well as navigation of which,
the ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to be far
superior to that of any people in America. These
had advanced no farther in naval skill than the use
of the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians ventured to
raise a mast, and spread a fail, by means of which
their balzas not only went nimbly before the wind,
but could veer and tack with great celerity z.

Mode of re- NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peru-
fning silver vians confined solely to objets of essential utility.

They had made some progress in arts, which may
be called elegant. They possessed the precious
metal in greater abundance than any people of
America. They obtained gold in the fame man-
ner with the Mexicans, by searching in the chan-
nels of rivers, or waffing the earth in which par-
ticles of it were contained. But in order to pro-
cure silver, they exerted no inconsiderable degree
of skill and invention. They had not, indeed,
attained the art of finking a shaft into the bowels
of the earth, and penetrating to the riches con-
cealed there; but they hollowed deep caverns on
the banks of rivers, and the fides of mountains,
and emptied such veins as did not dip suddenly
beyond their reach. In other places, where the
vein lay near the surface, they dug pits to such a
depth, that the person who worked below could
throw out the ore, or hand it up in bafketsa.

They

x See NOTE XXXVI. y Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 376, B.

Zarate, lib. i. c. 14. Vega, lib. iii. c. 7. 8. Herrera, dec. v.
lib. iv. c. 3, 4. z Ulloa Voy. i. 67, &c. a Ra-
mufio, iii. 414, A.

They had discovered the art of smelting and re- B o 0 K
fining this, either by the simple application of VIL.
fire, or where the ore was more stubborn, and '-
impregnated with foreign substances, by placing
it in small ovens or furnaces on high grounds, so
artificially conftruaed, that the draught of air
performed the function of a bellows, a machine
with which they were totally unacquainted. By
this simple device, the purer ores were smelted
with such facility that the quantity of silver in
Peru was so considerable, that many of the uten-
fils employed in the functions of common life
were made of it b. Several of those vessels and
trinkets are said to have merited no small degree
of estimation, on account of the neatness of the
workmanship, as well as the intrinsic value of the
materials. But as the conquerors of America
were well acquainted with the latter, but had
scarcely any conception of the former, most of
them were melted down, and rated according to
their weight and fineness in the division of the
spoil.

IN other works of mere curiosity, or ornament, Works of

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many elegance
of those have been dug out of the Guacas, or
mounds of earth, with which they covered the
bodies of the dead. Among there are mirrors of
various dimensions, of hard Ihining stones highly
polished; vessels of earthen ware of different
forms; hatchets, and other inflruments, some def-
tined for war, and others for labour. Some were of
flint, ome of copper, hardened to such a degree
by an unknown process, as to supply the place of
iron on several occasions. Had the use of these
tools formed of copper been general, the progress
of the Peruvians in the arts might have been

such,

b Acofta, lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Vega, p. i. lib. viii. c. 25. Ulloa
Entreten. 258.

B O O K such, as to emulate that of more cultivated nations.

VII. But either the metal was so rare, or the operation
~'' by which it was hardened o tedious, that their

initruments of copper were few, and so extreme-
ly small that they seem to have been employed
only in flighter works. But even to such a circum-
fcribed use of this imperfeqc metal, the Peruvians
were indebted for their uperiority to the other
people of America in various artsc. The fame
observation, however, may be applied to them,
which I formerly made with refpet to the arts of
the Mexicans. From several specimens of Peru
vian utensils and ornaments, which were depo-
fited in the royal cabinet in Madrid, and from
some preserved in different collections in other
parts of Europe, I have reason to believe, that
the workmanship is more to be admired on ac-
count of the rude tools with which it was execut-
ed, than on account of its intrinsic neatness and
elegance, and that the Peruvians, though the
most improved of all the Americans, were not
advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

Animper- BUT notwithstanding so many circumstances,
sea civiliza- which seem to indicate an high degree of improve-

ment in Peru, others occur that fuggefi the idea of
a society still in the first Rfages of its transition from

No citiesbut barbarism to civilization. In all the dominions of the
cuzc. Incas, Cuzco was the only place that had the ap-

pearance, or was entitled to the name of a city.
Every where else, the people lived mofftly in de-
tached habitations, dispersed over the country,
or, at the utmost, fettled together in small vil-
lages d. But until men are brought to assemble in
numerous bodies, and incorporated in such close
union, as to enjoy frequent intercourse, and to
feel mutual dependence, they never imbibe per-

fetly

c Ulloa Voy. tor. i. 381, &c. Id. Entreten. p. 369, &c.
d Zarate, lib. i. c. 9. Herrera, dec. v. lib. vi. c. 4-

sealy the spirit, or assume the manners of social B O O K
life. In a country of immense extent, with only VII.
one city, the progress of manners, and the im- ' '
provement either of the necessary or more resin-
ed arts, must have been so flow, and carried on
under such disadvantages, that it is more surprising
the Peruvians should have advanced so far in
refinement, than that they did not proceed
farther.

IN consequence of this fate of imperfect union, No perfea

reparation of

the eparation of professions in Peru was not fOprfefiions.
complete as among the Mexicans. The less
closely men associate, the more simple are their
manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts
of common and most necessary use in life do not,
in such a ate, become so complex or difficult,
as to render it requisite that men hould be trained
to them by any particular course of education.
All those professions were accordingly exercised by
every Peruvian indiscriminately. None but the
artists, employed in works of mere curiosity or
ornament, constituted a separate order of men,
or were distinguished from other citizens e.

FROM the want of cities in Peru, another con- Little com-

· · mcrcial in-

sequence followed. There was little commercial tercourfe.
intercourse among the inhabitants of that great em-
pire. The ativity of commerce is co-eval with
the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in
considerable numbers in one place, its operations
become vigorous. The citizen muff depend for
subsistence on the labour of those who cultivate
the ground. They, in return, must receive some

VOL. III. N equivalent.

e Acofta, lib. vi. c. i5. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Herrera, dec.
v. lib. iv. c. 4.

B 0 0 Kequivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is establish-

VII. ed, and the produtions of art are regularly ex-
chan"changed for the fiuits of agriculture. In the towns

of the Mexican empire, itated markets were
held, and whatever could supply any want or de-
fire of man was an object of commerce. But in
Peru, from the singular mode of dividing pro-
perty, and the manner in which the people were
fettled, there was scarcely any species of com-
merce carried on between different provincess,
and the community was less acquainted with that
active intercourse, which is at once a bond of uni-
on, and an incentive to improvement.

Unwarlike B T the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was
spirit of the
Peruvians. the most remarkable, as well as the most fatal

defeEt in their characterg. The greater part of
the rude nations in America opposed their invad-
ers with undaunted ferocity, though with little
conduct or success. The Mexicans maintained
the struggle in defence of their liberties, vith
such persevering fortitude, that it was with diffi-
culty the Spaniards triumphed over them. Peru
was subdued at once, and almost without resist-
ance; and the molt favourable opportunities of
regaining their freedom, and crushing their op-
pressors, were loft through the timidity of the
people. Though the traditional history of the
Peruvians represents all the Incas as warlike
princes, frequently at the head of armies which
they led to victory and conquest; few symptoms
of such a martial spirit appear in any of their ope-
rations subsequent to the invasion of the Spaniards.
The influence, perhaps, of those institutions

which

f Vega, lib. vi. c. 8. gXerez, 90. Sancho ap
Ram. iii. 37. Herrera, dec. v. lib. i. c. 3.

which rendered their manners gentle, gave their B o K
minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the con- VII.
ftant serenity and mildness of the climate may
have enervated the vigour of their frame; per-
haps, ome principle in their government, un-
known to us, was the occasion of this political
debility. Whatever may have been the cause,
the fact is certain, and there is not an instance in
history of any people so little advanced in refine-
ment, so totally destitute of military talents and
enterprize. This-charader hath descended to their
posterity. The Indians of Peru are now more
tame and depressed than any people of America.
Their feeble spirits, relaxed in lifeless ination,
seem hardly capable of any bold or manly exer-
tion.

BUT, betides those capital defe&ts in the politi-

cal fate of Peru, ome detached circumstances
and fats occur in the Spanish writers which
discover a considerable remainder of barbarity in
their manners. The fame cruel custom, that
prevailed in some of the most savage tribes, sub-
sifted among the Peruvians. On the death of the
Incas, and of other eminent persons, a confide-
rable number of their attendants were put to
death, and interred around their Guaca, that they
might appear in the next world with their former
dignity, and be served with the fame refpet.
On the death of Huana-Capac, the most power-
ful of their monarchs, above a thousand victims
were doomed to accompany him to the tombh.
In one particular, their manners appear to have
been more barbarous than those of most rude
tribes. Though acquainted with the use of fire
in preparing maize, and other vegetables for food;
they devoured both flesh and fish perfectly raw,

N 2 and
h Acofta, lib. v. c. 7.

B 0 0 K and astonished the Spaniards, with a praAice re-

V11. pugnant to the ideas of all civilized people i.

Other domi- BUT though Mexico and Peru are the poffefli-
nions of
Spain in ons of Spain in the New World, which, on ac-
Amtrica. count both of their ancient and present itate,

have attracted the greatest attention; her other
dominions there are far from being inconfidera-
ble, either in extent or value. Most of them
were reduced to fubjeaion during the firfi part of
the sixteenth century, by private adventurers,
who fitted out their finall armaments either in
Hispaniola, or in Old Spain, and were we to fol-
low each leader in his progress, we should disco-
ver the fame daring courage, the fame persevering
ardour, the fame rapacious desire of wealth, and
the fame capacity of enduring and surmounting
every thing in order to attain it, which distinguish-
ed the operations of the Spaniards in their greater
American conquests. But, instead of entering
into a detail, which, from the similarity of the
tranfafions, would appear almost a repetition of
what has been already related, I hall satisfy my-

A brief fur- self with such a view of those provinces of the
veyofthem. Spanish empire in America, which have not hi-

therto been mentioned, as may convey to my
readers a more adequate idea of its greatness, ser-
tility, and opulence.

Suchas are I BE GIN with the countries contiguous to the
adjacentto two great monarchies, of whose history and in-
the empire
of Mexico. ftitutions I have given some account, and hall

then briefly describe the other diftrits of Spanish
America. The jurifdition of the viceroy of New
Spain extends over several provinces, which were
not subject to the dominion of the Mexicans.

Ciniloa and The countries of Cinaloa and Sonora, that stretch
Sonora, &c. along the east fide of the Vermilion sea, or gulf

of

i Xerez, p. I90. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372. C. Herrera, dec.
v. lib. i. c. 3.

of California, as well as the immense kingdoms B OK
of New Navarre and New Mexico, which bend VII.
towards the weft and north, did not acknowledge
the sovereignty of Montezuma, or his predecessors.
These regions, not inferior in magnitude to all the
Mexican empire, are reduced more or less com-
pletely under the Spanish yoke. They extend.
through the most delightful part of the temperate
zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
and all their productions, whether animal or ve-
getable, are most perfect in their kind. They
have all a communication either with the Pacific
Ocean, or with the Gulf of Mexico, and are wa-
tered by such rivers as not only enrich them, but
may become subservient to commerce. The
number of Spaniards fettled in those vast coun-
tries, is indeed extremely small. They may be
said to have subdued, rather than to have occupied
them. But if the population in their ancient efta-
blifhments in America hall continue to increase,
they may gradually spread over those diftrids, of
which, however inviting, they have not hitherto
been able to take poffefiion.

ONE circumstance may contribute to the speedy Rich mines.

population of ome ditriEts. Very rich mines
both of gold and silver have been discovered in
many of the regions which I have mentioned.
Wherever these are opened, and worked with
success, a multitude of people resort. In order
to supply them with the necessaries of life, culti-
vation must be increased, artisans of various kinds
must assemble, and industry as well as wealth
will be gradually diffused. Many examples of
this have occurred in different parts of America
since they fell under the dominion of the Spani-
ards. Populous villages and large towns have
suddenly arisen amidst uninhabited wilds and
mountains; and the working of mines, though
far from being the most proper objec towards

which

B O0 K which the attention of an infant society should

VII. be turned, may become the means both of pro-
m' ot' moting useful ativity, and of augmenting the
A recent number of people. A recent and singular in-
and remark- s
able dio- lfance of this has happened, which, as it is but lit-
very. tie known in Europe, and may be productive of

great effets, merits attention. The Spaniards
fettled in the provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora,
had been long disturbed by the depredations of
some fierce tribes of Indians. In the year 1765,
their incursions became so frequent, and so de-
ftructive, thatthe inhabitants, in despair, applied
to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for
such a body of troops as might enable them to
drive those formidable invaders from their places
of retreat in the mountains. Bt the treasury of
Mexico was so much exhausted by the vast fums
drawn from it, in order support the late war
against Great Britain, that the viceroy could afford
them no aid. The refpet due to his virtues, ac-
complifhed what his official power could not effect.
He prevailed with the merchants to advance
about two hundred thousand pesos for defraying
the expence of the expedition. The war was con-
dueted by an officer of abilities; and after being
protrated for three years, chiefly by the difficulty
of pursuing the fugitives over mountains and
through defiles which were almost impassable, it
terminated in the year 1771, in the final submission
of the tribes, which had been so long the object of
terror to the two provinces. In the course of this
service, the Spaniards marched through countries
into which they seem not to have penetrated be-
fore that time, and discovered mines of such va-
lue, as was astonishing even to men acquainted
with the riches contained in the mountains of the
New World. At Cineguilla, in the province of
Sonora, they entered a plain of fourteen leagues
in extent, in which they found gold in grains, at

the

the depth of only sixteen inches, of such a size, B O O K
that some of them weighed nine marks, and in VII.
such quantities, that in a short time, with a few ' -
labourers, they collected a thousand marks of
gold in grains, even without taking time to wash
the earth that had been dug, which appeared to.
be so rich, that persons of skill computed that it
might yield what would be equal in value to a mil-
lion of pesos. Before the end of the year 1771, Probable
above two thousand persons were fettled in Cine- e'eas of
guilla, under the government of proper ma-
giftrates, and the infpeetion of several ecclefi-
aflics. As several other mines, not inferior in
riches to that of Cineguilla, have been discover-
ed, both in Sonora and Cinaloa k, it is probable
that these negleEted and thinly inhabited pro-
vinces, may soon become as populous and valua-
ble as any part of the Spanish empire in America.

THE Peninsula of California on the other fideCalifornia,

of the Vermillion sea, seems to have been lefsit6 ate,
known to the ancient Mexicans, than the pro-
vinces which I have mentioned. It was discovered
by Cortes in the year 536 (Book V. p. 73).
During a long period it continued to be so little
frequented, that even its form was unknown, and
in moRt charts it was represented as an island, not
as a peninsula'. Though the climate of this
country, if we mayjudge from its situation, must
be very desirable; the Spaniards have made small
progress in peopling it. Towards the close of the
last century, the Jesuits, who had great merit in
exploring this neglected province, and in ci-
vilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly ac-
quired a dominion over it as complete as that
which they possessed in their missions in Paraguay,

and
See NOTE XXXVII. -1 See NOTE XXXVIII.

B O O K and they laboured to introduce into it the fame

VII. policy, and to govern the natives by the fame
-p maxims. In order to prevent the court of Spain

from conceiving any jealousy of their designs and
operations, they seem studiously to have depre-
ciated the country, by representing the climate as
so disagreeable and unwholesome, and the foil as so
barren, that nothing but their zealous desire of
converting the natives, could have induced them
to fettle there m. Several public-fpirited-citizens
endeavoured to undeceive their sovereigns, and to
give them a better view of California; but in

and probabi- vain. At length, on the expulsion of the Jesuits
iy of its from the Spanish dominions, the court of Ma-
ing. drid, as prone at that junutre to fufpet the

purity of the Order's intentions, as formerly to
confide in them with implicit trust, appointed
Don Joseph Galvez, whose abilities have since
raised him to the high rank of minister for the In-
dies, to visit that peninsula. His account of the
country was favourable; he found the pearl fish-
ery on its coasts to be valuable, and discovered
mines of gold of a very promising appearance".
From its vicinity to Cinaloa and Sonora, it is pro-
bable, that if the population of these provinces shall
increase in the manner which I have supposed,
California may, by degrees, receive from them
such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no longer
reckoned among the desolate and useless diftrits
of the Spanish empire.

Yucatan and ON the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Hondu-
Honduraras are comprehended in the government of New

Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said
to have formed a part of the Mexican empire.
These large provinces, stretching from the Bay of
Campeachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not,

like

m Venegas Hist. of California, i. 26.
n Lorenzano, 349, 350.

like the other territories of Spain in the New B o K
World, derive their value either from the fertility VI.
of their foil, or the richness of their mines, but
they yield in greater abundance, than any part of
America, the logwood tree, which, in dying
some colours, is so far preferable to any other ma-
terial, that the consumption of it in Europe is
considerable, and it has become an article in com-
merce of great value. During a long period, no
European nation intruded upon the Spaniards in
those provinces, or attempted to obtain any ihare
in this branch of trade. But after the conquest
of Jamaica by the English, it oon appeared what
a formidable rival was now feated in the neigh-
bourhood of the Spanish territories. One of the
firfl objects that tempted the English, was the
great profit arising from the logwood trade, and
the facility of wresting some portion of it from
the Spaniards. Some adventurers from JamaicaTheirde-
made the first attempt at Cape Catoche, the fouth-ci"ne,
east promontory of Yucatan, and by cutting log-
wood there, carried on a gainful traffic. When
moll of the trees near the coast in that place were
felled, they removed to the island of Trift, in
the Bay of Campeachy; and in latter times, their
principal station has been in the Bay of Honduras.
The Spaniards, alarmed at this encroachment,
endeavoured by negociation, remonfirances, and
open force, to prevent the English from obtaining
any footing on that part of the American conti-
nent. But after struggling aainft it for more
than a century, the disasters of last war extorted
from the court of Madrid a reluctant consent to
tolerate this settlement of foreigners in the heart
of its territories o. The pain which this humbling
concession occasioned, seems to have suggested a
method of rendering it of little consequence,

more
o Treaty of Paris, Art. xyiii.

B O K more effectual than all the efforts of negociation

VII. or violence. The logwood produced on the weft
I- "*in coast of Yucatan, where the foil is drier, isin

quality far superior to that which grows on marshy
and revival.grounds where the English are fettled. By en-

couraging the cutting of this, and permitting the
importation of it into Spain without paying any
duty p, such vigour has been given to this declin-
ing branch of commerce, and the logwood which
the English bring to market has funk so much in
value, that their trade to the Bay of Honduras has
gradually declined q since it obtained a legal fanti-
on; and, it is probable, will soon be finally aban-
doned. In that event, the provinces of Yucatan
and Honduras will become possessions of confide-
rable importance to Spain.

cona Rica STILL farther east than Honduras lie the two
and Vela- provinces of Cofia Rica and Veragta, which like-

wife belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain;
but both have been so much neglected by the
Spaniards, and are apparently of such small value,
that they merit no particular attention.
Chili. THE most important province depending on

the vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas
had established their dominion in some of its fou-
thern diflricts; but in the greater part of the
country, its gallant and high-fpirited inhabitants
maintained their independence. The Spaniards,
allured by the fame of its opulence, early at-
tempted the conquest of it under Diego Almagro;
and after his death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed
the design. Both met with fierce opposition. The
former relinquished the enterprize in the manner
which I have mentioned r. The latter after hav-

ing

P Real Cedula, Campomanes, iii. 145.
1 See N O T E XXX1X. r Book vi. p. 49, &c.

ing given many displays, both of courage and B OO K
military skill, was cut off with a considerable VI1.
body of troops under his command. Francisco L
de Villagra, his lieutenant, by his spirited con-
dut, checked the natives in their career, and sav-
ed the remainder of the Spaniards from deftru&i-
on. By degrees, all the champaign country along
the coast was fubjeted to the Spanish dominion.
The mountainous country is frill possessed by the
Puelches, Araucos, and other tribes of its origi-
nal inhabitants, formidable neighbours to the
Spaniards; with whom, during the course of two
centuries, they have been obliged to maintain
perpetual hostility, suspended only by a few inter-
vals of insecure peace.

TH AT part of Chili then, which may properly Excellence

-l - r> */I * * IT of its cl'-

be deemed a Spanifi province, is a narrow dif-mateand
trict, extending along the coast from the defertfoil.
of Atacamas to the island of Chiloe, above nine
hundred miles. Its climate is the most delicious
of the New World, and is hardly equalled by that
of any region on the face of the earth. Though
bordering on the Torrid Zone, it never feels the
extremity of heat, being screened on the east by
the Andes, and refreshed from the weft by cool-
ing fea-breezes. The temperature of the air is
so mild and equable, that the Spaniards give it
the preference to that of the southern provinces
in their native country. The fertility of the foil
corresponds with the benignity of the climate,
and is wonderfully accommodated to European
productions. The most valuable of there, corn,
wine and, oil, abound in Chili, as if they had
been native to the country. All the fruits
imported from Europe attain to full maturity
there. The animals of our hemisphere not only
multiply, but improve in this delightful region.
The horned cattle are of larger size than those

of

B 0 0 K of Spain. Its breed of horses surpasses, both in

VII. beauty and in spirit, the famous Andalufian race,
'"3 from which they sprung. Nor has nature ex-

haufted her bounty on the surface of the earth;
hfe has fiored its bowels with riches. Valuable
mines of gold, of silver, of copper, and of lead,
have been discovered in various parts of it.

Caufeof its A COUNTRY distinguished by so many bless-
leged by ings, we may be apt to conclude, would early
theSpani- become a favourite iation of the Spaniards, and
ards. must have been cultivated with peculiar predi-

letion and care. Instead of this, a great part of
it remains unoccupied. In all this extent of coun-
try, there are not above eighty thousand white
inhabitants, and about three times that number of
negroes and people of a mixed race. The most
fertile foil in America lies uncultivated, and ome
of its most promising mines remain unwrought.
Strange as this neglect of the Spaniards to avail
themselves of advantages, which seemed to court
their acceptance, may appear, the causes of it can
be traced. The only intercourse of Spain with
its colonies in the South Sea, was carried on during
two centuries by the annual fleet to Porto-bello.
All the produce of the colonies were shipped in
the ports of Callao, or Arica in Peru, for Pana-
ma, and carried from thence across the isthmus.
All the commodities which they received from the
mother-country, were conveyed from Panama to
the fame harbours. Thus both the exports and
imports of Chili passed through the hands of the
merchants of Peru. These had of course a profit
on each; and in both tranfaaions the Chilefe felt
their own Subordination; and having no direct in-
tercourfe with the parent state, they depended
upon another province for the disposal of their
productions, as well as for the supply of their
wants. Under such discouragements, popula-

tion

tion could not increase, and indultry was defi- B O O K
tute of one chief incitement. But now that Spain, VII.
from motives which I shall mention hereafter, has proeof
adopted a new system, and carries on her com- its improve-
merce with the colonies in the South Sea, by hips ment.
which go round Cape Horn, a diret intercourse
is opened between Chili and the Mother-country.
The gold, the silver, and the other commodities
of the province will be exchanged in its own
harbours for the manufactures of Europe. Chili
may speedily rife into that importance among the
Spanish settlements to which it is entitled by its
natural advantages. It may become the granary
of Peru, and the other provinces along the Paci-
sic Ocean; it may supply them with wine, with
cattle, with horses, with hemp, and many other
articles for which they now depend upon Europe.
Though the new system has been established only
a few years, those effecs of it begin already to
be observeds. If it shall be adhered to with any
lreadinefs for half a century, one may venture to
foretell, that population, industry and opulence
will advance in this province with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Provinces of
Tucuman and Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, Tucuan

.2

,. s and Rio de

and like it were dependent on the vice-royalty of la Plata.
Peru. These regions of immense extent stretch Northern
in length from north to south above thirteen hun-divfioth
dred miles, and in breadth more than a thousand.
This country, which is larger than most European
kingdoms, naturally forms itself into two great
divisions, one on the north, and the other on the
south of Rio de la Plata. The former compre-
hends Paraguay, the famous missions of the Je-
suits, and several other diftri&s. But as disputes
have long subsisted between the courts of Spain

and
Campomanes, ii. 15 7.

B O O K and Portugal, concerning its boundaries, which,

VII. it is probable, will be oon finally ascertained,
'*' either amicably, or by the decision of the sword,

I chufe to reserve my account of this northern di-
vision, until I enter upon the history of Portu-
guefe America, with which it is intimately con-
neded; and, in relating it, I shall be able from
authentic materials, supplied both by Spain and
Portugal, to give a full and accurate description
of the operations and views of the Jesuits, in
rearing that singular fabric of policy in America,
which has drawn so much attention, and has been
so iperfedly understood. The latter division
of the province contains the governments of Tu-
cuman and Buenos-Ayres, and to these I shall at
present confine my observations.

View of the THE Spaniards entered this part of America
laIter. by the river De la Plata, and though a succession

of cruel disasters befell them in their early attempts
to establish their dominion there, they were en-
couraged to persist in the design, at firit by the
hopes of discovering mines in the interior coun-
try, and afterwards by the necessity of occupying
it, in order to prevent any other nation from set-
tling there, and penetrating by this route into their
rich poffeflions in Peru. But except Buenos-
Ayres, they have made no settlement of any
consequence in all the vafr space which I have
mentioned. There are, indeed, scattered over
it, a few places on which they have bestowed the
name of towns, and to which they have endea-
voured to add some dignity, by erecting them in-
to bifhopricks; but they are no better than paltry
villages, each with two or three hundred inhabi-
tants. One circumstance, however, which was not
originally foreseen, has contributed to render this
difiria, though thinly peopled, of considerable im-
portance. The province of Tucuman, together
with the country to the south of the Plata, instead of

being

being covered with wood like other parts of Ameri- B o o K
ca, forms one vast open plain, almost without a tree. VII.
The foil is a deep fertile mold, watered by many " V
streams descending from the Andes, and clothed
in perpetual verdure. In this rich pasturage, the
horses and cattle imported by the Spaniards from
Europe have multiplied to a degree which almost
exceeds belief. This has enabled the inhabitants
not only to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by
supplying it with cattle, horses, and mules, but
to carry on a commerce no less beneficial, by the
exportation of hides to Europe. From both the
colony has derived great advantages. But its
commodious situation for carrying on contraband
trade, has been the chief source of its prosperity.
While the court of Madrid adhered to its ancient
system, with refpet to its communication with
America, the river De la Plata lay so much out of
the course of Spanish navigation, that interlopers,
almost without any rifque of either being observed
or obftruEted, could pour in European manufac-
tures in such quantities, that they not only sup-
plied the wants of the colony, but were conveyed
into all the eastern difirias of Peru. When the
Portuguese in Brasil extended their settlements to
the banks of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities flowed
into the Spanish territories, with still more faci-
lity, and in greater abundance. This illegal
traffic, however detrimental to the parent slate,
contributed to the increase of the settlement,
which had the immediate benefit of it, and Buenos
Ayres became gradually a populous and opulent
town. What may be the effect of the alteration
lately made in the government of this colony, the
nature of which shall be described in the fubfe-
quent Book, cannot hitherto be known.

ALL

B O O K ALL the other territories of Spain in the New

VII. World, the islands excepted, of whose discovery

Oh ter and redution I have formerly given an account,
Other ter-
ritories of are comprehended under two great divisions; the
Spain. former denominated the kingdom Tierra Firme,

the provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to the
mouth of the .Orinoco; the latter, the New King-
dom of Granada, situated in the interior country.
With a short view -of there I shall close this part
of my work.
Darien. To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-

jeet to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of
Darien. Though it was in this part of the con-
tinent, that the Spaniards first began to plant co-
lonies, they have made no considerable progress in
peopling it. As the country is extremely moun-
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part of
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains
no mines of great value, they would probably
have abandoned it altogether, if they had not
been allured to continue by the excellence of the
harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that of
Panama on the other. These have been called
the keys to the communication between the north
and south sea, between Spain and her most va-
luable colonies. In consequence of this advan-
tage, Panama has become a considerable and
thriving town. The peculiar noxiousness of its
climate has prevented Porto-bello from increasing
in the fame proportion. As the intercourse with
the settlements in the Pacific Ocean, is now car-
ried on by another channel, it is probable that
both Porto-bello and Panama will decline, when
no longer nourished and enriched by that com-
merce, to which they were indebted for their pro-
fperity, and even their existence.

THE

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Mar- B O O K

tha, firetch to the eastward of the iffthmus of Da- VII.
rien. The country fill continues mountainous, carthagena
but its vallies begin to expand, are well watered, and Santa
and extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fub-Martha'
jeAed this part of America to the crown of Spain,
about the year 532. It is thinly peopled, and
of course ill cultivated. It produces, however, a
variety of valuable drugs, and ome precious
stones, particularly emeralds. But its chief im-
portance is derived from the harbour of Cartha-
gena, the safest and best fortified of any in the
American dominions of Spain. In a situation so
favourable, commerce oon began to flourish. As
early as the year 1544, it seems to have been a
town of ome note. But when Carthagena was
chosen as the port in which the galeons should first
begin to trade on their arrival from Europe, and
to which they were dire&ted to return, in order to
prepare for their voyage homeward, the com-
merce of its inhabitants was fo'much favoured by
this arrangement, that it soon became one of the
most populous, opulent, and beautiful cities in
America. There is, however, reason to appre-
hend, that it has reached its highest point of ex-
altation, and that it will be so far affected by the
change in the Spanish system of trade with Ame-
rica, which has withdrawn from it the desirable
visits of the galeons, as to feel at leaIt a temporary
decline. But the wealth now collected there,
muff find or create employment for itself, and
may be turned with advantage into some new
channel. Its harbour is so safe, and so conveni-
ently situated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchants have been so long accuf-
tomed to convey there into all the adjacent pro-
vinces, that it is probable they will still retain
this branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to
be a city of great importance.

VOL. III. 0 THE

B O O K THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on

VITI. the east, was first visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in
Venuela the year 499t; and the Spaniards, on their

landing there, having observed some huts in an
Indian village built upon piles, in order to raise
them above the flagnated water which covered the
plain, were led to bestow upon it the name of Ve-
nezuela, or little Venice, by their usual propen-
fity to find a resemblance, between what they dif-
covered in America, and the objects which were fa-
miliar to them in Europe. They made ome at-
tempts to fettle there, but with little success. The
final reduction of the province was accomplished
by means very different from those to which Spain
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the New
World. The ambition of Charles V. often en-
gaged him in operations of such variety and extent,
that his revenues were not sufficient to defray the
expence of carrying them into execution. Among
other expedients for supplying the deficiency of
his funds, he had borrowed large fums from the
Veliers of Augiburgh, the most opulent merchants
at that time in Europe. By way of retribution for
thee, or in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new
loan, he bestowed upon them the province of Ve-
nezuela, to be held as an hereditary fief of the
crown of Castile, on condition that within a li-
mited time they should render themselves maters
of the country, and etablifh a colony there. Un-
der the direction of iuch persons, it might have
been expected, that a iettlement would have been
established on maxims very different from thole of
the Spaniards, and better calculated to encouroge
such ueful indufiry, as they might have kn,:wn to
be the only certain source of prosperity and opu-
lence. But unfortunately they committed the
execution of their plan, to some of those soldiers

of
t Book ii. p. 148.

of fortune with which Germany abounded in the B 0 0 K
sixteenth century. These adventurers, impatient VII-
to amass riches, that they might speedily aban- "
don a fiation which they oon discovered to be
very uncomfortable, instead of planting a colony
that might have cultivated and improved the coun-
try, wandered from diftriEt to diftri&t in search of
mines, plundering the natives with unfeeling ra-
pacity, or oppressing them by the imposition of
intolerable talks. In the course of a few years,
their avarice and exactions, in comparison with
which those of the Spaniards were moderate, de-
solated the province so completely, that it could
hardly afford them subsistence, and the Velfers re-
linquifhed a property, from which the inconfi-
derate condut of their agents left them no hope
of ever deriving any advantage u. When the
wretched remainder of the Germans deserted Ve-
nezuela, the Spaniards again took possession of it;
but, notwithstanding many natural advantages,
it is one of their most languishing and unproduc-
tive settlements.

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana areCaraccasand

the last of the Spanifl territories on this coat ; but Cumana.
in relating the origin and operations of the mer-
cantile company, in which an exclusive right of
trade with them has been vested, I shall hereafter
have occasion to confider their fate and produc-
tions.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an New king-

inland country of vast extent. This important °o f Gra
addition was made to the dominions of Spain
about the year 536, by Sebastian de Benalcazar
and Gonzalo Ximenes de Quefada, two of the
bravest and noft accomplished officers employed

0 in
u Oviedo y Bagnos Hist. de Venezuela, p. I , &c.

B 0 o Kin the conquest of America. The former, who

VII. commanded at that time in Quito, attacked it

J from the south; the latter made his invasion from
Santa Martha on the north. As the original in-
habitants of this region were farther advanced in
improvement, than any people in America but
the Mexicans and Peruviansx, they defended
themselves with great resolution and good con-
dud. The abilities and perseverance of Benal-
cazar and Quefada surmounted all opposition,
though not without encountering many dangers,
and reduced the country into the form of a Spa-
nifh province.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far ele-

vated above the level of the ea, that though it
approaches almost to the equator, the climate is re-
markably temperate. The fertility of its vallies is
not inferior to that of the richest diitrids in Ame-
rica, and its higher grounds yield gold and pre-
cious stones of various kinds. It is not by dig-
ging into the bowels of the earth that this gold is
found; it is mingled with the foil near the surface,
and separated from it by repeated waffing with
water. This operation is carried on wholly by
negroe slaves; for though the chill subterranean
air has been discovered, by experience, to be so fa-
tal to them, that they cannot be employed in the
deep silver mines, they are more capable of per-
forming the other species of labour than Indians.
As the natives in the New Kingdom of Granada
are exempt from that service, which has wafted
their race so rapidly in other parts of America, it
is remarkably populous. Some diftriEts yield gold
with a profusion no less wonderful than that in the
vale of Cineguilla, which I have formerly menti-
oned, and it is often found in pepitas, or grains,

which
Book iv. p. 99, &c.

which manifest the abundance in which it is pro- B O OK
duced. On a rising ground near Pamplona, fin- VII.
gle labourers have colleted in a day what washh
equal in value to a thousand pesos r. A late go-
vernor of Santa Fe brought with him to Spain a
lump of virgin gold, estimated to be worth seven
hundred and forty pounds sterling. But without
founding any calculation on what is rare and ex-
traordinary, the value of the gold usually collet-
ed in this country, particularly in the provinces of
Popayan and Choco, is of considerable amount.
Its towns are populous and flourishing. The num-
ber of inhabitants in almost every part of the
country daily increases. Cultivation and industry
of various kinds begin to be encouraged, and to
prosper. A considerable trade is carried on with
Carrhagena, the produce of the mines, and other
commodities, being conveyed down the great ri-
ver of St. Magdalen to that city. On another
quarter, the New Kingdom of Granada has a
communication with the Atlantic by the river Ori-
noco ; but the country which itretches along its
banks towards the ealt, is little known, and im-
perfectly occupied by the Spaniards.

y Piedrahita Hist. del N. Reyno, p. 48 MS. penes me.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTOR Y

F
A MERICA.

B O O K VIII.

AFTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards B OO K
in their discoveries and conquests during more VIII.
than half a century, I have conducted them to tT
that period when their authority was established po.' cynd
over almost all the vast regions in the New World trade of the
still filbjee to their dominion. The effect of their lopnies.
settlements upon the countries of which they took
possession, the maxims which they adopted in
forming their new colonies, the interior ftruture
and policy of these, together with the influence of
their progressive improvement upon the parent
itate, and the commercial intercourse of nations,
are the objeas to which we now turn our attenti-
on, and they are no less interesting than impor-
tant.

THE first visible consequence of the eftablith- Depopulation
ments made by the Spaniards in America, as the tofimfat

diminution ofthem.

B O K diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree

VIII. equally astonishing and deplorable. I have al-
.-v-a- ready, on different occasions, mentioned the dif-

afirous influence under which the connection of
the Americans with the people of our hemisphere
commenced, both in the islands, and in several
parts of the continent, and have touched upon
various causes of their rapid confulmption. Where-
ever the inhabitants of America had resolution to
take arms in defence of their liberty and rights,
many perfhed in the unequal contest, and were
cut off by their fierce invaders. But the greatest
desolation followed after the sword was sheathed,
and the conquerors were fettled in tranquillity.

c.ufesorthisIt was in the islands, and in those provinces of
andhe imea the continent which firetch from the Gulf of Tri-
partsof the nidad to the confines of Mexico, that the fatal
continet effects of the Spanish dominion were sirs and

most sensibly felt. All there were occupied either
by wandering tribes of hunters, or by such as had
made but small p:ogrefs in cultivation and indus-
try. When they were compelled by their new
maters to take up a fixed residence, and to apply
to regular labour; when taflks were imposed up-
on them disproportioned to their strength, and
vwere exacted with unrelenting severity; they pof-
feled not vigour either of mind or of body to
sustain this unusual load of oppression. Dejection
and deip:ir drove many to end their lives by vio-
lence. Fatigue and famine destroyed more. In
all those extensive regions, the original race of
inhabitants waited away; in some it was totally
ext'nguifhed. In Mexico, where a powerful and
martial people difiinguifhed their opposition to the
Spaniards, by efforts of courage worthy of a better
fate, great numbers fell in the field; and there, as
well as in Peru, fill greater numbers perifhled un-
der the hardhips of attending the Spanish armies
in their various expeditions and civil wars, worn

out

out with the incessant toil of carrying their bag- B 0 K
gage, provisions, and military stores. VII.

BuT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- In New

niards were so deftrudtive to the people of Mexico Spain and
and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with which
they eablifhed their new settlements. The for-
mer were temporary calamities, fatal to indivi-
duals; the latter was a permanent evil, which,
with gradual consumption, wafted the nation.
When the provinces of Mexico and Peru were di-
vided among the conquerors, each was eager to
obtain a diftrit, from which he might expect an
instantaneous recompence for all his services. Bold
adventurers, accustomed to the carelessness and
diflipation of a military life, had neither industry
to carry on any plan of regular cultivation, nor
patience to wait for its flow, but certain returns.
Instead of fettling in the vallies occupied by the
natives, where the fertility of the foil would have
amply rewarded the diligence of the planter, they
chose to fix their flations in tome of the moun-
tainous regions, frequent both in New Spain and
in Peru. To search for mines of gold and silver,
was the chief object of their activity. The vast
profpets which this opens, and the alluring hopes
which it continually presents, correspond wonder-
fully with the spirit of enterprize and adventure
that animated the first emigrants to America in
every part of their conduct. In order to push
forward those favourite projects, so many hands
were wanted, that the service of the natives be-
came indispensably requisite. They were, accord-
ingly, compelled to abandon their ancient habi-
tations in the plains, and driven in crowds to the
mountains. This sudden transition from the sultry
climate of the vallies, to the chill penetrating air
peculiar to high lands in the torrid zone; the fa-

tigue

B O OK tigue of exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholesome

VII. nourishment, and the despondency occasioned by

~V a species of oppression to which they were not ac-

cuitomed, and of which they saw no end, affected
them nearly as much as their lets industrious coun-
trymen in the islands. They funk under the unit-
ed preffire of those calamities, and melted away
with almost equal rapidityz. In consequence of
this, together with the introduction of the small-
pox, a malady unknown in America, and ex-
tremely fatal to the natives a, the number of peo-
ple both in Ne\v Spain and Peru was so much re-
duced, that in a few years the accounts of their
ancient population appeared almost incredible b.

Not the re- SUC H are the most considerable events and
fult of any
fyfemofpo- causes, which, by their combined operation, con-
licy* tributed to depopulate America. Without at-

tending to theie, many authors, astonished at the
suddenness of the desolation, have ascribed this
unexampled event to a scheme of policy no less
profound than atrocious. The Spaniards, as they
pretend, concious of their own inability to occupy
the vast regions which they had diicovered, and
foreseeing the impolfibility of maintaining their
authority over a people infinitely superior to them-
selves in number, in order to preserve America,
resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by
converting it into a defart, endeavoured to secure
their own dominion over it . But nations seldom
extend their views to objects so remote, or lay their
plans so deep; and, for the honour of humanity,
we may observe, that no nation ever deliberately
formed fach an execrable scheme. The Spanish

monarchs,

z Torquemada, i. 613. a B. Diaz, c. 124. Her-

rera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. 4. Ulloa Entreten, zo6. b Tor-
quein. 615. 64z, 643. See NOTE XL. c See
NOT E XLI.

monarchs, far from acting upon any such system B O O K
of deftruetion, were uniformly solicitous for the VIII.
preservation of their new fubjets. With Isabella, -
zeal for propagating the chrifltian faith, and the
desire of communicating the knowledge of truth,
and the consolations of religion, to people destitute
of spiritual light, were more than ostensible mo-
tives for encouraging Columbus to attempt his
discoveries. Upon his success, Ihe endeavoured to
fulfil her pious purpose, and manifested the most
tender concern to secure not only religious in-
ftrution, but mild treatment, to that inoffensive
race of men fubjeted to her crown d. Her fuc-
cenors adopted the fame ideas; and, on many
occasions, which I have mentioned, their autho-
rity was interposed in the most vigorous exertions,
to protea the people of America from the oppref-
sion of their Spanish fubjeds. Their regulations
for this purpose were numerous, and often repeat-
ed. They were framed with wisdom, and dic-
tated by humanity. After their possessions in the
New World became so extensive, as might have
excitedfome apprehensions of difficulty inretaining
their dominion over them, the spirit of their regu-
lations was as mild as when their settlements were
confined to the islands alone. Their solicitude to
protet the Indians seems rather to have augment-
ed as their acquisitions increased; and from ardour
to accomplish this, they enacted, and endeavour-
ed to enforce the execution of laws, which ex-
cited a formidable rebellion in one of their colo-
nies, and spread alarm and disaffection through
all the reft. But the avarice of individuals was
too violent to be controuled by the authority of
laws. Rapacious and daring adventurers, far re-
moved from the feat of government, little ac-

customed
dSee N OTE XII,

r

B o K customed to the restraints of military discipline

VIII. while in service, and fill less disposed to refpet

the feeble jurisdiction of civil power in an infant
colony, despised or eluded every regulation that
set bounds to their exations and tyranny. The
parent fRate, with persevering attention, issued
ediEts to prevent the oppression of the Indians;
the colonists, regardless of there, or trusting to
their difiance for impunity, continued to confider,
and treat them as slaves. The governors them-
selves, and other officers employed in the colo-
nies, several of whom were as indigent and ra-
pacious as the adventurers over whom they pre-
fided, were too apt to adopt their contemptuous
ideas of the conquered people; and, instead of
checking, encouraged or connived at their ex-
cesses. The desolation of the New World hould
not then be charged on the court of Spain, or be
confidered as the effect of any fyfiem of policy
adopted there. It ought to be imputed wholly
to the conquerors and firit planters of America,
who, by measures no less inconsiderate than un-
just, counteracted the ediEts of their sovereign,
and have brought disgrace upon their country.

nor the e- WITH still greater injurtice, have many au-
fntf reti- thors represented the intolerating spirit of the

Roman Catholic religion, as the cause of exter-
minating the Americans, and have accused the
Spanish ecclesiastics of animating their country-
men to the slaughter of that innocent people, as
idolaters and enemies of God. But the first mif-
fionaries who visited America, though weak and il-
literate, were pious men. They early espoused
the defence of the natives, and vindicated their
character from the aspersions of their conquerors,
who, describing them as incapable of being formed
to the offices of civil life, or of comprehending the
doctrines of religion, contended, that they were

a sub-

a Subordinate race of men, on whom the hand of B o o K
nature had set the mark of servitude. From the VIiI.
accounts which I have given of the humane and V
persevering zeal of the Spanish miflionaries, in
protecting the helpless flock committed to their
charge, they appeare in a light which reflets
lustre upon their function. They were ministers
of peace, who endeavoured to wrest the rod from
the hands of oppressors. To their powerful in-
terpofition, the Americans were indebted for eve-
ry regulation tending to mitigate the rigour of
their fate. The clergy in the Spanish settlements,
regular as well as secular, are fRill confidered by
the Indians as their natural guardians, to whom
they have recourse under the hardships and ex-
ations to which they are too often exposed e.

BUT, notwithfanding the rapid depopulation Thenumber

of America, a very considerable number of the ,.ndian
native race frill remains both in Mexico and Pe-ing.
ru, especially in those parts which were not ex-
posed to the first fury of the Spanish arms, or de-
solated by the first efforts of their indufiry, fiill
more ruinous. In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua,
and the other delightful provinces of the Mexican
empire that firetch along the south-sea, the race
of Indians is still numerous. Their settlements
in some places are so populous, as to merit the
name of cities . In the three audiences into
which New Spain is divided, there are at least
two millions of Indians; a pitiful remnant, in-
deed, of its ancient population, but such as fill
forms a body of people superior in number to that
of all the other inhabitants of this vast country .
In Peru several difiricts, particularly in the king-
dom of Quito, are occupied almost entirely by
Indians. In other provinces, they-are mingled

with

e See NOTE XLIII. f See NOTE XLIV. g See
NOTE XLV.

B O O Kwith the Spaniards, and in many of their fettIe-

VIII. ments praftife the mechanic arts, and fill most of
'"*'the inferior fations in society. As the inhabitants,

both of Mexico and Peru were accuflomed to a
fixed residence, and to some degree of regular
indufiry, less violence was requisite in bringing
them to some conformity with the European modes
of civil life. But wherever the Spaniards fettled
among the savage tribes of America, their at-
tempts to incorporate with them have been al-
wa)ys fruitless, and often fatal to the natives. Im-
patient of refiraint, and disdaining labour as a
mark of servility, they either abandoned their
original feats, and fought for independance in
mountains and forefis inaccessible to their oppref-
fors, or perished when reduced to a slate repug-
nant to their ancient ideas and habits. In the
diftrits adjacent to Carthagena, to Panama, and
to Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is more general
than even in those parts of Mexico and Peru, of
which the Spaniards have taken most full posses-
sion.

General idea BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the
of the policy New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabi-
ts colonies. tants, were made at a period when that monarchy

was capable of forming them to best advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful state, equal to so great an un-
dertaking. Its monarchs, having extended their
prerogative far beyond the limits which once cir-
cumfcribed the regal power in every kingdom of
Europe, were hardly subjet to controul, either in
concerting, or in executing their measures. In every
wide extended empire, the form of government
muff be simple, and the authority of the sovereign
absolute; that his resolutions may be taken with
promptitude, and pervade the whole with undimi-
nished force. Such was the power of the Spanish

monarchs,

monarchs, when they were called to deliberate con- B O O K
cerning the mode of effablifhing their dominion VIlI.
over the mofl remote provinces, that had ever been '
subjeCted to any European fRate. In this deliberati-
on, they felt themselves under no conflitutional
restraint, and that as independent masters of their
own resolves, they might issue the edits requisite
for modelling the government of the new colo-
nies, by a mere at of prerogative.

THIS early interposition of the Spanish crown, Early inter-

in order to regulate the policy and trade of its co- thei regal au.
lonies, is a peculiarity which distinguishes their thority.
progress from that of the colonies of any other
European nation. When the Portuguese, the
English, and French, took poffeflion of those re-
gions in America which they now occupy, the
advantages which they promised to yield were
so remote and uncertain, that they were suffered
to struggle through a hard infancy, almost witl:-
out guidance or protetion from the parent
itate. But gold and silver, the first productions
of the Spanish settlements in the New World,
were more alluring, and immediately attrated
the attention of their monarchs. Though they
had contributed little to the discovery, and almost
nothing to the conquest of the New World, they
instantly assumed the funcin of its legifators;
and having acquired a species of dominion for-
merly unknown, they formed a plan for exercif-
ing it, to which nothing similar occurs in the
history of human affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanish jurifpru- All power

and pope ty

dence with refpet to America, is to confider vlteo in the
what has been acquired there as vested in the crown.
crown, rather than in the Rtate. By the bull of
Alexander VI. on which, as its great charter,
Spain founded its right, all the regions that had

been,

B O K been, or should be discovered, were bestowed as

VIII. a free gift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. They and
~Lw their fuccefiors were uniformly held to be the uni-

versal proprietors of the vast territories, which the
arms of their fubjeds conquered in the New
World. From them, all grants of land there
flowed, and to them they finally returned. The
leaders who conducted the various expeditions, the
governors who presided over the different colo-
nies, the officers of jufiice, and the ministers of
religion, were all appointed by their authority,
and removable at their pleasure. The people
who composed infant settlements were intitled to
no pivileges independent of the sovereign, or
that served as a barrier against the power of the
crown. It is true, that when towns were built,
and formed into bodies corporate, the citizens
were permitted to elea their own magiitrates, who
governed by laws which the community enacted.
Even in the most despotic flates, this feeble spark
of liberty is not extinguished. But in the cities
of Spanish America, this jurifdidion is merely
municipal, and is confined to the regulation of
their own interior commerce and police. in what-
ever relates to public government, and the gene-
ral interest, the will of the sovereign is law. No
political power originates from the people. All
centres in the crown, and in the officers of its
nomination.

All the new WHEN the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame-
dominions of -
Spain ub- rica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
jeaed totwo the plan of interior policy for their new domini-
viceros. ons, divided them into two immense govern-

ments, one subjed to the viceroy of New Spain,
the other to the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdiaion
of the former extended over all the provinces be-
longing to Spain in the northern division of the
American continent. Under that of the latter,

was

was comprehended whatever she pofeffeed in South B O O K
America. This arrangement which, from the VIII.
beginning, was attended with many inconveni- ."-~
encies, became intolerable when the remote pro-
vinces of each viceroyalty began to improve in in-
dufiry and population. The people complained
of their fubje&ion to a superior, whose place of
residence was so distant, or so inaccessible, as al-
most excluded them from any intercourse with the
feat of government. The authority of the vice-
roy over diftrits so far removed from his own eye
and observation, was unavoidably both feeble
and ill-directed. As a remedy for those evils, a
third viceroyalty has been etablifhed in the pre-
sent century, at Santa Fe de Bogota, the capital
of the new kingdom of Granada, the jurifdition
of which extends over the whole kingdom of
TierraFirme, and the province of Qitoh. Those Their pow.
viceroys not only represent the person of their"'
Sovereign, but possess his regal prerogatives within
the precincts of their own governments, in their
utmost extent. Like him, they exercise supreme
authority in every department of government,
civil, military and criminal. They may preside
in every tribunal. They have the sole right of
nominating the persons who hold many offices of
the highest importance, and the occasional privi-
lege of supplying such as are in the royal gift, un-
til the successor appointed by the king shall arrive.
The external pomp of their government is suited
to its real dignity and power. Their courts are
formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
horse and foot guards, a household regularly efta-
blifhed, numerous attendants, and ensigns of
command, displaying such magnificence, as hardly
retains the appearance of delegated authority i.

VOL. III. P BU

h Voy. de. Ulloa, i. 23. 255,

UJlloa, Voy. i. 432. . Gage, 6.

B O OK B' T as the viceroys cannot discharge in person

Viii. the funtions of a supreme magistrate in every

Cots f part of their extensive jurildition, they are aided
Audience. in their government by officers and tribunals fimi-

lar to those in Spain. The conduct of civil affairs
in the various provinces and diftrias, into which
the Spanish dominions in America are divided, is
committed to magistrates of various orders and
denominations; some appointed by the king,
others by the viceroy, but all fubje& to his com-
mand, and amenable to his jurifdition. The
adminiftraticn of justice is vested in tribunals,
known by the name of Audiences, and formed up-
on the model of the court of Chancery in Spain.
These are eleven in number, and dispense justice
to as many districts, into which the Spanish domi-
nions in America are divided k. The number of
judges in them is various, according to the ex-
tent and importance of their jurifdiaion. The
flation of a judge in the court of Audience is no
less honourable than lucrative, and is commonly
filled by persons of such abilities and merit, as
renders this tribunal extremely refpeEable. Both
civil and criminal causes come under their cogni-
zance, and for each peculiar judges are set apart.

Their juri- Though it is only in the most despotic govern-
didion. ments, that the sovereign exercises in person the

formidable prerogative of adminiftring justice to
his fubjets, and in absolving, or condemning,
consults no law but what is deposited in his own
breast; though in all the monarchies of Europe,
judicial authority is committed to magistrates,
whose decisions are regulated by known laws and
established forms, the Spanish viceroys have often
attempted to intrude themselves into the feat of
justice, and with an ambition which their distance
from the controul of a superior, rendered bold,

have
k See NOTE XLVI.

have aspired at a power which their master does B O OK
not venture to assume. In order to check an ufur- VIII.
pation which must have annihilated justice and ""
security in the Spanish colonies, by subjecting the
lives and property of all to the will of a single
man, the viceroys have been prohibited, in the
most explicit terms, by repeated laws, from in-
tersering in the judicial proceedings of the courts
of Audience, or from delivering an opinion, or
giving a voice with refpet to any point litigated
before them . In some particular cafes, in which
any question of civil right is involved, even the
political regulations of the viceroy may be brought
under the review of the court of Audience,
which, in those inflances, may be deemed an in-
termediate power placed between him and the
people, as a contfitutional barrier to circumscribe
his jurifdidion. But as legal reitraints on a per-
son who represents the sovereign, and is clothed
with his authority, are little suited to the genius
of Spanish policy; the hesitation and reserve with
which it confers this power on the courts of Au-
dience, are remarkable. They may advise, they
may remonfirate, but in the event of a direct col-
lifion between their opinion and the will of the
viceroy, what he determines must be carried into
execution, and nothing remains for them, but to
lay the matter before the king and the council of
the Indiesm. But to be intitled to remonstrate,
and inform against a person, before whom all
others must be silent, and tamely submit to his
decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity to the
courts of Audience. This is farther augmented
by another circumstance. Upon the death of a
viceroy, without any provifiop of a successor by

P 2 the

1 Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 5. 38. 44. lib. iii. tit. iii. 36, 37.
m Solorz, De jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 40, 41. Recop. lib,
ii. tit. xv. 1. 36. lib. iii. tit, iii. 1. 34 Lib. v. tit. ix. 1. x.

B O O K the king, the supreme power is veiled in the court

VIII. of Audience resident in the capital of the viceroy-
C-STi alty, and the senior judge, aflifted by his bre-

thern exercises all the functions of the viceroy
while the office continues vacant n. In matters
that come under the cognizance of the Audien-
ces, in the course of their ordinary jurisdiction,
as courts of justice, their sentences are final in
every litigation concerning property of less value
than fix thousand pesos; but when the fubje in
dispute exceeds that fum, their decisions are sub-
jea to review, and may be carried by appeal be-
fore the royal council of the Indies o.

Councilof IN this council, one of the most considerable
theIndies. in the monarchy for dignity and power, is vested

the supreme government of all the Spanish domi-
nions in America. It was first established by Ser-
dinand, in the year I511, and brought into a
more perse& form by Charles V. in the year 1524.
s power, Its jurifdiion extends to every department, ec-

clefiaftical, civil, military, and commercial. All
laws and ordinances relative to the government
and police of the colonies originate there, and must
be approved of by two-thirds of the members,
before they are issued in the name of the king.
All the offices, of which the nomination is referv-
ed to the crown, are conferred in this council.
To it each person employed in America, from
the viceroy downwards, is accountable. It re-
views their conduct, rewards their services, and in-
flicts the punishments due to their malverfationsp.
Before it, is laid whatever intelligence, either pub-
lic or secret, is received from America, and every
scheme of improving the administration, the po-
lice, or the commerce of the colonies, is submitted

to

n Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 57, &c.
o Recop. lib. v. tit xiii. 1. i, &c.
P Recop. lib. ii. tit. ii. 1. , 2, &C. : ;

to its consideration. From the first inflitution ofB O O K
the council of the Indies, it has been the coniant VIII.
object of the catholic monarchs, to maintain its au-
thority, and to make such additions from time to
time, both to its power and its splendor, as
might render it formidable to all their fubjets in
the New World. Whatever degree of public or-
der and virtue still remains in that country, where
so many circumstances conspire to relax the for-
mer, and to corrupt the latter, may be ascribed
in a great measure to the wife regulations and vi-
gilant inspeCtion of this refpetable tribunal q.

As the king is supposed to be always present in Cafadeon-

his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in
the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been instituted, in order to regulate such com-
mercial affairs, as required the immediate and
personal infpeAion of those appointed to super-
intend them. This is called Casa de la Contratacion,
or the house of trade, and was established in Se-
ville, to whose port commerce with the New
World was confined, as early as the year 501or.ts fune.
It may be confidered both as a board of trade, and ton'
as a court of judicature. In the former capacity,
it takes cognizance of whatever relates to the in-
tercourfe of Spain with America, it regulates what
commodities should be exported thither, and has
the infpeation of such as are received in return.
It decides concerning the departure of the fleets
for the Weft Indies, the freight, and burden of
the ihips, their equipment, and destination. In
the latter capacity, it judges with refpe& to every
quefftion, civil or commercial, or criminal, arising
in consequence of the tranfafions of Spain with
America; and in both there departments, its deci-

sions
i Solorz. de Jure In. lib. iv. 1. 12.

B O K sions are exempted from the review of any court

VIII. but that of the council of the Indies r.

SU C H is the great outline of that system of go-

vernment, which Spain has established in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
subordinate boards and officers employed in the
administration of justice, in colleating the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of
the country, to describe their different funEtions,
and to inquire into the mode and effect of their
operations, would prove a detail no less intricate
than minute and uninteresting.

Firltobea, THE first objeEt of the Spanish monarchs was
to secure an
excfiuvea to secure the productions of the colonies to the
trade, parent slate, by an absolute prohibition of any in-

tercourfe with foreign nations. They took pof-
session of America by right of conquest, and con-
fcious of the feebleness of their infant settlements,
and aware of the difficulty in establishing their
dominion over such vast regions, or of retaining
so many reluEtant nations under the yoke, they
dreaded the intrusion of strangers; they even
shunned their infpeEtion, and endeavoured to keep
them at a distance from their coasts. This spirit
of jealousy and exclusion, which at first was natu-
ral, and perhaps necessary, augmented as their
possessions in America extended, and the value of
them came to be more filly understood. In con-
sequence of it, a system of colonizing was intro-
duced, to which there had hitherto been nothing
similar among mankind. In the ancient world,
it was not uncommon to fend forth colonies. But
they were of two kinds only. They were either
migrations, which served to disburden a state of
its superfluous fubjeas, when they multiplied too

fart

r Recop. lib. ix. tit. i. Veitia Norte de la Contratacion, lib.
. C, I. '

fast for the territory which they occupied: or they B O O K
were military detachments fRtioned, as garrisons, VII.
in a conquered province. The colonies of some '
Greek republics, and the swarms of northern bar-
barians which fettled in different parts of Europe,
were of the first species. The Roman colonies
were of the second. In the former, the connec-
tion with the mother-country quickly ceased, and
they became independent fates. In the latter,
as the disjuntion was not complete, the depen-
dence continued. In their American settlements, Regulations
the Spanish monarchs took what was peculiar to forthat pur.
each, and studied to unite them. By fending co- P '
lonies to regions so remote, by establishing in
each a form of interior policy and administration,
under diftind governors, and with peculiar laws,
they disjoined them from the mother-country. By
retaining in their own hands the rights of legifla-
tion, as well as that of imposing taxes, together
with the power of nominating the persons who
filled every department, civilor military, they fe-
cured their dependence. Happily for Spain, the
situation of her colonies was such, as rendered it
poflible to reduce this new idea into praftice. Al-
most all the countries which he had discovered
and occupied, lay within the tropics. The pro-
ductions of that large portion of the globe, are
different from those of Europe, even in its most
southern provinces. The qualities of the climate
and of the foil naturally turn the industry of those
who fettle there into new channels. When the
Spaniards first took potieflion of their domains in
America, the precious metals which they yielded,
were the only object that attracted their attention.
Even when their efforts began to take a better di-
rection, they employed themselves almost wholly
in rearing such peculiar productions of the climate,
as, from their rarity or value, were of chief de-
mand in the mother-country. Allured by vati

profpets

BO OK profpeAs of immediate wealth, they disdained

VIII. to waste their industry on what was less lucrative,

but of superior moment. In order to render it
impossible to correEt this error, and to prevent
them from making any efforts that might interfere
with those of Spain, the establishment of several
species of manufatures, and even the culture of
the vine, or olive, are prohibited in the colonies s,
under revere penalties t, They must trust entirely
to the mother-country for the objects of primary
necessity. Their clothes, their furniture, their
instruments of labour, their luxuries, and even a
considerable part of the provisions which they
consume, were imported from Spain. During a
great part of the sixteenth century, Spain possess-
ing an extensive commerce and flouriihing manu-
factures, could supply with ease the growing de-
mands of her colonies, from her own stores. The
produce of their mines and plantations was given
in exchange for there. But all that the colonies re-
ceived, as well as all that they gave, was convey-
ed in Spanish bottoms. No vessel belonging to
the colonies was ever permitted to carry the com-
modities of America to Europe. Even the com-
mercial intercourse of one colony with another,
was either absolutely prohibited, or limited by
many jealous restriCtions. - All that America yields
flows into the ports of Spain; all that it consumes
must issue from them. No foreigner can enter
one of its colonies without express permission;
no vessel of any foreign nation is received into
their harbours; and the pains of death, with con-
fifcation of moveables, are denounced against eve-
ry inhabitant who presumes to trade with them".
Thus the colonies are kept in a state of perpetual

pupillage

See NO T E XLVII. t B. Ulloa Retab. des Manus.
&c. p. 206. u Recopil, lib. ix. tit. xxvii. 1. 1. 4. 7, &c.

pupillage; and by the introduction of this com- B O OK
mercial dependence, a refinement in policy of VIII.
which Spain set the first example to the European
nations, the supremacy of the parent state hath
been maintained over remote colonies during two
centuries and a half,

SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spa- Slowpro.

grefs of pa.

nifh monarchs seem to have attended in forming pulation
their new settlements in America. But they could from Eu"
not plant with the fame rapidity that they had de- "' '
stroyed; and, from many concurring causes, their
progress was extremely flow, in filling up the im-
mense void which their devastations had occasion-
ed. As soon as the rage for discovery and adven-
ture began to abate, the Spaniards opened their
eyes to dangers and distresses, which at first they
did not perceive, or had despised. The numerous
hardships with which the members of infant co-
lonies have to struggle, the diseases of unwhole-
some climates, fatal to the constitution of Euro-
peans; the difficulty of bringing a country, co-
vered with forests, into culture; the want of
hands necessary for labour in some provinces, and
the flow reward of industry in all, unless where
the accidental discovery of mines enriched a few
fortunate adventurers, were evils universally felt
and magnified. Discouraged by the view of
these, the spirit of migration was so much damped,
that sixty years after the discovery of the New
World, the number of Spaniards in all its pro-
vinces is computed not to have exceeded fifteen
thousand x.

THE mode in which property was distributed in Discouraged

the Spanish colonies, and the regulations efta-by the flte
blifhed with refpec to the transmission of it, whe-

ther
xSee NOTE XLVIII.

B OO K ther by descent, or by sale, were extremely un-

VIII. favourable to population. In order to promote
- - a rapid increase of people in any new ettlement,

property in land ought to be divided into small
shares, and the alienation of it ihould be rendered
extremely easy Y. But the rapaciousness of the Spa-
nifh conquerors of the New World paid no re-
gard to this fundamental maxim of policy; and,
as they poffiffed power, which enabled them to
gratify the utmost extravagance of their wishes,
many of them seized diftirts and provinces of
vast extent, and held them as encomiends. By
degrees they obtained the privilege of converting
a part of these in o Mayoragos, a species of fief-
introduced into the Spanish fyfiem of feudal jurif-
prudence z, which can neither be divided nor alie-
nated. Thus a great portion of landed property,
under this rigid form of entail, is withheld from
circulation, and descends from father to son un-
improved, and of little value either to the propri-
etor or to the community. In the account which
I have given of the reduction of Peru, various
examples occur of enormous traas of country
occupied by rome of the conquerors a. The ex-
cefes in other provinces were similar, for as the
value of the lands which they acquired, was ori-
ginally estimated according to the number of In-
dians which lived upon them, America was in ge-
neral so thinly peopled, that only dltricts of great
extent could afford such a number of labourers,
as might be employed in the mines with any prof-
pea of considerable gain. The pernicious es-
sets of thoie radical errors in the distribution and
nature of property in the Spanish settlements, are
felt through every department of industry, and
may be confidered as one great cause of a pro-

grefs
Y Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. 66. z Recop. lib. iv. tit. iii. I.

4. a Book vi. p. I 13.

grefs in population so much flower than that B 0 OK
which has taken place i better constituted co- VIIL
lonies b . -

To this we may add, that the support of the and the na-

enormous and expensive fabric of their ecclefiafti-' tue si thica
cal establishment, has been a burden on the Spa- policy.
nifh colonies, which has greatly retarded the
progress of population and industry. The pay-
ment of tithes is a heavy tax on indufry; and if
the exaction of them-be not regulated and cir-
cumfcribed by the wisdom of the civil magif-
trate, it becomes intolerable and ruinous. But,
instead of any restraint on the claims of eccle-
fiaftics, the inconsiderate zeal of the Spanish le
giflators admitted them into America in their full
extent, and at once imposed on their infant colo.
nies a burden which is in no flight degree oppref-
five to society even in its most improved slate. As
early as the year 50 r, the payment of tythes in
the colonies was enjoined, and the mode of it re-
gulated by law, and every article of primary ne-
ceflity, towards which the attention of new set-
tiers must naturally be turned, is fubjeded to
that grievous exaction c. Nor were the demands
of the clergy confined to articles of simple culture.
Its more artificial and operose produ&tions; such
as sugar, indigo, and cochineal, were soon de-
clared to be tytheable d; and thus the industry of
the planter was taxed in every stage of its pro-
grefs, from its rudef essay to its highest improve-
ment. To the weight of this legal imposition,
the bigotry of the American Spaniards has made
many voluntary additions. From their fond de-
light in the external pomp and parade of religion,
and from superstitious reverence for ecclesiastics
of every denomination, they have bestowed pro-

fuse

b See NOTE XLIX. c Recop. lib. i. tit. xvi. 1. z.
Ibid. 1. 3. and 4.

B O O K fuse donatives on churches and monasteries, and

VIII. have unprofitably wafted a large proportion of
'^ 3' that wealth, which might have nourished and given

vigour to productive labour in growing colonies.

Various or- BuT o fertile and inviting are the regions of
ders of peo-
pie in the America, which the Spaniards have occupied,
colonies. that notwithstanding all the circumstances, which

have checked and retarded population, it has gra-
dually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain
with citizens of various orders. Among these,
the Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diftin-

,Chapetons guifhed by the name of Chapetones, are the sirs in
the first. b a ones,

rank and power. From the jealous attention of
the Spanish court to secure the dependence of the
colonies, every department of consequence is
filled by persons sent from Europe; and in order
to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being em-
ployed, each muff bring proof of a clear descent
from a family of Old Christians, untainted with any
mixture of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and never
disgraced by any censure of the inquisition e. In
such pure hands, power is deemed to be safely
lodged, and almot every public function, from
the viceroyalty downwards, is committed to them
alone. Every person, who by his birth, or re-
fidence in America, may be fufpeed of any at-
tachment or interest adverse to the mother-coun-
try, is the object of distrust to such a degree, as
amounts nearly to an exclusion from all offices of
confidence or authority f. By this conspicuous
predilection of the court, the Chapetones are
raised to such pre-eminence in America, that they
look down with disdain on every other order of
men.

THE

e Rcop. lib. ix. tit. xxvi. . i 5. 16.
f See NOTE L.

THE character and state of the Creoles, or de- B 0 0 K

fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the VIII.
second class of fubjets in the Spanish colonies, Creles te
has enabled the Chapetones to acquire other ad- econd.
vantages, hardly less cQnfiderable than those which
they derive from the partial favour of govern-
ment. Though some of the Creolian race are de-
scended from the conquerors of the New World;
though others can trace up their pedigree to the
noblest families in Spain; though many are
poffefied of ample fortunes, yet, by the enervat-
ing influence of a sultry climate, by the rigour of
a jealous government, and by their despair of at-
taining that distinction to which mankind naturally
aspire, the vigour of their minds is so entirely
broken, that a great part of them waste life in
luxurious indulgences, mingled with an illiberal
superstition fill more debasing. Languid and
unenterprizing, the operations of an active ex-
tended commerce would be to them so cumber-
some and oppressive, that in almotl every part of
America they decline engaging in it. The interi-
or traffic of every colony, as well as its trade with
the neighbouring provinces, and with Spain it-
self, are carried on chiefly by the Chapetones g;
who, as the recompence of their industry, amass
immense wealth, while the Creoles, funk in sloth,
are satisfied with the revenues of their paternal
eflates.

FROM this fiated competition for power and RivalihPi

wealth, between those two orders of citizens, and between
the various passions excited by a rivalfhip so inter-
etiing, their hatred is violent and implacable.
On every occasion, symptoms of this aversion
break out, and the common appellations which
each bestows on the other, are as contemptuous as

those
s Voy. de Ulloa, . 27. z21 . Voy. de Frezier, 227.

BO O K those which flow from the most deep-rooted nati-

VIII. onal antipathy h. The court of Spain, from a re-
1 V *finement of difiruitful policy, cherishes those feeds

of discord, and foments this mutualjealoufy, which
not only prevents the two moit powerful classes of
its fubjeds in the New World from combining
against the parent slate, but prompts each with the
most vigilant zeal, to observe the motions and to
counteract the schemes of the other.

A mixed THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanish
race forms
hethid or- colonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of
derofciti- an European and a negroe, or of an European
iCs' and Indian, the former called Mulattoes, the latter

Mefjizos. As the court of Spain, solicitous to in-
corporate its new vassals with its ancient fubjets,
early encouraged the Spaniards fettled in America
to marry the natives of that country, several alli-
ances of this kind were formed in their infant co-
lonies i. But it has been more owing to licentious
indulgence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed has
multiplied so greatly, as to constitute a confidera-
ble part of the population in all the Spanish fettle-
ments. The several stages of descent in this
race, and the gradual variations of hade until
the African black, or the copper-colour of Ame-
rica, brighten into an European complexion, are
accurately marked by the Spaniards, and each dif-
tinguifhed by a peculiar name. Those of the first
generation are now confidered and treated as In-
dians and negroes; but in the third descent, the
chara&eriftic hue of the former disappears; and
in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is
so entirely effaced, that they can no longer
be distinguished from Europeans, and are en-

titled

h Gage's Survey, p. . Frezier, 226. i Recopil.

lib. vi. tit. i. 1. a. Herrera, dec. i. lib. v. c. i a Dec. iii. lib,
vii. 2.

titled to all their privileges k It is chiefly by this B 0 0. K
mixed race, whose frame is remarkably robust and VIII.
hardy, that the mechanic arts are carried on, and
other active funEtions in society are discharged,
which the two higher clafles of citizens, from
pride, or from indolence, disdain to exercise 1.

THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the Negres

inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. The intro-fourth order,
ducion of that unhappy part of the human fpe-
cies into America, together with their services and
sufferings there, shall be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to point out a peculiarity in their situation under
the Spanish dominion. In several of their fettle-
ments, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
chiefly employed in domestic service. They form
a principal part in the train of luxury, and are che-
rifhed and caressed by their superiors, to whose
vanity and pleasures they are equally subservient.
Their dress and appearance is hardly less splendid
than that of their matters, whose manners they
imitate, and whose pafiions they imbibe m. Ele-
vated by this diftinEtion, they have assumed such
a tone of superiority over the Indians, and treat
them with such insolence and scorn, that the anti-
pathy between the two races has become implaca-
ble. Even in Peru, where negroes are more nume-
rous, and employed in field-work as well as do-
meflic service, they maintain their ascendant over
the Indians, and their mutual hatred subsists with
equal violence. The laws have industriously so-
mented this aversion, to which accident gave rife,
and by most rigorous injunctions, have endea-

voured

k Voy. de Ulloa, i. p. 27. 1 Ibid. p. 29. Voy. de
Bouguer, p. Iol. Melendez, Teforos, Verdaderos, i. 354.

m Gage, p. 56. Voy. de Ulloa, i. 4 1.

BO K voured to prevent every intercourse that might

VIII. form a bond of union between the two races.
'""' Thus, by an artful policy, the Spaniards derive

strength from that which is the weakness of other
European colonies, and have secured as associates
and defenders, those very persons who elsewhere
are objects of jealousy and terror .

The Indians THE Indians form the last, and the most de-
form the alt
orderof ci- prefied order of men in that country, which be-
tizens. longed to their ancestors. I have already traced

the progress of the Spanish ideas with refpeEt to
the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more
early regulations, concerning a matter of so much
consequence in the adminiitration of their new
dominions. But since that period to which I have
brought down the history of America, the infor-
mation and experience acquired during two cen-
turies, have enabled the court of Spain to make
such improvements in this part of its American
system, that a short view of the present condition
of the Indians may prove both curious and in-
teresting.

heir pre- BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in
tion I542, which have been so often mentioned, the

high pretensions of the conquerors of the New
World, who confidered its inhabitants as slaves,
to whose service they had acquired a full right of
property, were finally abrogated. From that
period, the Indians have been reputed freemen,
and intitled to the privileges of fubjeds; When
admitted into this rank, it was deemed just, that
they hould contribute towards the support and
improvement of the society, which had adopted

them

n Recopil. lib. vii. tit. . I. 7. Herrera, dec. viii. lib. vii,
c. 12. Frezier, 2a4.

them as members. But as no considerable bene- B o o K
fit could be expected from the voluntary efforts of VIIi.
men, unacquainted with regular industry, and -.
averse to labour, the court of Spain found it ne-
ceflary to fix and secure, by proper regulations,
what it thought reasonable to exact from them. Taximpofed
With this view, an annual tax was imposed uponn em
every male, from the age of eighteen to fifty; and,
at the fame time, the nature as well as extent of the
services which they might be required to perform,
were ascertained with precision. This tribute va-
ries in different provinces, but if we take that paid
in New Spain as a medium, its annual amount
is nearly four shillings a head, no exorbitant fum
in countries where, as at the source of wealth, the
value of money is extremely low o. The right of
levying it likewise varies. In America, every In-
dian is either an immediate vassal of the crown,
or depends upon some subjet to whom the dif-
trict, in which he resides, has been granted for a
limited time, under the denomination of encomien-
da. In the former cafe, about three-fourths of
the tax is paid into the royal treasury; in the lat-
ter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the
holder of the grant. When Spain first took pof-
session of America, the greater part of it was par-
celled out among its conquerors, or those who first
fettled there, and but a small portion reserved for
the crown. As those grants which were made for
two lives only p, reverted successively to the so-
vereign, he had it in his power either to diffuse
his favours by grants to new proprietors, or to
augment his own revenue by valuable annexa-

VOL. III. QC tions.

o See NOTE ELI. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 42. Hack-

luyt, vol. iii. p. 461. P Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. 48. Solorz.
de Ind. jure, lib. ii. c. 16.

B O K tions q. Of these, the latter has been frequently

VIII. chosen: the number of Indians now depending

Lcc1 5immediately on the crown, is much greater than

in the firit age after the conquest, and this branch
of the royal revenue continues to extend.

The services THE benefit arising from the services of the In-
demanded. dians accrues either to the crown, or to the holder

of the encomienda, according to the fame rule ob-
served in the payment of tribute. Those services,
however, which can now be legally exacted, are
very different from the servile talks originally im-
posed upon the Indians. The nature of the work
which they must perform is defined, and an equi-
table recompence is granted for their labour. The
stated services demanded of the Indians, may
be divided into two branches. They are either
employed in works of primary necessity, without
which society cannot subsist comfortably, or are
compelled to labour in the mines, from which the
Spanish colonies derive their chief value and im-
portance. In consequence of the former, they
are obliged to afilft in the culture of maize, and
other grain of necessary consumption; in tending
cattle, in ereting edifices of public utility, in
building bridges, and in forming high roadsr;
but they cannot be constrained to labour in rai-
sing vines, olives, and sugar-canes, or any fpe-
cies of cultivation, which has for its obje& the
gratification of luxury, or commercial profits.
In consequence of the latter, the Indians are com-
pelled to undertake the more unpleasant talk, of
extracting ore from the bowels of the earth, and

of

q See NOTE LII. 'r Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19.

Solorz. de Ind.jure, ii. lib. i. c. 6, 7. 9. s Recopil. lib. vi,
tit. xiii. c. 1. 8. Solorz. lib. i. c. 7. No. 41, &c.

of refining it by successive processes, no less un- B O O K
wholesome than operose t VIII

THE mode of exacting both there services is The mode

of exaaing

the fame, and is under regulations framed with a th ere.
view of rendering it as little oppressive as possible
to the Indians. They are called out alternately in
divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
pelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
ber called out mufft not exceed the seventh part of
the inhabitants in any diftrid u. In New Spain,
where the Indians are more numerous, it is fix-
ed at four in the hundred x. During what time
the labour of those Indians, who are employed in
agriculture, continues, I have not been able to
learn Y. But in Peru, each Mita, or division, def-
tined for the mines, remains there fix months;
and while engaged in this service, a labourer ne-
ver receives less than two Ihillings a day, and of-
ten earns more than double that fum z. No Indian
residing at a greater distance than thirty miles from
a mine, is included in the Mita, or division em-
ployed in working it a; nor are the inhabitants of
the low country exposed to certain deftruetion,
by compelling them to remove from that warm
climate, to the cold elevated regions where mine-
rals abound b.

THE Indians who live in the principal towns, How go-

are entirely subjea to the Spanish laws and ma- verned.
giftrates; but in their own villages, they are go-
verned by Caziques, ome of whom are the de-
fcendants of their ancient lords, others are named
by the Spanish viceroys. These regulate the pet-

Q2 ty

t See NOTE LIII. u Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 2,.

x Ibid. 1. 22. y See NOTE LIV. z Ulloa Entre-
ten. 265, 266. a Rcopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 3.
b Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1. 13. See NOTE LV.

B 0 0 K ty affairs of the people under them, according to

VIII. maxims ofjutlice, transmitted to them by tradi-
-"- tion from their ancestors. To the Indians, this

jurifdiation, lodged in such friendly hands, afford
some coniblation; and so little formidable is this
dignity to their new masters, that they often allow
it to descend by hereditary right c. For the farther
relief of men so much exposed to oppreflion, the
Spanish court has appointed an officer in every
diftriE, with the title of Protetor of the Indians.
It is his function, as the name implies, to assert
the rights of the Indians, to appear in their de-
fence in the courts of justice; and by the interpo-
fition of his authority, to set bounds to the en-
croachments and exactions of his countrymend.
A certain portion of the reserved fourth of the
annual tribute, is destined for the salary of the
caziques and protecors, another is applied to the
maintenance of the clergy employed in the in-
firuction of the Indianse. Another part seems
to be appropriated for their support, and the pay-
ment of their tribute in years of famine, or when
a particular district is affected by any extraordina-
ry calamity f. Betides this, Provision is made by
various laws, that hospitals shall be founded in
every new settlement for the reception of Indiansg.
Such hospitals have accordingly been erected, both
for the indigent and infirm in Lima, in Cuzco,
and in Mexico, where the Indians are treated with
tenderness and humanity 1h.

Su H is the great outline of the jurisprudence
and policy by which the Indians are now governed

in

c Solorz. de. jure Ind. lib. i. c. 26. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vii.
d Solorz. lib. i. c. 27. p. 201. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vi.
e Recopil. lib. vli. tit. v. 1. 3o0. Tit. xvi. 1. 12-15.
f Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. 13. g Recopil. lib. i. tit. iv. 1.

I. &c. h Voy. de Ulloa, i. 429. 509. Churchill, iv.
496.

in the provinces belonging to Spain. In those re- B o o K
gulations of the Spanish monarchs, we discover no VIII.
traces of that cruel system of extermination, which
they have been charged with adopting; and if
we admit, that the necessity of securing subsistence
for their colonies, or the advantages derived from
working the mines, give them a right to avail
themselves of the labour of the Indians, we must
allow, that the attention with which they regulate
and recompence that labour, is provident and fa-
gacious. In no code of laws is greater solicitude
displayed, or precautions multiplied with more
concern for the preservation, the security, and the
happiness of the subjet, than we discover in the
collection of the Spanish laws for the Indies. But
those latter regulations, like the more early edits
which have been already mentioned, have too often
proved ineffectual remedies against the evils which
they were intended to prevent. In every age, if
the fame causes continue to operate, the fame es-
sets must follow. From the immense distance
between the power entrusted with the execution of
laws, and that by whose authority they are en-
ated, the vigour even of the most absolute go-
vernment muff relax, and the dread of a superior
too remote to observe with accuracy, or to punish
with dispatch, muff insensibly abate. Notwith-
ifanding the numerous injunctions of the Spanish
monarchs, the Indians fill susser, on many occa-
sions, both from the avarice of individuals, and
from the exations of the magistrates, who ought
to have protected them; unreasonable talks are im-
posed; the term of their labour is prolonged, and
they groan under all the insults and wrongs which
are the lot of a dependent people'. From some
information on which I can depend, such op-
prefion abounds more in Peru, than in any other

colony.
iSee NOTE LVI.

B O 0 K colony. But it is not general. According to the

accounts, even of thoie authors who are most ex-
posed to exaggerate the sufferings of the Indians,
they, in several provinces, enjoy not only ease,
but affluence; they possess large farms; they are
masters of numerous herds and flocks; and, by
the knowledge which they have acquired of Eu-
ropean arts and industry, are supplied not only
with the necessaries, but with many luxuries of
life .

Ecciefiftical AFTER explaining the form of civil policy
conltitut ion
of the colo- in the Spanish colonies, and the state of the vari-
ies' ous orders of persons subjet to it, the peculiari-

ties in their ecclesiastical constitution merit confi-
deration. Notwithstanding the superstitious ve-
neration with which Spaniards are devoted to the
Holy See, the vigilant and jealous policy of Ser-
dinand early prompted him to take precautions
against the introduction of the papal dominion

RenrTaint o America. With this view, he solicited Alex-
on the papal
jurifdicion. ander VI. for a grant of the tythes in all the newly-

diicovered countries , which he obtained on con-
dition of his making provision for the religious in-
ftrudion of the natives. Soon after, Julius II.
conferred on him the right of patronage, and ab-
solute disposal of all ecclefiafical benefices there m.
Both these pontiffs, unacquainted with the value
of what he demanded, bellowed those donations
with an inconsiderate liberality, which their fuc-
ceffors have often lamented, and wiflled to recall.
In consequence of those grants, the Spanith mo-
narchs have become, in effect, the heads of the
American church. In them the administration of
its revenues is vested. Their nomination of per-
sons to supply vacant benefices is inifantly con-

firmed

k Gage's Survey, p. 85. 90. 104. 19, &c. 1Bulla Alex.

VI. A. D. 5o01, ap Solorz. de jure Ind. ii. p. 498. m Bulla
Julii, ii. 1508. Ibid. 5o9.

firmed by the pope. Thus, in all Spanish Ame- B O O K
rica, authority of every species centres in the VIII.
crown. There no collision is known between ~"'
spiritual and temporal jurifdition. The king is
the only superior, his name alone is heard, and
no dependence upon any foreign power has been
introduced. Papal bulls cannot be admitted into
America, nor are they of any force there, until
they have been previously examined, and approved
of by the royal council of the Indies n; and if any
bull should be surreptitiously introduced, and cir-
culated in America without obtaining that appro-
bation, ecclesiastics are required not only to pre-
vent it from taking effet, but to seize all the co-
pies of it, and transmit them to the council of
the Indies o. To this limitation of the papal jurif-
diction, equally singular, whether we confider the
age and nation in which it was devised, or the
jealous attention with which Ferdinand, and his
successors, have fiudied to maintain it in full
force p, Spain is indebted, in a great measure, for
the uniform tranquillity which has reigned in her
American dominions.

THE hierarchy is established in America in the Form and

fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- ofhw,,cliurc
bishops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries. i the Spa-
The inferior clergy are divided into three classes, nlf colonies.
under the denomination of Curas, Do'lrineros, and
MIioneros. The first are parifh-priefts in those
parts of the country where the Spaniards have
fettled. The second have the charge of such dif-
tricts as are inhabited by Indians, fubjeted to the
Spanish government, and living under its pro-
tection. The third are employed in converting

and

n Recopil. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. z. and Autas del Confejo de las In.

dias, clxi. o Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55. p Recop.
lib. i. paflinm.

B 0 0 K and inftruEting those fiercer tribes, which disdain

VIII. fubmifiion to the Spanish yoke, and live in remote

or inaccessible regions, to which the Spanish arms
have not penetrated. So numerous are the eccle-
fialtics of all those various orders, and such the
profuse liberality with which many of them are
endowed, that the revenues of the church in
America are immense. The fuperfiltion of Rome
appears with its utmofft pomp in the New World.
Churches and convents there are magnificent and
richly adorned; and on high festivals, the display
of gold and silver, and precious stones, is such
as exceeds the conception of an European q. An
ecclesiastical establishment so splendid and expen-
five, is untavourable, as has been formerly ob-
served, to the progress of rising colonies; but in
countries where riches abound, and the people
are so delighted with parade, that religion must
a{tlme it, in order to atttadt their veneration, this
propensity to ostentation has been indulged, and
becomes lets pernicious.

Pernicous THE early inflitution of monasteries in the
monic in. Spanish colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in
ftiutions. multiplying them, have been attended with con-

sequences more fatal. In every new settlement,
the first object is to encourage population, and
to incite every citizen to contribute towards aug-
menting the strength and number of the commu-
nity. During the youth and vigour of society,
while there is room to spread, and fuffenance is
procured with facility, mankind increase with
amazing rapidity. But the Spaniards had hardly
taken possession of America, when, with a molt
preposterous policy, they began to ereEt convents
where persons of both exes were shut up, under
a vow to defeat the purpose of nature, and to

counteract
q Voy. de Ulloa, i. 430.

counterat the firif of her laws. Influenced by a B o o K
misguided piety, which ascribes transcendent me- VIII.
rit to a iate of celibacy, or allured by the prof- v
ped of that lifflefs ease, which, in sultry cli-
mates, is deemed supreme felicity, numbers crowd
into those mansions of sloth and fuperitition, and
are loft to society. As none but persons of Spa-
nifh extraEt are admitted into the monasteries of
the new World, the evil is more sensibly felt, and
every monk or nun, may be confidered as an ac-
tive member withdrawn from civil life. The im-
propriety of such foundations in any situation
where the extent of territory requires additional
hands to improve it, is so obvious, that some ca-
tholic states have expressly prohibited any person
in their colonies from taking the monastic vowsr.
Even the Spanish monarchs, on ome occasions,
seem to have been alarmed with the spreading of
a spirit so adverse to the increase and prosperity of
their colonies, that they have endeavoured to
check it s. But the Spaniards in America, more
thoroughly under the influence of superstition than
their countrymen in Europe, and diredted by ec-
clefiaftics more bigoted and illiterate, have con-
ceived such an high opinion of monastic fandity,
that no regulations can restrain their zeal; and, by
the excess of their ill-judged bounty, religious
houses have multiplied to a degree no less amazing
than pernicious to society t

IN viewing the state of colonies, where the num- Charaaer of

ber and influence of ecclesiastics is so great, the i, fiaiaf,
charater of this powerful body is an object that America;
merits particular attention. A considerable part
of the secular clergy in Mexico and Peru are na-

tives

r Voy. de Ulloa, ii. 124. s Herrera, dec. v. lib. ix. c. I,

z. Recop. lib. i. tit. iii. 1. , 2. Tit. iv. c. z. Solorz, lib. iii.
e. 23. t See NOTE LVII.

B3 K tives of Spain. As persons accustomed by their

VIli. education to the retirement and indolence of aca-
w-"- z demic life, are more incapable of ative enter-

prize, and less disposed to frike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclesiastical adven-
turers by whom the American church is recruited,
are commonly such as, from merit or rank in life,
have little profpeL of success in their own coun

of the felc- try. Accordingly, the secular priests in the New
hrs VtWorld are still less diftinguihed than their bre-

them in Spain, for literary accomplishments of
any species; and though, by the ample provision
which has been made for the American church,
many of its members enjoy that ease and inde-
pendence, which is favourable to the cultivation
of science; the body of secular clergy has hard-
ly, during two centuries and a half, produced one
author whose works convey such useful informa-
tion, or possess such a degree of merit, as to be
ranked among those which attrat the attention of
enlightened nations. But the greatest part of

of the regu-the ecclesiastics in the Spanish settlements are re-
lars. crulars. On the discovery of America, a new

field opened to the pious zeal of the monaflic or-
ders; and, with a becoming alacrity, they im-
mediately sent forth missionaries to labour in it.
The first attempt to inftrut and convert the Ame-
ricans, was made by monks; and, as soon as
the conquest of any province was completed,
and its ecclesiastical establishment began to as-
fume some form, the popes, as a reward of
their service, permitted the missionaries of the
four mendicant orders, to accept of parochial
charges in America, to perform all spiritual func-
tions, and to receive the tythes, and other emo-
luments of the benefice, without depending on
the jurifdidion of the bishop of the diocese, or
being subjea to his censures. In consequence of
this, a new career of usefulness, as well as new
objets of ambitition presented themselves. When-

ever

ever a call is made for a fresh supply of milliona- BOO K
ries, men of the most ardent and aspiring minds, VIII
impatient under the restraint of a cloister, weary
of its insipid uniformity, and fatigued with the
irksome repetition of its frivolous functions, offer
their service with eagerness, and repair to the New
World in quest of liberty and diftintion. Nor
do they pursue them without success. The high-
eft ecclesiastical honours, and most lucrative pre-
ferments in Mexico and Peru, are often in the
hands of regulars; and to them chiefly the Ame-
ricans are indebted for any portion of science that
is cultivated among them. They are almost the
only Spanish ecclesiastics, from whom we have
received accounts either of the civil or natural his-
tory of the various provinces in America. Some
of them, though deeply tinged with the indelible
superstition of their profeflion, have published
books which give a favourable idea of their abili-
ties. The natural and moral history of the New
World, by the Jesuit Acotla, contains more accu-
rate observations, perhaps, and more found fci-
ence, than are to be found in any description of
remote countries published in the sixteenth century.

BUT the fame disgust with monafiic life, tODiffolute
which America is indebted for some inftrutors of annes

fme of

worth and abilities, filled it with others of a very them.
different charater. The giddy, the profligate, the
avaricious, to whom the poverty and rigid difci-
pline of a convent are intolerable, confider a mif-
sion to America as a release from mortification and
bondage. There they soon obtain some parochial
charge, and far removed, by their situation, from
the infpetion of their monastic superiors, and ex-
empt, by their character, from the jurifdidtion of
their diocefanu, they are hardly subjea to any con-

troul.
u Avenando Thef. Indic. ii. 253,

B o o K troul. According to the tefiimony of the moil

VIII. zealous catholics, many of the regular clergy in
W '
tthe Spanish settlements, are not only destitute of

the virtues becoming their profeflion, but regard-
less of that external decorum and refpet for the
opinion of mankind, which preserve a emblance
of worth, where the reality is wanting. Secure
of impunity, some regulars, in contempt of their
vow of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and
are so rapaciously eager in amassing wealth, that
they become the moit grievous oppressors of the
Indians, whom it was their duty to have proteted.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their vow
of chastity, indulge with little disguise in the most
dissolute licentioufnefsx.

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for re-

dressing enormities so manifest and offensive. Se-
veral persons no less eminent for piety than dif-
cernment, have contended, that the regulars in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to
be confined within the walls of their cloisters, and
should no longer be permitted to encroach on the
functions of the secular clergy. Some public-
spirited magiitrates, from conviction of its being
necessary to deprive the regulars of a privilege be-
llowed at first with good intention, but of which
time and experience had discovered the pernicious
effects, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
their attempts to assert their own rights. The
16x8. Prince D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Philip

I1I. took measures so decisive and effectual for cir-
cumfcribing the regulars within their proper sphere,
as struck them with general consternation Y. They
had recourse to their usual arts. They alarmed

the
See NOTE LVIII. y See N OTE LIX.

the superstitious, by representing the proceedings B O O K
of the viceroy as innovations fatal to religion. V1II.
They employed all the refinements of intrigue, in
order to gain persons in power; and seconded by
the powerful influence of the Jesuits, who enjoy-
ed all the privileges which belonged to the Mendi-
cant orders in America,.they made a deep impref-
sion on a bigoted prince, and a weak ministry.
The ancient pracice was tolerated. The abuses
which it occafioned.continued to increase, and the
corruption of Monks, exempt from the refiraints
of discipline, and the infpedtion of any superior,
became a disgrace to religion. At last, as the ve-
neration of the Spaniards for the monaitic orders
began to abate, and the power of the Jesuits was
upon the decline, Ferdinand VI. ventured to apply
the only effetual remedy, by issuing an edit pro- June 23d.
hibiting regulars of every denomination from ta- '7Y*
king the charge of any parish with the cure of
fouls; and declaring, that on the demise of the
present incumbents, none but secular priests, sub-
jeat to the jurifdidtion of their diocesans, ihall'be
presented to vacant benefices z. If this regulation
is carried into execution with steadiness, in any de-
gree proportional to the wisdom with which it is
framed, a very considerable reformation may take
place in the ecclesiastical state of Spanish America,
and the secular cle; gy may gradually become a re-
fpeetable body of men. The deportment of ma-
ny ecclesiastics, even at present, seems to be de-
cent and exemplary, otherwise they would not be
held in such high estimation, and possess such a
wonderful ascendant over the minds of their coun-
trymen, throughout all the Spanish settlements.

BUT
z Real Cedula MS. penes me.

B 00 K BUT whatever merit the Spanish ecclesiastics in

VIII. America may possess, the success of their endea-
v Vyours in communicating the knowledge of true

Small pro- .
grefs in con- religion to the Indians has been more imperfet
verting he than might have been expeeed, either from the
Indians to
chrilianity. degree of their zeal, or from the dominion which

they had acquired over that people. For this va-
rious reasons may be afligned. The firt mifliona-
ries, in their ardour to make proselytes, admitted
the people of America into the christian church,
without previous inftrution in the doctrines of re-
ligion, and even before they themselves had ac-
quired such knowledge of their language, as to
be able to explain to them the mysteries of faith,
or the precepts of duty. Refting upon a subtle
diftinEtion in scholastic theology, they adopted this
strange practice no less inconsistent with the spirit
of a religion, which addresses itself to the under-
ifanding of men, than repugnant to the dictates
of reason. As oon as any body of people over-
awed by dread of the Spanish power, moved by
the example of their own chiefs, incited by levity,
or yielding from mere ignorance, expressed the
slightest desire of embracing the religion of their
conquerors, they were instantly baptized. While
this rage of conversion continued, a ingle clergy-
man baptized in one day above five thousand
Mexicans, and did not desist until he was so ex-
haufted by fatigue, that he was unable to lift his
hands a. In the course of a few years, after the
reduction of the Mexican empire, the sacrament
of baptism was administered to more than four
millions b. Proselytes adopted with such inconfide-
rate haste, and who were neither inftruated in the
nature of the tenets, to which it was supposed they
had given assent, nor taught the absurdity of those

which

a P. Torribio, MS. Torquem. Mon. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6.
b P. Torribio, Ibid. Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 8.

which they were required to relinquish, retained B o o K
their veneration for their ancient superstitions in VIII.
full force, or mingled an attachment to its doc-
trines and rites, with that slender knowledge of
Christianity which they acquired. These senti-
ments they transmitted to their posterity, into
whose minds they have funk so deep, that the
Spanish ecclesiastics, with all their industry, have
not been able to eradicate them. The religious
institutions of their ancestors are still remembered,
and held in honour by the Indians, both in Mex-
ico and Peru; and whenever they think themselves
out of reach of infpeation by the Spaniards, they
assemble and celebrate their idolatrous rites c.

Bu T this is not the moR unsurmountable ob-

flacle to the progress of Christianity among the
Indians. The powers of their uncultivated un-
derftandings are so limited, their observations and
reflections reach so little beyond the mere objects
of sense, that they seem hardly to have the capaci-
ty of forming abftrad ideas, and possess not lan-
guage to express them. To such men, the sub-
lime and spiritual dotrines of Christianity must
be incomprehensible. The numerous and fplen-
did ceremonies of popilh worship, as they catch
the eye, please and interest them; but when their
inftrutors attempt to explain the articles of faith,
with which those external observances are con-
nected, though they liften with patience, they so
little conceive the meaning of what they hear, that
their acquiescence does not merit the name of be-
lief. Their indifference is fill greater than their
incapacity. Attentive only to the present mo-
ment, and ingroffed by the objects before them,
the Indians so seldom refleEt upon what is past,

or

c Voy, de Ulloa, i. 341. Torquem. lib. xv. c. 23. Lib xvi.
c. 28. Gage, 71.

B 0 O K or take thought for what is to come, that neither

VIII. the promises nor threats of religion, make much

impression upon them; and while their foresight
rarely extends so far as the next day, it is almost
impossible to inspire them with solicitude about
the concerns of a future world. Astonished equal-
ly at their slowness of comprehension, and at
their insensibility, some of the early miiflonaries
pronounced them a race of men so brutish, as to
be incapable of understanding the first principles
of religion. A council held at Lima, decreed,
that, on account of this incapacity, they ought to
be excluded from the sacrament of the Euchar-
ift d. And though Paul III. by his famous bull,
issued in the year 1537, declared them to be ra-
tional creatures, entitled to all the privileges of
chriftianse; yet, after the lapse of two centuries,
during which they have been members of the
church, so imperfect are their attainments in
knowledge, that very few possess such a portion
of spiritual discernment, as to be deemed worthy
of being admitted to the holy communion. From
this idea of their incapacity and imperfect know-
ledge of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. efta-
blifhed the inquisition in America in the year
1570, the Indians were exempted from the jurif-
diation of that evere tribunal g, and still continue
under the inspection of their diocesans. Even as-
ter the most perfect inftruation, their faith is held
to be feeble and dubious; and though ome of
them have been taught the learned languages, and
have gone through the ordinary course of academic
education with applause, their frailty is fill so
much fufpeted, that no Indian is either ordained
a priest, or received into any religious order h.

FROM

d Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20. e Torquern. lib. xvi.

c. 2. Garcia origen. 311. f Voy. deUlloa, i. 343.
g Recop. lib vi. tit. i. 35. h Torquem. lib. xvii.
c. 13. See NOTE LX.

FROM this brief survey, some idea may be B P OK

formed of the interior state of the Spanish colo- V4I.
nies. The various producions with which they od,5
supply and enrich the mother-country, and the of theSpa-
system of commercial intercourse between them, nih co?
come next in order to be explained. f the do-
minions of Spain in the New World, had beeir
of such moderate extent, as bore any proportion
to the parent slate, the progress of her colonizing
might have been attended with the fame benefit
as that of other nations. But when, in less than
half a century, her inconsiderate rapacity had
seized on countries larger than all Europe, her in-
ability to fill such vast regions, with a number of
inhabitants sufficient for the cultivation of them,
was so obvious, as to give a wrong direction to
all the efforts of the colonists. They did not form
comp,,& settlements, where industry, circum-
fcribed within limits, both in its views and ope-
rations, is conducted with that fober preserving
'spirit, which gradually converts whatever is in its
pofleflion to its proper use., and derives from it
the greatest advantage. Inflead of this, the Spa-
niards, reduced by the boundless profped which
opened to them, divided their poffeflions in Ame-
rica into governments of vast extent. As their
number was too small to attempt the regular
culture of the immense provinces, which they oc-
cupied rather than peopled, they bent their atten-
tion to a few objeas, that allured them with hopes
of sudden and exorbitant gain, and turned away
with contempt from the humbler paths of indus-
try, which lead more slowly, but with greater cer-
tainty, to wealth and increase of national strength.

OF all the methods by which riches may be ac- From their

quired, that of searching for the precious metalsmine
is one of the most inviting to men, who are ei-
ther unaccustomed to the regular assiduity with

Yo. I. ' 6rhidR

B O O K which the culture of the earth, and the operations

VIII. of commerce must be carried on, or so enterpri-

sing and rapacious, as not to be atisfied with the
gradual returns of profit which they yield. Ac-
cordingly, as oon as the several countries in Ame-
rica were subjected to the dominion of Spain, this
was almost the only method of acquiring wealth
which occurred to the adventurers, by whom they
were conquered. Such provinces of the continent
as did not allure them to fettle, by the profpe of
their affording gold and silver, were totally ne-
glected. Those, in which they met with a dif-
appointment of the sanguine expectations they
had formed, were abandoned. Even the value of
the islands, the first fruits of their discoveries, and
the first objeEt of their attention, funk so much
in their estimation, when the mines which they
had opened there were exhausted, that they were
deserted by many of the planters, and left to be
occupied by more industrious possessors. All
crowded to Mexico and Peru, where the vat
quantities of gold and silver found among the na-
tives, who searched for them with little industry,
and less skill, promised an unexhaufted store, as
the recompence of more intelligent and perfever-
ing efforts.

Dicover of DU R ING several years, the ardour of their re-
tofi and a searches was kept up by hope, rather than success.
cotecas. At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Peru,

were accidentally discovered in the year 1545i, by
an Indian, as he was clambeling up the mountain,
in pursuit of a Llama which had strayed from
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in
New Spain, little inferior to the other in value,
were opened. From that time, successive disco-
veries have been made in both colonies, and silver

mines
i Fernandez, p. i. lib. xi. c. 1 1.

mines are now o numerous, that the working of B 0 0 K
them, and of ome few mines of gold in the pro- VIII.
vinces of Tirra Fierma, and the new kingdom of
Granada, has become the capital occupation of
te Spaniards, and is reduced into a system no
less complicated than interesting. To describe
the nature of the various ores, the mode of ex-
trafting them from the bowels of the earth, and
to explain the several processes by which the me-
tals are separated from the substances with which
they are mingled, either by the aion of fire, or
the attractive powers of mercury, is the province
of the natural philosopher or chymift, rather than
of the historian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the moun- Riches

tains of the New World poured forth their trea-ywich they
fures, atonifhed mankind, accustomed hitherto
to receive a penurious supply of the precious me-
tals, from the more scanty itores contained in the
mines of the ancient hemisphere. According to
principles of computation, which appear to be
extremely moderate, the quantity of gold and
silver that has been regularly entered in the ports
of Spain, is equal in value to four millions fter-
ling annually, reckoning from the year I492, in
which America was discovered to the present
time. This in two hundred and eighty-three
years, amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two
millions. Immense as this fum is, the Spanish
writers contend, that as much more ought to be
added to it, in consideration of the treasure which
has been extrated from the mines, without paying
duty to the king. By this account, Spain has
drawn from the New World a supply of wealth,
amounting at least to two thousand millions of
pounds sterling k,

R2 x THE

k Uztariz Theor. y Praa. de Comercia, c. 3. Herrera, dec.
viii. lib. xi. c. 5. See NOTE LXI.

B 0 K THE mines, which have yielded this amazing

V1il. quantity of treasure, are not worked at the ex-

Spirit to pence of the crown, or of the public. In order
which this to encourage private adventurers, the person who
vs rie. (discovers a new vein, is intitled to the property of

it. Upon laying his claim before the governor of
the province, a certain extent of land is measured
off, and a certain number of Indians allotted him,
under the obligation of his opening the mine
within a limited time, and of his paying the cuf-
tomary duty to the king, for what it shall produce.
Invited by the facility with which such grants are
obtained, and encouraged by some striking exam-
ples of success in this line of adventure: not only
the sanguine and the bold, but the timid and diffi-
dent enter uponit with astonishing ardour. With
vast objets always in view, fed continually with
hope, and expeating every moment that fortune
will unyeil her flores, and give them up to their
wihesi they deem every other occupation insipid
and uninteresting. The charms of this pursuit,
like the rage for deep play, is so bewitching, and
take such full possession of the mind, as even to
give a new bent to the natural temper. Under its
influence, the cautious become enterprizing and
the covetous profuse. Powerful as this charm na-
turally is, its force is augmented by the arts of an
order of men known in Peru, by the cant name
of earchers. These are commonly persons of de-
fperate fortunes, who, availing themselves of some
kill in mineralogy, accompanied with the infinuat-
ing manner, and confident pretensions peculiar
to projectors, address the wealthy and the credu-
lous. By plausible descriptions of the appearances
which they have discovered of rich veins hitherto
unexplored; by producing when requisite, fpeci-
mens of promising ore; by affirming, with an im-
posing assurance, that success is certain, and that
the expence must be trifling; they seldom fail to

persuade

persuade. An association is formed; a small um B 0o K
is advanced by each co-partner; the mine is o- VIII.
pened; the searcher is intrusted with the sole di-
retion of every operation: unforeseen difficulties
occur ; new demands of money are made; but a-
midst a fucceflion of disappointments and delays,
hope is never extinguished, and the ardour of ex--
pectation hardly abates. For it is observed, that
if any person once enter this seducing path, it is
almost impossible to return; his ideas alter, he
seems to be possessed with another spirit, visions of
imaginary wealth are continually before his eyes,
and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams of nothing
else 1.

SU c H is the spirit that muff be formed, where- Fatal effect

ever the a&ive exertions of any society are chiefly of ''
employed in working mines of gold and silver.
No spirit is more adverse to such improvement in
agriculture and commerce, as render a nation re-
ally opulent. If the system of adminifiration in
the Spanish colonies had been founded upon the
principles of found policy, the power and ingenui-
ty of the legislature would have been exerted with
as much ardour, in restraining its fubjeEts from
such pernicious industry, as is now employed in
alluring them towards it. "Projets of mining
"(fays a good judge of the political condut of
cc nations) instead of replacing the capital em-
"ployed in them, together with the ordinary
' profit of flock, commonly absorb both capital
" and profit. They are the projets therefore, to
"which, of all others, a prudent law-giver, who
"desired to increase the capital of his nation,
' would least chufe to give any extraordinary en-
"couragement, or to turn towards them a greater

" hare
I Ulloa Entreten, p. 223.

B OOK K," hare of that capital than would go to them of

VII. " its own accord. Such, in reality, is the absurd

i'" confidence which all men have in their own

c good fortune, that wherever there is the least
" probability of success, too great a share of it is
" apt to go to them of its own accord m." But in
the Spanish colonies government is studious to che-
rifh a spirit which it should have laboured to de-
press, and by the fanaion of its approbation aug-
ments that inconsiderate credulity, which has turn-
ed the active industry of Mexico and Peru into such
an improper channel. To this may be imputed
the slender progress which they have made during
two centuries and a half, either in useful manufac-
tures, or in those lucrative branches of cultivation,
which furniih the colonies of other nations with
their staple commodities. In comparison with the
precious metals, every bounty of nature is so
much despised, that this extravagant idea of their
value has mingled with the idiom of the language
in America, and the Spaniards fettled there deno-
minate a country, rich, not from the fertility of
its foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exube-
rance of its pastures, but on account of the mine-
rals which its mountains contain. In quest of
these, they abandon the delightful plains of Peru
and Mexico, and retort to barren and uncomfort-
able regions, where they have built ome of the
largest towns which they possess in the New World
As the activity and enterprise of the Spaniards o-
originally took this direction, it is now so difficult to
bend them a different way, that although, from
various causes, the gain of working mines is much
decreased; the fascination continues, and almost
every person, who takes any active part in the com-
merce of New Spain or Peru, is frill engaged in
some adventure of this kind n.

BUT
m Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c. ii. 155. n See NOTE LXII.

BUT though mines are the chief object of B OOK

attention to the Spaniards, and the precious me- VIII.
tals which they yield, form the principal article' in Other com-
their commerce; the fertile countries which they modites of
possess, supply them with other commodities of the spanih
such value or scarcity, as to attract a considerable
degree of attention. Cochineal is a production
almost peculiar to New Spain, of such demand
in commerce, that the sale is always certain, and
it yields such profit, as amply rewards the pains
and attention employed in rearing the curious in-
sets of which this valuable drug is composed, and
preparing it for the market. Quinquina, or Je-
fiiit's Bark, the most salutary simple, perhaps, and
of mofi restorative virtue, that Providence, in
in compassion for human infirmity, has made
known unto man, is found only in Peru, to which
it affords a lucrative branch of commerce n. The
indigo of Guatimala is superior in quality to that
of any province in America, and cultivated to a
considerable extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar
to the Spanish colonies, attains to its highest fiate
of perfection there, and from the great confump-
tion of chocolate in Europe, as well as in America,
is a valuable commodity. The tobacco of Cuba,
of more exquisite flavour any than brought from the
New World; the sugar raised in that island, in
Hispaniola, and in New Spain; together with
drugs of various kinds, may be mentioned among
the natural productions of America, which enrich
the Spanish commerce. To there mutf be added
an article of no inconsiderable account, the expor-
tation of hides; for which, as well as for many
of those which I have enumerated, the Spaniards
are more indebted to the wonderful fertility of the
country than to their own foresight and industry.
The domestic animals of Europe, particularly

horned
P See NOTE LX1II.

B OK horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World

VIII. with a rapidity which almost exceeds belief. A
~v '"few years after the Spaniards fettled there, the

herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned them by thoufandso.
Less attention being paid to them, as they conti-
nued to increase, they were suffered to run wild,
and spreading over a country of boundless extent,
under a mild climate and covered with rich pas-
tilre, their number became immense. They range
over the vast plains which extend from Buenos
Ayres, towares the Andes, in herds of thirty or
forty thousand; and the unlucky traveller who
once falls in among them, may proceed several
days before he can disentangle himself from among
the crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
seems to have no end. They are hardly less nu-
merous in New Spain, and in several other pro-
Vinces : these are killed merely for the fake of
their hides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is
lo great, that the fench of the carcases which are
left in the field, would affect the air, if large
packs of wild dogs, and vast flocks of gallinazos,
or American vultures, the most voracious of all
the feathered kind, did not instantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every fleet
to Europe is prodigious, and is a lucrative branch
or commerce p.

ALMOST all those articles may be confidered as

staple commodities peculiar toAmerica, and differ-
ent, if we except that last mentioned, from the
productions of the mother-country.

A:S.t ES WHEN the importation into Spain of those vat
aerivt fr^,l rious articles from her coltnies, firfi became active
er colonies, and considerable, her interior industry and manu-

factures

Oviedo ap. R?.muf. ii. i oi, B. Hackluyt, ii. . 46 5 .
P Acofta, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo His. of Chili. Church. Col-

eRt. iii. 47. fep. Jbid. v. p. 63o. 69z. Lettres Edif. xiii. 235.
Feuill, i. 249.

fatures were in a fate so prosperous, that with BOOK
the produt of these, she was able both to purchase VIIi
the commodities of the New World, and to an-
fwer its growing demands. Under the reigns of
Ferdinand and Isabella, and Charles V. Spain-was
one of the most indufirious countries in Europe,
Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk,
were so extensive, as not only to furnish what was
sufficient for her own consumption, but to afford
a surplus for exportation. When a market for
them, formerly unknown, and to which she alone
had access, opened in America, she had recourse
to her domestic store, and found there an abun-
dant supply q. This new employment must na-
turally have added vivacity to the spirit of indus-
try. Nourished and invigorated by it, the manu-
factures, the population, and wealth of Spain
might have gone on increasing in the fame pro-
portion with her colonies. Nor was the state of
the Spanish marine at this period less flourishing
than that of its manufactures. In the beginning
of the sixteenth century, Spain is said to have
possessed above a thousand merchant fhipsr, a
number probably far superior to that of any na-
tion in Europe. By the aid which foreign trade
and domestic induitry give reciprocally to each o-
ther in their progress, the augmentation of both
muff have been rapid and extensive, and Spain
might have received the fame accession of opulence
and vigour from her acquisitions in the NewWorld,
that other powers have derived from their colonies
there.

BUT various causes prevented this. It is with why ,le

nations as with individuals, when wealth flows inder..eth.
gradually, and with moderate increase, 'it feedsfame.
and nourishes that ativity which is friendly to

commerce,
q See NOTE LXIV. r Campomanes, ii. 140.

BO OK commerce, and calls it forth into vigorous and
VIII. well conducted exertions; but when it pours in
' --s suddenly, and with too full a fiream, it overturns

all fober plans of industry, and brings along with
it a tate for what is wild, and extravagant, and
daring in business or in action. Such was the great
and sudden augmentation of power and revenue,
that the possession of America brought into Spain,
and some symptoms of its pernicious influence
upon the political operations of that monarchy
soon began to appear. For a considerable time,
however, the supply of treasure from the New
World was scanty and precarious, and the genius
of Charles V. conducted public measures with such
prudence, that the effets of this influence were
little perceived. But when Philip II. ascended the
Spanish throne, with talents far inferior to those
of his father, and remittances from the colonies
became a regular and vast branch of revenue, the
fatal operation of this rapid change in the state of
the kingdom, both on the monarch and his peo-
ple, was at once conspicuous. Philip, poffefling
that spirit of unceasing assiduity, which often cha-
raterizes the ambition of men of moderate talents,
entertained uch an high opinion of his own refour-
ces, that he thought nothing too arduous for him
to undertake. Shut up himself in the solitude of
the Escurial, he troubled and annoyed all the na-
tions around him. He waged open war with the
Dutch and English; he encouraged and aided a
rebellious faction in France; he conquered Portu-
gal, and maintained armies and garrisons in Italy,
Africa, and both the Indies. By such a multipli-
city of great and complicated operations, pursued
with ardour during the course of a long reign,
Spain was drained both of men and money. Un-
der the weak administration of his successor, Phi-
lip III. the vigour of the nation continued to de-
crease, and funk into the lowefi decline, when

the

the inconsiderate bigotry of that monarch expell- B o K
ed at once near-a million of his most indutrious VIII.
subje&s, at the very time when the exhausted ftateA.. 6.
of the kingdom required some extraordinary ex-
ertion of political wisdom to augment its num-
bers, and to revive its strength. Early in the fe-
venteenth century, Spain felt such a diminution
in the number of her people, that from inability
to recruit her armies, he was obliged to contract
her operations. Her flourishing manufactures were
fallen into decay. Her fleets, which had been the
terror of all Europe, were ruined. Her extensive
foreign commerce was loft. The trade between
different parts of her own dominions was inter-
rupted, and the ships which attempted to car-
ry it on, were taken and plundered by enemies,
whom they once defpiied. Even agriculture, the
primary object of industry in every prosperous state
was neglected, and one of the most fertile coun-
tries in Europe hardly raised what was sufficient
for the support of its own inhabitants.

IN proportion as the population and manufac- Rapid de-

tures of the parent fRate declined, the demands of tr'adf
her colonies continued to increa.e. The Spaniards,
like their monarchs intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, deserted
the paths of industry, to which they had been ac-
customed, and repaired with eagerness to those re-
gions from which this opulence issued. By this
rage of emigration, another drain was opened,
and the strength of the colonies augmented by ex-
haufting that of the mother-country. All those
emigrants, as well as the adventurers who had at
first fettled in America, depended absolutely upon
Spain for almost every article of necessary confump-
tion. Engaged in more alluring and lucrative
pursuits, or prevented by refiraints which govern-
ment imposed, they could not turn their own

attention

B O K attention towards establishing the manufatures

VlM. requisite for comfortable subsistence. They re-

ceived (as I have observcd in another place) their
clothing, their furniture, whatever miniffters to
the ease or luxury of life, and even their inftru-
ments of labour from Europe. Spain, thinned of
people, and void of industry, was unable to sup-
ply their increasing demands. She had recourse to
her neighbours. The manufactures of the Low
Countries, of England, of France, and of Italy,
which her wants called into exiftence,or animated
with new vivacity, furnished in abundance what-
ever mhe required. In vain did the fundamental
law concerning the exclusion of foreigners from
trade with America, oppose this innovation. Ne-
ceffity, more powerful than any statute, defeated
its operations, and constrained the Spaniards them-
selves to concur in eluding it. The English, the
French, and Dutch, relying on the fidelity and ho-
nour of Spanish merchants, who lend their names
to cover the deceit, fend out their manufactures to
America, and receive the exorbitant price for which
they are fold there, either in specie, or in the rich
commodities of the New World. Neither the
dread of danger, nor the allurement of profit, e-
ver induced a Spanish factor to betray or defraud
the person who confided in him s; and that probi-
ty, which is the pride and diitinEtion of nation,
contributes to its ruin. In a short time, not above
a twentieth part of the commodities exported to
America was of Spanish growth or fabric r. All
the reft was the property of foreign merchants,
though entered in the name of Spaniards. The
treasure of the New World may be said hence-
forward not to have belonged to Spain. Be-
fore it reached Europe, it was anticipated as the

price
Zava.l Reprefcntacion, p. 226. t Campomanes, ii. 138.

price of goods purchased from foreigners. That B 0 K
wealth, which, by an internal circulation, would VIII.
have spread through each vein of industry, and --,'"
have conveyed life and activity to every branch of
manufaAure, flowed out of the kingdom with
such a rapid course, as neither enriched nor ani-
mated it. On the other hand, the artisans of rival
nations, encouraged by this quick sale of their
commodities, improved so much in skill and
industry, as to be able to afford them at a rate
so low, that the manufactures of Spain, which
could not vie with theirs, either in quality or cheap-
ness of work, were fill farther depressed. This
deftrudive commerce drained off the riches of
the nation falter and more completely, than even
the extravagant schemes of ambition carried on
by its monarchs. Spain was so much astonished
and distressed, at beholding her American trea-
fures vanish almost as soon as they were import-
ed, that Philip III. unable to supply what was
requisite in circulation, issued an edit, by which
he endeavoured to raise copper money to a value
in currency nearly equal to that of silver u; and
the lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was
reduced to a wretched expedient, which is the
last resource of petty impoverished fates.

THUS the poffeifions of Spain in America have

not proved a source of population and of wealth
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na-
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the
spirit of industry subsists in full vigour, every
person fettled in such colonies, as are similar in
their situation to those of Spain, is supposed to
give employment to three or four at home in sup-
plying his wantsx. But wherever the mother-

country
u Uztariz, c. 104. x Child on trade and cclonies.

B 0 O K country cannot afford this supply, every emigrant

VIII. may be confidered as a citizen loft to the commu-

ni -nity, and strangers muff reap all the benefit of

answering his demands.

hcreafed bof Such has been the internal state of Spain from
regulating the close of the sixteenth century, and such her
itSuieeth inability to supply the growing wants of her colo-
America. nies. The fatal effets of this disproportion be-

tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-
ing them, have been much increased by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the
intercourse between the mother-country and the
colonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing
the trade with America, and debarring her sub-
je6ts there from any communication with foreign-
ers,that all her jealous and systematic arrangements
have arisen. These are so singular in their nature
and consequences, as to merit a particular expla-
nation. In order to secure the monopoly at which
he aimed, Spain did not vest the trade with her
colonies in an exclusive company, a plan which
has been adopted by nations more commercial,
and at a period when mercantile policy was an
object of greater attention, and ought to have
been better understood. The Dutch gave up the
whole trade with their colonies, both in the East
and Weft Indies, to exclusive companies. The
English, the French, the Danes, have imitated
their example with refpet to the East Indian com-
merce; and the two former have laid a similar re-
firaint upon some branches of their trade with the
New World. The wit of man cannot, perhaps,
devise a method for checking the progress of
industry and population in a new colony more
effectual than this. The interest of the co-
lony, and the exclusive company, must in eve-
ry point be diametrically opposite; and as
the latter possesses such advantages in this un-
equal contest, that it can prescribe at pleasure

the

the terms of intercourse, the former must not B O OK
only buy dear and fell cheap, but susser the mor- VIII.
tification of having the increase of their surplus
stock discouraged by those very persons to whom
alone they are permitted to difpoe of it y.

SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from fall-This con

fined to one

ing into this error in policy, by the high ideaspor inSpain.
which she early formed concerning the riches of
the New World. Gold and silver were commo-
dities of too high value to vest a monopoly of
them in private hands. The crown wished to re-
tain the diretion of a commerce so inviting;
and in order to secure that, ordained that the car-
go of every ship fitted out for America, should be
inspected by the officers of the Casa de Contratacion
in Seville, before it could receive a licence to make
the voyage; and that on its return, a report of
the commodities which it brought should be made
to the fame board, before it could be permitted
to land them. In consequence of this regulati-
on, all the trade of Spain with the New World
centred in the port of Seville, and was gradually
brought into a form, in which it has been con-
duted, with little variation, from the middle of
the sixteenth century almost to our own times.
For the greater security of the valuable cargoes
sent to America, as well as for the more easy pre-
vention of fraud, the commerce of Spain with its
colonies is carried on by fleets, which fail under
firong convoys. These fleets consisting of two fqua-
drons, one distinguished by the name of Galeons,
the other by that of the Flota, are equipped an-
nually. Formerly they took their departure from
Seville; but as the port of Cadiz has been found
more commodious, they have failed from it since
the year 17Z0.

THE
y Smith's Inquiry, ii. I7I.

BOOK THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firme,

VIII. and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost
Crri- on every article of luxury, or necessary consumption,
by the Ga- that an opulent people can demand, touch firt at

on; Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello, To the

former, the merchants of S.nia ,Martha, Caraccas,
the New Kingdom of Granada, and several other
provinces resort. The latter is the great mart for
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the sea-
son when the Galeons are expeaed, the product
of all the mines in these two kingdoms, together
with their other valuable commodities, is tranf-
ported by ea to Panama. From thence, as
soon as the appearance of the fleet from Europe
is announced, they are conveyed across the ifth-
mus, partly on mules, and partly down the river
Chagree to Porto-bello. This paltry village,
whose climate, from the pernicious union of ex-
ceffive heat, continual moisture, and the putrid
exhalations arising from a rank foil is more fatal
to life than any perhaps in the known world, is
immediately filled with people. From being the
residence of a few negroes and mulattoes, and of
a miserable garrison relieved every three months,
its streets are crowded with opulent merchants
from every corner of Peru, and the adjacent pro-
vinces. A fair is opened, the wealth of America
is exchanged for the manufatures of Europe,
and during its prescribed term of forty days,
the richest traffic on the face of the earth is
begun and finished, with that simplicity of
tranfadion and unbounded confidence, which
:ndFlota. accompany extensive commercez. The Flota

holds its course to Vera Cruz. The treasures and
commodities of New Spain, and the depending
provinces, which were deposited at Los Angeles
in expectation of its arrival, are carried thither,

and
z See N O T E LXV,

and the commercial operations of Vera Cruz, con- B 0 0 K
duted in the fame manner with those of Porto- VTII.
bello, are inferior to them only in importance and ~"v
value. Both fleets, as soon as they have complet-
ed their cargoes from America, rendezvous at the
Havanna, and return in company to Europe,

The trade of Spain with her colonies, while Bad effeof

thus fettered and reftrined, came necessarily to this:rrang
be conduEted with the fame spirit, and upon the w'
fame principles, as that of an exclusive company.
Being confined to a tingle port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole
of it was gradually engrossed by a small number
of wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now
in Cadiz. These by combinations, which they
can easily form, may altogether prevent that com
petition which preserves commodities at their na-
tural price; and by ating in concert, to which
they are prompted by their mutual interest, they
may raise or lower their value at pleasure. In con.
sequence of this, the price of European goods in.
America is always high, and often exorbitant. A
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundred
per cent. are profits not uncommon in the com-
merce of Spain with her coloniesa. From the
fame ingroffing spirit it frequently happens, that
traders of the second order, whose warehouses
do not contain a complete assortment of commo-
dities for the American market, cannot purchase
from the more opulent merchants,fuch goodsas they
want, at a lower price than that for which they are
fold in the colonies. With the fame vigilant jealousy
that an exclusive company guards against the in,
trufion of the free trader, those overgrown mo,
nopolifts endeavour to check the progefs of eve.

VOL. III. S ry

a , Vliloa Retabli. part ii. p. 9I,

B 0 K ry one whose encroachments they dread b But

VIII. this restraint of the American commerce to one

port, not only effets its domestic state, but
limits its foreign operations. A monopolist may
acquire more, and certainly will hazard less, by a
confined trade which yields exorbitant- profit,
than by an extensive commerce in which he re-
ceives only a moderate return of gain. It is
often his interest not to enlarge, but to circum-
scribe the sphere of his aivity; and instead of
calling forth more vigorous exertions of commer-
cial industry, it may be the objet of his attention
to check and set bounds to them. By some such
maxim, the merchantile policy of Spain seems
to have regulated its intercourse with America.
Instead of furnishing the colonies with European
goods in filch quantity as might render both the
price and the profit moderate; the merchants of Se-
ville and Cadiz seem to have supplied them with a
sparing hand, that the eagerness of competition
amongfi customers obliged to purchase in a scanty
market, might enable their fators to difpofeof their
cargoes with exorbitant gain. About the middle
of the last century, when the exclusive trade to
America from Seville was in its most flourishing
fate, the burden of the two united squadrons of
the Galeons and Flota, did not exceed twenty-
seven thousand five hundred tons . The supply
which such a fleet could carry must have been
very inadequate to the demands of those populous
and extensive colonies, which depended upon it
for all the luxuries, and many of the necessaries
of life.

Remedies SPAIN early became fenfibleof her declension
iropofed. from her former prosperity, and many respectable

and

b Smith's Inquiry, if. 7 1. Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 438.
c Campomanes, Educ. Popul. i. 435. ii. 10o.

and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts in B 0 0 K
devising methods for reviving the decaying in- VIII.
duftry and commerce of their country. From
the violence of the remedies proposed, we may
judge how desperate and fatal the malady appear-
ed. Some, confounding a violation of police
with criminality against the slate, contended,
that in order to check illicit commerce, every per-
son convited of carrying it on, fhduld be punish-
ed with death, and confiscation of all his effects da
Others, forgetting the diftintdioii between civil
offences and ats of impiety, insisted, that con-
traband trade should be ranked among the crimes
reserved for the cognizance of the Inquisition;
that such as were guilty of it might be tried and
puniihed, according to the secret and summary
form in which that dreadful tribunal exercises its
jurifdictione. Others, uninftruted by observing
the pernicious effets of monopolies iti every
country where they have been eflablifhed, have
proposed to vest the trade with America in exclu-
five companies, whom interest would render the
most vigilant guardians of the Spanilh comrmerce
against the encroachments of interlopers

BESIDE these wild projects, many schemes bet-

ter digested, at first without effea, and more
beneficial, were fugefted. But under the feeble
monarchs, with whom the reign of the Autrian
line in Spain closed, incapacity and indecision
are conspicuous in every department of govern-
ment. Iritead of taking for their model the ac-
tive administration of Charles V. they affected to
imitate the cautious procrastinating wisdom of
Philip II. and destitute of his talents, they deli-
berated perpetually, but determined nothing. No
remedy was applied to the evils under which the

S 2 national

d M. de Santa Cruz Comercio Suelto, p. 142. e Moncada

Reftauracion politica de Efpagna, p. 4'r. f Zvala y Abgnon
Reprefentacion, &c. p. 19o.

B O O K national commerce, domestic as well as foreign,

VIII. languished. These evils continued to increase,
L
*^ and Spain, with dominions more extensive and

more opulent than any European CLate, possessed
neither vigour, nor moneyh, nor industry. At
length, the violence of a great national convulsion
rouzed the slumbering genius of Spain, and the
efforts of the two contending parties in the civil
war, kindled by the disputes concerning the fuc-
cession of the crown at the beginning of this cen-
tury, called forth in ome degree, the ancient fpi-
rit and vigour of the nation. While men were
forming, capable of adopting more liberal senti-
ments, than those which had influenced the coun-
cils of the monarchy during the course of a century,
Spain derived from an unexpected source the
means of availing itself of their talents. The va-
rious powers who favoured the pretensions either
of the Austrian or Bourbon candidate for the Spa-
nifh throne, sent formidable fleets and armies to
their support. France, England and Holland
remitted immense fums to Spain. These were
spent in the provinces which became the theatre
of war. Part of the American treasure of which
they had drained the kingdom, flowed back thi-
ther. From this era, one of the most intelligent
Spanish authors, dates the revival of the monar-
chy; and, however humiliating the truth may be,
he acknowledges that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund
of circulating specie, in ome measure adequate
to the exigencies of the public i.

Steps to- As soon as the Bourbons obtained quiet pof-
pwardeSit session of the throne, they discerned this change
bytheBour- in the spirit of the people, and in the state of the
bon archs nation, and took advantage of it; for although

that
h See NOTE LXVI. i Campomanes, i. 429.

that family has not given monarchs to Spain re- B O 0 K
markable for superiority of genius, they have all VII.
been beneficient princes, attentive to the happi- 'r"'J
ness of their fubjeds, and solicitous to promote it.
It was, accordingly the first objeEt of Philip V.
to suppress an innovation which had crept in dur-
ing the course of the war, and overturned the
whole system of the Spanish commerce with Ame-
rica. The English and Dutch, by their fuperi- by excluding
ority in naval power, having acquired such corn- from trade
mand of the lea, as to cut off all intercourse be- with Peru;
tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to
furnish them those necessaries of life, without
which they could not exiff, and as the only means
of receiving from thence any part of their trea-
sure, departed so far from the usual rigour of
its maxims, as to open the trade with Peru to her
allies the French. The merchants of St. Malo,
to whom Louis XIV. granted the privilege of this
lucrative commerce, engaged in it with vigour,
and carried it on upon principles very diffe-
rent from those of the Spaniards. They sup-
plied Peru with European commodities at a more
moderate price, and not in stinted quantity; the
goods which they imported were conveyed to
every province of Spanish America, in such abun-
dance as had never been known in any former
period. If this intercourse had been continued,
the exportation of European commodities from
Spain must have ceased, and the dependance
of the colonies on the mother-country have
been at an end. The most peremptory injunCi- 173a.
ons were therefore issued, prohibiting the admif-
sion of foreign vessels into any port of Peru or
Chili k, and a Spanish squadron was employed to
clear the South Sea of intruders, whose aid was
no longer necessary.

'BuT

k Frezier Voy. 256, B. Ulloa Retab, ii. 04, &c. Alcedo y
Herrera Avifo, &c. 236.

B OOK Bu T though, on the cessation of the war, which

VIII. was terminated by the treaty of Utretch, Spain ob-
by cheking tained relief from one encroachment on her corn-
contraband mercial system, she was exposed to another which
trade, Ihe deemed hardly less pernicious. As an in-

ducement that might prevail with Queen Anne to
conclude a peace which France and Spain desired
with equal ardour, Philip V. not only conveyed

particularly to Great Britain the Afiento, or contract for sup-
of th Eng- plying the Spanilh colonies with negroes, which
o coAmny had formerly been enjoyed by France, but grant-

ed it the more extraordinary privilege of fending
annually to the fair of Porto-bello a ship of five
hundred tons, laden with European commodities.
In consequence of this, British factories were
eitablifhed at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz,
Buenos Ayres, and other Spanish settlements.
The veil with which Spain had hitherto covered the
slate and transactions of her colonies was remov-
ed. The agents of a rival nation, residing in the
towns of most extensive trade, and of chiefretort
had the best opportunities of becoming acquaint-
ed with the interior condition of their provinces, of
observing their stated and occasional wants, and
of knowing what commodities might be import-
ed into them with the greatea advantage. In
consequence of information so authentic and ex-
peditious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other
English colonies who traded to the Spaniih main,
were enabled to assort and proportion their cargoes,
so exactly to the demands of the market, that the
contraband commerce was carried on with a facility
and to an extent unknown in any former period.
This, however, was not the most fatal consequence
of the Afliento to the trade of Spain. The agents
of the British South Sea Company, under cover
of the importation which they were authorised to
make by the hip ent annually to Porto-bello pour-
ed in their commodities on the Spanish continent,

without

without limitation or refiraint. Instead of a hip B O0 OK
of five hundred tons, as stipulated in the treaty, VII
they usually employed one which exceeded nine ' -"
hundred tons in burden. She was accompanied
by two or three other smaller vessels, which moor-
ing in ome neighbouring creek, supplied her
clandestinely with fresh bales of goods to replace
such as were fold. The infpeators of the fair, and
officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant pre-
sents, connived at the fraudl. Thus, partly by
the operations of the company, and partly by the
activity of private interlopers, almost the whole
trade ofSpanifh America was ingroffed by foreign-
ers. The immense commerce of the Galeons, for-
merly the pride of Spain, and the envy of other 737'
nations, funk to nothing, and the squadron itself,
reduced from fifteen thousand to two thousand
tonsm, served hardly any purpose but to fetch
home the royal revenue arising from the fifth on
silver.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, GuardaCof-

tas emp!oyed

and felt so sensibly their pernicious effects, it was for hispur-
impossible not to make some effort to restrain them. pore.
Her first expedient was to station ships of force,
under the appellation of Guarda Costas, upon the
coasts of those provinces, to which interlopers
most frequently resorted. As private interest con-
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded them
vigilant and active, ome check was given to the
progress of the contraband trade, though in do-
minions so extensive, and so accessible by sea, no
number of cruizers was sufficient to guard against
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption of
an intercourse, which had been carried on with so
much facility, that the merchants in the British co-

lonies

I See NOTE LXVII. m Alcedo y Herrera, p. 359. Cam-
pomanes, i. 436.

t 0 0 K lonies were accustomed to confider it almost as ati

VIII. allowed branch of commerce, excited murmurs

"
w and complaints. These authorised, in ome mea-

sure, and rendered more interesting, by several
unjustifiable ats of violence committed by the
captains of the Spanish Guarda Coitas, precipitat-
t739. ed Great Britain into a war with Spain, by which

the latter obtained a final release from the Affien-
to, and was left at liberty to regulate the com-
mterce of her colonies, without being restrained
by any engagement with a foreign power.

The fe of As the formidable encroachments of the Eng-
regifterfhips lifh on their American trade, had discovered to

the Spaniards the vast consumption of European
goods in their colonies, and taught them the ad-
vantage of accommodating their importations to
the occasional demand of the various provinces,
they perceived the neceflity of devising ome me-
thod of supplying their colonies, different from
their ancient one, of fending thither periodical
fleets. This mode of communication was not
only uncertain, as the departure of the Galeons
and Flota was Sometimes retarded by various acci-
dents, and often prevented by the wars which
raged in Europe, but was ill adapted to afford
America a regular and timely supply of what it
wanted. The scarcity of European goods in the
Spanish settlements frequently became excessive;
their price rose to an enormous height; the vigilant
eye of mercantile attention did not fail to ob-
serve this favourable opportunity, an ample supply
was poured in by interlopers from the English, the
French, and Dutch islands ; and when the Galeons
at length arrived, they found the markets so glut-
ted by this illicit commerce, that there was no de-
mand for the commodities with which they were
loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain permitted
a considerable part of her commerce with Ameri-

ca,

ca, to be carried on by regiser FJhps. These are B O 0 K
fitted out, during the intervals between the fated VII.
seasons when the Galeons and Flota fail, by mer-
chants in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence
from the council of the Indies, for which they
pay a very high premium, and are defined for
those ports where any extraordinary demand is
foreseen or expected. By this expedient, such a
regular supply of fresh commodities is conveyed
to the American market, that the interloper is no
longer allured by the fame profpet of excessive
gain, or the people in the colonies urged by the
fame neceflity to engage in the hazardous adven-
tures of contraband trade,

IN proportion as experience manifested the ad- Thegaiem

vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the e
number of register ihips increased; and at length,
in the year I748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
abolished. From that period there has been no in-
tercourfe with Chili and Peru but by single ships,
dispatched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expect a market will open.
These fail round Cape Horn, and convey directly
to the ports in the South Sea the productions and
manufatures of Europe, for which the people
fettled in those countries were formerly obliged to
repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These towns,
as has been formerly observed, must gradually de-
cline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their existence. This disadvantage
however is more than compensated, for the whole
continent of South America receives supplies of
European commodities, with so much regularity,
and in such abundance, as must contribute greatly
to the happiness and prosperity of all the colonies
fettled there. But as all the register ships destined
for the South Seas, must still take their departure

from

B O O K from Cadiz, and are obliged to return thither n,

V1Ii. this branch of the American commerce, even in
' ' its new and improved form, continues subject to

the refiraints of a species of monopoly, and feels
those pernicious effets of it, which I have already
described.

Schemes for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined
reviving to regulating the trade with its flourishing colo-

ommerc. ies, it has extended likewise to the reviving com-

merce in those settlements where it was neglected,
or had decayed. Among the new taftes which the
people of Europe have acquired, in consequence
of their intercourse with the natives of those coun-
tries which they conquered in America, that for
chocolate is one of the most universal. The use
of this liquor made with a palte, formed of the nut,
or almond of the cacao tree, compounded with
various ingredients, the Spaniards first learned
from the Mexicans; and it has appeared to them,
and to the other European nations, so palatable, so
nourishing, and so wholesome, that it has become
a commercial article of considerable importance.
The cacao-tree grows spontaneously in several
parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the belt
quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the South
Sea, are produced in the rich plains of Caraccas, a
province of Tierra Firme. In consequence of
this acknowledged superiority in the quality of ca-
cao in that province, and its communication with
the Atlantic, which facilitates the conveyance to
Europe, the culture of the cacao there is more ex-
tensive than in any diftrit of America. But the
Dutch, by the vicinity of the settlements in the
small islands of Curazoa and Buen-Ayre, to the
coast of Caraccas, gradually ingroffed the greatest
part of the cacao trade. The traffic with the mo-
ther-country for this valuable commodity ceased

almost
n Campomanes, i. 434. 440.

almoftentirely; and such wasthe supine negligence B o K
of the Spaniards or the defeats of their commercial VIII.
arrangements, that they were obliged to receive '
from the hands of foreigners this production of
their own colonies, at an exorbitant price. In or-
der to remedy an evil no less disgraceful, than per-
nicious to his fubjets, Philip V. in the year 1728, by ef(ablih
granted to a body of merchants, an exclusive ingthecom-
right to the commerce with Caraccas and Cumana, YofY cIL
on condition of their employing, at their own ex-
pence, a sufficient number of armed vessels to
clear the coast of interlopers. This society dif-
tinguifhed sometimes by the name of the Compa-
ny of Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain in
which it is established, and sometimes by that of
the Company of Caraccas, from the difirit of
America to which it trades, has carried on its ope-
rations with such vigour and success, that Spain
has recovered an important branch of commerce,
which the had suffered to be wrested from her, and
is plentifully supplied with an article of extensive
consumption at a moderate price. Not only the
parent fiate, but the colony of Caraccas, has de-
rived great advantages from this institution; for
although, at the first aspet, it may appear to be
one of those monopolies, whose tendency is to
check the spirit of industry, instead of calling it
forth to new exertions, it has been prevented from
operating in this manner, by several salutary regu-
lations, framed upon foresight of such bad effects,
and of purpose to obviate them. The planters in
the Caraccas are not left to depend entirely on the
company, either for the importation of European
commodities, or the sale of their own productions.
The inhabitants of the Canary Ifiands have the
privilege of fending thither annually a register ship
of considerable burden, and from Vera Cruz in
New Spain, a free trade is permitted in every port
comprehended in the charter of the company. In

consequence

B 0 0 K consequence of this, there is such a competition,

VIII. that both with refpeEt to what the colonies pur-
chasmm chafe, and what they fell, the price seems to be

fixed at its natural and equitable rate. The com-
pany has not the power of raising the former, or
degrading the latter at pleasure; and accordingly,
since it was established, the increase of culture, of
population, and of live stock, in the province of
Caraccas has been very considerable o.

Enlarge- BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any
menci of sysem which time has rendered venerable, or that
commercial
ideas in commerce can be diverted from the channel in
Spain. which it has long been accustomed to flow; Philip

V. in his new regulations concerning the American
trade, paid such deference to the ancient maxim
of Spain, concerning the limitation of all impor-
tation from the New World to one harbour, as to
oblige both the register ships which returned from
Peru, and those of the Guipofcoan Company from
Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes in the portof
Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments more liberal
and enlarged begin to spread in Spain. The fpi-
rit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the glory
of the present age to have turned from frivolous
or abstruse speculations, to the business and affairs
of men, has extended its influence beyond the
Pirenees. In the researches of ingenious authors,
concerning the police or commerce of nations, the
errors and defects of the Spanish system with ref-
pect to both met every eye, and have not only
been exposed with severity, but are held up as a
warning to other states. The Spaniards, flung
xwith their reproaches, or convinced by their argu-
ments, and admonished by several enlightened
writers of their own country, seem at length to
have discovered the destructive tendency of those

narrow
See NOTE IXVIII.

narrow maxims, which, by cramping commerce B O O K
in all its operations, have so long retarded its pro- VIIi.
grefs. It is to the monarch now on the throne, t'*
that Spain is indebted for the first public regulati-
on formed in consequence of those ideas.

WHI L Spain adhered with rigour to her ancient Eftablif-

maxims concerning her commerce with America, uplapfck
she was so much afraid of opening any channel, boats.
by which an illicit trade might find admission into
the colonies, that she almost shut herself out from
any intercourse with them, but that which was
carried on by her annual fleets. There was no
eftablifhment-for a regular communication of ei-
ther public or private intelligence, between the
mother-country and its American settlements.
From the want of this necessary institution, the
operations of the state, and the business of indi-
viduals, were retarded or conduded unfkilfully,
and Spain often received from foreigners her first
information with refpet to very interesting
events in her own colonies. But though this de-
seA in police was sensibly felt, and the remedy for
it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanish monarchs guarded the exclusive trade, re-
strained them from applying it. At length Charles
III. surmounted those considerations which had de-
terred his predecessors, and in the year 1764, ap-
pointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the first
day of each month, from Corugna to the Havan-
na or Porto-Rico. From thence letters are con-
veyed in smaller vessels to Vera Cruz and Porto-
bello, and transmitted by post through the king-
doms of Tierra Firme, Granada, Peru, and New
Spain. With no less regularity packet-boats fail
once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the ac-
commodation of the provinces to the east of the
Andes. Thus provision is made for a speedy and

certain

B O O Kcertain circulationof intelligence throughout thevaft

VIII. dominions of Spain, from which equal advantages

must redound tothe political and mercantile interest
of the kingdom P. With this new arrangement, a
scheme of extending commerce has been more im-
mediately connected. Each of the packet-boats
which are vessels of some considerable burden, is
allowed to take in half a loading of such commo-
dities as are the product of Spain, and most in
demand in the ports' whither they are bound. In
return for these they may bring home to Corugna
an equal quantity of Atmerican productions q. This
may be confidered as the firfi relaxations of those
rigid laws, which confined the trade with the New
World to a ingle port, and the first attempt to
admit the reft of the kingdom to some hare in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more decisive. In
permitted tothe year 765, Charles III. laid open the trade to
everal pr- the windward islands, Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto

Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his subjects in
every province of Spain. He permitted them to
fail from certain ports in each of these specified in
the edict, at any eafon, and with whatever cargo
they deemed most proper, without any other war-
rant than a simple clearance from the custom-house
of the place whence they took their departure.
He released them from the numerous and oppref-
five duties imposed on goods exported to America,
and in place of the whole substituted a moderate
tax of fix in the hundred on the commodities ent
from Spain. He allowed them to return either to
the fame port, or to any other where they might
hope for a more advantageous market, and there
to enter the homeward cargoe, on payment of
the usual duties; This ample privilege which

at

p Ponz Viagede Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. 15.
q Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. p. 31.

ohce broke through all the fences, which the jea-B O O K
lous policy of Spain had been labouring for two VIII.
centuries and a half to throw round its commer-
cial intercourse with the New World,was oon
after extended to Louisiana, and to the provinces
of Yucatan and Campeachy .

THE propriety of this innovation, which may eneficial

be confidered as the most liberal effort of Spanilhf eas of it,
legislation, has appeared from its effects. Prior
to the edit in favour of the free trade, Spain de-
rived hardly any benefit from its neglected colonies
in Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Tri-
nidad. Its commerce with Cuba was inconfider-
able, and that of Yucatan and Camnpeachy was in-
grossed almost entirely by interlopers. But as oon
as a general liberty of trade was permitted, the in-
tercourfe with those provinces revived, and has
gone on with a rapidity of progression, of which
there are few examples in the history of nations.
In less than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been
more than tripled. Even in those settlements
where, from the languishing slate of industry,
greater efforts were requisite to restore its activity,
their commerce has been doubled. It is computed,
that such a number of hips is already employed in
the free trade, that the tonnage of them far ex-
ceeds that of the Galeons and Flota, at the most
flourishing ara of their commerce. The benefits
of this arrangement are not confined to a few
merchants, established in a favourite port. They
are diffused through every province of the king-
dom; and by opening a new market for their
various produtions and manufatures, must en-
courage and add vivacity to the industry of the
farmer and artificer. Nor does the kingdom

profit
r Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. 37. 54. 91.

B OOK profit only by what it exports, it derives advan-

VIII. tage likewise from what it receives in return, and
'"- has the profpet of being oon able to supply it-

self with several commodities of extensive con-
fumption, for which it formerly depended on so-
reigners. The consumption of sugar in Spain is
perhaps as great in proportion to the number of
its inhabitants, as that of any European king-
dom. But though possessed of countries in the
New World, whose foil and climate are molt
proper for rearing that valuable plant, though the
domestic culture of the sugar-cane in the kingdom
of Granada was once considerable, such has been
the fatal tendency of its inititutions in America,
and such the pressure of injudicious taxes in Eu-
rope, that Spain has loft almot entirely this
branch of induifry, which has enriched other
nations. This commodity, which has now be-
come an article of primary necessity in Europe,
the Spaniards were obliged to purchase of so-
reigners, and had the mortification to fee their
country drained annually of an immense fum on
that account . But if that spirit, which the per-
mifion of free trade has put in motion, hall
persevere in its efforts with the fame vigour, the
cultivation of sugar in Cuba and Porto Rico, may
increase so much, that in a few years their growth
may be equal to the demand of the kingdom.

Freetrade HER experience of the beneficial consequences
Setween therefulting from having relaxed somewhat of the
colonies. rigour of her ancient laws with refpet to the

commerce of the mother-country with the colo-
nies, has induced Spain to permit a more libe-
ral intercourse of one colony with another. By
one of the jealous maxims of the old system,
all communication between the various pro-

vinces
IJztariz, C. 9,

vinces situated on the South Seas, was prohibited B 0

o

under the most severe penalties. Though each of V1Ii.
these yield peculiar productions, the reciprocal
exchange of xwhich might have added to the ha-
piness of their refpeaive inhabita nts, or have faci-
litated their progress in industry, so solicitous was
the Council of the Indies, to prevent their receiving
any supply of their wants but by the periodical fleets
from Europe; that in order to guard against this,
it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in
New Spain, in Guatimala, and the New Kingdom
of Granada, from such a correspondence with
their fellow fubjeds, as tended manifelfly to their
mutual prosperity. Of all the numerous reftric-
tions devised by Spain for securing the exclusive
trade with her American settlements, none per-
haps was more illiberal, none seems to have been
more sensibly felt, or to have produced more
hurtful effets. This grievance coeval with the
settlements of Spain in the New World, is at last
redrefed. In the year 1774, Charles 1II. pub-
lifhed an edict, granting to the soar vast provin-
ces which I have mentioned, the privilege of a
free trade with each other t. What may be the
effects of opening this communication between
countries defined by their situation for recipro-
cal intercourse, cannot yet be determined by ex-
perience. They can hardly fail of being bene-
ficial and extensive. The motives for granting
this permiflion are manifetly no less lauda.1e,
than the principle on which it is founded is liberal;
and both discover the progress of a spirit in Spain
far elevated above the narrow prejudices and
maxims on which their system for regulating the
trade, and conducing the government cf their
colonies, was originally founded.

VOL. III. T AT

t Real Cedula penes me. Ponz. Viage de Efpagng, yi. Prolog,
p. a. NOTE LXIX,

B o OK. AT the fame time that Spain has been intent

VIII. on introducing regulations, suggested by more

tegula- enlarged views of policy, into her system of

ticns con- American commerce, she has not been inattentive
goerviment to the interior government of her colonies. Here
of the colo- too there was much room for reformation and im-
nies. provement, and Don Joseph Galvez, who has

now the direction of the department for Indian
affairs in Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities,
not only of observing the defe6ts and corruption
in the political frame of the colonies, but of dif-
covering the sources of those evils. After being em-
ployed seven years in the New World on an extra-
ordinary mifion, and with very extensive powers,
as infpetor-general of New Spain, after visiting
in person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, So-
nora, and California, and making several impor-
tant alterations in the fiate of their police and re-
venue; he began his minifiry with a general re-

Reformation formation of the tribunals of justice in America.
of the courts In consequence of the progress of population and
ofjuftice. wealth in the colonies, the business of the Courts

of Audience has increased so much that the num-
ber of judges of which they were originally com-
posed, has been found inadequate to the growing
labours and duties of the office, and the salaries
fettled upon them, inferior to the dignity of the
flation. As a remedy for both, he obtained a
royal edid, establishing an additional number of
judges in each court of Audience, with higher
titles and more ample appointments u

New difri. To the fame intelligent minister Spain is in-
vernmenis. debted for a new difiribution of government in its

American provinces. Even since the eftablilh-
ment of a third viceroyalty in the New King-

dom
Gzeta de Madrid, i9th of March, 776.

dom of Granada, so prodigious is the extent of the B OO K
Spanili dominions in the New World, that feve- VIII.
ral places subjeE to the jurifdicion of each of the '
viceroys, were at such an enormous ditance from
the capitals in which they resided, that neither
their attention, nor their authority, could reach
them. Some provinces subordinate to the viceroy
of New Spain, lay above two thousand miles
from Mexico. There are countries subjet to the
viceroy of Peru ill farther from Lima. The
people in those remote diftrits, could hardly be
said to enjoy the benefit of civil government.
The oppreilion and insolence of its inferior mini-
fters they often feel, and rather submit to these
in silence, than involve themselves in the expence
and trouble of resorting to the difiant capitals, New vice-
where alone they can find redress. As a remedy royalty Au-
for this, a fourth viceroyalty has been erected, to I'gt i77
the jurisdiction of which are fubjeded the pro-Plata.
vinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayres, Para.
guay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta. Cruz de la Sierra,
Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and St.
Juan. By this well judged arrangement, two ad-
vantages are gained. All the inconveniences
occasioned by the remote situation of those pro-
vinces, which had been long felt, and long com-
plained of are removed. The countries most dif-
tant from Lima are separated from the vice-royalty
of Peru, and united under a superior, whose feat
of government at Buenos Ayres will be commo-
dious and acceflibie. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive,
as must have put a final flop to the exportation
of commodities from Spain to her southern co-
lonies, may be checked more thoroughly, and
with greater facility, when the supreme magifirate,
by his vicinity to the places in which it is carried
on, can view its progress and effetswith his own
eyes. Don Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised
to this new dignity, with appointments equal

T to

BOOK to those of the other viceroys, is well acquainted

VIII. both with the ltate and the interest of the countries

over which he is to preside, having served in them
long and with distinction. By this dismember-
ment, succeeding that which took place at the
eretion of the vice royalty of the New Kingdom
of Granada, almost two third parts of the terri-
tories originally subjet to the vice-roys of Peru,
are now lopped off from their jurifdition.

erment i THE limits of the vice-royalty of New Spain
provinctsof have likewise been considerably circumscribed,
Sonora, c. and with no less propriety and ditcernment. Four of

its mroft remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, Cali-
fornia, and New Navarre, have been formed into
a separate government. The Chevalier de Croix,
who is intruied with this command, is not dig-
nified with the title of viceroy, nor does he en-
joy the appointments belonging to that rank, but
his jurifdition and authority is altogether inde-
pendent on the vice-royalty of New Spain. The
erec&ion of this last government seems to have
been suggested, not only by the consideration of
the remote situation of there provinces from Mex-
ico; bt by attention to the late discoveries made
there, which I have mentioned . Countries con-
taining such riches, and which probably may rife
into such importance, required the immediate in-
fpe-ticn of a governor, to whom they were special-
l1 committed. As every consideration of duty,
of intcreft, and of vanity, mut concur in prcmpt-
ing those new governors to encourage such exer-
ticns as tend to diffuse opulence and prosperity
thiough te provinces committed to their charge,
the beneficial effects of this arrangement may be
considerable. Many diftriEts in America long
deprefed by the languor and feebleness natural to
provinces which compose the extremities of an

overgrown
y Book vii. p. I181.

overgrown empire, may be animated with vigour B 0 O K
and ativity when brought so near the feat of VIlI.
power, as to feel its invigorating influence.

SU H, since the acceflion of the Bourbons to the Attempts to

reform do-

throne of Spain, has been the progress of their re- miijcpolicy
gulations, and the gradual expansion of their views
with refped to the commerce and government of
their American colonies. Nor has their attention
been so entirely engrolfed by what related to the
more remote parts of their dominions, as to render
them neglectful of what was till more impor-
tant, the reformation of domestic errors and de-
sects in policy. Fully sensible of the cauies to
which the declension of Spain, from her former
prosperity, ought to be imputed; they have made
it a great object of their policy, to revive a spirit of
industry among their fubjeAs, and to give such ex-
tent and perfection to their manufactures, that they
may be able to iupplythe demandsof America from
their own stock, and to exclude foreigners from
a branch of commerce which has been io fatal to
the kingdom. This they have endeavoured to
accomplish, by a variety of edits iliued since the
peace of Utrecht. hey have granted bounties for
the encouragement of some branches of industry;
they have lowered the taxes on others; they have
prohibited, or have loaded with additional duties,
such foreign manufactures as come in competition
with them; they have infsituted fucieties for the
improvement of trade and agriculture; they have
planted colonies of husbandmen in some uncul-
tivated districts of Spain, and divided among them
the waite fields : they have had recourse to eve-
iy expedient devifd by commercial ;ifdom, or
commercial jealousy, for reviving their own in-
dufiry, and difcountenancing that of other na-
tions. These, however, it is not my province to

explain,

B O K explain, or to inquire into their propriety and es-

VIII. feds. There is no effort of legislation more ar-
"' duous, no experiment in policy more uncertain,

than an attempt to revive the spirit of industry
where it has declined, or to introduce it where it is
unknown. Nations already possessed of extensive
commerce, enter into competition with such ad-
vantages, derived from the large capitals of their
merchants, the dexterity of their manufaturers,
the alertness acquired by habit in every depart-
ment of business, that the Itate which aims at
rivalling, or supplanting them, must expeEt to
struggle with many difficulties, and be content
to advance slowly. If the quantity of productive
industry now in Spain, be compared with that of
the kingdom under the listless monarchs of the
Austrian line, its progress must appear confidera-
ble, and is sufficient to alarm thejealoufy, and to
call forth the mofft vigorous efforts of the nations
now in poffefi on of the lucrative trade which the
Spaniards aim at wrefling from them. One cir-
cumfiance may render those exertions of Spain
an object of more serious attention to the other
European powers. They are not to be ascribed
wholly to the influence of the crown and its mi-
nifters. The sentiments and spirit of the people
seem to second the provident care of their mo-
narchs and to give it greater effet. They
have adopted more liberal ideas, not only with
refpet to commerce, but domestic policy. In all
their later writers, defects in their arrangements
concerning both are acknow ledged, and remedies
proposed, which pride would not have allow-
ed their ancestors to confers, and ignorance ren-
dered them incapable of difcerningx. But after
all that the Spaniards have done, much remains
to do. Many pernicious institutions and abuses

deeply
x See NOTE LXX.

deeply incorporated with the system of internal B O O K
policy and taxation, which has been long efta Viii.
blifhed in Spain, muff be abolished before industry
and manufactures can recover an extensive acti-
vity.

STILL, however, the commercial regulations Contraband

of Spain with refpe6t to her colonies, are too ri- trade
gid and systematical to be carried into com-
plete execution. The legislature that loads trade
with impositions too heavy, or fetters it by refiric-
tions too evere, defeats its own intention; and,
in truth, is only multiplying the inducements to
violate its statutes, and proposing an high pre-
mium to encourage illicit traffic. The Spaniards,
both in Europe and America, circumscribed in
their mutual intercourse by the jealousy, or op-
pressed by the exations of the crown, have their
invention continually on the firetch how to elude
its edicts. The vigilance and ingenuity of private
interest discover means of effecting this, which
public wisdom cannot foresee, nor public authority
prevent. This spirit, counterading that of the
laws, pervades the commerce of Spain with Ame-
rica in all its branches; and from the highest de-
partments in government, descends to the lowest.
The very officers appointed to check contraband
trade, are often employed as instruments in car-
rying it on; and the boards instituted to restrain
and punish it, are the channels through which it
flows. The king is supposed to be defrauded by
various artifices, of more than one half of the re-
venue which he ought to receive from America Y;
and as long as it is the interest of so many persons
to screen those artifices from detection, the know-
ledge of them will never reach the throne. " How
"many ordinances, fays Corita, how many in-

" ftrutions,
y Solorz de Ind.jure, ii. lib. v.

BOOK "c ftruaions, how many letters from our fove

VIii. 6; reign, are sent in order to correa abuses, and how

; t little are they observed, and what small advan
't tage is derived from them. To me the old
" observation appears jufi, that where there are
" many physicians, and many medicines, there
" is a want of health; where there are many

lawsi and many judges there is a want ofjuftice.
' We have viceroys, presidents, governors, oydors,
" corrigidors, alcaldes, and thousands of algua-

zils abound every where but notwithstanding
all these, public abuses continue to multiply z.'

Time has increased the evils which he lamented
as early as the reign of Philip II. A spirit of
corruption has infected all the colonies of Spain
in America. Men far removed from the feat of
government, impatient to acquire wealth, that
they may return speedily from what they are apt
to confider as a state of exile in a remote un-
healthful country, allured by opportunities too
tempting to be resifted, and educed by the ex-
ample of those around them, find their senti-
ments of honour and of duty gradually elax,
In private life, they give themselves up to a diffo-
lute luxury, while in their public conduCt they
become unmindful of what they owe to their so.
Vereign and their country.

Tradebe. BEFORE I CloCe this account of the Spanish
tween New . .
spainandhetrade in America, there remains one detached,
Philippine.. but important branch of it, to be mntioned,

Soon after his accefliri to the throne, Philip II.
i564. formed a scheme of planting a colony in the

Philippine islands, which had been neglected filce
the time of their discovery a; and he accomplishcd
it by means of an armament fitted out from New
Spainb. Manila, in the island of Luconi, a the

S..n .., aas te

iation

v hMS. penes me. s Book v. p, 299 &c. b Torquein, lib. v.
t. 14.

station chosen for the capital of this new establish- B O b
ment.From it an active commercialintercourfebegan VIiI.
with the Chinese, and a considerable number of-
that indultrious people, allured by the profped of
gain, fettled in the Philippines under the Spanish
protection; They supplied the colony so amply
with all the valuable produ&tions and manufac-
tures of the East, as enabled it to open a trade
with America, by a course of navigation the long-
eft from land to land on our globe. In the infan-
cy of this tr:;de, it was carried on with Callao, on
the coadt of Peru ; btl- experience having discover-
ed many difficulties in this mode of comiunlicati-
on, the taple

ol tis commerce between the east

and weft wv.:s removed fiom Callao to Acapulco,
on the ccait of New Spain.

AFTR variotis arrangements, it has been

brought into a reguila fodm.' One or two ships
depart annually from Acapulco, which may carry
out si .e to the amount of five hundred thousand
pes:,s c, but have hardly any thing else of value on
board in return for which, they bring back fpi-
ces, diugs, china, and japan wares, callicoes,
chintz, muflns, silks, and every precious article
with which the benignity of the climate, or the in-
genuity of its people, have enabled the East to
supply the reft of the world. For bome time the
merchants of Peru were admitted to participate
in this traffic, and might fend annually a ship to
Acapulco, to wait the arrival of the vessels from
Manila, and receive a proportional share of the
commodities which they imported. At length, the
Peruvians were excluded by moft-rig:jrous edi is,
and all the commodities from the EaRt reserved
solely for the consumption of New Spair.

IN

BO K IN consequence of this Indulgence, the inhabi-

ii. tants of that country enjoy advantages unknown

in the other Spanish colonies. The manufa&ures
of the East are not only more suited to a warm
climate, and more showy than those of Europe,
but can be fold at a lower price; while at the fame
time, the profits upon them are so considerable, as
to enrich all those who are employed, either in
bringing them from Manila, or vending them in
New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer
and feller concurred in favouring this branch of
commerce, it continued to extend in spite of re-
gulations, concerted with the most anxiousjealou-
fy to circumscribe it. Under cover of what the
laws permit to be imported, vast quantities of In-
dia goods are poured into the markets of New
Spaind, and when the fota arrives at Vera Cruz,
it often finds the wants of the people already sup-
plied by cheaper and more acceptable commodi-
ties.

THERE is not in the commercial arrangements

of Spain, any circumstance more inexplicable than
the permifiion of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its fun-
damental maxim of holding the colonies in perpe-
tual dependance on the mother-country, by pro-
hibiting any commercial intercourse that might
suggest to them the idea of receiving a flpply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion must appear fill more extraordinary, from
confidering that Spain herself carries on no diret
trade with her settlements in the Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her American colonies,
which ihe denies to her fubjets in Europe. It is
probable, that the colonifis which originally took
poffefiion of the Philippines, having been ent
out from New Spain, begun this intercourse with a

country
d See NOTE LXXI.

country which they confidered, in some measure, B o O l
as their parent state, before the court of Madrid VII.
was aware of its consequences, or could establish "-
regulations in order to prevent it. Many remon-
ftranceshave been presented againi this trade, as
detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that treasure which
ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending to
give rife to a spirit of independence in the colo-
nies, and to encourage innumerable frauds, against
which it was impoflible to guard, in tranfaftions
so far removed from the infpetion of government,
But as it requires no flight effort of political wis-
dom and vigour to abolish any practice, which
numbers are interested in supporting, and to which
time has added the sanction of its authority, the
commerce betwixt Acapulco and Manila seems to
be as considerable as ever, and may be confidered
as one chief cause of the elegance and splendor
conspicuous in this part of the Spani(h dominions.

Bu T notwithstanding this general corruption in Public reve

the colonies, and all the defalcations of the publicA efi,
revenue, by the illicit importation of foreign com-
modities, or by the fraudulent arts of its own
fubjeds, the Spanish monarchs receive a very con-
fiderable fum from theirAmerican dominions. This
arises from taxes of various kinds, which may be
divided into three capital branches. The first con-
tains what is paid to the king, as sovereign, or
superior lord of the New World: to this class be-
longs the duty on the gold and silver raised from
the mines, and the tribute exaced from the Indi-
ans; the former is termed by the Spaniards the
right of fgniority, the latter is the duty of vassalage,
The second branch comprehends the numerous
duties upon commerce, which accompany and op-
press it in every itep of its progress, from the
greatest transaCtions of the wholesale merchant, to

the

Bo 0 Kthe petty traffic of the vender by retail. The

VII. third includes what accrues to the king, as head
't4 of the church, and administrator of ecclefiafiical

funds in the New World. In consequence of this
he receives the firfi fruits, annats, spoils, and
other spiritual revenues levied by the apostolic
chamber in Europe; and is entitled likewise, to
the profit arising from the sale of the bull of Cru-
zado. This, which is published every two years,
contains an absolution from past offences by the
Pope, and, among other immunities, a permif-
sion to eat several kinds of prohibited food, dur-
ing Lent, and on meagre days. The monks
employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their
virtues with all the fervour of interested eloquence;
the people, ignorant and credulous, liften with im-
plicit assent; and every person in the Spanih colo-
nies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, pur-
chafes a bull, which is deemed essential to his fal-
vation, at the rate set upon it by government e.
tts amouht. WHAT may be the amount of those various

funds, it is almost impoflible to determine with
precision. The extent of the Spanilh dominions
in America, the jealousy of government, which
renders them inacceflible to foreigners, the myfte-
rous silence which the Spaniards are accustomed to
observe with refpec to the interior itate of their
colonies, combine in covering this subjed with a
veil which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate, than it is cu-
rious, has lately been published of the royal reve-
nue in New Spain, from which we may so m some
idea with refpet to what is colleced i the other
provinces. According to that account the crown

does
e See NOTE LXXiI.

does not receive from all the departments of tax- B O o K
ation in New Spain, above a million of our mo- VIII.
ney, from which one half muff be deducted as the '-v A
expence of the provincial establishments. Peru,
it is probable, yields a fum not inferior to this,
and if we suppose that all the other regions of A-
merica, including the islands, furnish a third ilare
of equal value; we hall not perhaps be far wide
from the truth, if we conclude, that the net pub-
lic revenue of Spain, raised in America, does not
exceed a million and a half sterling. This falls
far short of the immense films, to which fuppofiti-
ons, founded upon conjecture, have raised the Spa-
nifh revenue in America g. It is remarkable, how-
ever, upon o:e account. Spain and Portugal are
the only European powers, who derive a direct re-
venue from their colonies as their quota towards
defraying the general ex:pence of government.
All the advantage that accrues to other nations,
from their American dominions, arises from the
exclusive enjoyment of their trade; but bide
this, Spain has brought her colonies to contribute
to increase the power of the fRate; and in return
for protetion, to bear a proportional flare of the
common burden,

ACCORDINGLY, what I have computed as the

amount of the Spanish revenue from America,
comprehends only the taxes collected there, and is
far from being the whole of what accrues to the
king from his dominions in the New World. The
heavy duties imposed on the commodities exported
from Spain to America h, as well as what is paid
by those which she fends home in return; the tax
upon the negroe-ilaves, with which Africa supplies

th¢

f See NOTE LXXIII. g See NOTE LXXIV.
,b See NOTE LXXV.

BO OK the New World, together with several smaller

VIII. branches of finance, bring large fums into the
r s treasury, the precise extent of which I cannot pre-

tend to ascertain.

Expence of Bu T if the revenue which Spain draws from A-
a"tinira- merica be great, the expence of administration in

her colonies bears proportion to it. In every de-
partment, even of her domestic police and sinan-
ces, Spain has adopted a system more complex,
and more encumbered with a variety of tribunals,
and a multitude of officers, than that of any Eu-
ropean nation, in which the sovereign possesses
such extensive power. From the jealous spirit
with which (he watches over her American fettle-
ments, and her endeavours to guard againit fraud
in provinces so remote from infpeAion; boards
and officers have been multiplied there with fill
more anxious attention, In a country where the
expence of living is great, the salaries allotted to
every person in public office must be high, and
must load the revenue with an immense burden.
The parade of government greatly augments the
weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
the.New Kingdom of Granada, asreprefentatives
of the king's person, among people fond of often-
tation, maintain all the slate and dignity of royal-
ty. Their courts are formed upon the model of
that at Madridwith horse and foot guards, a house-
hold regularly established, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, displaying such pomp, as
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
rity. All the expence incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have be-
fides peculiar appointments suited to their exalted
ltation. The salaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
tremely moderate, that of the viceroy of Peru is
only thirty thousand ducats; and that of the vice-

roy

roy of Mexico twenty thousand ducats i. Of late, B O o K
they have been raised to forty thousand. VIII.

THESE salaries, however, constitute but a small

part of their revenue. The exercise of an abfo-
lute authority extending to every department of
government, and the power of disposing of many
lucrative offices, affords to them innumerable op-
portunities of accumulating wealth. To.thefe,
which may be confidered as legal and allowed
emoluments, vast fums are often added by exac-
tions, which in countries so far removed from the
feat of government, it is not easy to discover, and
impossible to restrain. By monopolizing ome
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants,
a viceroy may rife such an annual revenue, as no
subjea of any European monarch enjoys k. From
the tingle article of presents made to him on the
anniversary of his Name-day (which is always ob-
served as an high festival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanish faying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Conscious of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
formerly observed, grant a commiflion to their
viceroy only for a few years. This circumstance,
however, renders them often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they
labour to improve every moment of power which
they know is hastening fast to a period; and short
as its duration is, it usually affords fifficient time
for repairing a hattered fortune, or creating a
new one. But even in situations so trying to hu-
man frailty, there are inflances of virtue that re-
main unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis

de
i Recop. lib. iii. tit. iii. c. 72, k See NOTE CIV.

288 HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B 00 Kde Croix finiihed the term of his viceroyalty in

VIII. in New Spain with unfuipeted integrity; and in-

ilhead of bringing home exorbitant wealth, return-
ed with the admiration and applause of a grateful
people, whom his government had rendered hap-
py.

NTES
N OTES

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

~VOL. I~~II. ~~ U~~/
VOL. III. U

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NO T E S

AND
IL LUSTRAT IONS.

NOTE I. p.i.

IN tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New
Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our most cer-
tain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain a
minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own
exploits. Our information with refpet to them is de-
rived however from contemporary and refpeaable au-
thors.

THE most early account of Pizarro's tranfations in

Peru, was published by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary.
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no far-
ther than the death of Atahualpa, in 533; for the
author returned to Spain in I534, and oon after he
landed, printed at Seville his short History of the Con-
quest of Peru, addressed to the emperor.

DON Pedro Sancho, an officer who served under Pi-

zarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which
was translated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted in
his valuable collettion, but has never been published in
its original language. Sancho returned to Spain at the
fame time with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both
those authors relate concerning the progress and opera-

U 2 tions

tions of Pizarro, but the residence of the Spaniards in
Peru had been so hort, at the time when they left it,
and their intercourse with the natives so slender, that
their knowledge of the Peruvian manners and customs
is very imperfect.

THE next contemporary historian is Pedro Cieza de

Leon, who published his Chronica del Peru, at Seville
in 15 53. If he had finished all that he proposes in the
general division of his work, it would have been the most
complete history which had been published of any region
in the New World. He was well qualified to execute it,
having served during seventeen years in America, and
visited in person most of the provinces concerning which
he had occasion to write. But only the first part of his
Chronicle has been printed. It contains a description
of Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with an
account of the institutions and customs of the natives,
and is written with so little art, and such an apparent
regard for truth, that one must regret the loss of the
other parts of his work.

TH Is los is amply supplied by Don Augustine Zarate,

who published, in 55, his Hiftoria del defcubrimiento
y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarate was a man
of rank and education, and employed in Peru as comp-
troller general of the public revenue. His history,
whether we attend to its matter or composition, is a
book of considerable merit; as he had opportunity to be
well informed, and seems to have been inquisitive with
refped to the manners and tranfaftions of the Peruvians,
great credit is due to his testimony.

DoN Diego Fernandez published his Hiftoria del Peru

in 157 I. His sole objeCt is to relate the dissensions and
civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he ferv-
ed in a public flation in Peru, and was well acquainted
both with the country, and with the principal actors in
those singular scenes which he describes, as he pofleffed
found understanding, and great impartiality, his work
may be ranked among those of the historians most diftin-
guifhed for their induftrv in research, or their capacity
in judging with respeCt to the events which they relate.

THE

TH E last author who can be reckoned among the con-

temporary historians of the conquest of Peru, is Garcilafo
dela Vega, Inca. For though the first part of this work,
intitled, Comentarios Reales del Origen de los Incas Reies
del Peru, was not published sooner than the year 609,
feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the last
emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and was the son
of an officer of diftindion among the Spanish conquer-
ors, by a Caya, or lady of the royal race, on account
of which he always took the name of Inca, as he was
master of the language spoken by the Incas, and ac-
quainted with the traditions of his countrymen, his au-
thority is rated very high, and often placed above that of
all the other historians. His work, however, is little more
than a commentary upon the Spanish writers of the Pe-
ruvian story, and composed of quotations taken from
the authors whom I have mentioned. This is the idea
which he himself gives of it, Lib. i. c. io. Nor is it
in the account of fats only that he follows them servile-
ly. Even in explaining the institutions and rites of
his ancestors, his information seems not to be more per-
set than theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is al-
most the fame with that of Acofta. He produces no
specimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one
which he borrows from Bias Valera, an early missionary,
whose memoirs have never been published. Lib. ii. c.

5. As for composition, arrangement, or a capacity of
diftinguifling between what is fabulous, what is proba-
ble, and what is true, one searches for them in vain in
the commentaries of Inca. His work, however, not-
withstanding its great defeEts, is not altogether destitute
of use. Some traditions which he received from his
countrymen are preserved in it. His knowledge of the
Peruvian language has enabled him to correct ome er-
rors of the Spanish writers, and he has inserted in it some
curious facts taken from authors whose works were ne-
ver published, and are now loft.

NOTE

NOTE II. p.6.

O NE may form an idea both of the hardships which
they endured, and of the regions which they visited,
from the extraordinary mortality that prevailed among
them. Pizarro carried out 112 men, Almagro 70.
In less than nine months 130 of these died. Few fell by
the sword; most of them were cut off by diseases. Xe-
rez, p. i80.

NOTE III. p.9.

T HIS iland, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncom-
sortable by the unwholefomenefs of its climate, its im-
penetrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude of insets and reptiles, that it is seldom any softer
epithet than that of infernal is employed in describing
it. The fun is almost never seen there, and throughout
the year it hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. iii. lib. x. c.
3. Dampier touched at this island in the year 685;
and his account of the climate is not more favourable.
Vol. . p. 172. He, during his cruize on that coast,
visited most of the places where Pizarro landed, and his
description of them throws light on the narrations of
the early Spanith historians.

NOT E IV. p. 23.

B Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spa-
nifh settlements on the continent. When Cortes began
his expedition in the year i 58, though his armament
was more considerable than that of Pizarro, and com-
posed of persons superior in rank to those who invaded
Peru, he could procure no more than sixteen horses.

NOTE

NOTE V. p. 25.

IN the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George
Juan, travlled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame
route which Pizarro took. From the description of
their journey, one may form an idea of the difficulty of
his march. The sandy plains between St. Michael de
Piura and Motupe extend go miles, without water,
without a tree, a plant, or any green thing, on a dreary
itretch of burning sand. Voyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE VI. p. 29.

T HIS extravagant and unseasonable discourse of
Valverde has been censured by all historians, and with
justice. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigotted monk, nowise resembling the good 01.
medo, who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his
address to Atahualpa muff not be charged wholly upon
him. His harangue is evidently a translation, or para-
phrase of that form, concerted by a junto of Spanifi
divines and lawyers in the year 509, for explaining the
right of their king to the overeignty of the New
World, and for dire&ting the officers employed in Ame-
rica how they ihould take poeffesion of any new country.
See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The sentiments contained in
Valverde's harangue must not then be imputed to the bi-
gotted imbecillity of a particular man, but to that of the
age. Gornara and Benzoni relate one circumstance con-
cerning Valverde, which, if authentic, renders him
an object not of contempt only, but of horror. They
assert, that during the whole acion, Valverde continu-
ed to excite the soldiers to slaughter, calling to them
to strike the enemy not with the edge, but with the
points of their swords. Gom. Cron. c. 13. Benz.
Hiftor. Nov. Orbis, lib, iii. c, 3. Such behaviour was
very different from that of the Roman Catholic clergy
in other parts of America, where they uniformly ex
erted their influence to protect the Indians, and to mo-
derate the ferocity of their cutrym.

N 0 T

NOTE VII. p. 30.

TWO different systems have been formed concern-
ing the condut of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers, in
order to justify the violence of their countrymen, con-
tend, that all the Inca's professions of friendship were
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and
his followers at one blow; that for this purpose he ad-
vanced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
had arms concealed under their garments to execute this
scheme. This is the account given by Xerez and Zarate,
and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the plan of
the Inca to destroy the Spaniards, one can hardly ima-
gine that he would have permitted them to march un-
molested through the desert of Motupe, or have ne-
glected to defend the passes in the mountains, where they
might have been attacked with so much advantage. If
the Peruvians marched to Caxamalca with an intention
to fall upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable, that of so
great a body of men, prepared, for ation, not one
should attempt to make resistance, but all tamely susser
themselves to be butchered by an enemy whom they
were armed to attack. Atahualpa's mode of advanc-
ing to the interview, has the afpe& of a peaceable pro-
cession, not of a military enterprize. He himself,
and his followers were, in their habits of ceremony,
preceded, as on days of solemnity, by unarmed harbin-
gers. Though rude nations are frequently cunning and
false, yet, if a scheme of deception and treachery muff
be imputed either to a monarch, that had no great reason
to be alarmed at a visit from strangers who solicited ad-
mission into his preence as friends, or to an adventurer
so daring, and so little scrupulous as Pizarro, one cannot
hesitate in determining where to fix the presumption of
guilt. Even amidst the endeavours of the Spanish writ-
ers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro, one plainly
perceives, that it was his intention, as well as his interest,
to seize the Inca, and that he had taken measures for
that purpose, previous to any suspicion of that mo-
narch's designs.

GARCILASSO

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to

vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the crime
of having concerted the destruCtion of Pizarro and his fol-
lowers, and no less afraid to charge the Spaniards with
improper conduc towards the Inca, has framed another
system. He relates, that a man of majestic form, with a
long beard, and garments reaching to the ground, having
appeared in vision to Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and de-
clared, that he was a child of the Sun, that monarch
built a temple in honour of this person, and ere&ed an
image of him, resembling as nearly as possible the fingu-
lar form in which he had exhibited himself to his view.
In this temple, divine honours were paid to him, by the
name ofViracocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. 2. lib.v.c. 22. When
the Spaniards first appeared in Peru, the length of their
beards, and the dress they wore, struck every person so
much with their likeness to the image of Viracocha,
that they supposed them to be children of the Sun,
who had descended from heaven to earth. All conclud-
ed, that the fatal period of the Peruvian empire was now
approaching, and that the throne would be occupied
by new possessors. Atahualpa himself, confidering the
Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was so far from
entertaining any thoughts of reifting them, that he de-
termined to yield implicit obedience to their commands.
From those entiments flowed his professions of love and
refpet. To those were owing the cordial reception of
Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the sub-
miflfve reverence with which he advanced to visit the
Spanish general in his quarters. But from the gross ig-
norance of Philipillo, the interpreter, the declaration
of the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were so ill ex-
plained, that by their mutual inability to comprehend each
other's intentions, the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca,
with all its dreadful consequences, was occasioned.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperititious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are
to be found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate,
previous to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the
two former served under Pizarro at that time, and te

latter
4

latter visited Peru oon after the conquest. If either
the Inca himself, or his messengers, had addressed the
Spaniards in the words which La Vega put in their
mouths, they must have been struck with such submissive
declarations; and they would certainly have availed
themselves of them to accomplish their own designs with
greater facility. La Vega himself, though his narrative
of the intercourse between the Inca and the Spaniards
preceding the rencounter at Caxamalca, is founded on the
iuppofition of his believing them to be Viracochas, or
divine beings. P. ii. lib. i. c. 17, &c. yet with his usual
inattention and inaccuracy he admits, in another place,
that the Peruvians did not recolle& the resemblance be-
tween them and the god Viracocha, until the fatal difaf-
ters subsequent to the defeat at Caxamalca, and then
only began to call them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v, c. 21.
This is confirmed by Herrera, dec. v. lib. ii. c. 12. In
many different parts of America, if we may believe the
Spanish writers, their countrymen were confidered as di-
vine beings who had descended from Heaven. But in this
instance, as in many which occur in the intercourse be-
tween nations, whole progress in refinement is very une-
qual the ideas of those who used the expression, were dif-
ferent from the ideas of those who heard it. For, such
is the idiom of the Indian languages, or such is the fim-
plicity of those who speak them, that when they fee
any thing with which they were formerly unacquainted,
and of which they do not know the origin; they fay,
that it came down from heaven. Nugnez. Ram. iii.
327, C.

THE account which I have given of the sentiments

and proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more
natural and consistent than either of the two preceding,
and is better supported by the facts related by the con-
temporary historians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thousand Peru-

vians were killed. Sancho makes the number of the
slain fix or seven thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By La
Vega's account, five thousand were massacred. P. ii.
lib. i. c. 25. The number which I have mentioned,

being

being the medium between the extremes, may probably
be nearest the truth.

NOTE VIII. . 32.

NOTHING can be a more striking proof of this,
than that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to
Cuzco. The distance between them is fix hundred
miles. In every place throughout this vast extent of
country, they were treated with all the honours which
the Peruvians paid to their sovereigns, and even to their
divinities. Under pretext of amassing what was wanting
for the ransom of the Inca, they demanded the plates
of gold with which the walls of the Temple of the Sun
in Cuzco were adorned; and though the prieffs were
unwilling to alienate those sacred ornaments, and the
people refused to violate the hrine of their God, the
three Spaniards with their own hands robbed the Tem-
ple of that part of this valuable treasure; and such was
the reverence of the natives for their persons, that though
they beheld this a of sacrilege with astonishment,
they did not attempt to prevent or disturb the com-
mission of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap. Ramu;s
iii. 375, D.

NOTE IX. p. 42.

ACCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco,
after etting apart the king'sjfth, was divided among 480
persons. Each received 4000 pesos. This amounts to
1,920,000 pesos. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the ge-
neral, and other officers, were entitled to a part far
greater than that of the private men, the fum total must
have risen much beyond what I have mentioned. Go-
mara, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy themselves
with asserting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco
was of greater value than the ransom of Atahualpa.

NOTE

NOTE X. p. 44.

No expedition in the New World was condu&ed
with more persevering courage than that of Alvarado,
and in none were greater hardships endured. Many of
the persons engaged in it were, like their leader, veterans
who had served under Cortes, inured to all the rigour of
American war. Such of my readers as have not an op-
portunity of perusing the firiking description of their
sufferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form some idea of
the nature of their march from the sea-coast to Quito,
by consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa gives of
his own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame route. Voy.
tom. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who pro-
ceeded from Puerto Viejo to Qito, by the fame road
which Alvarado took. He compares his own journey
with that of the Spanish leader, and by the comparison,
gives a most striking idea of the boldness and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through so many obfta-
cles. Voyage du Perou, p. xxviii, &c.

NOTE XI. p. 45.

ACCORDING to Herrera, there was entered on
account of the king, in gold, 155,300 pesos, and 5400
marks (each 8 ounces) of silver, besides several vefiels
and ornaments, ome of gold, and others of silver; on
account of private persons, in gold 499,ooo pesos, and
54,000 marks of silver. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XII. p. 52.

THE Peruvians had recourse to other military arts
than those of the Spaniards. As the cavalry were the
chief object of their terror, they endeavoured to render
them incapable of a&ing, by throwing a long thong with a
stone fastened to each end. This twisted about the horse
and its rider, entangled them so as to render them in-

capable

capable of ating. Herrera mentions this as an inven-
tion of their own. Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have
observed, vol. ii. p. 129, this weapon is common among
several barbarous tribes towards the extremity of South
America; and it is more probable, that the Peruvians
had observed the dexterity with which they used it in
hunting, and on this occasion adopted it themselves.
The Spaniards were considerably annoyed by it. Her-
rera, ibid. Another instance of the ingenuity of the
Peruvians deserves mention. By turning a river out of
its channel, they overflowed a valley, in which a body of
Spaniards was posted, so suddenly, that it was with the
utmost difficulty they made their escape. Herrera, dec.
v. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XIII. p. 69.

H E R R E R A's account of Orellana's voyage is the
most minute, and apparently the most accurate. It was
probably taken from the journal of Orellana himself.
But the dates are not diftin&tly marked. His navigation
down the Coca, or Napo, begun early in February 541;
and he arrived at the mouth of the river on the 26th of
August, having spent near seven months in the voyage.
M. de la Condamine, in the year 1743, failed from
Cuenca to Para, a settlement of the Portuguese at the
mouth of the river, a navigation much longer than that
of Orellana, in less than four months. Voyage, p. 179.
But the two adventurers were very differently provided
for the voyage. This hazardous undertaking, to which
ambition prompted Orellana, and to which the love of
science led M. de la Condamine, was undertaken in the
year 1769, by Madame Godin des Odonais, from con-
jugal affection. The narrative and hardships which lhe
suffered, of the dangers to which he was exposed, and
of the disasters which besel her, is one of the most fin-
gular and affe&ing stories in any language, exhibiting
in her condu& a striking piture of the fortitude
which distinguish the one sex, mingled with the fenfibi-
lity and tenderness peculiar to the other. Lettre de
M. Godin, a M. de la Condamine.

NOTE

NOTE XIV. p. 72.

H ERRERA gives a friking piture of their indi-
gence. Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers of
diftincion under Almagro, lodged in the fame house,
and having but one cloak among them, it was worn al-
ternately by him who had occasion to appear in public,
while the reft, from the want of a decent dress, were
obliged to keep within doors. Their former friends
and companions were so much afraid to .give offence to
Pizarro, that they durst not entertain, or even converse
with them. One may conceive what was the condition,
and what the indignation of men once accustomed to
power and opulence, when they felt themselves poor
and despised, without a roof under which to ihelter
their heads, while they beheld others, whose merit and
services were not equal to theirs, living with splendor in
sumptuous edifices. Dec. vi. lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE XV. p. 83.

HERRERA, the most accurate of the Spaninh his-
torians, asserts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poflefed domains
in the neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, which
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of the
archbishop of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Europe.
Dec. vii. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XVI. p.95.

A L L the Spanish writers describe his march, and the
diftrefes of both parties very minutely. Zarate ob-
serves, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in history,
either with respect to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his com-
putation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thou-
land miles. Lib. v. c. 6. 26.

NOTE

NOTE XVII. p. 108.

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the best in-
formed historian of that period, to one million four
hundred thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XVIII. p. o9.

CA R V A J AL, from the beginning, had been an
advocate for an accommodation with Gafca. Finding Pi-
zarro incapable of holding that bold course which he ori-
ginally suggested, he recommended to him a timely sub-
mission to his sovereign as the safest measure. When the
president's offirs were first communicated to Pizarro, "By
our Lady (said he, in that strain of buffoonery which
was familiar to him) the priest issues gracious bulls. He
gives them both good and cheap, let us only accept of
them, but wear them as reliques about our necks."
Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XIX. p. I14.

D UR IN G the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, seven
hundred men were killed in battle, and three hundred
and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrera, dec. viii.
lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of there were cut
off by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Zarate makes
the number of those put to a violent death five hundred.
Lib. vii. c. I.

NOTE XX. p. 2I.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of
the Mexicans, I have received much information from a
large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the
year 553, Philip II. in order that he might discover the

mode

mode of levying tribute from his Indian subje&s, that
would be most beneficial to the crown, and least oppref-
five to them, addressed a mandate to all the Courts of
Audience in America, enjoining them to answer certain
queries which he proposed to them, concerning the an-
cient form of government established among the various
nations of Indians, and the mode in which they paid
taxes to their kings or chiefs. In obedience to this
mandate, Corita, who had resided nineteen years in
America, fourteen of which he passed in New Spain,
composed the work of which I have a copy. He ac-
quaints his sovereign, that he had made it an obje& dur-
ing his residence in America, and in all its provinces
which he had visited, to inquire diligently into the man-
ners and customs of the natives, that he had converted
for this purpose with many aged and intelligent Indians,
and consulted several of the Spanish ecclesiastics, who
understood the Indian languages most perfe&tly, particu-
larly some of those who landed in New Spain soon after
the conquest. Corita appears to be a man of some learn-
ing, and to have carried on his inquiries with the dili-
gence and accuracy to which he pretends. Greater cre-
dit is due to his testimony from one circumstance. His
work was not composed with a view to publication, or
in support of any particular theory, but contains fim-
pie, though full answers to queries proposed to him of-
ficially. Though Herrera does not mention him among
the authors whom he had followed as guides in his his-
tory, I hould suppose, from several fats of which he
takes notice, as well as from several expressions which
he uses, that this memorial of Corita was not unknown
to him.

NOTE XXI. p. 30.

T HE early Spanish writers were so hasty and inac-
curate in estimating the numbers of people in the pro-
vinces and towns of America, that it is impossible to
ascertain that of Mexico itself with any degree of pre-
cifion. Cortes describes the extent and populousness of
Mexico in general terms, which imply, that it was not

inferior

inferior to the greatest cities in Europe. Gomara is
more explicit, and affirms, that there were 60,oo0
houses, or families in Mexico. CronC c. 78. Herrera
adopts his opinion. Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. 3; and the ge-
nerality of writers follow them implicitly without inqui-
ry or scruple. According to this account, the inha-
bitants of Mexico mufft have been about 300,000. Tor-
quemada, with his usual propensity to the marvellous,
ailerts, that there were a hundred and twenty thousand
houses or families in Mexico, and consequently about
fix hundred thousand inhabitants. Lib. iii. c. 23. But
in a very judicious account of the Mexican empire, by
one of Cortes's officers, the population is fixed at
60o,oo000 people. Ramufio, iii. 309, A. Even by this
account, which probably is much nearer the truth than
any of the foregoing, Mexico was a great city.

NOTE XXII . . 33.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benevente, that I am indebt-
ed for this curious observation. Palafox, bishop of Los
Angeles, confirms and illustrates it more fully. The
Mexican (fays he) is the only language in which a ter-
mination indicating refpe&t, llavas reverentiales y de cor-
efia, may be affixed to every word. By adding the si-
nal syllable zin or azin to any word, it becomes a pro-
per expression of veneration in the mouth of an infe-
rior. If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father is
to be used, it is TatI, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One
priest speaking to another, calls him Teopixque; a person
of inferior rank calls him Teopixcatzin. The name of
the emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico,
was Montezuma, but his vassals, from reverence, pro-
nounced it Montezumazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Vir-
tudes del Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only
reverential nouns, but reverential verbs. The manner
in which these are formed from the verbs in common
use, is explained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guevara in
his Mexican Grammar, No. 88.

VOL. III. X NOTE

NOTE XXIII. p. I37.

FRO M comparing several paifages in Corita and Her-
rera, we may collet with ome degree of accuracy, the
various modes in which the Mexicans contributed to-
wards the support of government. Some persons of
the first order eem to have been exempted from the
payment of any tribute, and, as their only duty to the
public, were bound to personal services in war, and to
follow the banner of the sovereign with their vafrals.
2. The immediate vaflals of the crown were bound not
only to personal military service, but paid a certain pro-
portion of the produce of their lands in kind. 3. Those
who held offices of honour or trust, paid a certain share
of what they received in consequence of holding there.
4. Each Capullee, or association, cultivated ome part
of the common field allotted to it, for the behoof of
the crown, and depofted the produce in the royal gra-
naries. 5. Some part of whatever was brought to the
public markets, whether fruits of the earth, or the
various produtions of their artists and manufactures,
was demanded for the public use, and the merchants
who paid this were exempted from every other tax.
6. The Mayeques or adfcripti gleba, were bound to cul-
tivate certain diftri&s in every province, which may be
confidered as crown lands, and brought the increase in-
to public storehouses. Thus the obvereign received some
part of whatever was useful or valuable in the country,
whether it was the natural prodution of the foil, or ac-
quired by the industry of the people. What each con-
tributed towards the support of government, seems to
have been inconsiderable. Corita, in answer to one of
the queries put to the Audience of Mexico, by Philip
II. endeavours to estimate in money the value of what
each citizen might be supposed to pay, and does not
reckon it at more than three or four reals, about eigh-
teen pence or two hillings a head.

NOTE XXIV. p. 138.

C R T ES, who seems to have been as much aftonifll-
ed with this, as with any instance of Mexican ingenuity,
gives a particular description of it. Along one of the

causeways,

causeways, fays he, by which they enter the city,
are conduced two conduits, composed of clay temper-
ed with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raised
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a stream of
excellent water, as large as the body of a man, into the
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants
plentifully. The other is empty, that when it is necef-
fary to clean, or repair the former, the stream of wa-
ter may be turned into it. As this conduit passes along
two of the bridges, where there are breaches in the
causeway, through which the salt-water of the lake
flows, it is conveyed over them in pipes as large as the
body of an ox, then carried from the conduit to the
remote quarters of the city in canoes, and fold to the
inhabitants. Relat. ap. Ramus. 241, A.

NOTE XXV. p. I40.

IN the armoury of the royal palace of Madrid, are
ihewn suits of armour, which are called Montezuma's.
They are composed of thin lacquered copper-plates. In
the opinion of very intelligent judges they are evidently
eastern. The forms of the silver ornaments upon them,
representing dragons, &c. may be confidered as a con-
firmation of this. They are infinitely superior in point
ofworkmanfhip to any effort of American art. The Spa-
niards probably received them from the Philippine islands.
The only unquestionable specimen of Mexican ar, that I
know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine gold, which
is said to have belonged to Montezuma. It weighs 5 oz.
12 pwt. Three drawings of it were exhibited to the So-
ciety of Antiquaries, June 0o, 1765. A man's head is
represented on this cup. On one fide the full face, on
the other the profile, on the third the back parts of the
head. The relievo is said to have been produced by
punching the inside of the cup, so as to make the repre-
fentation of a face on the outside. The features are
rude, but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Spa-
nifh workmanhip. This cup was purchased by Edward
earl of Orford, while he lay in the harbour of Cadiz with
the fleet under his command, and is now in the posTef-
sion of his grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted for

X 2 this

this information to my refpeEtable and ingenious friend
Mr. Barrington.

NOTE XXVI. p. 44-

THE learned reader will perceive how much I have
been indebted in this part of my work, to the guidance
of the bishop of Gloucester, who has traced the fuc-
ceffive steps, by which the human mind advanced in this
line of its progress, with much erudition, and greater
ingenuity. He is the first, as far as I know, who form-
ed a rational and coniftent theory concerning the va-
rious modes of writing pra&ised by nations, according
to the various degrees of their improvement. Div. Le-
gation of Moses, iii. 69, &c. Some important obfer-
vations have been added by the learned and intelligent
author of the Traite de la Formation Mechanique des
Langues, tom. i. 295, &c.

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious mo-

numents extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will
not be improper to give some account of the means by
which they were preserved from the general wreck of every
work of art in America, and communicated to the Public.
For the most early and complete collection ofthefe publish-
ed by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of that
curious enquirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza,
viceroy of New Spain, having deemed those paintings a
proper present for Charles V. the ship in which they
were ent to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and
they came into the possession of Thevet, the king's geo-
grapher, who having travelled himself into the New
World, and described one of its provinces, was a cu-
rious observer of whatever tended to illustrate the man-
ners of the Americans. On his death, they were pur-
chased by Hakluyt, at that time chaplain of the English
ambassador to the French court; and, being left by him
to Purchas, were published at the desire of the learned
antiquary, Sir Henry Spelman. Purchas, iii. o65.

THE second specimen of Mexican piture-writing,

was published by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two
copper-plates. The first is a map, or representation of

the
4,

the progress of the ancient Mexicans on their first arri-
val in the country, and of the various stations in which
they ettled, before they founded the capital of their
empire in the lake of Mexico. The second, is a Chro-
nological Wheel, or Circle, representing the manner in
which they computed and marked their cycle of fifty-
two years. The former was given to him by Dr. Chris-
toval de Guadalajora, in the city of Los Angeles; the
latter he received from Don Carlos de Siguenza y Gon-
gorra. But as it seems now to be a received opinion
(founded I know not-on what evidence) that Carreri was
never out of Italy, and that his famous Giro del Mundo,
is an account of a fictitious voyage, I have not menti-
oned thef& paintings in the text. They have, however,
manifeffly the appearance of being Mexican productions,
and are allowed to be so by Boturini, who was well qua-
lified to determine whether they were genuine or sup-
pofitious. The style of painting in the former is confi-
derably more perse&, than any other specimen of Mex-
ican design; but as the original is said to have been
much defaced by time, I fufpe& that it has been im-
proved by some touches from the hand of an European
artist. Carreri, Churchil, iv. p. 487. The. chronolo-
gical wheel is a just delineation of the Mexican mode of
computing time, as described by Acofta, lib. vi. c. z.
It seems to resemble one which that learned Jesuit had
seen; and if it be admitted as a genuine monument, it
.proves, that the Mexicans had artificial, or arbitrary
charaters, which represented several things besides num-
bers. Each month is there represented by a symbol ex-
preffive of some work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was disco-

vered by another Italian. In I 736, Lorenzo Boturini
Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led by several
incidents to study te language of the Mexicans, and
to colle& the remaifis of their historical monuments.
He persisted srine years in his refeaches, with the enthu-
fiafm of a prbie&or, and the patience of an antiquary.
In 1746, he published at Madrid, Idea de una Nueva
Hi/oria General de la America Septentrional, containing
an account of the result of his inquiries; and he add-
ed to it a catalogue of his American Hifforical Mu-

feum,

feum, arranged under thirty-fix different heads. His
idea of a New History appears to me the work of a
whimsical credulous man. But his catalogue of Mex.
ican maps, paintings, tribute-rolls, calendars. &c. is
amazing. Unfortunately a ihip, in which he had ent
a considerable part of them to Europe, was taken by
an Erglifh privateer in the war before last; and it is pro-
bable that they perished by falling into the hands of igi
norant captors. Boturini himself incurred the difplea-
sure of the Spanish court, and died in an hospital at
Madrid. The history, of which the Idea, &c. was on-
ly a profpeuns, was never published. The remainder of
his Museum seems to have been dispersed. Some part of
it came into the possession of the present archbishop of
Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and he
published from it that curious tribute-roll which I have
mentioned.

THE only other collecion of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna,
By order of their Imperial Majesties, I have obtained
such a specimen of these as I desired, in eight paintings,
made with such fidelity, that I am informed the co-
pies could hardly be distinguished from the originals.
According to a note in this Codex Mexicanus, it appears
to have been a present from Emmanuel King of Por-
tugal to Pope Clement VII. who died A. D. 5 3 3. As-
ter pasing through the hands of several illustrious pro-
prietors, it fell into those of the cardinal of Saxe-Eife-
nach, who presented it to the emperor Leopold. These
paintings are manifestly Mexican, but they are in a tyle
very different from any of the former. An engraving
has been made of one of them, in order to gratify such
of my readers, as may deem this an obje& worthy of
their attention. Were it an object of sufficient import-
ance, it might be possible, with ome attention, by
recourse to the plates of Purchas, and the archbishop
of Toledo, as a key, to form plausible conjectures
concerning the meaning of this piture. Many of
the figures are manifestly similar. A. A. are targets
and darts, .almost in the fame form with those published
by Purchas, p. 1070, 107I, &c. B. B. are figures of
temples, nearly resembling those which occur in Purchas,
p. I 09 and I I 13, and in Lorenzana, Plate II. C. is a

bale

bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, the figure of which
occurs in almost every plate of Purchas and Lorenzana.
E. E. E. seem to be Mexican captains in their war dress,
the fantastic ornaments of which resemble the figures in
Purchas, p. IIo, III. 1113. I hould suppose this
pi&ure to be a tribute-roll, as their mode of noting
numbers occurs frequently. D. D. D. &c. According
to Boturini, the mode of computation by the number
of knots, was known to the Mexicans as well as to the
Peruvians, p. 85, and the manner in which the number
of units is represented in the Mexican paintings in my
possession, seems to confirm this opinion. They plain-
ly resemble a string of knots on a cord or rope.

NOTE XXVII. p. 145.

T HE first was called, the Prince of the deathful
Lance; the second, the Divider of Men; the third, the
Shedder of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Dark-
House. Acoftal Lib. VI. c. 25.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 151.

T HE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more
holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the most con-
fiderable. But it was nothing more than a mount of
solid earth. According to Torquemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and rose to
the height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 9.

FROM infpecing various figures of Temples, which

occur in the paintings engraved by Purchas, there
seems to be ome reason for fufpe&ing that all their
temples were constru&ed in the fame manner. See
vol. iii. p. I 09, I I I. I 3. '

NOTE XXIX. p. I52.

N OT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in
Mexico itself the houses of the people were mere huts
built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees. They
were extremely low, and flight, and without any furni-
ture but a few earthen vessels. Like the rudest Indians,

several

several families resided under the fame roof, without
having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib.
vii. c. I3. lib. x. c. 22. Dec. iv. lib. iv. c. 17. Tor-
quem. lib» iii. c. 23.

NOTE XXX. p. 52.

I A M informed by a person who resided long in New
Spain, and visited almost every province of it, that there
is not in all the extent of that vast empire, any monu-
ment, or vestige of any building more ancient than the
conquest, nor of any bridge, or highway, except some
remains of the causey from Gaudaloupe to the gate of
Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. MS. penes me.
The author of another account in manuscript observes,
"That at this Day there does not remain even the smallest
vestige of the existence of any ancient Indian building,
public or private, either in Mexico or in any province of
New Spain. I have travelled, fays he, through all the
countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia, New Bis-
cay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New Kingdom
of Leon, and New Santandero, without having obferv-
ed any monument worth notice, except the ruins near an
ancient village in the valley de Casas Grandes, in lat. N.
300. 46. longit, 2580. 24'. from the Island of Tene-
riffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W. from Mexico. He de-
scribes this minutely, and it appears to have been a paltry
building of turf and stone, plaistered over with white
earth or lime. A mifionary informed that gentleman,
that he had discovered the ruins of another settlement
similar to the former, about a hundred leagues towards
N. W. on the banks of St. Pedro. MS. penes me.

THOSE testimonies derive great credit from one cir-

cumftance, that they were not given in support of any
particular system or theory, but as simple answers to
queries which I had proposed. It is probable, however,
that when these gentlemen assert no ruins or monuments
of any ancient work whatever are now to be discovered
in the Mexican Empire, they meant that there were no
such ruins or monuments, as conveyed any idea of grant

deup

deur or magnificence, in the works of its ancient inha
bitants. For it appears from the testimony of several
Spanish authors, that in Otumba, Tlafcala, Cholula,
&c. some vestiges of ancient buildings are still visible.
Villa Segnor Theatro Amer. p. 143. 308. 353. D.
Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, formerly archbishop of Mexico,
and now of Toledo, in his introduction to that edition
of the Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he published
at Mexico, mentions some ruins which are ffill visible in
several of the towns, through which Cortes passed in
his way to the capital, p. 4. &c. But neither of these
authors give any description of them, and they seem to
befo very inconfiderable,as to siew only that some build-
ings had once been there. The large mount of earth at
Cholula, which the Spainiards dignified with the name
of temple, till remains, but without any steps by which
to ascend, or any facing of stone. It appears now like
a natural mount, covered with grass and shrubs, and
possibly it was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iii.
c. 9. I have received a minute description of the re-
mains of a temple near Cuernavaca, on the road from
Mexico to Acapulco. It is composed of large stones,
fitted to each other as nicely as those in the buildings of
the Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the
foundation it forms a square of 25 yards; but as it rites
in height, it diminishes in extent, not gradually, but by
being contraCted suddenly at regular distances, so that it
must have resembled the figure B. in the Plate. It ter.
minated, it is said, in a spire,

NOTE XXXI. p. I57,

THE exaggeration of the Spanish Historians, with
refpe& to the number of human victims sacrificed in
Mexico, appears to be very great. According to Go-
mara, there was no year in which twenty thousand hu-
man victims were not offered to the Mexican Divinities,
and in some years they amounted to fifty thousand.
Cron. c. 229. The skulls of those unhappy persons
were ranged in order in a building erected for that pur-
pose, and two of Cortes's officers who had counted
them, informed Gomara that their number was a hun-

dred

dred and thirty fix thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's
account is still more incredible, that the number of vic-
tims was o great, that five thousand have been sacrificed
in one day, nay on some occasions, no less than twenty
thousand. Dec. iii. lib. ii. c. 6. Torquemado goes
beyond both in extravagance for he aflerts that twenty
thousand children, exclusive of other victims, were
slaughtered annually. Mon. Ind. lib. vii. c. 2. The
most refpeftable authority in favour of such high num-
bers is that of Zumurraga, the first biihop of Mexi-
co, who, in a letter to the chapter general of his order,
A. D. 631, asserts that the Mexicans sacrificed annu-
ally twenty thousand vitims. Davila. Teatro Eccles. 26.
In opposition to all these accounts, B. de las Casas ob-
serves that if there had been such an annual waste of
the human species, the country could never have arriv-
ed at that degree of populousness, for which it was re-
markable when the Spaniards first landed there; and he
positively asserts, that the Mexicans never sacrificed
more than fifty or a hundred persons in a year. See his
dispute with Sepulveda, subjoined to his Breviffima Re-
lacion, p. 0o5. Cortes does not fpecifywhat number
of vi&ims was sacrificed annually, but B. Diaz del Caf-
tillo relates that an inquiry having been made, with re-
fpedt to this, by the Franciscan Monks, who were ent
into New Spain immediately after the conquest, it was
found that about two thousand five hundred were facri-
siced every year in Mexico. c. 207.

NOTE XXXII. p. 58.

IT is hardly necessary to observe, that the Peruvian
Chronology is not only obscure, but repugnant to con-
clufions deduced from the most accurate, and extensive
observations, concerning the time that elapses during
each reign, in any given succession of princes. The
medium has been found not to exceed twenty years.
According to Acofta and Garcilaffo de la Vega, Huana
Capac, who died about the year 527, was the twelfth
Inca. The duration of the Peruvian monarchy ought
not to have been reckoned above two hundred and forty
years; but they affirm that it had subsisted four hundred
years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega, lib. i. c. 9. By
this account, each reign is extended at a medium to

thirty

thirty three years, initead of twenty, the number as-
certained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but so im-
perfet were the Peruvian traditions, that though the
total is boldly marked, the number of years in each
reign is unknown.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 64.

M ANY of the early Spanish writers aert, that the
Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xerez. p. i90. Za-
rate, lib. i. c. . Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But Garci-
lasso de la Vega contends, that though this barbarous
practice prevailed among their uncivilized ancestors, it
was totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human
vi&im was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This
assertion, and the plausible reasons with which he con-
firms it, are sufficient to refute the Spanish writers,
whose accounts seem to be founded entirely upon re-
port, not upon what they themselves had observed,
Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their festivals, the Peru-
vians offered cakes of bread, moistened with blood
drawn from the arms, the eye-brows, and noses of
their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This rite seems to
have been derived from their ancient pratice.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 169,

THE Spaniards have adopted both those customs of
the antient Peruvians. They have preserved some of
the aqueducts or canals, made in the days of the Incas,
and have made new ones, by which they water every
field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom. i. 422,
477. They likewise continue to use guano, or the dung
of sea-fowls as manure. Ulloa gives a description of
the almost incredible quantity of it in the finall islands
near the coast. Ibid. 481.

NOTE XXXV. p. 7.

T HE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at
Callo in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-
Cannar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c. who
infpeced them with great care. M. de Condamine pub-
lifled a curious memoir concerning the ruin of Atun-
Cannar. Mem. de l'Academie de Berlin, A.D. 1746,

P. 435.

p. 435. Acofta describes the ruins of Cuzco, which
he had examined. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaffo in his
usual stile, gives pompous and confused descriptions of
several temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. 21.
lib. vi. c. 4. Don --- Zapata, in a large treatise
concerning Peru, which has not hitherto been published,
communicates ome information with refpet to several
monuments of the ancient Peruvians, which have not
been mentioned by other authors. MS. penes me, Arti-
culo xx. Ulloa describes some of the antient Peruvian
fortifications, which were likewise works of great ex-
tent and solidity. Tom. i. 391. Three circumstances
struck all those observers: the vast size of the stones
which the Peruvians employed in ome of their build-
ings. Acofta measured one, which was thirty feet long,
eighteen broad, and fix in thickness; and yet, he adds,
that in the fortress at Cuzco, there where stones confi-
derably larger. It is difficult to conceive how the Pe-
ruvians could move there, and raise them to the height
even of twelve feet. The second circumstance is, the
imperfection of the Peruvian art, when applied to work-
ing in timber. By the patience and perseverance natural
to Americans, stones may be formed into any hape,
merely by rubbing one against another, or by the use
of hatchets or other instruments made of stone; but
with such rude tools, little progress can be made in
carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beams
together, or give any degree of union, or stability to
any work composed of timber. As they could not
form a centre, they were totally unacquainted with the
use of arches in building, nor can the Spanish authors
conceive how they were able to frame a roof for those
ample ftru&ures which they raised.

THE third circumstance is a striking proof, which

all the monuments of the Peruvians furnish, of their
want of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with
patience no less astonishing. None of the stones em-
ployed in those works were formed into any particu-
lar or uniform shape, that might render them fit
for building. The Indians took them as they fell
from the mountains, or were raised out of the quar-

rie

ries. Some were square, some triangular, ome convex,
some concave. Their art and industry were employed in
joining them together, by forming such hollows in the
one, as perfeely corresponded to the projecions or ri-
sings in the other. This tedious operation which might
have been so easily abridged, by adapting the surface of
the stones to each other, either by rubbing, or by their
hatchets of copper, would be deemed incredible, if it
were not put beyond doubt by infpecing the remains of
those buildings. It gives them a very singular appearance
to an European eye. There is no regular layer or fhta-
tum of building, and no one stone resembles another in
dimensions or form. At the fame time, by the perse-
vering, but ill-dire&ted industry of the Indians, all are
joined with that minute nicety which I have mentioned.
Ulloa made this observation concerning the form of the
stones in the fortress of Atun-Canar. Voy. i. p. 387.
Pineto gives a similar description of the fortress of
Cuzco the most perse& of all the Peruvian works. Za-
pata MS. penes me. According to M. de Condamine
there were regular strata of building in some parts of
Atun-Canar, which he remarks as singular, and proof of
some progress in improvement.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 174.

T HE appearance of those bridges, which bend with
their own weight, wave with the wind, and are confi-
derably agitated by the motion of every person who pas-
fes along them, is very frightful at firit. But the Spa-
niards have found them to be the easiest mode of passing
the torrents of Peru, over which it would be difficult
to throw more solid ftru&ures either of stone or timber.
They form those hanging bridges so strong and broad
that loaded mules pass along them. All the trade of
Cuzco is carried on by means of such a bridge over the
river Apurimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 358. A more simple
contrivance was employed in passing smaller streams: a
baiket, in which the traveller was placed, being sus
pended from a strong rope stretched across the itream,
it was pushed or drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

NOTE

NOTE XXXVII. p. 83.

Ml Y information with refpe& to those events is taken
from Noticia breve de la expedicion militar de Sonora y
Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eftado, en que por
confecuencia de ello, fe han puefto ambas provincias,
publified at Mexico, June 7th, 177i, in order to fa-
tisfy the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnished
the viceroy with money for defraying the expence of the
armament. The copies of this Noticia are very rare in
Madrid; but I have obtained one which has enabled me
to communicate these curious fa&s to the Public. Ac-
cording to this account, there was found in the mine
Yecorato in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two ca-
rats, which weighed sixteen marks four ounces four
ochavas; this was ent to Spain as a present fit for the
king, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. I83.

TH E uncertainty of geographers with refpe& to this
point is remarkable, for Cortes seems to have surveyed
its coasts with great accuracy. The archbishop of To-
ledo has publiihed, from the original, in the poffeflion
of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
map drawn in 1541, by the pilot Domingo Castillo, in
which California is laid down as a peninsula, stretching
out nearly in the fame direction which is now given to
it in the best maps, and the point where Rio Colorado
enters the gulf is marked with precision. Hist. de Nu-
eva Efpagna, 327.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 86.

I Am indebted for this sac to M. L'Abbe Raynal,
tom. iii. 103, and upon consulting an intelligent person,
who having been long fettled on the Mosquito hore,
has been engaged in the logwood trade, I find that in-

genious

genious author has been well informed. The logwood
cut near the town of St. Francis of Campeachy, is of
much better quality than that on the other fide of
Yucatan, and the English trade in the Bay of Honduras is
almoftat an end.

NOTE XL. p. 202.

Pv Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enu-
merated ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexico,
to which he gives the name of the ten plagues. Many
of these are not peculiar to that province. i. The in-
trodu&tion of the small-pox. This disease was first
brought into New Spain in the year 1520, by a ne-
groe slave, who attended Narvaez. Torribio affirms,
that one half of the people, in the provinces visited with
this distemper, died. To this mortality occasioned by
the finall-pox, Torquemada adds the deftruive effets
of two contagious distempers which raged in the years
1545 and I576. In the former 800,000ooo; in the latter,
above two millions perilhed, according to an exa& ac-
count taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i.
642. The small-pox were not introduced into Peru for
several years after the invasion of the Spaniards, but
proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia Origen, p. 88.
2. The numbers who were killed, or died of famine in
their war with the Spaniards, particularly during the
siege of Mexico. 3. The great famine that followed as-
ter the reduCtion of Mexico, as all the people engaged,
either on one fide or other, had negleced the cultivation
of their lands. Something similar to this happened in
all the other countries conquered by the Spaniards.
4. The grievous tasks imposed by the Spaniards upon
the people belonging to their Repartimientos. 5. The
oppressive burden of taxes which they were unable to
pay, and from which they could hope for no exemption.
6. The numbers employed in collecting the gold, carried
down by the torrents from the mountains, who were
forced from their own habitations, without any provi-
sion made for their subsistence, and fubjeted to all the
rigour of cold in those elevated regions. 7. The im-
mense labour of rebuilding Mexico, which Cortes urged

on

on with such precipitate ardour, as destroyed an incre.
dible number of people. 8. The number of people
condemned to servitude, under various pretexts, and
employed in working the silver mines. These, marked
by each proprietor with a hot iron, like his cattle, were
driven in herds to the mountains. The nature of the
labour to which they were fubje&ed there, the noxious
vapours of the mines, the coldness of the climate, and
scarcity of food were so fatal, that Torribio affirms,
the country round several of those mines, particularly
near Guaxago, was covered with dead bodies, the air
corrupted with their stench, and so many vultures, and
other voracious birds, hovered about for their prey, that
the fun was darkened with their flight. i o. The Spani-
ards, in the different expeditions which they undertook,
and by the civil wars which they carried on, destroyed
many of the natives, whom they compelled to serve
them as Tamemes, or carriers of burdens. This last
mode of oppression was particularly ruinous to the Peru-
vians. From the number of Indians who perished in
Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the
east of the Andes, one may form some idea of what
they suffered, and how fast they wafted. Torribio, MS.
Corita in his Breve y Summaria Relacion, illustrates and
confirms several of Torribio's observations, to which
he refers. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLI. p. 202.

EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii
c. 8. But the passion of that great man for system,
sometimes rendered him inattentive to research; and
from his capacity to refine, he was apt in some instances,
to overlook obvious andjuft causes.

NOTE XLII. p. 203.

A Strong proof of this occurs in the testament of
Isabella, where he discovers the moss tender concern for
the humane and mild usage of the Indians. Those lau-
dable sentiments of the queen have been adopted into

the

the public law of Spain, and serve as the introduction
to the regulations contained under the title of the good
treatment of the Indians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE XLIII. p. 205.

IN the seventh Title of the first book of the Recopi-
lacion, which contains the laws concerning the powers and
functions of archbishops and bishops, almost a third
part of them relates to what is incumbent upon them,
as guardians of the Indians, and points out the various
methods in which it is their duty to interpose, in order
to defend them from oppreflion, either with refpet to
their person or property. Not only do the laws com-
mit to them this honourable and humane office, but they
actually exercise it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced

from Spanish authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as
he was not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popish
clergy, to which they were not fully entitled. Survey,
p. 142. 192, &c. Henry Hawks, an Englilh merchant,
who resided five years in New Spain, previous to the
year 1572, gives the fame favourable account of the po-
pish clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V.
not only bishops, but other ecclesiastics, are empowered
to inform and admonish the civil magistrates, if any In-
dian is deprived of his just liberty and rights. Recopi-
lac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley. 4; and thus were constituted
legal protetors of the Indians. Some of the Spanish
ecclesiastics refused to grant absolution to such of their
countrymen as poffefied Encomiendas, and confidered
the Indians as slaves, or employed them in working their
mines. Gonz. Davil. Fiatro. Eccles. i. 157.

VOL. I. Y NOTE

NOTE XLIV. p. 05.

ACCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos con-
tains 4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of
the largest Indian towns in America. P. 104.

NOTE XLV. p. 205.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the
state of population in those kingdoms of Europe where
the police is moit perfect, and where cience has made
the greatest progress. In Spanish America, where know-
ledge is still in its infancy, and few men have leisure to
engage in reearches merely peculative, little attention
has been paid to this curious inquiry. But in the year

741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys and governors of
the several provinces in America, to make an actual fur-
vey of the people under their jurisdiction, and to tranf-
mit a report concerning their number and occupations.
In consequence of this order, the Conde de Fuen-Clara,
viceroy of New Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio de
Villa-Segnor y Sanchez, to execute that commiflion in
New Spain. From the reports of the magistrates in the
several diftrits, as well as from his own observations,
and long acquaintance with most of the provinces, Villa-
Segnor published the reult of his inquiries in his Theatro
Americano. His report, however, is imperfect. Of
the nine dioceses, into which the Mexican empire has
been divided, he has published an account only of five,
viz. the archbishopric of Mexico, the biihoprics of Los
Angeles, MIechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia. The
biihoprics of Yucutan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guati-
mala, are entirely omitted, though the two latter com-
prehend countries, in which the Indian race is more nu-
merous than in any part of New Spain. In his survey
of the extensive diocese of Nova Galicia, the situation
of the different Indian villages is described, but he fpe-
cifies the number of people only in a finall part of it.
The Indians of that vast province, in which the Spanish

dominion

dominion is imperfe&ly eftablilhed, are not regifftered
with the fame accuracy as in other parts of New Spain.
According to Villa Segnor, the atual state of populati-
on in the five dioceses above mentioned is of Spaniards,
negroes, mulattoes, and mestizos, in the dioceses of

Families.

Mexico - 105,202
Los Angeles - - 30,600
Mechoacan - - - 30,840
Oaxaca - - - 7,296
Nova Galicia - - 16,770

I90,708
At the rate of five to a family, the total

number is - - - 953,540

Indian families in the diocese of

Mexico - - 119,511

Los Angeles - -88,240
Mechoacan - - - 36,196
Oaxaca - - - 44,222
Nova Galicia - - 6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number is

1,471,955. We may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken
from the Matricula, or register, according to which
the tribute paid by them is collected. As four dioceses
of nine are totally omitted, and in that of Nova Gali-
cia, the numbers are imperfe&tly recorded, we may con-
clude, that the number of Indians in the Mexican em-
pire exceeds two millions.

THE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. seems

not to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa
Segnor observes in general terms, that several Spani-
ards, negroes, and people of a mixed race, reside there,

Y 2 without

without specifying their number. If, therefore, we
make allowance for these, and all who reside in the four
dioceses omitted, the number of Spaniards, ?id of those
of a mixed race, may probably amount to a million and
a half. In ome places, Villa Segnor distinguishes be-
tween Spaniards and the three inferior races of negroes,
Mulattos, and Mestizos, and marks their numbers fe-
parately. But he generally blends them together. But
from the proportion observable in those places, where
the number of each is marked, as well as from the ac-
count of the state of population in New Spain by other
authors, it is manifest that the number of negroes and
persons of a mixed race far exceeds that of the Spaniards.
Perhaps the latter ought not to be reckoned above
500,000 to a million of the former.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the number
of people in Peru, as might enable me to form any con-
jec're equally satisfying with refpe& to the degree of
its population. I have been informed, that in the year
I 761, the proteCtor of the Indians in the vice-royalty of
Peru computed that 62,780 paid tribute to the king.
As all females, and persons under age, are exempted
from this tax in Peru, the total number of Indians
ought, by that account, to be 2,449,120. MS. penes
me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess concerning the state
of population in New Spain and Peru. According to
an account which I have reason to confider as accurate,
the number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, export-
ed to Peru on each new publication, is I,171,953; to
New Spain 2,649,326. I am informed, that but few
Indians purchase bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to
the Spanish inhabitants, and those of mixed race, so
that the number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed
race, will amount, by this mode of computation, at least
to three millions.

THE

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spanish America, may give us some idea of the extent
of population, and correc the inaccurate, but popular
notion entertained in Great Britain, concerning the
weak and desolate state of their colonies. The city of
Mexico contains at least 50,ooo people. Los Angeles
contains above 60,ooo Spaniards, and people of a mixed
race. Villa Segnor, p. 247. Guadalaxara contains
above 30,0000, exclusive of Indians. Id. ii. 206. Li-
ma contains 54,ooo. D. Cofme, Bueno Defcr. de
Peru, 1764. Carthagena contains 25,000. Potofi
contains 25,000. Bueno, I767. Popayan contains
above 2o,ooo. Ulloa, i. 287. Towns of a second class
are still more numerous. The cities in the most thriv-
ing settlements of other European nations in America
cannot be compared with these.

THESE are such detached accounts of the number of

people in several towns, as I found scattered in authors
whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained
an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in
the province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I
can rely; and I communicate it to the Public, both to
gratify curiosity, and to re&ify the mistaken notion
which I have mentioned. St. Francisco de Quito
contains between o5 and 60,ooo people of all the difer-
ent races. Besides the city, there are in the Corregimi-
ento 29 curacies established in the principal villages, each
of which has smaller hamlets depending upon it. The
inhabitants of these are moffly Indians and Mestizos.
St. Juan de Pasto has between 6 and 8000 inhabitants,
besides 27 dependent villages. St. Miguel de Ibarra
7000 citizens, and ten villages. The diftri& of Havala
between 18 and 20,000 people. The diftri& of Tacunna
between 10 and 12,000. The diftrift of Ambato be-
tween 8 and 1,ooo0, besides 16 depending villages. The
city of Riobamba between 6 and 20,000 inhabitants,
and 9 depending villages. The diftria of Chimbo be-
tween 6 and 8000. The city of Guaquil from 6 to
20,000 inhabitants, and 14 depending villages. The
diftri& of Atuafi between 5 and 6000, and 4 depending
villages. The city of Cuenza between 25 and 30,000

inhabitants,

inhabitants, and g populous depending villages. The
town of Laxa from 8 to 0o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 de-
pending villages. This degree of population though
slender, if we confider the vast extent of the country,
is far beyond what is commonly supposed. I have omit-
ted to mention, in its proper place, that Quito is the on-
ly province in Spanish America, that can be denominated
a manufa&uring country; hats, cotten fluffs, and course
woollen cloths, are made there in such quantities, as to
be sufficient not only for the consumption of the pro-
vince, but to furnish a considerable article for exportati-
on into other parts of Spanish America. I know not
whether the uncommon industry of this province hould
be confidered as the cause or effe& of its populousness.
But among the ostentatious inhabitants of the New
World, the passion for every thing that comes from Eu-
rope is so violent, that I am told the manufactures of
Quito are so much undervalued, as to be on the decline.

NOTE XLVI. p. 2o.

THESE are eflablifhed at the following places. St.
Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in New
Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firme, Santia-
go in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New Galicia, Santa Fe
in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in the coun-
try of Los Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito, St. Jago
de Chili, Buenos Ayres. To each of thele are fubje&ed
several large provinces, and ome so far removed from
the cities where the courts are fixed, that they can de-
rive little benefit from their jurifdiion. The Spanish
writers commonlyreckon up twelve courts of Audience,
but they include that of Manila in the Philippine Islands.

NOTE

NOTE XLVII. p. 216.

AN account of the distance of Peru and Chili from
Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of
such bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama,
the Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to
plant vines and olives. But they are ftri&ly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to Panama, Guatimala, or
any province in such a situation as to receive it from
Spain. Recop. lib. tit. xviii. 1. 15-18.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 217.

T HIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D.
1550, fifty-eight years after the discovery of America.
Hist. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2. But as Benzoni wrote
with the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to detrac
from the Spaniards in every particular, it is possible that
his calculation may be too low.

NOTE XLIX. p. 219.

M Y information with refpet to the division and tranf-
mission of property in the Spanifir colonies is iperfect.
The Spanish authors do not explain this fully, and have
not perhaps attended sufficiently to the effecs of their
own institutions and laws. Solorzano de jure Ind. vol.
ii. lib. ii. 1. 6. explains in ome measure the introducion
of the tenure of Mayorafgo, and mentions some of its
effects. Villa Segnor takes notice of a singular confe-
quence of it. He observes, that in Come of the best situ-
ations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of ground is
unoccupied, or covered only with the ruinsof the houses
once erected upon it; and adds, that as this ground is

held

held by right of Mayorafgo, and cannot be alienated,
that desolation and those ruins become perpetual. The-
atr. Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

NOTE L. p. 220.

T HE RE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices
either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there are
many Cedulas which recommend the conferring places
of trust indiscriminately on the natives of Spain and
America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p. 5, 6.
But notwithstanding such repeated recommendations,
preferment in almost every different line is conferred on
native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is pro-
duced by the author last quoted. From the discovery
of America to the year 1637, three hundred and sixty-
nine bishops, or archbishops, had been appointed to the
different dioceses in that country, and of all that num-
ber only twelve were Creoles, p. 40.

NOTE LI. p. 225.

MJ ODER ATE as this tribute may appear, such is
the extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces of
America, that the exa&ing of it is intolerably oppressive.
Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOTE LII. p. 226.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary me-
rit and services of the first conquerors, as well as the
small revenue arising from the country, previous to the
discovery of the mines of Sacatecas, the encomiendas were
granted for three, and ometimes for four lives. Re.
copil. lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c,

NO T E

NOTE LIII. p. 227.

D. Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in the mines
is not noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, that
many Mestizos and Indians, who do not belong to any
Repartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as miners;
and several of the Indians, when the legal term of their
service expires, continue to work in the mines of choice.
Entreten. p. 265. But his opinion concerning the
wholesomeness of this occupation is contrary to the ex-
perience of all ages; and wherever men are allured by
high wages, they will engage in any species of labour,
however fatiguing or pernicious it may be. D. Hern.
Carillo Altemirano relates a curious fa& incompatible
with this opinion. Wherever mines are wrought, fays
he, the number of Indians decreases; but in the pro-
vinces of Campeachy, where there are no mines, the
number of Indians has increased more than a third since
the conquest of America, though neither the foil nor
climate be so favourable as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert
Colle&. In another memorial presented to Philip III.
in the year 609, Captain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo
asserts, that in every diftrit of Peru, where the Indi-
ans are compelled to labour in the mines, their numbers
were reduced to the half, and in some places to the third
of what it was under the viceroyalty of Don Fran. To-
ledo in 1581. Colb. Colle&.

NOTE LIV. p. 227.

As labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with legal
accuracy, the talks seem to be in a great measure arbitrary,
and like the services exa&ed by feudal superiors, in vi-
nea, prato aut mefle, from their vassals, are extreme-
ly burdensome, and often wantonly oppressive. Pegna
Itiner. par Parochos de Indios.

NOT E

NOTE LV. p. 227.

T HE turn of service known in Peru by the name of
Mita, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it continues
no longer than a week at a time. No person is called
to serve at a greater distance from his habitation than 24
miles. This arrangement is less oppressive to the Indians
than that established in Peru. Memorial of Hern. Ca-
rillo Altamirano. Colbert Collet.

NOTE LVI. p. 229.

T HE strongest proof of this may be deduced from
the laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of
regulations to prevent abutes, we may form an idea
of their number. Though the laws have, wifely, pro-
vided that no Indian hall be obliged to serve in any mine
at a greater distance from his place of residence than
thirty miles; we are informed in a memorial of D.
Hernan Carillo Altamirano presented to the king, that
the Indians of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines
at the distance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and
even two hundred leagues from their habitation. Col-
bert Colle&. Many mines are situated in parts of the
country so barren, and so distant from the ordinary habi-
tations of the Indians, that the necessity of procuring
labourers to work there, has obliged the Spanish mo-
narchs to dispense with their own regulations in several
instances, and to permit the viceroys to compel the peo-
ple of more remote provinces to resort to those mines.
Efcalona Gazophyl. Perub. lib. i. c. 6. But in justice
to them it should be observed, that they have been ftu-
dious to alleviate this oppression as much as possible, by
enjoining the viceroys to employ every method, in order
to induce the Indians to fettle in some part of the coun-
try adjacent to the mines. Id. ibid.

NOTE

NOTE LVII. p. 233.

O R QUE M AD A, after a long enumeration, which
has the appearance of accuracy, concludes the number
of monasteries in New Spain to be four hundred. Mon.
Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of monasteries in the
city of Mexico alone was, in the year 745, fifty-five.
Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons up
forty convents in Lima; and mentioning those for nuns,
he fays, that a small town might be peopled out of
them, the number of persons fliut up there is so great.
Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter to the viceroy of Pe-
ru, A. D. 620, observes that the number of convents
in Lima was so great, that they covered more ground
than all the reft of the city. Solonz. lib. iii. c. 23. n.
57. Lib. iii. c. 6. Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3. The first
monastery in New Spain was founded, A. D. i52S,
four years only after the conquest. Torq. lib. xv. c.
16.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

establishment of the Amerian church in all the Spanilih
settlements was, in the year 649, I patriarch, 6 arch-
biflops, 32 bishops, 346 prebends, 2 abbots, 5 royal
chaplains, 840 convents. Teatro Ecclefiaftico de las Ind.
Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of efuits was
expelled from all the Spanifli dominions, the colleges,
profefedhoufes, and residences, which it possessed in the
province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito sixteen,
in the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru
seventeen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen, in
all a hundred and twelve. Colleccion General de Pro-
videncias hafta acqui tomadas fobre eftranamento, &c.
de la Compagnia, part i. p. I9. The number of, jefui:s,
priests and novices in all these amounted to 2245. MS.
penes me.

IN

IN the year 644, the city of Mexico presented a pe-

tition to the king, praying that no new monastery might
be founded, and that the revenues of those already efta-
blifhed might be circumscribed, otherwise the religious
houses would oon acquire the property of the whole
country. They request likewise, that the bishops might
be laid under reitriotions in conferring holy orders, as
there were at that time in New Spain above fix thousand
clergymen without any living. Id.p. 6. They must
have been enormous abuses indeed, when the fuperftiti-
on of American Spaniards was ihocked, and induced to
remonitrate against them.

NOTE LVIII. p. 236.

TH I S description of the manners of the Spanish clergy,
I should not have ventured to give, upon the testimony of
protestant authors alone, as they may be fufpeted of
prejudice or exageration. Gage, in particular, who had a
better opportunity than any protestant, to view the in-
terior state of Spanish America; describes the corrup-
tion of the church, which he had forsaken, with so
much of the acrimony of a new convert, that I should
have distrusted his evidence, though it communicates
some very curious and striking fadts. But Benzoni men-
tions the profligacy of ecclesiastics in America at a very
early period after their settlement there. Hist. lib. ii. c.
I9, 20. M. Frezier, an intelligent observer, and zealous for
his own religion, paints the dissolute manners of the Spa-
nifh ecclefiiafics in Peru, particularly the regulars, in
stronger colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 5 I. 2 I 5,
&c. M. Gentil confirms this account. Voy. i. 34. Correal
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circum-
stances. Voy. i. 6. 15S. 6i. Ihave good reason to
believe that the manners of the regular clergy, particular-
ly in Peru, are still extremely indecent. Acofta himself
acknowledges that great corruption of manners had
been the consequence of permitting monks to forsake

the

the retirement and discipline of the cloister, and to
mingle again with the world, by undertaking the charge
of the Indian parishes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib.
iv. c. 3, &c. He mentions particularly those vices, of
which I have taken notice, and confiders the temptations
to them as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion of
those who hold, that the regular clergy should not be em-
ployed as parish priests. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates
for the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among the monks of different orders, when
set free from the restraint of monastic discipline; and
from the tone of their defence, one may conclude that
the charge brought against them was not destitute of
truth. In the French colonies, the state of the regu-
lar clergy is nearly the fame as in the Spanish fettle-
ments, and the fame consequences have followed.
M. Biet, superior of the secular priests in Cayenne, in-
quires with no less piety than candour, into the causes
of this corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the ex-
emption of regulars from jurifdition and censures of
their diocesans; to the temptations to which they are
exposed; and to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p.
320. It is remarkable that all the authors, who cen-
sure the licentiousness of the Spanifi regulars with
greatest severity, concur in vindicating the condu of
the Jesuits. Formed under a discipline more perse&
than that of the other monastic orders, or animated
by that concern for the honour of the society, which
takes such full possession of every member, the Jesuits,
both in Mexico and Peru, it is allowed, have maintain-
ed a most irreproachable decency of manners. Fre-
zier, 223. Gentil, i. 34. The fame praise is likewise
due to the bishops and most of the dignified clergy.
Frez. Ibid.

NOTE

NOTE LIX. p. 236.

S OLORZ ANO, after mentioning the corrupt mo-
rals of ome of the regular clergy, with that cautious
reserve, which became a Spanish layman, in touching
on a subjea so delicate; gives his opinion very explicit-
ly, and with much firmness against committing parochial
charges to monks. He produces the testimony of fe-
veral refpe&able authors of his country, both divines
and lawyers, in confirmation of his opinion. De Jure
Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 6. A striking proof of the alarm
excited by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache to
exclude the regulars from parochial cures, is contained
in the Colbert collection of papers. Several memorials
were presented to the king by the procurators for the
monastic orders, and replies were made to these in name
of the secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous,
spirit is manifest on both fides, in the conduct of this
dispute.

NOTE LX. p. 240.

N OT only the native Indians, but the Mejfizos, or
children of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally ex-
cluded from the priesthood, and refused admission into
any religious order. But by a law issued Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip II. required the prelates of America to or-
.dain such mestizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
-hould find to be properly qualified, and to permit
them to take the vows in any monastery where they
had gone through a regular novicate. Recopil. lib. i.
tit. vii. 1. 7. Some regard seems to have been paid to
this law in New Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a
representation of this to Charles II. in the year 697,
he issued a new edit enforcing the observation of it,
and professing his desire to have all his fubjeats, Indians
and mestizos, as well as Spaniards, admitted to the enjoy-
ment of the fame privileges. Such, however, was the

aversion

aversion of the Spaniards in America to the Indians,
and their race, that this seems to have produced little
effed; for, in the year 1725, Philip V. was obliged to
renew the injunction in a more peremptory tone. But
so unsurmountable are the hatred and contempt of the
Indians among the Peruvian Spaniards, that the present
king has been con:trained to enforce the former edits
anew by a law, published September I I, 774. Real
Cedula, MS. penes me.

NOTE LXI. p. 243.

U ZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator,
seems to admit, that the quantity of silver that does
not pay duty may be stated thus high. According to
Herrera, there was not above a third of what was ex-
trated from Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii.
lib. ii. c. I5. Solorzano asserts likewise, that the quan-
tity of silver which is fraudulently circulated, is far great-
er than that which is regularly stamped, after paying the
fifth. De Ind. jure, vol. ii. lib. v. p. 846.

NOTE LXII. p. 246.

W H EN the mines of Potofi were discovered in the
year 545, the veins were so near the surface, that the
ore was easily extrated, and so rich, that it was refined
with little trouble, and at small expence, merely by the
action of fire. This simple mode of refining by fusion
alone continued until the year I574, when the use of
mercury in refining silver, as well as gold, was disco-
vered. Those mines having been wrought without in-
terruption for two centuries, the veins are now funk so
deep, that the expence of extraating the ore is greatly
increased. Besides this, the richness of the ore, con-
trary to what happens in most other mines, has become
less as the vein continued to dip, and has diminilhed to
such a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards
ihould persist in working it. Other rich mines have

been

been fuccefively discovered: but in general the value of
the ores has decreased so much, while the expence of
extracting them has augmented, that the court of Spain,
in the year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king
from afifth to a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Pe-
ru, is extracted from the famous mine of Guanacabe-
lica, discovered in the year 563. The crown has re-
served the property of this mine to itself; and the per-
sons who purchased the quicksilver, paid not only the
price of it, but likewise a fifth, as a duty to the king.
But, in the year 76I, this duty on quicksilver was
abolished, on account of the increase of expence in
working mines. Ulloa, Entretenimientos, xii.-xv.
Voyage, i. p. 505. 523. Any of my readers who are
desirous of being acquainted with the mode in which
the Spaniards conduct thewor king of their mines, and
the refinement of the ore, will find an accurate defcrip-
tion of it by Acofta. Lib. iv. c. I-13.

NOTE LXII. p. 247.

IN consequence of this abolition of thefifth, and some
subsequent abatements of price, which became necef-
fary on account of the increasing expence of working
mines, quicksilver, which was formerly fold at eighty
pesos the quintal, is now delivered by the king at the
rate of sixty pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 132.
Note, The duty on gold is reduced to a twentieth, or five
per cent.

NOTE LXIV. p. 249.

M ANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced
state of industry in Spain, at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. The number of cities in Spain was
considerable, and they were peopled far beyond the pro-
portion that was common in other parts of Europe.
The causes of this I have explained, Hist. of Cha. V. i.
158. Wherever cities are populous, that species of
industry which is peculiar to them increases, artificers
and manufaturers abound. The effet of the American

trade

trade in giving activity to thee is manifest, from a fin-
gular faa. In the year I545, while Spain continued
to depend on its own industry, for the supply of its
colonies, so much work was bespoke from the manu-
facturers, that it was supposed they could hardly finish
it in fix years. Campom. i. 406. Such a demand muff
have put much industry in motion, and have excited
extraordinary efforts. Accordingly, we are informed,
that in the beginning of Philip the II's reign, the city
of Seville alone, where the trade with America centered,
gave employment to no fewer than 6,ooo looms in silk
or woollen work, and that above 3o,ooo000 persons had
occupation in carrying on these manufactures. Cam-
pom. ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious was the ope-
ration of the causes which I shall enumerate, that be-
fore Philip III. ended his reign, the looms in Seville
were reduced to 400. Uztariz, c. 7.

NOTE LXV. p. 256.

No bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of trea-
sure is examined. Both are received on the credit of
the persons to whom they belong; and only one instance
of fraud is recorded, during the long period in which
trade was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-
bello in the year 1654, was found to be adulterated,
and to be mingled with a fifth part of base metal. The
Spanish merchants with their usual integrity, sustained
the whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners, by
whom they were employed. The fraud was detected,
and the treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the author of
it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de Manus.
&c. b. ii. p. 120.

NOTE LXVI. p. 260.

M ANY striking proofs occur of the scarcity of mo-
ney in Spain. Of all the immense fums which have
been imported from America, the amount of which I
shall afterwards have occasion to mention, Moncada as-

VOL. III. Z ferts,

ferts, that there did not remain in Spain, 619, above
two hundred millions of pesos, one half in coined mo-
ney, the other in plate and jewels. Reftaur. de Efpagna,
Disc. iii. c. I. Uztariz, who published his valuable
work in I724, contends, that in money, plate, and
jewels, there did not remain a hundred million. Theor.
&c. c. 3. Campomanes on the authority of a remon-
ftrance from the university of Toledo to Philip III. re-
lates, as a certain proof how scarce cash had become,
that persons who lent money, received a third part of
the fum which they advanced, as interest and premium.
Educ. popul. i. 417.

NOTE LXVII. p. 263.

THE account of the mode in which the facors of
the South Sea Company conducted the trade in the fair
of Porto-bello, which was opened to them by the As-
fiento, I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y Her-
rera, president of the court of Audience in Quito, and
governor of that piovince. Great credit is due to his
testimony, as he was an cye-witnefs to the transactions
which he relates, and often employed in detecting and
authenticating the frauds which he describes. It is pro-
bable, however, that his representation being composed
at the commencement of the war which broke out be-
tween Great Britain and Spain, in the year I739, may,
in rome infrances, be exaggerated. His detail of fasts
is curious; and even Englilh authors confirm it in some
degree, by admitting both that various frauds were
practised in the tranfations of the annual lip, and that
the countraband trade from Jamaica, and other Britifl
colonies, was become enormously great. But for the
credit of the Englifll nation it may be observed, that
those fraudulent operations are not to be confidered as
deeds of the comipany, but as the diihonourable arts of
their facors and agents. The Company itself ftiftained
a considerable loss by the Afiento trade. Many of its
firvants acquired immense fortunes. Anderson. Chro-
no!. deduc. ii. 388.

NOTE

NOTE LXVIII. p, 268,

SEVERAL fats with rfpet to the institution, the
progress, and the eflects, of this company, are curious
and but little known to Englifhl readers. Though the
province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four hun-
dred miles along the coast, and is one of the most fertile
in America; it was so much negleted by the Spaniards,
that during the twenty years prior to the establishment
of the company, only five hips failed from Spain to that
province; and during sixteen years, from 1706 to 1 72^,
not a ingle ship arrived from the Caraccas in Spain.
Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas, p. 28. During
this period Spain must have been supplied almost entirely
with the large quantity of cacao, which it consumes, by
foreigners. Before the eretion of the company, ner-
ther tobacco nor hides were imported from Caraccas in-
to Spain. Id. p. 1 17. But since the commercial ope-
rations of the company began in the year 173 , the im-
portation of cacao into Spain, has increased amazingly.
During thirty years subsequent to 701, the number ps
Fanegas of cacao (each a hundred and ten pounds) im-
ported from Caraccas, was 643,2i5. During eighteen
years subsequent to 1731, the number of Fanegas ii-
ported was 869,247; and if we suppose the importation
to be continued in the fame proportion during the re-
mainder of thirty years, it will amount to 1,448,746
Fanegas, which is an increase of 805,53I Fanegas. Id.
p. I48. During eight years subsequent to 756, there
Las been imported into Spain by the Company, 88,482
arrobas (each twenty-five pound) of tobacco; and hides
to the number of I77,354. Id. I6I. Since the pub-
lication of the Noticias de Compania, in 1765, its trade
seems to be on the increase. During five years fubfe-
quent to 1769, it has imported 179,1I56 Fanegas of
cacao into Spain, 36,208 arrobas of tobacco, 75 469
hides, and 221,432 pesos in specie. Campopmanes,
ji. 62. The last article is a proof of the growing
*wealth of the colony. It receives cash from Mexico
jrn return for the cacao, with which it fuplies that pro-

Z X yIce,

vince, and this it remits to Spain, or lays out in pur-
chafing European goods. But, besides this, the most
explicit evidence is produced, that the .quantity of cacao
raised in the province is double to what it yielded in
I73 I; the number of its live-flock is more than treble,
and its inhabitants much augmented. The revenue of
the bishop, which arises wholly from tythes, has in-
creased from eight to twenty thousand pesos. Notic. p.
69. In consequence of the augmentation of the quan-
tity of cacao imported into Spain, its price has decreaf-
ed from eighty pesos for the fanega to forty. Id. 61.

NOTE LXIX. p. 273.

THIS firif experiment made by Spain of opening a
free trade with any of her colonies, has produced es-
se&ts so remarkable, as to merit some farther illustration.
The towns to which this liberty has been granted, are
Cadiz and Seville, for the province of Andalusia; Ali-
cant and Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barce-
lona, for Catalonia and Arragon; Santander, for Caf-
tile; Corugna, for Galicia; and Gijon, for Asturias.
Append. ii. a la Educ. popul. p. 4. These are either
the ports of chief trade in their reflective districts, or
those most conveniently situated for the exportation of
their refp&tive producions. The following facts give a
view of the increase of trade in the settlements, to
which the new regulations extend. Prior to the allow-
ance of free trade, the duties colleted in the custom-
house at the Havanna, were computed to be I04,208
pesos annually. During the five years preceding 774,
they rose at a medium to 308,000 pesos a year. In Yu-
catan, the duties have risen from 8,ooo to i5,o00. In
Hispaniola from 2,500 to 5,600. In Porto Rico, from
1,200 to 7,000. The total value of goods imported
from Cuba into Spain, was reckoned, in 774, to be
1,500,000 pesos. Educ. Popul. i. 450, &c.

NOTE

NOTE LXX. p.278.

THE two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Cam-
pomanes, Fiscal del real cotfejo y Spremo (an office in
rank and power nearly simiLar to that of Attorney Gene-
ral in England), and director of the Royal Academy of
-History, the one intitled, Difcurfo fobre el Fomento de
la Induftria Popular; the other Difcurfo fobre la Educa-
cion Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the for-
mer publithed in 774, and the latter in 775, afford a
striking proof of this. Almost every point of impor-
tance with refpet to interior police, taxation, agricul-
ture, manufactures, and trade, domestic as well as so-
reign, is examined in the course of these works; and
there are not many authors, even in the nations most
eminent for commercial knowledge, who have carried
on their inquiries with more thorough knowledge of
those various fubjeas, and a more perse& freedom from
vulgar and national prejudices, or who have united
more happily the calm researches of philosophy, with
the ardent zeal of a public spirited citizen. These books
are in high estimation among the Spaniards, and it is a
decisive evidence of the progress of their own ideas, that
they are capable of relishing an author whose sentiments
are so liberal.

NOTE LXXI. p. 282.

THE galeon employed in that trade, instead of the
fix hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop.
lib. xlv. 1. 15. is commonly from twelve hundred to two
thousand tons burden. The ship from Acapulco, taken
by Lord Anson, instead of the 500,000 pesos permitted
by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, beides uncoined
silver equal in value to 43,6I I pesos more. Anson's
Voyage, 384.

NOTE

NOTE LXXI. . 284.

T HE price paid for the bull varies according to the
rank of different persons. Those in the lowest order,
who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or
one iilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and those
in pubiic office, or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals.
Soiorz. de. jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According
to Chilton, an English merchant who resided long in the
Spanish settlements, the bull of Cruzado bore an higher
price in theyear 570, being then fold for four reals at
tie lowest. Hakluyt, iii. 46I. The price seems to
have varied at different periods. That exated for the
bulls issued in the last Predicacion, will appear from the
ensuing table, which will give some idea of the propor-,
tional numbers of the different classes of citizens in New
Spain and Peru.

There were iued for New Spain,
Bulls at Io pesos each - 4

at 2 pesos each - 22,60I
at I peso each - - I64,220
at 2 reals each 2,462,500

2,649,3 25

For Peru,

at 16 pesos, 4 reals each
at 3 pelbs, 3 reals each - 1420n
at i peso, 5- reals - 78,822
at 4 reals - - 410,325
at 3 reals - - 668,6r

1,171,953

NOTE LXXIII. p. 285.

AS Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this
information, was accomptant-general in one of the most
considerable departments of the royal revenue, and by
that means had access to proper information, his tefti-
mony with refpe& to this point merits great credit. No
such accurate detail of the Spanifl revenues in any part
of America, has hitherto been published in the Engliih
language, and the particulars of it may appear curious
and interesting to some of my readers.

FROM the bull of Cruzada, published every two years,

there arises an annual revenue in pesos 50,o000

From the duty on flver - 700,000
From ditto on gold - - 60,ooo
From tax on cards - - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Indians - - 161,ooo

From tax on stamped paper - - 41,000
From ditto on ice - - - I5,522
From ditto on leather - 2.500
From ditto on gunpowder - - 7 1 ^
From tax on salt - - - 3;?,o
From ditto on copper of Mechocan - I,o0o
From ditto on alum - - 650oo
From ditto on Juego de los Gallos - 21,100
From the half of ecclesiastical annats - 49,000
From royal ninth of bishoprics, &c. - 6838oo
From the tribute of Indians - - 65 o,0oo
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods 721,875
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house - 3 7 3 3 3 3
From the mint - - 357,500

3,552,68o

THIS

THIS fuin amounts to 819,1611. Sterling, and if we

add to it the profit accruing from the sale of 5000 quin-
tals of quicksilver, imported from the mines of Alma-
den, in Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues
from the Averia, and ome other taxes which Villa Sig-
nor does not climate, may well be reckoned above a mil-
lion pounds fierlng money. Theat. Mex. vol. i. p. 38,
&c. According to Villa Segnor, the total produce of
the Mexican mines, amounts at a medium to eight mil-
lions of pesos in silver annually, and to 5912 marks of
gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of the revenue have
been explained in the course of the history; ome,
which there was no occasion of mentioning, require a
particular illustration. The right of the tythes in the
New World, is vefied in the crown of Spain, by a bull
of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be
applied in the following manner. One-forth is allotted
to the bishop of the diocese, another fourth to the dean
and chapter, and other officers of the cathedral. The
remaining half is divided into nine equal parts. Two of
these, under the denomination of los dlos Novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and conititute a branch of the roy-
al revenue. The other seven parts are applied to the
maintainance of the parochial clergy, the building and
support of churches, and other pious uses. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley, 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur. In-
die. vol. i. p. 184.

THE Alcavala, is a duty levied by an excise on the

sale of goods. In Spain, it amounts to ten per cent.
In America to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indi-
ana, lib. vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 186.

THE AAlmajorfafgo, or custom paid in America on

goods imported and exported, may amount on an ave-
rage to fifteen per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley.
I. Avendano, vol. i. 188.

THE Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to

guard the hips failing to and from America, was first
imposed when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expedition into the South Sea,

It

It amounts to 2 per cent. on the value of goods. Avin-
dano, vol. i. p. 89. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley, 43, 44.

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the several branches of revenue in Peru, later than
the year 161 4. From a curious manuscript, contain-
ing a state of that vice-royalty in all its departments,
preinted to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran.
Lopez Caravantes, accomptant general in the tribunal
of Lima, it appears, that the public revenue, as nearly
as I can compute the value of the money in which Ca-
ravantes fiates his accounts, that the revenue colle&ed,
amounted in ducats, at 4. i d. to - 2,372,768

Expences of government - 1,242,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in sterling money - . 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this

computation, fluch as the duty on i.amped paper, leather,
ecclesiastical annats, &c. ib that the revenue of Peru
may be well supposed to be equal to that of Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a standard. There
the annual eftablifllment for defraying the charge of ad-
ministration, exceeds one half of the revenue colle&ed,
and there is no reason for supposing it to be less in New
Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount of

the public revenue of Spain from America and the Phi-
lippines, which, as the reader will perceive from the
two last articles, is more recent than any of the for-
mer,

Alcavalas

tk

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas pesos

fuertes (Customs), &c. - - 2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - 3,000,000
Bull of Cruzada - - - ,ooo,ooo0
Tribute of the Indians, - 2,000,000
By sale of quicksilver - - 300,000
Paper exported on the king's account,

and fold in the royal ware-houses - 300,000
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other finall

duties - - - ,000,00o
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one

real de la Plata for each mark - 300,000
From the trade of Acapulco, and the

coasting trade from province to pro-
vince - - - 500,000

Affiento of negroes - - 200,000
From the trade of Mathe, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized by
the Jesuits - - 50000
From other revenues formerly belong-

ing to that order -400,000-

Total 12,000,000

Total in sterling money 2,700oo,0
Deduce half, as the expence of admi-

niftration, and there remains net
free revenue - - - 1,350,000

NOT E LXXIV. p. 285,

AN author, long conversant in commercial fpecula-
tion, has computed that from the mines of New Spain
alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth, the fum
of two millions of our money. Harris Colle&. of Voy.
ii. p. 64. According to this calculation, the total pro-
duce of the mines must be ten millions sterling; a furm

so

so exorbitant, and so little corresponding with all ac-
counts of the annual importation from America, that
the information on which it was founded must evident-
ly be erroneous. According to Campomanes, the total
product of the American mines may be computed at
thirty millions of pesos, which, at four shillings and
fix pence a peso, amounts to 7,425,000l. sterling, the
king's fifth of which (if that were regularly paid)
would be 1,485,000ool. But from this fum the expence
of administration is to be deduced, which is very con-
fiderable as appears from the preceding note. Educ,
Popular, vol. ii. p. 13 . note.

NOTE LXXV. p. 285.

ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign
goods exported from Spain to America pay duties of
various kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per
cent. As most of the goods with which Spain supplies
her colonies are foreign; such a tax upon a trade so ex-
tensive muff yield a considerable revenue. Retablif. de
Manus. & du Commerce d'Efp. p. I5o. He computes
the value of goods exported annually from Spain to
America, to be about two millions and a half sterling,
P. 97.

NOTE LXXVI. p. 287.

THE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by a
monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the Ma-
nila trade as well as in that of Spain, gained annually a
million of ducats. In one year he remitted a million
of ducats to Spain, in order to purchase from the
Conde Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation of
his government, p. 6. He was successful in his suit,
and continued in office from 624 to 1635, double the
usual time.

SHORT

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p.xi.

SHORT ACCOUNT

F
What is contained in the LETTER. sent to

the EMPE ROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

T HIS letter is dated July 6th, 519. Cortes
in his second dispatch takes notice that it was sent
off on the 6th of July.

THE great object of the persons who wrote this

letter, is tojuftify their own character in eablifh-
mng a colony independent on the jurifdidion of
Velasquez. With this view they endeavour to de-
tract from his merit, in fitting out the two for-
mer armaments under Cordova and Giijalva, re-
presenting these as equipped by the adventurers
who engaged in the expedition, not by the go-
vernor. They labour like ife to depreciate the
services of Cordova and Grijalva, in order to ex-
alt the merit of their own exploits.

THEY contend, that the sole object of Velaf-

quez was to trade or barter with the natives, not
to attempt the conqueit of New Spain, or the
establishment of a colony there. This is fre-
quently mentioned by B. Diaz del Castillo, c; 9g.
41, 42, &c. But if Velasquez had not conquest
and fet.lement in view, there seems to have been
no reason for equipping such a considerable arma-
ment.

THEY

THEY assert, that Cortes defrayed the greatest

part of the expence of fitting out the armament.
But this does not agree with the account of his
slender fortune given by Gomara, Cron. c. 7. and
B. Diaz, c. 2o, or what I have mentioned Note
lxxi. vol. ii.

THEY take notice, that though considerable

numbers were wounded in their different encoun-
ters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them
died, and all recovered in a short time. This
seems to confirm what I have observed vol. ii. p.

I I, concerning the imperfection of the offensive
weapons of the Americans.

THEY give ome account of the manners and

ftitutions of the Mexicans. It is very short, and
as they had resided but a short time in the country,
and had but little intercourse with the natives, it
is both defective and inaccurate. They describe
minutely, and with great horror, the human fa-
crifices offered by the Mexicans to their deities,
and affirm that some of their number were eye-
witnesses of those barbarous rites.

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue and

description of the presents ent to the emperor.
That published by Gomara, Cron. c. 29. seems to
have been copied from it, and Pet. Martyr de-
scribes many of the articles in his treatise De In-
fulisnuper inventis, p. 354, &c.

A CA T A-

# A CATALOGUE OF Spanish Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

0 p
Spaniih Books and Manuscripts.

A
A CARETE de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la

Riviere de la Plata, & dela par Terre au Perou.
Exftat. Recueil de Thevenot, Part IV.

....._- A Voyage up the River de la Plata,
and thence by Land to Peru, 8vo. London, 1698.

Acola (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturelle & Moral des Indes
tant Orientales qu' Occidentales, 8vo. Paris, 1600.

---Novi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis.
Exft. in Colle&. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

De Natura N6vi Orbis, Libri duo, & de
procuranda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salmant. 8vo. 1589.

-..- (Chriftov.) Tratado de las Drogas y

Medecinas de las Indias Occidentales, con sus Plantas Di-
buxadas al vivo, 4to. Burgos, 15 78.

Acugna (P. Christoph.) Relation de la Riviere des Ama-
zones, Izmo. Tom. ii. Paris, 1682.

_ ___- A Relation of the great River of the ,Amazons
in South America, 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprere il Regno di di
fette Citti. Ramufio, III. 363.

Albuquerque Coello (Duarte de) Memorial de Artes de
la Guerra del Brasil, 4to. Mad. I634. Alcaarad

Alcas'arado

Alcafarado (Franc.) An Historical Relation of the Dif-
covery of the Isle of Madera, 4to. Lond. 675.

Al1cdo y Herrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiftorico-

Politico-Geografico, con las Noticias mas particulares, del
Peru, Tierra Firme, Chili, y nuevo Reyno de Granada,
4to. Mad. 1740.

--- Compendio Hiftorico de la Provincia y Puerto
de Guayaquil, 4to. Mad. 1741.

Aldama y Guevara (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Arte de la
Lengua Mexicana, 12mo. Mexico, 754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) Dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes

Referiendole sus Expediciones y Conquiftas en varias Pro-
vincias de N. Efpagna. Exft. Barcia Hiftoriad. Primit.
tom. i.

---- Lettre due, &c. Exft. Ramus. III. 296.

Aranzeles Reales de los Miniftros de la Real Audiencia
de N. Efpagna, fol. Mexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las
Iflas Malucas, fol. Mad. 609.

--- Anales de Aragon, fol. Saragofs, 630.
Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria
del Peru, 4to. Lima, 1 62 1.

Avendagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus ceu generalis In-

ftrucor pro Regimine Confcientie, in is ifquse ad Indias
fpedant, fol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 1660.

B

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hiftoriadores Primitivos de
las Indias Occidentales, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centinera (D. Martin di) Argentina y Conquifta
del Rio de la Plata Poema. Exft. Barcia Hist. Primit. III.

Barros (Joao de) Decadas de Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lifboa,
1628.

Bellefleros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, fol.
2 vols. Lima, 1685.

Benzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hiftoria:-De Bry Ame-
rica, Part IV, V, VI.

Betancurt y Figueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las Igle-
fias Metro Politanas de las Indias, 4to. Mad. I637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Conversion de Piritu de Indios
Cumanagotos y otros, 2mo. Mad. 169o.

Boturini Benaduci (Lorenzo) Idea de una nueva Hifto-

rica general de la America Septentrional, fundada fobre
material copiofa de Figuras, Symbolas Caraderes, Cantares
y Manufcritos de Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botello

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (D. Francisco de) El
Nuevo Mundo Poema Heroyco, 4to. Barcelona, 1701.

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provin-
cias, Reynos, y Ciudades del Mundo, 4to. Girona, 1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Geographiae Veteris & Novr,
4to. Paris, I648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar Nugnez) Relacion de los Naufra-
gios. Exif. Barcia Hist. Prim. Tom. i.

-------- Examen Apologetico de la Hiftorica
Narration de los Naufragios. Exft. ibid.

---- --- Commentarios de lo fuccedido duarante
fu gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exft. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exft. Ramufio, III. 3I0.
Cabota (Sebaft.) Navigazione de. Exft. Ramus II. 211.
Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del Or-
der de San Auguftin en el Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638

California-Diario Hiftorico de los Viages de Mar y

Tierra hechos en 1768, al Norte de California di orden del
Marques de Croix Vi-rey de Nueva Efpagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo que

a fu Mageftad Provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to.
I645.

Caracas-Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Compag-
nia Guipufcoana de Caracas, 2mo. Mad. 1765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias

que tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe
Provien, y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageftad, lo que
fe Gafta de ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dedicado al
Marques de Santos Claros, Agno. de 6I . MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfayo Cronologico para la
Hiftoria general de la Florida, fol. Mad. I733.

Caro de Torres (Franc.) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Milita-
res de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcantara, fol. Mad. 1629.

Carranzana (D. Gongales) A Geographical Description

of the Coasts, &c. of the Spanish -Weft-Indies, 8vo. Lond.
1740.

Casas (Bart. de las) Breviffima Relacion de la Deftruy-
cion de las Indias, 4to. 1 552.

-- Narratio Iconibus Illuftrata per Theod. de Bry,
4to. Oppent. 1614.

---Bart. de las) AnAccount of the firftVoyages and
Discoveries of the Spaniards in America, vo. Lond. 693.

VOL. 111. A a Calfani

Caflani (P. Joseph) Hiftoria de la Provincia de Compag-
nia de Jesus del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Mad. 1741.

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do Defcobrimento

& Conquifta de India pelos Portugueses, fol. 2 vol. Lifboa,
1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera parte de las Elegias de
Varones Illuftres de Indias, 4to Mad. 1589.

Castillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hiftoria Verdadera de la Con-
quifta de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1632.

Cavallero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de

las pefas y Medidas di varias Naciones, reducidas a las que
Corren en Castilla, 4to. Mad. 1731.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Chronica del Peru, fol. Sevill.
1553.

Cifneros (Diego) Sitio, Naturaleza y Propriedades de la
Ciudad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 6I8. /

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria de Yucatan,
fol. Mad. 688.

Collecao dos Brives Pontificos e Leyes Regias que forao

Expedidos y Publicadas defde o Anno 1741, fobre a la Li.
berdada des Pelfoas bene e Commercio dos Indos de Brefil.

Coleccion General de las Providencias hafta aqui tomadas

per el Gobierno fobre el Eftragnimento, y Occupacion de
Temporalidades de los Regulares de la Compagnia, de Es-
pagna, Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirante, D.
Chriftoval Colon. Exit. Barcia Hist. Prim. I. .

Columbus (Christ.) Navigatio qua multas Regiones hac-
tenus incognitas invenit. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynaei, p. 90.

-- - (Ferd.) Life and Ations of his Father Ad-

miral Christopher Columbus. Exft. Churchill's Voyages,
II. 479.

Co:-cilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebrados en

!. muy Noble y muy leal Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos de
1555 & 1565. fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium celebratum
Mexici, Anno 585, fol. Mexici. 1770.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los

Segnores, manera y Differencia de ellos, que havia en la
Nueva Efpagna, y otras Provincias sus Comarcanas, y de
sus Leyes, Ufos y Coftumbres, y de la Forma que tenian en
Tributas sus Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gentilidad, &c. MS.
4to. pp. 307.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Lettere

del Viaggio fatto del Fra. Marco da Nizza al fette Citt de
Cevola. Exft. Ramuflo II. 354.

---- Relation del Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ra-
mufio III. 359.

Cortes

Cortes (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperador
Carlos V. en que ha Relacion de sus Conquiftas en la Nueva
Efpagna. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. i.

Cortefii (Ferd.) De infulis nuper inventis Narrationes ad
Carolum V. fol. 1532.

Cortefe (Fern.) Relationi, &c. Exft. Ramuflo III. 225.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte del
Mundo Zaragoff. 4to. i688.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hifloria de la Fundacion y
Difcurfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufs.
1625.

...-. (Gil. Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaftico de la
Primitiva Iglefia de las Indias Occidentales, fol. 2 vols. 1649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regulares
de la Compagnia fufcitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas
Obifpo de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. r768.

E

Echavari (D. Bernardo bagnez de) El. Reyno Jefuitico
del Paraguay. Exft. tom. iv. Coleccion de Documentos, 4to.
Mad. 1770.

Echave y Affu (D. Francisco de) La Eftrella de Lima
convertida en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes, 688.

Eguiara el Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicana,
five Eruditorum Hiftoria Virorum in America Boreali na-
torum, &c. tom. Prim. fol. Mex. I755. N. B. No more
than one volume of this work has been published.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana Poema
Eroico, fol. Mad. I733.

Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium Peru-
Vicum, fol. Mad. 1775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hitoria del Reyno de Portu
gal, fol. Amber. 1730.

-- - -- History of Portugal from the first Ages to
the Revolution under John IV. 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Hiftoria del Peru, fol. Sevill. 571.
------ (P. Juan Patr.) Relacion Hiftorial de las
Missiones de los Indios que Claman Chiquitos, 40o. Mad. 1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Difcur-
so V1. del tom. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

- --Solucion del gran Problema Hiftorico, fobre

la Poblacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del tom. v. del
Teatro Critico.

-- - (D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de la ciudad
Y Provincia de Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

A a 2 Freyre

Frevre (Ant.) Piratas de la America, 4to.
Fraf.o (D. Petro) De Regio Patronatu Indiarum, fol.
2 vols. Matriti, 1775.

G

Galvao (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos anti-
gos y Modernos, fol. Lifboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the
first Original unto the Year 1555. O(borne's Collet. II. 354.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hiftoria Ecclefiaftica y Seglar de la

India Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacion de la Santa
Evangelia en ella, 2mo. Baeca, 626.

--- (Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo
Mundo, fol. Mad. 1729.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata del

Defcubrimiento de diverfas Ciudades, y Provincias y Guer-
ras que tuio con los Indios. ExIt. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

---- Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 300.

Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hiftoria general de las In-
dias, 2mo. Any. 1554.

---- Hlifloria general de las Indias. Exft. Barcia
Hist. Prim tom. ii.

---- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna 6 Conquifta
de Mexico. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

Gumill-t (P. Jos.) Hifloire Naturelle, Civile & Geogra-

phique de l'Orenoque.Traduite par M. Eidous, I2mo. tom.
iii. Avign. 1758.

Gufinan (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Provin-

cia de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell 530. Exlt.
Ramufio III. 331.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides belli Guaranici, ab
Anno 754. Exft. Collecion general de Docum. tom: iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Plantarum, Animaliul & Minerali-
um Mexicanorum Hilloria, fol. Rom. 1651.

Herrcra (Anton. de) Hiltoria general de los Hechos de

los Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tierra Firma del Mar Oceano,
fol. 4 vols. Mad. 160I.

--- Hiftoria General, &c. 4 vols. Mad. 730.

General History, &c. Tranfiated by Stephens,
Sv. 6 v. Lond. 1740.

Defcriptio India Occidentalis, fol. Amft. 1622.

L

, on (Ft. P.,iz. d) -Iernandia Poema Heroyco de
C:ci}uiit; d Meixico, 4.o. NIaci. I755.

---- (ACt. de) Epikome de la Bibliotheca Oriental
y Uccidenzrali lautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. 1737.

Lima,

Lima, A true Account of the Earthquake which hap-

pened there 28th OEtober 1746. Translated from the Spa-
nifh, 8vo. Lond. 748.

Lima Gozofa, Description de las feftibas Demonftracio-

nes, con que efta ciudad Celebro la real Proclamacion de
el Nombre Augufto del Catolico Monarcho D. Carlos III.
Lima, 4to. 7 60.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tcmo I.

de las Memorias Hiftorico-Phyficas, Critico-Apologeticas
de la America Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz. 759.

Lopez (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America Sep-
tentrional y Meridional, izmo. Par. 758.

Lorenzana (D. Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria de Nueva Efpagna,

efcrita por fu Efclarecido Conquistador Hernan Cortes,
Aumentada con otros Documentos y Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Description Chorographica, del

Terretorios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, y de
los ritos y Coftumbres, de las innumerabiles Naciones que
la Habitan, 4to. Cordov. 1733.

----- Hiftoria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la
Provincia del Paraguay, fol. vols. Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Description de la Gouvernment du

Perou. Exft. Voyages qui ont fervi a l'etabliffement de la
comp. des Indes, tom. ix. o05.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfermedades de
la Compagnia de Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de la Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las Hifto-

rias de los Defcubrimientos, Conquiftas y Guerras dc Ia
India Oriental, y sus Iflas, defde los Tiempos del Infante
pon Enrique de Portugal fu inventor, 4to. Mad. I68I.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rebus Oceanicis & Novo
Orbe Decades tres, I2mo. Colon. 1574.

- --- De Infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus
Incolarum. Ibid. p. 329.

------ Opus Epiftolarum, fol. Anlt. I670.

-- ---- II Sommario cavato della fua Hiftoria del
Nuevo Mundo. Ramufio III. i.

Mechu.:can-Relacion de las Ceremonias, Ritos y Pob-

lacion de los Indios de Mechuacan-hecha al I. S. D. -nt.
de Mendoza Virrey de Nueva Elagna, fol. MS.

Melendez (Fr. Juan) Teforos Vcrdadcros de las ndLas

Hiftoria de la Provincia de S. Juan Baptifla del Peru, del
Orden de Predicadores, fol. 3 vols.

Mendoza

Mendoza (D. Ant. de) Lettera al Imperatore del Disco.

primento della Terra Firma della N. Spagna verso Tra-
monLano. Exft. Ramufio III. 355.

----- (Juan Gonz. de) Hifloria del gran Reyno

de China con un ltinerario del Nuevo Mundo, 8vo. Rom.
I585.

Monardes (El Dottor) Primera y Segunda y Tercera

Parte de la Hiftoria Medicinal, de las Cosas que fe traen
de nueftras Indias Occidentales, que firven en Medeci.na,
4to. Sevilla 574.

Moncada (Sancho de) Reftauracion Politica de Efpag.
na y deifos Publicos, 4to. Mad. I746.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fatta per Ter-

ra al Cevole, Regno di cette Citta. Exft. Ramus. III.
356.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes

Barth. y Gornz. de Nodal al defcubrimiento del Eftrecho
que hoy es nombrado de Maire, y reconocimiento del de
Magellanes, 4to. Mad

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Es-

pagna dibidida en tres Partes. En la primera trata de los
Ritos, Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad.
En la fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y
modo de celebrar las Fiestas de Nueftra Santa Iglefia. En
la tercera del Genio y Caraacer de aqueUa Gente; y Figu-
ras con que notaban sus Acontecimientos, con otras par-
ticularidades; y Noticias de las principales Ciudades en
aquel Reyno. Efcrita en el Agno 154I por uno de .los
doce Religiofos Franciscos que primero Paffaron a enten-
der en fu Conversion, MS. fol. pp. 618.

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, Izmo. Mad.
1605.

Ordenanzas del Confejoreal de las Indias, fol. Mad. I68I.
Ortega (D. Cafimiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del primer
Viage hecho al rededor del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1769.

Offorio (Jerome) History of the Portuguese, during the
Reign of Emmanuel, 8vo. z vols. Lond. 1752.

Olforius (Hieron.) De Rebus Emmanuelis Lufitanix Re-
gis, 8vo. Col. Agr. 1572.

Ovalle (Alonfo) Hilforica Relacion del Reyno de Chili,
fol. Rom. 646.

- An HitPorical Relation of the Kingdom
of Chili. Exft. Churchill Colle&. III. i.

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiftoria la Conquifta y Pub-
lacion de Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Ovied

Oviedo (Alonfo) Sommaria, &c. Exft. Ramufio III.
44-

Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la Hifto-
ria Natural de las Indias. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

Oviedo Hiftoria Generale & Naturale Dell Indie Occi-
dentale. Exft. Ramufio. III. 74.

-- ----- Relatione della Navigatione per la Gran-
diffima Fiume Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. III.415.

P

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o Natu-
raliza y Coftumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

.---- Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox Eve-
que de l'Angelopolis, Izmo. Cologe, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades
de las Iflas de Gran. Canaria, 4to. Mad. 676.

Pegna Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para

Parochos de Indios, en que tratan las materias mas parti-
rulares, tocantes a ellos para fu buen adminiftracion, 4to.
Amberes, 754.

Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Con-
quifta del Peru Poema Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de El Apoftol de las Indi-

y nueves gentes San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia de
Jesus Epitome de sus Apoftolicos hechos, 4to. Pamp. 1665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annaes Hiftoricos do efta-
do do Maranchao, fol. Lifboa, I749.

Peru- Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Defco-
primento y Conquifta del Peru. Exft. Ramus. III. 37I.

Peru-Relatione d'un Secretario de Franc. Pizarro della
Conquefta del Peru. Exft. Camuflo III. 392.

---- - Relacion del Peru, MS.

Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme

Mugnos, &c. por haverlos Commerciado illicitamente en
tiempo de Guerra, fol. 755.

Philipinas-Carta que escribe un Religiofo antiguo de

Philipinas, a un Amigo fuyo en Efpagna, que le pregunta
el Naturel y Genio de los Indios Naturales de Eftas Iflas.
MS. 4to.

Piedrahita (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Con-
quiftas del Nuevo Reyno de Granada. fol. Ambres.

Pinelo (Ant. de Leon) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Orien-

tal y Occidental en que fe contienen los Efcritores, de las
Indias Orientales y Occidentales. fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1737.

Pinzonius

Pinzonius focius Admirpntis Columbi - Navigatio &
res per um reparte. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynei, p. II9.

Pizzaro y Orellana [D. Fern.] Varones illuftres del N.
Mundo, fol. Mad. 1639.

Puente [D. Jos Martinez de la] Compendio de las His-

torias de los Dcscubrimientos de la India Oriental y sus
Iflas, 4to. Mad 681.

Quir [Ferd. de] Terra Australis Incognita,, or a New

Southern Discovery, containing a fifth Part of the World
lately found out, 4to. Lond. 617.

R

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias his-

toriales Practicas, de los Succeffos y Adelantemientos de
efta Compagnia defde fu Fundacion en 1728, hafta 1764,
4to. 1765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indas, fol.
4 vols, Mad. 1756.

Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe del-

la gran Citta Temlilatan, Mexico, & elle altre cofe della
Nova Spagna. Exfr. Ramul. II. 404.

Remefal [Fr. Ant.] Hilloria general de las Indias Oc-

cidentales y particular de la Governacion de Chiapa y
Guatimala, fol. Mad. 620.

Ribadeneyra [D. Diego Portichuelo de] Relacion del

Viage defde que ialio de Lima hafta, que Ilego a Efpagna,
4to. Mad. 657.

Ribandeneyra y Barrientos [D. Ant. Joach.] Manuel

Compendio de el Regio Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad.
1755-

Ribas [Andr. Perez de] Hiftoria de los Triumphos de

Nueftra Sta Fe, entre Gentes las mas Barbaras, en las
mifiones de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad 645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Representation a Philipe V. fobre el

eftado actual de los Papeles univeriales de la Monarchia,
MS.

Rocha Pitta (Sebaftiano de) Hilloria da America Por-

tougueza des de o Anno de I5oo de fu Defcobrimento
ate o de 1724, fol. Lifboa, 1730.

Rodriguez (Manucl) Explication de la Bulla de la
fanta Crtuzada, 4to. Alcala, 1589.

- P. iMan.) El Maragnon y 'Amazonas, Hiftoria

de los Defcubrimentos, Entradas y Reducion de Nacioncs
fol. Mid. 1684.

Roman (Hireon.) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols.
Mi:d. 1525.

l'Ro'cende P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palafox
Arzobilpo de Mexico, fol. Mad. 671.

Ruiz

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual hecha por os Reli-

giofos de la Compagnia de Jesus, en las Provincias de la
Paraguay Uraguay, Parana y Tape, 4t0. Mad. 1639.

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro') Monarquia de
Efpagna, tom. i, iii, fol. Mad. I770.

Salazar y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoira de la Conquifta
de Mexico-Segunda parte-No place nor year.

Salazar y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conftituciones y

Ordenanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real
Univerfidad y eftudio general de San Marcos de la Ciu-
dad le los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de los Reyes,
'735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur l'Origine de la

Maladie Venerienne, dans laquelle un prouve qu'elle n'a
point et6 portee de 1'Amerique, I2mo. Paris, 1765.

Sarmiento de Gamboa (Pedro de) Viage al Eftrecho de
Magellanes, 4to. Mad. I761.

Santa' Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto yen Com-
panais General, 2mo. Mad. 1732.

Schemidel (Hulderico) Hiftoria y Defcubrimiento del Rio
de la Plata y Paraguay. Ext. Barcia His. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara da Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique &

Analytique de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe dite
de Jesus, depuis son entree dans ce Royaume en 1540
jufqu'a son Expulsion en I759, I2m. 3 vols. Li . I769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de jultis belli caufis pra-
fertim in Indos Novi Orbis. MS.

Sexyas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval Hydrogra-
lico, 4to. 1648.

--- Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotero de la Re-

gion Austral Magellanica, 4to. Mad. i69o.
' Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiltorialcs de las Conquiftas de
Tierra Firme en las IndiasVOccidentales, fol. Cuenca, 1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hilloria de las Conquiftas de Mexi-
co, fol. Mad. 684.

History of the Conqucif of Mexico.-Tranflated
by Townsend, fol. 1724.

Solorzano Pereirra (Joan.) Politica Indiana.
--- De Indiarumjure five de jufta Indiarum Oc-
cidentalium Gubernatione, fol. 2 vols. Lugd. I672.

- - De Indiarum Jure, Matriti, z vols. fol.
1620.

Suarez de Figueroa (Chriftov.) Hechos de D. Garcia
Hurtado de Mendoza 4to. Mad. 1613.

Tarragones

T

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofmogra.
phia, 4to. Milan, 556.

Techo (F. Nichol. de) The Hifiory of the Provinces of

Paraguay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exft. Churchill's
Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols.
Mad. 1723.

Torres (Sim. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exft. Barcia
Hist. Prim. III.

---- (Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Mi-

litares de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcantara, defde fu
Fundacion halla el Rey D. Felipe II. Adminiftador
pcrnetuo dii;as, fol. Mad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hiftoria Natural
Efagna la ful. Mad I 754.

----_- Dilfertcaion Hiftorico Politica y en much a
parze Geograiica de las Iflas Philipinas, 12mo. Mad. 1753.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de l'Amerique
Mridionale, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, I752.

---N- Noticias Americanas, Entretenimentos Phyfl-

cos-Hiftoricos, fobre la America Meridional y la Septen-
trional Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

- (Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire l'Ifole delle

Speciere fino al Mare detto Vermejo nel I539. Exft.
Ramu'. III. 339.

---- - (D. Bernado) Retabliffement des Manufactures
& du Commerce d'Efpagne, I2111. Amft. 1753.

Utariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y Pradtica de Commercio
& de Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

The Theory and Practice of Commerce, and
Maratime Affairs, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Venegas (Miguel) A Natural and Civil History of Ca-
lifornia, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. I759.

Varages (D. Thom. Tamaio de) Reftauracion de la Ciu-

dad del Salavador y Baia de Todos Santos en la
Provincia del Brasil, 4to. Mad. I628.

Vargas Machuca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Defcripcion
de las Indias, 4to. Mad. g699.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire des Guerres

Civiles des EfIpagnoles dans les Indes, par Boudouin, 4to.
t.,n. Pa-is, 1648.

Vega

Vega (Garcilaffode la) Hiftoire de la Conquete de la
Floride. Traduite, par Richelet, i2mo. 2 tom. Leyd. 1731.

---- Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol.
Lond. 1688.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanish Rule of Trade to the
Weft Indies, 8vo. Lond. 1702.

Norte de la Contratacion de las Indias Occiden-
tales, fol. Sevill. 1672.

Verazzano (Giov.) Relatione delle Terra per lui Sco-
perta nel 1524. Exft. Ramufio III. p. 420.

Viage de Efpagna, i2mo. 6 tom. Mad. I776.
Vi&oria (Fran.) Relationes Theologice de Indis & de
jure belli contra eos, 4to. Mad. I765.

Viera y Clavijo (D. Jos) Noticias de la Hiftoria gene-
ral de las Iflas de Canaria, 4to. 2 tom. Mad. 1772.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hiftoria de Nuevo Mexico Poema,
i2mo. Alcala, 61o.

Villa Segnor y Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant.) Theatro Ame-

ricano. Description general de los Reynos y Provincias
de la Nueva Efpagna, fol. 2 tom. Mex. 1746.

X

Xerez (Franc. de, Verdadera Relacion de la Conquifia

del Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, Embiada al Emperador
Carlos V. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. III.

-- - Relatione, &c. &c. Ext. Ramuifo III. 372.

z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hiftoria del Defcubrimientoy Conquifta
de la Provincia del Peru. Exft. BarciaHift. Prim. tom. II.

- Hiftoire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete du
Perou, I2mo. 2 tom. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augnon (D. Miguel. de) Reprefentacion al
Rey N. Segnor D. Philipe V. dirigida al mas feguro Au-
mento del Real Erario. No place, 1732.

Zevallos (D. Pedro Ordognez de) Hiftoria y Viage del
Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1691.

INDEX

# INDEX.

IN D E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume, and the Si-

gures to the Page.

A treatment of the Indians of Hifpanio-

TIA1 ^ebi la, i. 214.
iABYSSINIA, an embassy sent to Alcavala, in the Spanish culoms, the

that country by John I. King of term explained, iii. 343.

Portugal, i. 55. Alexander the Great, his political cha-
Acapulco, the nature of the trade carried rater, i. 14. Hismotive in founding

on from thence to Manila, iii. 28I. the city of Alexandria, 5. His dif-
Amount of the treasure on board the coveries in India, 16.
ship, taken by Lord Anson, 341. Alexander, VI. Pope, grants to Ferdi-
Acofla, his method of accounting for the nand and Isabella o Callile, the right

different degrees of heat, in the old of all their weflern discoveries, i. 3.
and new continents, ii. 323. Sends miflionaries with Columbus on
Adair, his account of the revengeful his second voyage, 14.

temper of the native Americans, ii. Almagro, Diego de, his birth and cha-
351. rafer, iii. 3. Associates with Pizar-
Adanfon, his jutlification o Hanno's ac- ro and de Luque, in a voyage of dif-

count of the African seas, i. 251. covery, 4. His unsuccessful attempts,
Africa, the western coall of, first ex- 5. Is negleted by Pizarro in his Spa-

plored by order of John I. King of nilh negociation, 13. Is reconciled to
Portugal, i. 40. Is dilcovered from him, 14. Brings reinforcements to
Cape Non, to Bojador, 42. Cape Pizarro at Peru, 32 Beginning of
Bojador doubled, 46. The countries dissensions between him and Pizarro,
southward of the River Senegal disco- 46. Invades Chi'i, 49. Is created go-
vered, 52. Cape of Good Hope seen vernor of Chili, and marches to Cuf-
by Bartholomew Diaz, 55. Causes co, 53. Seizes Culco out of the hands
of the extreme heat of the climate of Pizarro, 55. Defeats Alvaraio,
there, ii. 8. Ignorance of the ancient and takes himprifoner, ibid. Is de-
astronomers concerning, i. 251. ceived by the artful negociations of
Agriculture, the state of, among the na- Francis Pizarro, 57. Is defeated by

tive Americans, ii. 82. Two princi- thePizarros, 6n. Is taken prisoner, 6.
pal causes of the defe&s of, 86. Is tried and condemned, 6z. Is put to
Aguada, is sent to Hispaniola, as acorn- deah, 63.

missioner to infpet theconduCt of Co- Aliagro, the son, affords refuge to his
lumbus, i. 130. father's followers at Lima, iii. 7. His
Aguilar, Jeiotn de, is relieved from a charaet.r, ibid. Heads a conspiracy a-

long captivity among the Indians at gainfl Fraicis Pizarro, 72. Pizarro
Cozumel,by Fernando Cortes, ii. 182. assassinated, 73. Is acknowledged as
Albuquerque, Rodrigo, his barbarous his

his fuccefr, 74. His precarious cumflances, 42. The venerealdif-
situation, 7. Is defeated by Va- ease derived from this part of the
ca de Caltro, 77. Is betrayed and ex- world, 6r. Why so thinly inhabited,
ecuted, 78. 9i. The country depopulated by con-
Almajsrifajgr, in the Spanish American tinual wars, 2o. Cause of the ex-

culloms, the amount of, iii. 344. tremecoldnels toward the southern ex-
Alvarado, Alonzo, is ent from Lima,'by tremity of, 326. The natural uncul-

Francis Pizarro, with a body of Spa- tivated state of the country described,
niards to relieve his brothers at Cusco, 327. Bones of large extinct species
iii. 56. Is taken pritbner by Alma- of animals discovered under ground
gro, 56. His escape, 57. near the banks of the Ohio, 328.
Alkaradc, Pedro de, is left byCortes to Why European animals degenerate

command at Mexico, whilehe march- there, 330. Supposed to have under-
ed against Narvaez, ii. 250. He is gone a convulive reparation from Asia,
besieged by the Mexicans, 256. His 334. Causes of the depopulation of,
imp:udent conduct, 257. His expe- traced, iii. oo. This depopulation
dition to Quito in Peru, iii. 43. not the result of any intentional fyflem
Amazons, a community of, Laid to exist of policy, 202. Nor the result of re-

in South America, by Francis Orel- ligion, 204. Number of Indian na-
lana, iii. 69. tives ttill remaining in Mexico and
America, the continent of, discovered by Peru, 205. All the Spanish domini-

Chriflopher Columbus, i. 138. How ons there, subjected to two viceroys,
it obtained this name, 149. Ferdi- 208. Its third viceroyalty lately elta-
nand of Calile, nominates two go- blilhed, 209. SseeMexico, Peru, Cor-
vernments in, 192. The propositions tes, Pizarro, &c.
offered to the natives, ibid. Ill recep- Americans, native, in Spaniflh America,
tion of Ojeda and Nicueffa among their bodily conltitution and complexi-
them, 93. The South Sea discover- on, ii. 43. Their llrength and abili-
ed by Ealboa, 704. Riode Plata disco- ties, 44. Their insensibility with re-
vered, 213. The natives of, injuriously gard to their women, 46. No defor-
treated by the Spaniards, 233. The mities in their frame, 50. This cir-
vafi extent of, ii. 2. The grand ob- cumftance accounttd for, 5i. Unifor-
jeds it presented to view, 3. The mity of their colour, 52. A peculiar
circumitances of, favourable sot corn- race of, described, 55. The Efqui-
merce and civilization, 4. The c!i- maux, 56. Patagonians, 57. The
mates of, 6. Various causes of the existence of Patagonian giants yet
peculiarity of its climates, 7. Its rude remaining to be decided, 59. Their
and uncultivated fate when first dif- diseases, 60. The venereal disease,
covered, ii. Its animals, 13. Its peculiarly theirs, 61. The powers and
infeEts and reptiles, 15. Birds, 6. qualities of their minds, 62. Areon-
General account of its foil, 17. In- ly solicitous to supply immediate
quiry into the first popu'ation of, 8. wants, 64. The art of computation,
Could not be peopled by civilized nati- scarcely known to them. ibid. Have
ons, 24. The northern extremity of, no abltract ideas, 66. The North
contiguous to Asia, 27. Probably peo- Americans much more intelligent
pled by Asiatics, 34. Condition and than those of the fonth, 67. Their
character of the native inhabitants aversion to labour, 69. Their social
inquired into, 35. Wtre more fhate, 71. Domeflic union, ibid. The
rude than the natives of any c- women, 72. Their womennot pro-
ther known parts or the ea!th, 36. lific, 75. Their pa;ental affection and
The Peruvians and Mexicans except- filial duty, 76. Their modes of sub-
cd, 37. The first dilcoverers incapa- filtence, 78. Fishing, 79. Hunting,
ble of a judicious speculative xami- 8. Agriculture, 82. The various
nation, 39. The various f'fltcms of objects f their culture, 83. Two
philosophers rfpeEing the natives, 40. piinc'lral caues of the defects of
Methodobferved in the present review their ag iculture, 86. Their want
of their bodily conllituion and cir. of tame animal-,, ibid. Their want

of

of ureful metals, 88. Their poli- pendence, 64. Fortitu'te, ibid. At-
tical inltitutions, 90. Were divided tachment to their community, 165.
into small independent communities, Their fatisfa&ion with their own
ibid. Unacquainted with the idta of condition, ibid. General caution with
property, 91. Their high sense of refpet to this inquiry, 168. Two
equality and independence, 92. Their dillinguilhable clailes of, 169. Excep-
ideas of ubordination imperfect, 94. tions as to their charader, 171. Their
To what tribes these descriptions ap- characterilltc feaiures dfciibcd, 334.
ply, 95. Some exceptions, 97. Flo- Jnlances of their per!cvering speed,
rida, ibid. The Natchez, 98. The 335. An antipathy indultrioufy en-
islands, 99. In Bogota, ibid. Inquiry couraged between them and the ne-
into the causes of these irregularities, groes in America, by the Spaniards,
1oo. Their art of war, 103. Their ii. 223. Their present condition,
motives to hostility, 104. Causes of 224. How taxed, 225. Sated ser-
their ferocity, 105. Perpetuity of vices demanded from them, 226.
their animofities, io6. Their modes Mode ot exacting these services, 227.
of conducting war, 107. Are not How governed, ibid. Protector of
destitute of courage and fortitude, 1og. the Indians, his funcion, 228. Rea-
Incapable of military discipline, lo. sons why so fall a progress is made
Their treatment of prisoners, i i . in their conversion, 237.
Their fortitude under torture, 113. Amerigo V'pucci, publishes the first
Never eat human flesh but to gratify written account of the NewWo ld, and
revenge, I 15. How the South Ame- hence gave name to America, i. 149.
ricans treated their prisoners, i 6. Hisclaimasadifcoverer examined,268.
Their military education,t 17. Strange nncoana, a female cazique of Hispaniola,
method of chufing a captain, among her bale-and cruel usage by the Spa-
the Indians on the banks of the Ori- niards, i. 18o.
noco, ibid. Their numbers wafted by Andes, flupendous height and extent of
continual wars, 120. Their tribes that range of mountains, ii. 3. Their
now recruit their numbersby adopting height compared with other moun-
priloners, 121. Are never formidable tains, 321. Gonzalo Pizarro's re-
in war, to more polished nations, 122. markable expedition.over, iii. 67.
Their arts, dress, and ornaments, 123. Animals large, very few found in America
Their habitations, z26. Their arms, at its firlt discovery, ii. 13.
128. Their domestic utensils, 129. Antients, caule of the imperfection of
Conftrucion of their canoes, 130. the art of navigation among them i.
The liltleffnefs with which theyapply 4. Their geographical knowledge
to labour, 131. Their religion, 132. extremely confined,22, 251, 2 2, 254.
Some tribes altogether defiitute of any, Arabians, peculiarly attached to the
135. Remarkable diversity in their Itudy of geography, i. 27.
religious notions, 138. Their ideas Argonauts, the expedition oF, why so fa-
of the immortality of the foul, 141. mous among the (reeks,i. 12.
Their modes of burial, 142. Why Arithmetic, or computation, the art of,
theirphyficians pretend to be conjurors, hardly known to the native Ameri-
144. Their love of dancing, 147. cans, ii. 64.
Their immoderate passion for gam- Apcoiin, father, his extraordinary minion
ing, 149. Are extremely addicted to to the prince of the Tartars, i. 32.
drunkenness, 150. Put their aged fiatic di coveries made by the Ruffians,
and incurable to death, 54. General ii. 27.
eflimate of their chaiacter, 155. ffeto trade, the nature of, explained,
Their intellectual powers, 156. The:r ii. 262. The frauds in, and how
political talents, 57. Powers of as- put an end to, 263, 336.
section, 158. Hardness of heait, 159. Atahualpa, is left by his father Huafcar
Their inlenfibility, 6o. Taciturnity, his fucccl1or in the kingdom of Quito,
16t. Their cunning, 162. Their iii. 1A. Defeats his rother Hualca,,
virtues, 63. Their spirit of inde- andufurpsthe empireofPeru, ib. Sends

prefcnts

prerents toPizarro,24.VifrtsPizarro,27. stretch to an immense dillance from
Isperfidioufyfeized by hm,3o. Agrees land, i. 258.
with Pizarro on a ransom, 31. Is re- Bogta in America, some account of the
fused his liberty, 34. His behaviour inhabitants of, i. 99. Causes of their
during his confinement, 37. A form tame fubmifion to the Spaniards, 102.
of tria, beltowed on him, 38. Is put Their religious doctrines and rites, 140.
to death, 39. Comrarifon of autho- Bojador cape, the first discovery of, i. 42.
rities relating to his tranfations with, Is doubled by the Portuguese disco-
and teatment by Pizarro, 296. veries, 46.
Audience of New Spain, board of, efta- Bcff, his account of the American war-

blifhed by the Emperor Charles V. ii. song, ii. 354.
3! . Courts o', their jtuiidition, iii. Bs'vadilla, Francis de, is sent to Hifpani-
210. ola to inquire into the conduct of
Averia, a Spanish tax for convoy to and Columbus, i. 154. Sends Columbus

from America, when first imposed, home in irons, 55. Is degraded,
iii. 342. Its rate, 343. 158, i6i.
Az:res, those islands discovered by the Bpugainville, his defence of the Periplus

Poituguefe, i. 50. of Hanno, i. 25o.

Bcurger, M. his character of the native
B Peruvians, ii. 340.

Brasil, the coalt of, discovered byAlvarez
Balbca, Vasco Nugnez de, fettlesa co- Cabral, i. 151. Remarks on the

lonv at Santa Maria on the gulph of climate of, ii. 325.
Darien, i. 194. Receives intelligence BriJges, Peruvian, described. iii. 317.
of the rich country of Peru, 200. Buenos Ayres, in South America, some
His chara&er, 202. Matches across account of that province, iii. 1go.
the isthmus, 203 Discovers the Bulls, papal, of no force in Spaniih Ame-
Southern Ocean, 204. Returns, rica, before examined and approved
205. Is superseded in his command by the royal council of the Indies,
.by the appointment of Pediarias Da- iii. 231. See Cruado.
vila, 207. Is fined by Pedrarias for Burialof the dead, American mode of,
former translations, 208. Is appoint- ii. 142.
ed lieutenant' governor of the coun-
tries on the South Sea, and marries
Pedrarias's daughter, 210o Is arrelted C
and put to death by Pedrarias, 21.
Bark, Jesuits, a produition peculiar to Cabrai, Alvarez, a Portuguese corn-

Peru, iii. 247. mander, discovers the coast of Brasil,
Barrere, his description of the conftruc- i. 51.

tion of Indian houifs, ii.358. Cacoa, the heft in quality, produced in
BeAring and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navi- the Spanifl American colonies, iii.

gators, thought to have dillovered the 247. The preparation of chocolate
north weft extremity of America from, derived from the Mexicans,
from the eaflward, ii. 29. Uncer- 266.
tainty of their accounts, 333. Cadi, the galeons and flota, removed
Benalccaar, governor of St. Michael, re- thither from Sville, iii. 255.

duces the kingdom of Quito, iii. 44. California, the peninsula of, discovered
Is deprived of his command by Pizar- by Fernando Cortes, ii. 316. The
ro, 67. true Itate of this country long un-
Benjamin the Jew of Tudela, his extra- known, iii. lR3. Why depreciated

ordinray travels, i. 31. by the Jesuits, 184. Favourable ac-
Bernalder, instance of the bravery of the count ot, given by Don Joseph Galvez,

Caribbees, mentioned by him, ii. 364. ibid.
Bethencourt, John de, a No;man baron, Califctnians, the character of, by P. Ve-

conquers and poftires the Canary ni is, ii. 342.
Islands, i. 38. Ca^aicJtdy, dilcovered by Cordova, who
Birds, an account of those natural to is repulftd by the natives, i. 239.

America, ii. 16. The flight of, often Campomancs

Campsmats, Don PedroRodriguez, cha- packet-boats between Spain and the

rafter of his political and commercial colonies, iii. 269. Allows free trade
writings, iii. 341. His account of the to the windward ifiands, 270. Grants
produce of the Spanifi American the colonies a free trade with each
mines, 346. other, 272.
Canary iflandsereeted into a kingdom by CharlesV. emperor, fends Roderigode

pope Clement VI. i. 37. Are con- Figueroa to Hispaniola, as chief judge,
quered by John de Bethencourt, 38. to regulate the treatment of the In-
Cannibals, no people ever found to eat dians, i. z25. Causes this subjet to

human fiefh for fubfillence, though be debated beforehim, 23o. Equips
often for revenge, ii. 115. 354. a squadron at the solicitation of Ser-
Canoes, American, the conltruction of, dinand Magellan, ii. 301. Resigns

described, ii. 30. his claim on the Moluccas to the Por-
Caracas, efiablifiment of the company tuguefe, 305. Appoints Cortes go-

trading to that coast, iii. 267. Growth vernor of New Spain, 307. Rewards
of the trade, 337. him on coming home, 314. Establish-
Caribbee islands, discovered by Columbus es a board called the Audience of New

in his second voyage, i. 114. Spain, 315. His consultations on A-
Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. merican affairs, iii. 79. Eftablifies

171. Their character by M. de Chan- new regulations, 83.
valon, 341. Probable conjecture as Chili, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 49.
to the diftintion in chara&ter between How subjected by the Spaniards, i 86.
them and the natives of the larger if- Excellenceof its climate and foil, 87.
lands, 365. Cause of its being negleted, 188.
Carpini, his extraordinary mission to the Profpe& of its improvement, 189.

prince of the Tartars, i. 32. Chiquitos, political state of that people,
Carthagena, the harbour of, thefafet from Fernandez, ii. 350.

and best fortified of any in all the Spa- Chocolate, the use of, derived from the
niLh American dominions, iii. 193. Mexicans, iii. 266.
Carthaginiaus, state of commerce and Cholula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes

navigation among, i. 8. The fa. there, with rome account of the town,
mous voyages of Hanno and Himil- ii. zi8. A conspiracy against Cortes
co, 9. discovered, and the inhabitants de-
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to firoyed, 22o.

Vaca de Castro's victory over young Cictro, intlance of his ignorance in geo-
Almagro, iii. 78. Encourages Gonza- graphy, i. 254.
lo Pizzaro to afltume the government Cixaloa, political state of the people
of Peru, 92. Advises Pizzaroto as- there, ii. 350. Their mode of living,
fume the sovereignty of the country, 357. Are destitute of all religion, 361.
97. Is seized by Gafca and executed, Extraordinary large grain of gold found
i l. there, iii. 318.
Cafillo, Bernal Diaz del, chara6ter of Cineguilla, in the province of Sonora,

his Hiftoria Verdadero de la Conquif- late discoveries of rich mines made
ta dela NuevaEfpagna, ii. 367. there by the Spaniards, iii. 182. Pro-
Centeno, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo bable effets of those discoveries, 183.

Pizarro to the viceroy of Peru, iii. 94. Clement VI. pope, erects the Canary if-
Is defeated by Carjaval, and secrets lands into a kingdom, i. 37.
himfel-in a cave, 96. Sallies out and Climates, influenced by a variety of cauf-
seizes Cuzco, 107. Is reduced by Pi- es, ii. 6. Their operation on mankind,
zarro, xo8. Is employed by Gafca to x68. Inquiry into the cause of the
make discoveries in the regions about different degrees of heat in, 323.
the river Plata, x6. Cochineal, an important produ6lion, al-
Chanvalon, M. de, his character of the most peculiar oNew Spain, iii. 247.

native Caribbees, ii. 341. Cld, extraordinary predominance of, in
Chaperones, in the Spanish American co- the climates of Amelica, ii. 6. Caulks

lonies, who thus diflinguilhed, iii. 2o. of this peculiaity, 7.
Charles II. king of Spain, eftlalifhes Colonies

VOL. III. B b

Colcnie, Spanifi American, view of the affairs there by his brother on his re-

policy and trade of, iii. 199. Depopu- turn to Spain, 131. Founds the town
lation the first effet of them, ibid. of St. Domingo, 139.
Causes of this depopulation, 2oo. Columbus, Christopher, birth and educati-
The fmall-poic very fatal to, 202. Ge- tion of, i. 59. His early voyages, 60.
ieral idea of the Spanish policy in, 206. Marries and fettlesat Lilbon, 61. His
Early interposition of the regal autho- geographical reflections, 63. Con-
rity in, 207. An exclusive trade the ceives the idea of making discoveries
firftobjea in, 214. Compared with to the westward, 65. Offers hisfervices
those of antient Greece and Rome, to the Genoese senate, 67. Cause of
215. The great reftri&ions they are his overtures being rejected in Portu-
fubje& to, 216. Slow progress of their gal, 69. Applies to the courts of
population from Europe, 217. Are Caflile and England, ibid. His pro-
discouraged by the slate of property pofal, how treated by the Spanish
there, ibid. And by the nature of geographers, 71. Is patronised by Juan
their ecclefiafical policy, 219. The Perez, 74. His proposals again re-
variond classes of penplc in, 220. Ec- jeted,75. Is invited by Isabella, and
clefiailical constitution of, 230. Form engaged in the Spanish service, 79,
and endowments of the church there, Preparations for his voyage, 80. The
231. Pernicious effects of monafdic amount of his'equipment, 81. Sails
institutions there, 232. Characer of from Spain, 82. His vigilant attenti-
the ecclfiaftics there, 233. Produc- on to all circumftancesduring his voy-
tions cf, 241. The mines, ibid. Those age, 84. Apprehensions of his crew,
of Potofi and Sacotecas, 242. The 85. His address in quieting their ca-
spirit with which they are worked,244. bals, 87. Indications of their ap-
Fataleffects of this adour, 245. O proaching land, 89. An island disco-
ther commodities that compose the vered, go. He lands, 91. His inter-
commerce of, 247. Amazing increase view with ihe natives, 9. Names
of horned cattle there, 248. Advan- the island San Salvadore, 93. Prose-
tages which Spain formerly derived cutes his discoveries southward, 94.
from them, ibid. Why the fame ad- Discovers, and lands, on the island of
vantages are not still received, 250. Cuba, 9. Discovers Hispaniola, 96.
Guarda collas employed to check the Suffers hipwreck, but is saved by the
contraband trade in, 263. The use of Indians, 99. Builds a fort, oz. , Re-
register ships introduced, 264. And turns to Europe, 104. His expedient to
galeons laid aside, 265. Company of preserve the memory of his discoveries
the Caraccas instituted, 267. Efta- during a form, o16. Arrives at the
blifhment of regular packet-boats to, Azores, ibid. ArrivesatLifbon, o17.
269. Free trade permitted between His reception in Spain, o18. Hisau-
them, 272. New regulations in the dience with Ferdinand and Isabella,
government of, 274. Reformation 1o9. His equipment for a second voy-
of the courts of jullice, ibid. New age, Ix2. Discovers the Caribbee
ditlribution of governments, ibid. A ifiands, 114. Finds his colony on Hil-
fourth viceroyalty eltablifhed, 275. paniola detroyed, 115. Builds acity,
Attempts to reform dbrntitic policy, which he calls Isabella, 117. Visits
277. Their trade with the Philippine the interior parts of the country, 119.
islands, 280. Revenue derived from, His men discontented and fa&tious,
by Spain, 283. Expence of admini- 12o. Discovers the island of Jamai-
firation there, 286. State of popula- ca, 122. Meets his brother Bartholo-
lation in, 322. The number of mew at Isabella, 123. The natives
rnonafteries there, 331. See Mexico, ill used by his men,' and begin to be
Peru, &c. alarmed, 124. He defeats the Indians,
Cclumbus, Bartholomew, is ent by his 127. Exafts'tribute from them, z18.

brother Christopher to negociate with Retlrns to Spain to jullify his con-
Henry VII. king of England, i. 70. dut, 131. Is furnifled with a more
The misfortunes of his voyage, 73. regular plan for colonization, 133. His
So lows his brotherto Hifpanio'a, 1 3. third voyage, 136. Discovers the if-
Is vested ith the adminifration o land of Trinidad, 137. Discovers the

continent

tinent of America, 38. State of His- nies, iii. 279. CharaCter of his Ame-
paniola on his arrival, 139. Corn- rican memoirs, 303.
poses the mutiny of Roidan and his Cortes, Fernando, his birth, education,
adherents, 142. Is distressed by the and character, ii. 175. Is by Velaf-
factious behaviour of his men, 152. quez appointed commander of the ar-
Complaints carried to Spain against mament fittedoutby him against New
him, 153. Is sent home in irons, 155. Spain, 176. Velasquez becomes jea-
Clears his conduc, but is not refored lous of him, 178. Velasquez fends
to his authority, 157. His folicitati- orders to deprive him of his commifli-
ons neglected, 61. Forms new on, and lay him under arrelt, 179. Is
schemes of discovery, 162. Engages protected by his troops, 180. Thea-
in afourthvoyage, 164. His treat- mount of his forces, 81. Reduces
ment at Hispaniola, ibid. Searches the Indians at Tabasco, 183. Arrives
after a passage to the Indian o- at St. Juan de Ulua, ibid. His inter-
cean, 166. Is hipwrecked on the coast view with twoMexican commanders,
of Jamaica, 167. His artifice to fe- x85. Sends presents to Montezuma,
cure the friendship of the Indians, 187. Receives others in return, 188.
170. Is delivered, and arrives at His- His schemes, 193. Eablifhes a form
paniola, 173. Returns to Spain, 174. of civil government, 196. Resigns
His death, 75. His right to the his commiflion under Velasquez, and
original discovery of America defend- assumes the command in the king's
ed, Az6. name, 199. Hisfriendihipcourtel by
Columbus, Don Diego, sues out his claims the Zempollans, oo. Builds a fort,

to his father's privileges, i. 188. Mar- 202. Concludes a formal alliance with
ries and goes over to Hispaniola, 189. several caziques, ibid. Dilcovers a con-
Establishes a pearl fishery at Cubagua, fpiracy among his men, and dclhoys
19o. ProjeCts the conquest of Cuba, his hips, 205. Advances into the
196. His measures thwarted by Ferdi- country, 207. Is opposed by the Tlaf-
nand, 213. Returns to Spain, 214. calans, 209. Concludes a peace with
Commerce, the era from which its corn them, zi4. His rash zeal, 2 16. Pro-

mencement is tobe dated, i. 2. Mo- ceeds to Cholula, 218. Dilcovers a
tives to an intercourse amongt diltant conspiracy against him here, and de-
nations, 4. Still flourished in the ealt- stroys the inhabilants, 220. Approach-
em empire after the subversion of the es in fight of the capital city of Mexi-
western, 26. Revival of, in Europe, co, 222. His first interview with
28. Montezuma, 223. His anxiety at his
Compass, mariner's, navigation extended situation in the city of Mexico, 228.

more by the invention of, than by all Seizes Montezuma, 232 Orders him
the efforts of preceding ages, i. 35. By to be fettered, 234. Reasons of his
whom invented, 36. condut&, 235. Pevails on Montezu-
Cindamine, M. his account of the coun- ma to own him iel a vassal to the Spa-

try at the foot of the Andes, in South nifh crown, 238. Amount and divi-
America, ii. 327. His remarks on the sion of his trealure, 239. Enrages the
character of the native Americans, Mexicans hy his imprudent zeal, 242.
340. An armament sent by Ve'afquez to
Congo, the kingdom of, discovered by the supersede him, 246. His delibzrations

Portuguese, i. 52. on this event, 248. Advances to meet
Constantinople, the consequence of remov- Narvaez, 51. Defeats Narvatz and

ing the feat of the Roman empire takes him prisoner, 254. Gains over
to, i. 24. Continued a commercial the Spanilh soldiers tohis interct, 255.
cityafter the extinction of the western Returns to Mexico, 157. His impro-
empire, 26. Became the chief mart of per conduct on his arrival, a58. Is re-
Italy, 28. folutcly attacked by theMtexicans,259.
CsrdJva, Francisco He'nandiz, disco- Attacks them in turnwitho'.t ucccls,

vers Yucatan, i. 238. Is repulsed at 260. Death of Montezuma, 62. His
Campeachy,and returns to Cuba, 239. extraordinary escape ftom death, 263.
ita, Alonzo, his observations on the Abandons the city of Mexico, 264. Is
contraband trade of the Spanish colo- attacked by the Mexicans, 265. His
Bb 2

losses in the encounter, 266. Diffi- 259. The tobacco produced there,
culties of his retreat, 267. Battle the finest in all America, iii. 247.
of Otumba, 269. Defeats the Mex- Cubagua, a pearl fishery established there,
icans, 70. Mutinous pirit of his i. 190.
troops, 273. Reduces the Tepea- Cumana, the natives of, revenge their
cans, 274. Is flrengthened by feve- ill treatment by the Spaniards, i.
ral reinforcements, 276. Returns to 133. The country desolated by Die.
Mexico, 277. Eablifhes his head- go Ocampo, 35.
quarters at Tezuco, 279. Reduces Cuso, the capital of the Peruvian em-
or conciliates the surrounding coun- pire, founded by Manco Capac,' iii.
try, 28o. Cabals among his troops, x8. Is seized by Pizarro, 4. Is
281. His prudence i suppressing besieged by the Peruvians, 52. Is
them, 282. Builds and launches a surprised by Almagro, 5. Is re.
fleet of brigantines on the lake, 285. covered and pillaged by the Pizarros,
Besieges Mexico, 287. Makesa grand 6X. Was the only city in all Peru,
assault to take the city by form, but 176.
is repulsed, 290. Evades the Mex-
ican prophecy, 293. Takes Guati- D
mozin prisoner, 296. Gains posses-
sion of the city, ibid. And of the whole Dancing, the love of, a favorite paflton
empire, 299. Defeats another at- among the Americans, ii. 147.
tempt to supersede him in his com- Ddrien, the Iltmus of, described, i. 201.
mind, '306. Is appointed governor The increase of settlement there,
of New Spain, 307. His schemes obftruted by the noxiousness of the
and arrangements, 308. Cruel treat- climate, iii. 192.
ment of the natives, 309 His con- De 8lis, his unfortunate expedition up
duet fubje&ed to inquiry, 312. Re- the river Plata, i. 212.
turns to Spain to justify himself, De Solis, Antonio, character of his His-
313. Is rewarded by the emperor toria de la Conquifta de Mexico, ii.
Charles V. 314. Goes back to Mexi- 368.
co with limited powers, 315. Dif- D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru,
covers California, 36. Returns to his vigorous measures for restraining
Spain, and dies, ibid. Inquiry into the excesses of the regular clergy
the nature of his letters to the em- there, iii. 236. Rendered ineffec-
peror Charles V. 366. Authors tual, 237.
who wrote of his conquest of New Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape
Spain, 367. of Good Hope, i. 55.

C:incilof the Indies, its power, iii. 212. DiJcoeries, the difference between those
Creoles, in the Spanith American colonies, made by land, and those by sea,

character of, iii. 2i. fiated, ii. 253.
Cr>!an, colonel George, his account Dodwuell, his objection to the Pe-

of the discovery of the bones of large riplus of Hanno exploded, ii. 249.
extinct species of animals in North Domingo, St. on the iland of Hifpani6la,
America, ii. 318. founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
Crusades to the Holy Land, the great i. 139.

political advantages derived from, by Dominicans, those in Hispaniola, pub-
the European nations, i. 30. lickly remonstrate against the cruel
Cruadi, bulls of, published regularly treatment of the Indians. i. 215.

every twoyears in the Spanish colo- See Las Casas.
nies, iii. 284. Prices of, and amount Drunkenness, rong propensity of the
of the sale at the latt publication, 342. Americans to indulge in, ii. 50o.
Cba, the Island of, discovered by Chris-

topher Columbus, i. 95. Is failed E
round by Ocampo, 188. The con-
quest of, undetraken by Diego Velaf- Earth, the globe of, how divided intq
quez, 96. Cruel treatment of the zones by the antients, i. 22.
cazique Hatuey, and his, repartee Egyptians, antient, state of commerce
to a friar, 97. Coiumbus's enthufi- and navigation among them, i. 5.
aflic description of a harbour in, El

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a coun- by Columbus, i. 128. 136. Patro-

try so called, made by Francis Orel- nizes the expedition of Alonzo de
lana, iii. 69. Ojedo, 148.
Elephant, that animal peculiar to the

torrid zone, ii. 329.
Efquimaux Indians, resemblances between

them and their neighbours theGreen- G t n
landers, ii 32. Some account of Galeons, Spanish the nature and purpose
landers, . 32. Some account of of these effels, iii. 55. Arrangement
ri6. 359. of their voyage, 6.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portu- Galvez, Don Joreph, sent to discover

guefe an exclusive right to all the the true state of California, iii. 184.
countries they (hould discover, from Gama, Vaico de, his voyage for difcove-
Cape Non to the continent of India, , i. 44. Doubles the Cape of
. 49o' a t i r Good Hope, 1x5. Anchors before
Europe, how aected by the dirmember- the city Melinda, ibid. Arrives at

ment of the Roman empire by the Calecut in Malabar, 146.
barbarous nations, i. 25. Revival of Gaing, range propenity of theAme-
commerce and navigation in, 8. rians to, iig149.
Political advantages derived from the Ganges erroneous ideas of the ancients
crusades, 30. as to the position of that river, i.

252.
F. Gafca, Pedro de la ent to Peru as prefi-

dent of the court of Audience in Li-
Ferdinand, king of Castile. See Columbus ma, iii. oo. His character and mo-

and Iabella. Turns his attention at deration, ioI. The powers he was
length to the regulation of American veiled with, to1. Arrives at Pana-
affairs, i. 184. Don Diego de Co- ma, 103. Acquires poffeflion of Pa-
lumbus sues out his father's claims nama with the fleet and forces there,
against him, 118. Ere&s two go- 105. Advances towards Cuzco, 109.
vernments on the continent of Ame- Pizarro's troops desert to him, I 1o.
rica, 19i. Sends a fleet to Darien, His moderate use of the victory, I x.
and supersedes Balboa, 207. Appoints Devises employment for his soldiers,
Balboa lieutenant-governor of the x15. His division of the country
countries on the South Sea, 210. among his followers,' 16. Restores
Sends Dias de Solis to discover a order and government, 117. His re-
western passage to the Moluccas, 21. ception at his return to Spain, i8.
Thwarts the measures of Ditgo Co- Gemirmus, instance of his ignorance in
lumbus, 213. His decree concerning geography, i. 254.
the treatment of the Indians, 216. Geography, the knowledge of extremely
Fernandez, Don Diego, character of his confined among the ancients, i. 12.

Hiftoria del Peru, iii. 92. Became a favourite ltudy among the
Fernandez, P. his description of the poli- Arabians, 27.

tical state of the Chiquitos, ii. 350. Giants, the accounts of, in our early tra-
Figueroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief vellers, unconfirmed by recent disco-

justice of Hispaniola, with a commis- veriest i. 35. ii. 338.
sion to examine into the treatment of Gipia, Flavie, the inventor of the mari-
theIndian natives, i. 225. Makes an ner's compass, i. 36.
experiment to determine the capacity Globe, its division into zone by the an-
of the Indians, 234. cients, i. 22.
Flirida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Gold, why the first metal with which

Leon, i. 197. The chiefs theie he- man was acquainted, ii. 88. Etra-
reditary, ii. 95. Account of, from ordinary large grain of, found in the
Alvar Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, ii. mines of Cinaloa, iii. 318.
354. Gomara, character of his Cronica de la

Flota, Spanish, some account of, iii. 255. Nueva Eipagna, ii. 366.
Fonjeca, bifllop of Badajos, minister tor Good Hope, cape of, dilcovered by Bar-

Indian affairs, obltru&s the plans tholemew Diaz, i. 55.
of colonization and discovery formed Govern-

Gw.rnimen!t, no visible form o, among rapal grant of his new discoveries,

the native Americans ii. 94. Excep- 48. His death, 50.
tions, 97. Ierrada, Juan de, alTaflinates Francis
Gran Chacs, account of the method of Pizarro, iii. 73. D.es,,77.

making war among the natives of, Herr:ra, the belt hiflorian of the con-
trom Lozano, ii. 35. quell of New Spain, ii. 369. His ac-
Granada, new kingdom of, in America, count of Orrellaia's voyage, iii. 301.

by whom reduced to the Spanifi do- Ijpaniala the island of, dilcovered by
minion, iii. 195. Its climate and Christopher Columbus, i. 96. His
produce, 196. A viceroy lately eta- tranfations with the natives, 97.
blifhed there, 209. A colony left there by Columbus, 103.
Greeks, ancient progress of navigation The colony deflroyed, 11 5. Colum.

and discovery among them, i. . bus builds a city called Ilabella, 1 7.
Their commercial intercourse with The natives ill-used, and .begin to be
other nations very limited, 13. alarmed, 124. Are defeated by the
Greenland, its vicinity to North Ameri- Spaniards, 127. Tribute exated from

ca, ii. 3. them, 128. They scheme to Itarve
G-jala, Juan de, sets out from Cuba the Spaniards, z19. St. Domingo

on a voyage of discovery, i. 24o0 Dif- founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
covers and gives name to New Spain, 139. Columbus sent home in irons
24i. His rafons for not planting by Bovadilla, 55. Nicholas de
a colony in his newly discovered lands, Ovanda appointed governor, 158.
243. Summary view of the condut of
Guarda Costas, employed by Spain to the Spaniards towards the natives

check illicit trade in the American of, 179. Unhappy fate of Anaco-
colonies, iii. 263. ana, 18o. Great produce from
Guatimala, the indigo there superior to the mines there, 182. The inhabi-

any in America, iii. 247. tants diminilh, 158. The Spaniards
Guatima-in, nephew and fon-in-law of recruit them by trepanning the na-

Montezuma, succeeds Quetlavaca in tives of the Lucayos, 86. Arrival
the kingdom of Mexico, il. 279. Re- of Don Diego de Columbus, S19.
pulses the attacks of the Spaniards in The natives of, almolt extirpated by
Itorming the' city of Mexico, 290. slavery, 195. 214. Controversy con-
Is taken prisoner by Cortes, 296. Is cerning the treatment of them, 2i 5.
tortured to ifcover his treaSure, 298. Coiumbus's account of the humane
Is hanged, 310. treatment he received from the na-
Guiana, Dutch, cause of the excessive tives of, ii. 259. Curiousinltance of

fertility of the foil there, ii. 332. fuperflition in the Spanish planters

there, ii. 330
Ho!guin, Pedio Alvarez, erects the royal

Itandard in Peru, in opposition tothe
H. younger Almagro, iii. 77. Vaca de

Caltro arrives and afumes the com-
Hann, his Periplus defended, with an mand, ibid.

account of his voyage, i. 249. Thinner, his account of the navigation of
Hatuey, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel the ancient Greeks, i. 12.

treatment, and memorable repartee Hnduras, the value of that country,
to a Franciscan friar, i. 197. owing to its prodution of the logwood
Ha -ke/:;-rth's voyages, account of New tree, iii. 18.

Hol and, and the inhabitants from, ii. Hredcattle, amazing increase of them
347. in Spanifl America, iii. 248.
Heat, the different degrees of, in the Hor/es, afonifliment and mistakes of the

old and new continents accounted tor, Mexicans at the firll fight of them, ii.
ii. 323. Effimated, 331. 374. Expedient of thePeruvians to ren-
Henry, prince of Portugal, his character der them incapable of action, iii. 300.

and studies, i. 42. Expeditions form- Huana Capac, Inca of Peru his charac-
ed by his order, 44. Applies for a . ter and family, iii. ao.

Hafcar

taafcar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes Isabella, queen of Castile, is applied to

his brother Atahualpa's fucceflion to by Juan Perez in behalf of Chrifto-
Quito, iii. 21. Is defeated and taken pher Columbus; i. 74. Is again
prisoner by Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits applied to by Quintanila and Santan-
the aliftance of Pizarro against his gel, 77. Is prevailed on to equip him,
brother, 3. Is put to death by order 78. Dies, 174. Her real motives
of Atahualpa, 32. for encouraging discoveries in Ameri-

ca, iii. 203.

Isabella, the city of, in Hispaniola, built
I. by Christopher Columbus, i. 117.

Italy, the firt country in Europe, where
samaica, discovered by Christopher Co- civilization and arts revived after the

lumbus, i. 122. overthrow of the Roman empire, i.
Jerome, St. three monks of that order a8. The commercial spirit of, ac-

sent by Cardinal Ximenes to Hifpa. tive and enterprising, 29.
niola, to regulate the treatment of
the Indians, i. 220. Their condu&
under this commission, 222. Are re- L.
called, 225.
Jesuits, acquire an absolute dominion over Ladropie ifands; discovered by Ferdinand

California, iii. 183. Their motives Magellan, ii. 303.
for depreciating the country, 184. Lakes, amazing size of those in North
Jews, ancient, ate of commerce and America, ii. 4.

navigation among them, i. 7. Las Cfas, Bartholomew, returns from
Incas of Peru, received origin of their Hispaniola to solicit the cause of te

empire, iii. 19. 60. Their empire enslaved Indians at the court of Spaini
founded both in religion and policy, i. 219. Is sent back with powers by
161. See Peru. cardinal Ximenes, 220. Returns diffa-
India, the motives of Alexander the tisfied, 223. Procures a new commiffi-

Great in his expedition to, i. 15. on to be sent over on this subjea, 225.
The commerce with, how carried on Recommends the scheme of fipplying
in ancient times, 19. And when the colonies with ncgroes, 226. Un-
arts began to revive in Europe, 28. dertakes a new colony, 228. His
The first voyage made round the conference with the bishop of Darien
Cape of Good Hope, 145. before the emperor Charles V. 230.
Indians in Spanish Anmerica. See me- Goes to America to carry his schemes

ricans. into execution, 232. Circumstances
Indies, Weft, why Columbus's difcove- unfavourable to him, 234. His final

ries were lo named, i. 11. rmifcarriage, 235. Revives his repre-
Innocent IV. pope, his extraordinary fentations in favour of the Indians,

miflion to the prince of the Tartars, at the desire of the emperor, iii. 8.
i. 2. Composes a treatise on the deftruti-
n quiftion, court of, when and by whom, on of America, 8z.

firltintroducedinto Portugal, i. 256. Leon, Pedro Cieza de, charater of his
InfeSs and reptiles, why o numerous Chronica del Peru, iii. 29z.

and noxious in Ameiica, ii. 15. Lery, his description of the courage and
John I. king of Portuga!, the firit who ferocity of the Toupinambos, ii. 352.

sent hips to explore the weltern Lima, the city cf, in Peru, founded by
coasts of Africa, i. 40. His son Pizarro, iii. 48.
prince Henry engages in these at- Lvgwvsod, the commodity that gives im-
tempts, 42. portance to the provinces of Hon.
7cn II1. king of Portugal, patronises all duras and Yucatan, iii. 85. Policy

attempts towards discoveries, i. 5. of the Spaniards to defeat the Eng!i(h
Sends an embassy to Abyflinia, 55. trade in, 86.
His ungenerous treatment of Co- Louis, St. king of France, his embafly
lumbus, 69. to the chan of the Tartars, i. 32.
Ircnr the reason why savage nations Lozano, his account of the method of

were unacquainted with this metal, making war among the natives of
ii. 88. GranChaco, ii. 351.

Luque,

Lque, Hernando de, a priest, aociates America, totally unacquainted with

with Pizarro in his Peruvian expediti- ii. 88.
on, iii. 4. Aexicans, their account of their own

origin, compared with latter difcove.
ries, ii. 34. Descriptions of their his-
^~~~M ~torical pictures, iii. 308. Various

exaggerated accounts of the numbers
of human victims sacrificed by them,
Madeira, the iand of, first difcoverd, 33. Their language furnihed with

;*.o Nort Waes oys relpectful terminations for all its
Madcc, prince of North Wales, story of words, 305. How they contributed

his voyage and discovery of North A- to the upport of government, 306.
merica examined, i. 263. Mexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on
Mlagellan, Perdinand, his account of the coat of, ii. 83. His interview

the gigantic size of the Patagonians with two Mexcan officers, 185. In-
ii. 57. The existence of this giganic formation ent to Montezuma, with
race yet to be decided, 59. 337. His ome Spanh preents, 187. Mon-
introdu&ion to the court of Caflile, tezuma fends presents to Cortes,
300. Is equipped with a squadron for with oders not to approach his ca-
a voyage of discovery 301. Sails pital, 188. Stateof the empire at
through the famous Itrait that bears that time, 189. The Zempoallans
his name, 302. Dilcovers the La- court the friendhip of Cortes, 200.
drone and Philippine ifands, 303 Is Several caziques enter into alliance
killed, ibid.
killed, ibid with Cortes, o202. Character of the
Magnet, its property of attracting iron natives of Tlafcala, 208. The Taf-

known to the ancients, but not its calans reduced to sue for peace, 24.
poar inclination, i. 4. Extraordinary Arrival of.Cortes at thecapital city,
advantages refultingfrom this dilcove- 23. The city described, 224. Mon-
ry, 5. tezuma acknowledges himself a vassal
Maio, St. account of its commerce with to the Spanish crown, 238. Amount

Spanish Amesica, iii. 261. of the treasure collected by Cortes,
fianco Capac, founder of the Peruvian 240. Reasons of gold being found in

empire, account of, iii. 8, 160. such small quantities, ibid. The
Mande-ville, Sir John, his eallern travels, Mexicans enraged by the imprudent

wi'h a charaaer of his writings, i.34. zeal of Cortes, 242. Attack Alva-
Manila, the colony of, establishtd by Phi- rado during the absence of Cortes,

lip II. of Spain, iii. 280. Trade be- 256. Their resolute attack on Cor-
tweeD, and South America, 281. tes when he returned, 259. Death
Mankitd, their disposition and manners of Montezuma, 26I. The city

formed by their situation, ii. 21. abandoned by Cortes, 264. Battle of
Hence resemblances to be traced in ve- Otumba, 69. The Tepeacans re-
ry diflant places without communica- duced, 274. Preparations of the
tion, 22. Have uniformly attained Mexicans against the return of Cor-
the greate perfedion of their nature tes, 277. Cortes besieges the city
in temperate regions, 169. with a fleet on the lake, 287. The
Marco Polo the Venitiar, hit ectraordi- Spaniards repulsed in storming the

nary travels in the Ealt, i. 33. city, 29o. Guatimozin taken prifo-
Mareft, Gabriel, hisaccount of the coun- ner, 296. Cortes appointed gover-

try between the Ilionois and Machil- nor, 307. His schemes and arrange-
limakinac, ii. 348. ments, 308. Inhuman treatment of
Marina, Donna, a Mexican slave, her the natives, 309. Reception of the

hiltory, ii. 184 new regulations there, iii. 85. A re-
Marinus Tyrinus, his erroneous position trofpect into the form of government,

of China, i. 257. policy, and.arts in, 121. Our infor-
Martyr, Peter, his frntimentson the sift mation concerning, very imperfect,

discovery of Ame-ica, i. 266. 124. O igin of the monarchy,
MI'sios, in the Spanish American colo- 125. Number and greatness of

nies, diltintion between them and the cities, 129 Mechanical profeflions
Mulattoes, iii. 222. there diltinguf(hed from each other,
Metais, ulefu! the original natives of 330. Distinction of ranks, 131. Politi-

cal

cal inltitutions, 133. Power and proach his capital, 189. State of his
splendor of their monarchs, 136. Or- empire at this time, ibid. His cha-
der of government, ibid. Provision rater, 19o. His perplexity at the
for the support of it, 137. Police of arrival of the Spaniards, 191. His
ibid. Their arts, 138. Their paint- timid negociations with Coltes, 192.
ings, 140. Their method of con- His scheme for detloying Cortes at
puting time, 144. Their warsconti- Cholula discovered, 219. His irre-
nual and ferocious, ibid. Their fu- solute condut, 2z2. His first inter-
neral rites, 146. Imperfetion of view with Cortes, 223. Is seized by
their agriculture, ibid. Doubts con- Cortes, and confined to the Spanish
cerning the extent of the empire, quarters, 232. Is fettered 234. Ac-
147. Little intercourse among it, knowledges himself a vassal to the
several provinces, 148. Ignorance Spanish crown, 238. Remains in-
of money, 149. State of their cities, flexible with regard to religion, 242.
15o. Temples and other public build- Circumstances of his death, 262.
ings, i51. Religion of, 156. Cauf- Account of agoldcup of his, in Eng-
es of the depopulation of-this coun- land, 307.
try, 200. The small pox very fatal Mulattoes, in the Spanish American co.
there, 202. Number of Indian na- lonies explanation of this dillincion,
tives, remaining there, 205. Lilt iii. 222.
and character of those authors who N
wrote accounts of the conqueftof, ii. Narvae, Pamphilo, is ent by Velaf-
366. 367. Description of the aque- quez with an armament to Mexico,
dut for the supply of the capital city, to supersede Cortes, ii. 246. Takes
iii. 307. See Colonies. poffetlion of Zempoallo, z2x. Is de-
Michael, St. the gulph of, in the South feated and taken prisoner, by Cortes,

Sea, discovered and named by Ba'boa, 154. How he carried on his corref-
i. 204. The colony of, eflabifhied by pondence with Montezuma, 380.
Pizarro, iii. 7. Natchez, an American nation, their
Migraticns of mankind, why first made political intfitutions, ii. 98. Causes

by land, i. . of their tame fubmiflion to the Spa-
Mind, human, the efforts of, proporti- niards, 10o. Their religious doc-

oned to the wants of the body, ii. 68. trines, 139.
Mines of South America, the great in- Navigation, the arts of, very slowly im-

ducement to population, iii. 181. proved by mankind, i. 2. The
Some Account of, 241. Their pro- knowledge of, prior to commercial
duce, 243. The spirit with which intercourse, ibid. Imperfections of a-
they are worked, 244. Fatal effe&s mong the ancients, 4. More im-
of this ardor, 245. Evidence of the proved by the invention of the mari-
pernicious effects of labouring in ner's compass, than by all the efforts
them, 329. Of Mexico, total pro- of preceding ages, 35. The firit
duce of, to the Spanish revenue, 342. naval dilcoveries undertaken by Portu-
344. gal, 40.
Molucca Islands, the Spanish claims on, Negroes, their peculiar situation under

fold by the Emperor Charles V. to the Spanifli dominion in America, iii.
the Portuguese, ii. 305. 223.
Monastic inflitutions, the pernicious es- Ne-wfJundland, its situation described, ii.

feets of, in the Spanish American co- 322.
lonies, iii. 32. Number of con- Newo Hland, rome account of the coun-
vents there, 33r. try and inhabitants, ii. 347.
Monjoons, the periodicalcourfe of, wlen New Spain, discovered and named by

discovered by navigators, i. 9. Juan de Grijalva, i. 24. See Mexic.
Montefino, a Dominican preacher at St. Nigns, Alonfo, his voyage to America,

Domingo publickly remonstrates a- i. 150.
gainft the cruel treatment of the In- Norwegian.r, might in ancient times
dians, i. 2 1 5. have migrated to, and colonized Ame-
Montezuma, the first intelligence receiv- rica, ii. 33. i. 65.

ed by the Spaniards of this prince, i. Nugnez Vela, Blasco, appointed vice-
242. Receives intelligence of the roy of Peru, to enforce the new
arrival of Fernando Cortes in his do- regulations, iii. 85. His charac-
minions, ii. 187. His prelents to ter, 88. Commits Vaca de Caf-
Cortes, 188. Forbids him to ap- tro to prison, 89. Dissensions be-

tween

tween him and the court of audience, the Indians, 178. His cruel teeat-
91. Is confined, 9. Recovers his ment of them, 179. Encourages cul-
liberty, 93. Resumes his command, tivation and manufactures, 183. His
94. Ispurfued by Gonzalo Pizarro, method of trepanning the natives of
95. Is defeated and killed by Pizarro, the Lucayos, 186. Is recalled, 89.
96.

P
-O

Pacific ocean, why, and by whom so
Ocamp., Diego, sent with a squadron named, ii. 303.

from Hispaniola to desolate the coun- Packet boats, first etablifhment of, be-
try of Cumana, i. 233, 235. tween Spain and her American colo-
Ocampo, Sebastian de, first fails roundCu- nies, iii. 269.

ba, and discovers it to be an island, i. Panama, is fttled by Pedrarias Davila,
188. i. 212.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate Parmenides, the first who divided the

the intercourse between distant earth by zones, i. 255.
countries continued long a formidable Patagtnian, ome account of, ii. 57.
barrier, i. . See CcmpaJi, and Navi- The reality of their gigantic size yet
gation. to be decided, 59, 338.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition Pedrartas Davila, is lent with a fleet to

to theWeft Indies, i. 148. His second supersede Balboa in his government of
voyage, 1 59. Obtains a government Santa Maria on the isthmus of Darien,
on thecontinent, 192. . 207. Treats Balboa ill, zo8. Rapa-
Olmeda, Father Bartholomew de, checks cious conduEt of his men, 209. Is re-

the rash zeal of Cortes at Tlafcala in conciled to Balboa, and gives him his
Mexico, ii. 217. Is sent by Cortes to daughter, 20o. Puts Balboa to death,
negociate with Narvaez, 49 21 . Removes his settlement from
Orellana, Francis, is appointed to the Santa Maria to Panama, 212.

command of a bark built by Gonza!o Penguin, the name of that bird not de-
Pizarro, and delerts him, iii. 68. Sails rived from the Welch language, i. z64.
down the Maragnen, 69. Returns to Perez, Juan, patroniles Columbus at the
Spain with a report of wonderful dif- coutt of Callile, i. 74. His solemn
coveries, ibid. Herrera's account of invocation for the success of Colum-
hisvoyage, 301. bus's voyage, 82.
Orgegnez, commands Almagro's party a- Periplus, of Hanno, the authenticityof

gainfl the Pizarros, and is defeated that work jultified, i. 249.
and killed by them, iii. 60. Peru, the first intelligence concerning
Orinsco, the great river o, discovered this country, received by Vasco Nug-

by Christopher Columbus, i. 138. The nez de Balboa, i. 200. 2o5. The coalt
amazing plenty of fihing, ii. 344. of si; ft dilcovered by Pizarro, iii. o.
Strange method ot chufing a captain, Pizarro's Iecond arrival, 15. His
among the Indlian tribes on the banks hoftife proceedings againl the natives,
of, 117. i6. The colony of St. Michael ella-
Otaheite, the inhabitants of, ignorant of blifhtd, 17. State of the empire at

the art of boiling water, ii. 359. the time of this invasion, ibid. The
Otumba, battle of, btween Cortes and kingdom divided between Huafcar and

the Mexicans, ii. 269. Atahualpa, 2. Atahualpa uurps
Ovands, Nicholas, de, is sent governor the government, 22. Huafcar solicits

to Hilpaniola, i. 159. His prudent afiltance from Pizarro, 23. Atahualpa
regulations, 61. Refuses admiflion visits Pizarro, 27. Is feizedbyPizarro,
to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 29. Agrecment for his ransom, 31. Is
164. His ungenerous behaviour to retuscd his liberty, 34. Is cruelly put
Co!umhus on his shipwreck, 169,171. to death, 39. Confusion of the empire
Receives him at length and ends him on this event, 40. Quito reduced
home, 173. Engages ina war with by

by Benalcazar, 42. The cityof Lima Spain, 343. See Clonief.
founded by Pizarro, 48. Chili inva- Peter I. ar of Rufia, his extensive
ded by Almagro, 49. Infurreftion of views in profeculing Afialic dilove-
the Peruvians, 50. Almaro put to ries, ii. 27.
death by Pizarro, 63. Pizarro di- Pheniiais, antient, state of commerce
vides the country among his followers, and navigation among them, i. 6.
65. Progress of the Spanish arms Their trade, how conducted, 249.
there, 66. Francis Pizarro affatlina- Philipll. of Spain, his turbulent dfpo-
ted, 73. Reception of the new regu, fition aided by his American treasure,
lations there, 86. The viceroy con- iii. 50. Eltablifhes the colony of
fined by the court of audience, 92. Manila, 80.
The viceroy defeated and killed by Philp III. exhaufis his country by in-
Gonzalo Pizarro, 96. Arrival of Pe- fiderate bigotry, iii. 50.
dro de la Gafca, 103. Redution and Philippine illands, discovered by Ferdi-
deathofGonzalo Pizarro, ii. The nand Magellan, ii. 303. A colony
civil wars there not carried on with eftablilhed therebty Philip II. ofipain,
mercenary soldiers, 112. But never- iii. 280. Trade betweei, and Ame-
thelefs gratified with immense re- rica, 281.
wards, 113. Their profusion and Phyjic, the art of, in America, why
luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their con- connected with divination, ii. 144.
tests, 114. Their wa.:t offaith, ibid. Pinto, chevalier, his description of the
Inltances, 1 5. Division of, by Gafca charateriftic features of the native
among his followers, I x6. A retro- Americans, ii. 335.
fpe& into the orignial government, Pinaon, Vincent Yanez, commands a
arts, and manners of the natives, 12x. velTel under Columbus in his firit
The high antiquity they pretend to, voyage of discovery, i. 81. Sails to
157. Their records, 58. Origin of America on a private adventure with
their civil policy, 160. This founded four ships, t8o. Difeovers Yucatan,
in religion, x16. The authority of 188.
the Incas absolute and unlimited, ibid. Pizarro, Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuf-
All crimes there punished capitally, co by the Peruvians, iii. 52. Is
162. Mild genius of their religion, surprised there by Almagro, 55. Es-
163. Its influence on their civil po- capes with Alvarado, 57. Defends
licy, 64. And on their military sys- his brother at the court of Spain, 64.
tem, 65. Peculiar fate of property Is committed to prison, 65.
there, 166. Diftintion of ranks, Pizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in
167. State of arts, 68. Improved his settlement on the ithmus of Da-
tlate of agriculture, ibid. Their build- rien, i. 194. Marches under him
ings, 170. Their public roads, 171. across the ilthmus where they disco.
Their bridges, 173. Their mode of ver the South Sea, 204. His birth,
refining silver ore, 174. Works of education, and character, iii. 2. As-
elegance, 175. Their civilization, fociates with Almagro and De Lque,
nevertheless but imperfet, 176. in a voyage of difcovcry, 4. His ill
Cuzco the only place- that had the fuccels, 5. Is recalled, and deserted
appearance of a city, ibid. No per- by mos of his followers, 8. Remains
fe& separation of profefions, 177. on the illand of Gorgona for upplies,
Little commercial intercourse, ibid. ibid. Dilcovers the coat ofPeru, o.
Their unwarlike spirit, 178. Eat Returns to Panama, ii. Goes to
their flesh and filh raw, 179. Brief Spain to solicit reinforcements, 12.
account of other provinces under the Procures the supreme command
viceroy of New Spain, 180. Causes for himself, 13. Is affited with
of the depopulation of this country, money by Cortes, ibid. Lands again
o01. The small pox very fatal there, inPeiu, 5. His holtile proceedings
202. Writers who gave accounts of againfi the natives, 6. Eftablifles
the conqueftof, 291. Their method the colony of St. Michael, 17. State
of building, 31. State of the revenue of the Peruvian empire atthis time,
derived from, by the crown of ibid.

ibid. Cause of his easy penetration Pliny, the naturalist, inflance of his
into the country, 22. Is applied to ignorance in geography, i. 255.
by Huafcar, for afliftance against his Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida,
victorious brother Atahualpa, 23. i. 197. Romantic motive of his
State of his forces, ibid. Arrives at voyage, 198.
Caxamalca, 25. Is visited by the Population, of the earth, sow progress
Inca, 27. His perfidious fizure of of, i. .
him, 29. Agrees to Atahualpa's of- Porto Bello, discovered and named by
ser for his ranlom, 31. Division of Chrillopher Columbus, i. 66.
their plunder, 33. Refuses Atahu- Pcrto Rico, is fettled and subjected by
alpa his liberty, 34. His ignorance Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 187.
exposed to Atahualpa, 37. Beflows Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i. 44.
a form of trial on the Inca, 38. Puts Portugal, when and by whom the court
him to death, 39. Advances to Cuz- of inquisition was first introduced into,
co, 41. Honours conferred on him i. 256.
by the Spanish court, 45. Beginning Portugue, a view of the circumfances
of dissensions between him and Alma- that induced them to undertake the
gro, 46. His civil regulations, 47. discovery of unknown countries, i. 39.
Founds the city of Lima, 48. In- 41. First African discoveries of, 42.
furrection of the Peruvians, 50. Cuf- Madeiradifcovered, 45. They dou-
co seized by Almagro, 55. Deludes ble Cape Bojador, 46. Obtain a pa.
AImagro by negociations, 57. De- pal grant of all the countries they
feats Almagro, and takes him prison- should discover, 49. Cape Verd
er, 60. Puts Almagro to death, Islands, and the Azores discovered,
63. Divides the country among his 5o. Voyage to the Ealt Indies by
followers, 65. The impolitic par- Vasco de Gama, 145.
tiality of his allotments, ibid. Makes Pctfi, the rich silver mines there, how
his brother Gonzalo governor of discovered, iii. 242. The mines of,
Quito, 67. Is arallinated by Juan greatly exhaulted and scarcely worth
de Herrada, 73. working, 335.
Fizarro, Gonzalo, is made governor of Prfners of war, how treated by the na-

Quito, by his brother Francis, iii. 67. tive Americans, ii. 1 II.
His expedition over the Andes, ibid. Property, the idea of unknown to the
Is deserted by Orellana, 68. His dif- native Americans, ii. 91. Notions
trefs on this event, 70. His difaf- of the Brafilians concerning, 349.
trous return to Quito, 71. Is en- Protetor of the Indians, in Spanilh
couraged by the people to oppose Nug- America, his function, iii. 228.
nes Vela, the new viceroy, go. Ptolemy the philosopher, his geographical
Assumes the government of P eru, 92. descriptions more ample and exact than
Marches against the viceroy, 94. De- those of his predectffors, i. 24. His
feats and kills him, 96. Is advised geography translated by the Arabians,
by Carvajal toaffume the sovereignty 27. His erroneous position of the
of the country, 97. Chufes to ne- Ganges, 252.
gociate with the court of Spain, 98.
Consultations of the court on his con-
duct, 99. His violent resolutions on Q
the arrival of P edro de la Ga!-ca, c4.
Resolves to oppose him by violence,
o15. Marches to reduce Centcno at .etlavaca, brother of Montezuma
Cuzco. 107. Defeats him, oS8. Is succeeds him as king of Mexico, ii.
deserted by his troops on the approach 277. Conducts in person the fierce
of Gafca, lo. Suritnders and is attacks whieh obliged Cortes to aban-
executed, i. His adherents, men don his capital, ibid. Dies of the
of no principle, 115. small pox, 78.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de So- .evedo, bishop of Darien, his confer.

IiS, i. 213. Its amazing width, ii. ence
321.

rence with Las Casas on the treatment Franceto the chan oftheTartars,i. 33
of the Indians, in the presence of the Ru^ans, Afiaticdifcoveriesmadebythem
emperor Charles V. i. 230. ii. 27. Uncertainty of. 333.
Ouickfilver, the property of the famous

mines of, at Guanacabelica, reserved
by the crown of Spain, iii. 336. The S
price of, why reduced, ibid.
uinquina, or Jesuit's bark, a produ&ion Sacotecas, the rich fIver mines there
peculiar to Peru, iii. 247. when discovered, iii. 242.
,,ipos, or historic cords of the Peruvi- San Salvador, discovered and named by
ans, some account of, iii. I58. Chriltopher Columbus, i. 93.
Quito, the kingdom of, conquered by Sanchs, Don Bedro, account of his His-

Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, iii. 20. tory of the conquett of Peru, iii. 291.
Is left to his son Atahualpa, 21. Sandoval, the hocking barbarities exe-
Atahualpa's general revolts after his cuted by, in Mexico, ii. 309.
death, 41. Is reduced by the Spani- Sandoval, Francisco Tello de, is sent by
ards under Benalcazar, 42. Benalca- the emperor Charles V. to Mexico,
zar deprived, and Gonzalo Pizarro as vifitador of America, iii. 85. His
made governor, 67. moderation and prudence, ibid.

Savage life, a general estimate of, ii. 156.
Scalps, motive of the native Americans
R for taking them from their enemies,

i. 353.
Ramufo, his defence of Hanno's account Serralvo, marquis de, his extraordinary

of the coaf of Africa, i. 250. gains during his vice-royalty in Ame-
Regifler hips, for what purpose intro- rica, iii. 347.

duced in the trade between Spain and Seville, extraordinary increase of its ma-
her colonies, iii. 264. Supersede the nufatures by the American trade, iii.
use of the galeons, 265. 337. Its trade greatly reduced, ibi,.
Religion of the native Americans, an in- The American trade removed to Ca-

quiry into, ii. 32. diz, 55.
Ribas, his account of the political (late of Silverore, method of refining it pra&ised

the people of Cinaloa, ii. 350. Of by the native Peruvians, iii. 174.
their want of religion, 360 Snora, late discoveries of rich mines
Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account made there by the Spaniards, iii. 182.

of those provinces, iii. 189. Soul, American ideas of the immortali'y
River, the amazing ize of those in Ame- of, ii. 141.

rica, ii. 3. Ssuth Sea, first discovered by Vasco Nug.
Pobinfon, professor, his remarks on the nez de Balboa, i. 204.

temperature of various climates,ii. 323- Spain, general idea of the policy of, with
Rcldan, Francis, is left chief jultice in regard to the American colonies, iii.

Hispaniola, by Christopher Coiumbus, 206. Eaily inteipofition of the regal
i. 131. Becomes ringleader of a mu- authority in the colonies, o7. All
tiny, 40. Submits, 143. the American dominions of, ubjeteed
Romans, their progress in navigation and to two viceroys, 208. A third vice-

discovery, i. 17. Their military fpi- royalty lately eftablifled, 209. The
rit averse to mechanical arts and corn- colonies of, compared with those of
merce, 18. Navigation and trade Greece and Rome, 215. Advantages
favoured in the provinces under their Ihe derived from her colonies, 248.
-government, 19. Their extensive Why he does not fillderive the fame,
discoveries by land, 2o. Their em- 249. Rapid decline of trade, 251. This
pire, and the ciences, destroyed to- decline increased by the mode of regu-
gether, 25. lating the intercourse with America,
.ybruquis, father, his embalTy from 254. Employsguardacoftastocheckili.

cit

fit trade, 263. The use of regitler Peru, iii. 64. Arrives at Quito,
ships introduced, 264. E:lablifhment 75. Assumes the supreme authority,
of the company of Caraccas, 267. 76. Defeats young Almagro, 77.
Enlargement of commercial ideas The severity of his proceedings, 78.
there, 268 Free trade permitted to Prevents an infurretion concerted to
several provinces, 270. Revenuede- oppose the new regulations, 88. Is
rived fiom America, 283. Specifi- imprisoned by the new viceroy, 89.
cation, 343. Valverde, father Vincent, his curious
;paniards, their curious form of taking harangue to Atahualpa, Inca of Peru,

poisefion of new discovered countries, iii. 28. Gives his fanEion to the tri.
i. 270. al and condemnation of Atahualpa,
Strabc, a citation from, proving the great 38.

geographical ignorance of the anticnts, Vega, Garcilafo de la, character of his
i. 252. His ownwantof geographi- commentary on the Spanish writers
cal knowledge, 255. concerning Peru, iii; 293.
Superstition, always connected with a Vegetables, their natural tendency to ser-

a dfire of penetrating into the secrets tilize the foil where they grow, ii. 18.
of futurity, ii. 143. Yelafquez, Diego de, conquers the ifand

T. of Cuba, i. 96. 237. His prepare.

tions for invading New Spain, ii. 173.
Tapia, Chriftoval de, is ent from Spain His difficulty in chufing a commander

to Mexico, to fuperlede Cortes in his for the expedition, 174 Appoints
command, but fails in the attempt, ii. Fernando Cortes, 175. His motives
306. to this choice, 176. Becomes fufpi-
Tartars, the poflibility of their migrat- cious of Cortes, 178. Orders Cortes

ing to America, ii. 31. to be deprived of his commiflion, and
Tlafcala, in Mexico, character of the arrefled, 179. Sends an armament

natives of, ii. 209. Oppose the pas- to Mexico after Cortes, 44.
sage of the Spaniards, 209. Are Venegas, P. his characer of the native
reduced to sue for peace, 214. Californians, ii. 342.
Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured Venereal disease, originally brought from

of any in all America, iii. 247. America, ii. 6. Appears to be
ioupinambor, account of their ferocious wearing out, 62. Its firlt rapid pro-
courage from Lery, ii. 353. grefs, 339.
Trade, free, opened between Spain and Venezuela, hiltory of that settlement, iii.

her colonies, iii. 270. Increase of the 194.
Spanish customs from this measure, Venice, its origin as a maritime state, i.
338. 30. Travels of Marco Polo, 33.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, Yerd, illands discovered by the Portu-

when discovered by navigators, i. 19. guefe, i. 50.
Travellers, ancient, character of their Viceroys, all the Spanish dominions in

writings, i. 35. America fubjeaed to two, iii. 208.
Trinidad, the island of, discovered by A third lately established, 209. Their

Chriltopher Columbus on his third Their powers, ibid. A fourth elta-
voyage, i. 137. blifhed, 275.
Tutcuman, and Rio de la Plata, account illa, Segnor, his account of the slate

of those provinces, iii. 189. of population in New Spain, iii.
Tyre, the commeice of that city, how 323. His detail of the Spanish Ame-

conduEted, i 249. can revenue, 343.
'ythes of Spanifl America, how applied Villefagno, Antonio, one of Cortes's

by the court of Spain, iii. 344. soldiers, foments a mutiny among his

V. troops, ii. 282. Is discovered by Cor-

V* tes, and hanged, 283.
Faca de Caqfro, Chriftoval, is sent from Ulca,

Spain to regulate the government of

lUlloa Don Antonio de, his description Ximenes, cardinal, his regulations for the

of the chara&erillic features of the treatment of the Indians in the Spa.
native Americans, . 33 Hi nih colonies, i. 220. Patronifesthe
reason for the Americans not being so attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii.
sensible of pain as the reft of mankind, 300.
3g5. His account of the goods export-
ed from Spain to America, with the y
duty on them, iii. 347-
Volcanos, remarkable number of, in the 2',atan, the province of, discovered by

northern parts of the globe discovered Pinzon and Diaz de Solis, i. 88.
by the Ruflians, ii 334. Described, 271. From whence the

province derives its value, iii. 185.

W Policy of the court of Spain with re-

Jafir, Lionel, his account of a peculi- fpe& to, 186.
ar race of diminutive Americans iii.
55. Compared with similar produc-
tions in Africa, 56.
War song of the native Americans, the

sentiments and termsof, ii. 353, Zarate, Don Augufine, charater of his
Wrcmen, the condition of, among the na- Hifory of the conquest of Peru, iii.

tive Americans, ii. 72. Are not proli- 292.
sic, 75. Are not permitted to join i Zones, the earth how divided into, by the
their drunken feasts, 153. Nor to wear geography of the ancients, i. 2. By
ornaments, 3 57. -'- whom first so divided, 2 5 5.

uommaraga, Juan de,firll bifhopof Mex.
X ico, the dettroyer of all the ancient re-

gordsof the Mexican empire, iii. x5$.
Xtres, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro,

the earliefl writer on his Peruvian ex-
pedition, iii. 291.
