*€ -i{^

.. H . .... '
..T H E

I S

T O

OF

R

Y
SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
Queen M A R Y,

and of King

TILL

JAMES
His AccEssION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
.R v I EW of the S c o T T ISH HISTO R Y previous to that Period,

And an APPENDIx containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VO L U ME S.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSO N,D.D.

Minister of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

L 0 N D 0 N:
Printed for A. M i L 1. A t, in tle Strand.

MDCCLXII.
H

VI.

_ _
__ __ C_ 

I_ _I 1_1_

..' '
L.

# BOOK VI.

S** TiA N D
H I S TO R Y

OF
SCOTL AND.

B OOK VI.
T ~H E unexpected olow, by which the Regent was cut offg yB r

firuck the King's party with the utmost conflernation. '- -
Elizabeth bewailed his death as the most fatal disaster, DT1570 o

Disorders oc-
which could have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to caloned by

the Regent's

a degree that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, death.
as if, now, her restoration were not only certain, but near at hand.
The infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who expressed
such indecent joy at the commifion of it. And as the afaffin made
his escape on a horse, which belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton,
and fled diretly to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph,
it was concluded that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice to the re-
fentment of the Qeen's party, rather than to the revenge of
private man. On the day after the murder, Scott of Buccleugh,
and Ker of Ferniherft, both zealous abettors of the Qeen's cause,

VOL. I.' B entered

',"~ ,;','.i I ,

BOOK VI. entered England in an hostile manner, and plundered and burnt
~' I'^- the country, the inhabitants of which expeced no such outrage. If
3570.

the Regent had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on
such an irregular incursion, nor could it well have happened so oon
after his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the Regent's death gave occasion. During such general
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excesses of every kind. As it was impossible to restrain these, with-

Steps taken out a fettled form of government, a Convention of the nobles was
towards eleC&-
ing another held, in order to deliberate concerning the elecion of a Regent.
tb. Lz. The Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meeting, and

protested against its proceedings, The King's own party was irre-
solute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had
set at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then afembled
a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had been laid to
his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the two par-
ties, by proposing to admit the Queen to the joint administration
of government with her son. Elizabeth, adhering to her ancient
system with regard to Scottith affairs, laboured, notwithilanding the
follicitations of Mary's friends *, to multiply, and to perpetuate the
fa&tions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom he
despatched into Scotland on the firil news of the Regent's death,
and who was her usual agent for such services, found all parties so
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcileable rancour,
that it cost him little trouble to inflame their animosity. The Con-
vention broke up without coming to any agreement; and a new meet-
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited, was appointed
on the first of May -.

* See Append. No. L t Crawf.. Men. 31. Calderw.. . 157.

MEAW

3

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still continued to ac- BooK VI.
knowledge the King's authority, were at the utmost pains to restore I o

1570.
some degree of harmony among their countrymen. They procured, A coalition of

parties at-.

for this purpose, an amicable conference among the leaders of the tempted in
two factions. But while the one demanded the restoration of the
Queen, as the only thing which could re-establish the public tran-
quillity; while the other esteemed the King's authority to be so fa-
cred, that it was, on no account, to be called in question or im-
paired; and neither of them would recede in the least point from
their opinions, they separated without any profpet of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by the hope
of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France, with promises of
powerful succour to the Qeen's adherents; and as the civil wars in
that kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating in a peace,
it was expected that Charles would soon be at liberty to fulfil what
he promised. On the other hand, the Earl of Suffex was aem-
bling a powerful army on the borders, and its operations could not
fail of adding spirit and trength to the King's party *.

THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the factions proved Queen's party

ineffectual, it contributed omewhat to moderate, or suspend their Ednburgh.
rage; but they soon began to a with their usual violence. Mor-
ton, the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide, follicited
Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for the safety of a party, so
devoted to her interest, and which htood so much in need of her
assistance. The Chiefs of the Queen's fadion, assembling at Lin-
lithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was Aprl o.
both Governor of the castle, and Provost of the town, prevailed

* Crawf. Mcm. 134.

B ,? on
1

'0 ' the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and
x570,

Maitland, acceded almost openly to their party; and the Duke,
and Lord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's fa-
vour, refimed the places, which they had formerly held in their
councils. Encouraged by the acquisitions of persons, so illuifirious
by their birth, or So eminent for their abilities, they published j
proclamation, declaring their intention to fiupport the Queen's au-
thority, and seemed resolved not to leave the city before the meet-
ing of the approaching convention, in, which, by their numbers
and influence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voice&
on their fide *.

Endeavour to AT the fame time, they had formed a design of kindling war be-
involve the

iation in, a tween +he two Kingdoms. And if they could engage them. in hof-
wawithEng- tilites, and- revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they'

hoped, not only to diirlve a confederacy of great advantage to the
King's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to the Queen,
Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With this view,
they had. immediately after the murder of the Regent, prompted
Scott and: Ker to commence hostilities, and. had since instigated.
them to continue and extend their depredations. As-Elizabeth fore--
saw, on, the one hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this;
a ninal: quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not to fffer such.
an insult on her government to pass with impunity; flhe iued a
Proclamation, declaring that he imputed the outrages which had.
been committed, not to the Scottifll nation, but to a few desperate:
and ill-defigning persons; that, with the former, he was resolved-

* Crawf. Mcm. 137. Caldcrw. 2. 176.

to
4

'T 1- E' 14 1 9 T 0 RT

to maintain an inviolable friendflip, whereas the duty, which he BooK VI..
owed to her own fubjeds, obliged her to chastise the licentiousness 1570.
of the latter *. Suffex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the east, the other- on the weft borders, and laid waste
the adjacent countries with fire and sword -t. Fame magnified the
number and progress of their armies, and Mary's adherents, not
thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof
were i affe&ed to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There, by April z,
a public proclamation, they asserted the Queen's authority, and
sorbad giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Ar-
gyll and Huntly, whom she had constituted her Lieutenants in the
kingdom.

THE nobles who continued faithful to the King, though confi- King's party

derably weakened by the defecion of so many of their friends, a- burgh i"
fembled at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They issued a coun-May 1'
ter-proclamation declaring those who appeared for the Queen, e-
nemies of their country; and charging them with the murder both
of the late King, and of the Regent. They could not, however,.
presume so much on their own strength, as to venture either to eledt
a Regent, or to take the field against the Qeen's party; but the as-
fiftance which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do,
both. By her order, Sir William Drury marched into Scotland,
with a thousand foot, and three hundred horse; the King's adhe-
rents joined him with a considerable body of troops, and advan-
cing towards Glasgow, where the adverse party had already begun
hostilities, by attacking the caffle, they forced them to retire, plun-
dered the neighbouring country, which belonged to the Hamiltons,

Cald.. 2. 1:a. . abala, 174.

and,,

5

BOOK VI. and, after seizing ome of their castles, and razing others, -returned
(---" to Edinburgh.
1570.

ilotives of E- UNDER Drury's protedion, the Earl of Lennox returned into
lizabeth's con- Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of the kingdom
du&f with re-
gard to them. to him, during the minority of his grandson. His illustrious birth,

and alliance with the royal family of England, as well as of Scot-
land, rendered him worthy of that honour; and his resentment
against Mary being implacable, and his estate lying in England, and
his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him as a man, who,
both from inclination, and from interest, would adt in concert with
her, and ardently wished that he might succeed Murray in the of-
fice of Regent. But, on many accounts, he did not think it pru-
dent to discover her own sentiments, or to favour his pretensions too
openly. The civil wars in France, which had been excited by a
pretended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierceness that did
it real dishonour, appeared now to be on the point of coming to
an issue; and after hedding the best blood, and wafting the richest
provinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace with an ar-
dour, that facilitated the negociations, which were carrying on for
that purpole. Charles IX. was known to be a passionate admirer
of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser a Qeen of
France, and the most ancient ally of his crown, to languish in her
present cruel situation, without attempting to procure her relief.
He had, hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with remonftrat-
ing, by his ambassadors, against the indignity, with which the had
been treated. But if he were once at full liberty to pursue his in-
clinations, Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from the in-
petuofity of his temper, and the power of his arms. It therefore
became neceflary for her to at with ome reserve, and not to ap-

pear,
6

pear, avowedly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con- BOOK V.
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and prejudices of the 570
Scots required no less management. Had the openly supported
Lennox's claim; had he recommended him to the Convention, as
the candidate, whom he approved; this might have rouzed the in-
dependant spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her
intention, he might have defeated its success. For these reasons,
She hesitated long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the mef-
fages, which she received from the King's party. A more ex-
plicit declaration of her sentiments was at last obtained, and ar
event of an extraordinary nature seems to have been the occasion
of it. Pope Pius V. having issued a bull, whereby he excommu-
nicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and absolved her
fubjeas from their oath of allegiance, Felton, an Englishman, had
the boldness to fix it on the gates of the Bilhop of London's palace.
In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own ambition, or pride, or
bigotry, denounced this fatal sentence against the most powerful
monarchs; but as the authority of the court of Rome was now leTs
regarded, its proceedings were more cautious; and, it was only
when they were rouzed by some powerful Prince, that the thun-
ders of the church were ever heard. Elizabeth therefore impu-
ted this ftep, which .the Pope had taken, to a combination of the
Roman Catholic Princes against her, and fufpeaed that ome plot
was on foot in favour of the Scottish Queen. In that event, fie
knew that the safety of her own kingdom depended on preserving
her influence in Scotland; and ih order to strengthen this, he re-
newed her promises of protecing the King's adherents, encouraged
them to proceed to the eletion of a Regent, and even ventured to
point out the tarl of Lennox, as the person who had the best titles

That

7

BooK VI. That honour was accordingly conferred upon him, in a Conven-

'I ' tion of the whole party, held on the 12th of July*.
1570.

Lennox eleft- THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meeting of the Par-
ed Regent. liament, which the Queen's party had summoned to convene at

Linlithgow. Having effected that, he marched againtf the Earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garrison,
which he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at discretion. Soon
after he made himself master of some other castles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his administration, as well as by the
appearance of a considerable army, with which the Earl of Suffex
hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of fe-
cretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other leaders
of the QEeen's party, traitors and enemies of their country $.

Mary's adhe- . IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Queen's adherents
rents nego- had recourse to the King of Spain jj, with whom Mary had held a
tiate with
Spain. close correspondence ever since her confinement in England. They

prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two of his officers to take
a view of the country, and to examine its coasts, and harbours; and
obtained from him a fiall supply of money and arms, which were
sent to the Earl of Huntly t- But this aid, so disproportionate to

Elizabethpro-their exigencies, would have availed them little. They wcre in-
poses a treaty debted for their safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
of accommo-
dation be- under colour of retforing the captive Queen to her throne. The'
tween Mary
and hlr ub. first teps in this negociation had been taken in the month of May;
jec s. but hitherto little progress was made in it. The peace concluded be-

tween the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and her appre-

* §potfw. 240. Cald. 2. 86. See Append. No. II. : Crawf. Mcm. 159.
Cald. 2. 198. 11 See Append. No. III. t Anders. 3. 123. Crawf Mem. 153.

henfions

4

'henfions that Charles would' interpose with vigour in behalf ofBooKVI.
his fifter-in-law, quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affeaed to 1570.
treat her prisoner with more indulgence, she listened more gracious-
ly to the follicitations of foreign ambassadors in her favour, and
seemed fully determined to replace her on the throne of her ancef-
tors. As a proof of her sincerity, she laboured to procure a cefla-
tion of arms between the two contending facions in Scotland. Len-
nox, elated with the good fortune, which had hitherto attended his
administration, and flattering himself with an easy triumph over
enemies, whose estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, re-
fused, for some time, to come into this measure. It was not safe
for him, however, to dispute the will of his protearefs. A ceffa-
tion of hostilities during two months, to commence on the third of
September, was agreed upon; and being renewed from time to
time, it continued till the first of April next year *.

SOON after, Elizabeth despatched Cecil and Sir Walter Mildmay

to the Queen of Scots. The dignity of these ambassadors, the
former her prime Minister, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that the
negociation was serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty was
now approaching. The propositions, which they made to her,
were advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in Mary's
situation, had reason to expe&t. The ratification of the treaty of
Edinburgh; the renouncing any pretensions to the English Crown,
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the adhering
to the alliance between the two kingdoms; the pardoning her sub-
jeds, who. had taken arms againit her; and her promising to hold

* Spotfwood; 243:

:9
VOL. II.

C

110

BOOK VI. no correspondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that might

--- ditfurb Elizabeth's government; were among the chief articles. By
1570.

way of security for the accompliihment of these, they demanded
that ome persons of rank should be given as hostages, that the
Prince her son should reside in England, and that a few castles on
the border Should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some of these
propositions Mary conented; ome he endeavoured to mitigate;
and others he attempted to evade. In the mean time, he tranf-
mitted copies of them to the Pope, to the Kings of France and
Spain, and to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without
some timely and vigorous interposition in her behalf, he would be
obliged to accept of these hard conditions, and to purchase liberty
at any price. But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by
his efforts against the Turks, his treasury was entirely exhausted.
Charles had already begun to meditate that conspiracy against the
Hugonots, which marks his reign with such infamy; and it required
much leisure, and perfect tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan
to maturity. Philip was employed in fitting out that fleet, which
acquired so great renown to the Christian arms, by the vitory over
the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened an infur-
redtion; and his fubjets in the Netherlands, provoked by much
oppression, and many indignities, were breaking out into open re-
bellion. All of them, for these different reasons, advised Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the best
terms the could procure *.

Elizabeth's ar- MAR Y, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,
tifices in the
condut of it, and discovered a facility of disposition, which promised till fur-

+ Andcrf. Vol. III. 109, z1o.

ther

6
10

ther conceflons. But no concession he could have made, would BOOK VI.
have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated professions 57o.
of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and notwithstanding the so-
lemnity with which {he carried on the treaty, had no other objec
in it, than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time *. After hav-
ing so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so un-
generous a manner, fhle could not now dismiss her with safety.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary had
found means to excite commotions in England, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What desperate effecs of her just resent-
ment might be expected, if he were set at liberty, and recovered
her former power? What engagements could bind her, not to
revenge the wrongs he had suffered, nor to take advantage of the
favourable conjunctures, that might present themselves ? Was it
possible for her to give such security for her behaviour, in times to
come, as might remove all suspicions and fears ? And was there not
good cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ever obliterate.
the memory of past injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though
she continued to ad as if her views had been entirely different. She
appointed seven of her privy counsellors to be commissioners for
fettling the articles of the treaty; and as Mary had already named
the Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingfton, for her
ambassadors, he required the Regent to impower proper persons to
appear in behalf of the King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn ab-
bot of Dunfermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons chosen
by the Regent. They prepared for their journey, as slowly as Eli-
zabeth herself could have wifled. At length they arrived at Lon-
don, and met the commissioners of the two Queens. Mary's am- Feb. 19.

* Diggcs, Compl. Amb. 78.

II
C 2

bafla-

BOOK VI. baffiadrs discovered the fdrongeft inclination to comply with every

I- - -thing, that would remove' the obstacles, which flood in the way

of their mistress's liberty. But when Morton and his associates.
were called upon to vindicate their condut, and to explain the fen-
timents of their party, they began, in justification of their treat-
ment of the Queen, to advance such maxims concerning the li-
mited powers of Princes, and the natural right of subjes to re-
sift and to controul them, as were extremely shocking to Elizabeth,..
whose notions of regal'prerogative were very exalted.. With regard
to the authority which the King now possessed, they declared that:
they neither had, nor could possibly receive inftru&ions, to content
to any treaty, that tended to subvert, or even to impair it, in the
least degree *. Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than'
such a reply from the commissioners of the King of Scots, to the:
Qeen of England. His party depended absolutely on her protec--
tion, her hand had feated him on the throne, and to her power he-
owed the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease, She could,
have brought them to talk in a very different manner; and whatever.
conditions he might have thought fit to prescribe, they would have:
had no other choice but to.fubmit. This declaration, however, she.

It proves affected to confider. as an insuperable difficulty. And finding that.
fiuitles. there was no reason to dread any danger from the French King, who

had not discovered that eagerness in support of Mary, which was:
expected; the reply made by Morton furniihed her with a pretence
Manrchb.2. for putting a stop to the negociation, till the Regent should fend am-

baffadors with more. ample powers. Thus after being amused for:
ten months with the hopes of liberty, the unhappy Q(een of Scots
remained under ftriter.cuftody than ever, and without any prof-
pec of escaping from it;.. while thole fubjeds, who still adhered to

- Cld.. 2, 2.34,. Digges, 51. Hfaynes,,523, .524.:

her,.

7.

her, were exposed, without ally or protetor, to the rage of enemies, BOOK VI.
whom their success in this negociation rendered still more insolent .

I57I.
ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which had been Dunbarton

cafile furpriz-

observed with little exadnefs on either fide, Captain Crawford of ed by the Re-
Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, performed a service, gent
of great importance to the Regent, by surprising the castle of Dun-
barton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
the Queen had kept possession, ever since the commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rifes in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely flrong, and in the opinion of that age, impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and
esteemed the most proper place in the kingdom for landing any so-
reign-troops, that might come to Mary's aid. The strength of the
place rendered Lord Fleming the governor more secure than he
ought to have been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who had
served in the gartifon, and had been disgusted by ome ill usage,
proposed the scheme to the Regent, endeavoured to demonstrate that
it was pracicable, and offered himself to go the foremols man on
the enterprize. It was thought prudent to rifque any danger, for
so great a prize. Scaling-ladders; and whatever else was necessary,
were prepared with the utmost secrecy and dispatch. All the
avenues to the castle were seized, that no intelligence of the design
might reach the governor. Towards evening, Crawford marched
from Glasgow, with a finall but determined band. By midnight,
they arrived at the bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and
the fly, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was covered
with a thick fog. It was where the rock was highest, that the as-

* Andcrf. 3. 91, &c.

failants

BOOK VI. failants made their attempt, because. in that place there were few
*'- " sentinels, and they hoped to find them least alert. The firfl ladder

571.

was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness of those who mount-
ed it, brought it to the ground. None of the assailants were hurt
by the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and fastened the ladder
to the roots of a tree, which grew in a cleft. This place they all
reached with the utmost difficulty, but were still at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made fast a second
time; but in the middle of the ascent, they met with an unforeseen
difficulty. One of their companions was seized with ome sudden
fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All were at
a fland. It was impossible to pals him. To tumble him headlong
was cruel; and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's pre-
fence of mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall when the fit was
over: and turning the other fide of the ladder, they mounted, with
ease, over his belly. Day now began to break, and there frill re-
mained an high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many greater
difficulties, this was Loon accomplished. A sentry observed the first
man, who appeared on the parapet, and had just time to give the
alarm, before he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more follicitous
about their own safety, than capable of making resistance. The
assailants rushed forwards, with repeated houts, and with the ut-
most fury; took possession of the magazine; seized the cannon; and
turned them against their enemies. Lord Fleming got into a small
boat, and fled all alone, into Argylfhire. Crawford, in reward of
his valour and good condut, remained mafler of the castle; and as
he did not lose a single man in the enterprize, he enjoyed his fuc-
cess with unmixed pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French

Envoy,
14

Envoy, and Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews, were the pri-BoOK VI.
foners- of greatest diftindion *. 157

VERAC'S characer protected him from the usage, which he me- Archbishop of

St. Andrews

rited by his ativity in stirring up enemies against the King. The put to death
Regent treated the lady with great politeness, and humanity. But by him.
a very different fate awaited the archbishop; he was carried under
a strong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted
by a& of Parliament, he was, without any formal trial, condemn-
ed to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken, the
sentence was executed. An attempt was made to convict him of be-
ing accessary to the murther both of the King and Regent, but these
accusations were supported by no proof. Our historians observe
that he was the first bishop in Scotland who died by the hands of
the executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church
and state, ought to have exempted him from a punishment, inflicted
only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, his abi-
lities, and his profefion, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lennox hated him as the person, by whose
counsels the reputation and power of the house of Hamilton were
supported. And party rage, and personal enmity, dictated that in-
decent sentence, for which some colour was fought, by imputing to
him such odious crimes --.

THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment of the Arch- Kirkaldyde-

fends the caf-

bifhlop, perplexed and enraged the Q 'een's party; and hostilities tie ofEdin-
were renewed with all the fierceness which disappointment and in- burgh in the
dignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who during the truce, had taken
care to increase the number of his garrison, and to provide every

* Buch. 394. t Spotfw, 252,

thing

I5

Roogy VI. thing necessary for his defence, issued a proclamation declaring Len-

7 onox's authority to be unlawful, and usurped; .commanded all who fa-

voured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized the
arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the lteeple of
St. Giles; repaired the walls and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affecions of the inhabitants leaned a different way,
held out the metropolis againit the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that faction, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a small fum of
money, and ome ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a. considerable bo-
dy of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily kir-
mifhes happened, and with various success. The Queen's party
was not strong enough to take the field against the Regent, nor was
his superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the castle, or of
the town *.

Both parties SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies,
hold parlia. the Regent had summoned a Parliament to meet in that place. In
ments.
May 14. order to prevent any objedion against the lawfulness of the meeting,

the members obeyed the proclamation as exacly as possible; and
assembled in a house at the head of the Canongate, which though
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meeting; but they
were so strongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain. They pas-
fed an at attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then adjourn-
ed to the 28th of August $.

* .Cld. . 233, &c. I. Crawf. Mem. 177.

THE

'THE other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun- BooK VI.

tenanced by the fame (hew of legal authority, held a meeting of 57 I
parliament soon after. There was produced in this assembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby fle
had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an -a& was past pronouncing
the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good fubjets to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful Sovereign, and to
support those who ated in her name. The present eftablithment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another statute; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 26th of August *.

MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the king- Miserable

condition of

dom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, and the kingdom.
ranged themselves under the tfandards of the contending factions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, King's-men
and Steen's-men were names of diftin&ion. Political hatred diffol-
ved all natural ties, and extinguiihed the reciprocal good will and
confidence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious
zeal mingled itself with there civil diftintions, and contributed not
a little to heighten, and to inflame them.

THE fations which divided the kingdom were, in appearance, stateof f:.

only two. But in both thee, there were persons with views, and
principles, so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tinguilhed. With some, considerations of religion were predomi-

*Crawf, Mem. 177.

17
VOL. II.

D

nant,

BOOK VI. nant, and they either adhered to the Queen, because they hoped,,

by her means, to re-establish Popery, or they defended the King's
authority, as the-beft support of the Protestant faith. Among these
the opposition was violent and irreconcileable. Others were influ-
enced by political motives only, or allured by views of interest; the
Regent aimed at uniting thee, and did not despair of gaining, by
gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the King's-
authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a
coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might be restored to
some hare in the government, and the kingdom hake off its depen-
dance on England.. Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and
the moit powerful manof the King's party, held a particular course ;
and moving only as he was prompted by the court of England,
thwarted every measure, that tended towards a reconcilement of the.
fations; and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he derived
both power-and credit:from. her avowed protection.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of their-

parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two bishops
appeared inl that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin--
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were, they passed an.
adt for attainting upwards of 200 of the adverse faction. The meet'-
ing at Stirling was numerous and splendid. The Regent had pre-
vailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caflils, and Lord Boyd,
to acknowledge the King's authority. The three Earls were among
the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom, and had hitherto
been zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been one of
Mary's commifiloners at York and Westminster, and, since that time,
had been admitted into all her most secret councils. But, during that
turbulent period, the conduct of individuals, as well as the prin-

ciples

4
}S

ciples of factions, varied so often, that the sense of honour, the BOOK VI-
chief preservative of consistence in charaaer, was entirely loft; and 1571.
without any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one party,
and adopted all the violent passions of the other. The defection,
however, of so many persons of diftindtion, not only weakened the
Queen's party, but added reputation to her adversaries.

AFTER the example of the Parliamentat Edinburgh, that at Stir- TheKing's

party furpriz-

ling began with framing ads against the opposite facion. But in the ed in Stir-
midst of all the security, which confidence in their own numbers,
or distance from danger could inspire, they were awakened, early
one morning, by the shouts of the enemy in the heart of the town.
In a moment, the houses of every person of diftindion were fur- Sept. 3,
rounded, and before they knew what to think of so strange an
event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caf-
fils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Ogilvie; were all made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers,
who were ready to carry them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprize; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill-timed follicitude of his friends about his safety, not to
hazard his own person in conducing it, that day might have ter-
minated the contest between the two fataions, and have restored
peace to his country. By his diretion, four hundred men, under
the command of Huntley, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott of
Buccleugh, et out from Edinburgh, and the better to conceal their
design, marched towards the South. But they soon wheeled to the
right, and horses havipg been provided for the infantry, rode ftreight
to Stirling. By four in the morning, they arrived there; not
one sentry was posted on the walls, not a ingle man was awake a-
bout the place. They met with no refifance from any person they

D 2 had

Booc V. had seized, except Morton. He. defending his house with obftiriate

V"-*- valour they were obliged to fet-iton fire,, and he did not surrender
157.

till forced out of it by the flames. In performing this some time
was consumed; and the private men, unaccuflomed to regular dif.
cipline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses and shops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar in the town reached the castle;
The Earl of Mar sallied out with thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon:
the enemy, of whom almotf none but the officers kept together inm
a body. The townfien took arms to assist their governor; a sudden
panic firuck the aflailants; some fled, some surrendered themselves'
to their own prisoners; and had not the borderers who followed
Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the horses within the
place, not a man would have escaped. If the Regent had not un.
fortunately been killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been
as. inconsiderable, as the alarm was great. fhink-on te Archbihop
of St. Andrew's, was the word among the Queen's soldiers; and
The Regent Lennox fell a sacrifice to.his memory. The officer, to whom he

killed. urrendered, endeavouring to protet him, loft his own life in his.

defence. He was {lain, according to the general opinion, by com
mand of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concert-
ing this plan with great secrecy, and prudence; but Morton's fortu-
nate obtfinacy, and the want of discipline among his own troops;
deprived him of success, the only thing wanting to render this e-.
qual to the most applauded military.enterprizes of the kind *.

Mar chofcn As so many of the nobles were afiembled, they proceeded, with-
&t. 6. out delay, to the election of a Regent. Argyll, Morton, and Marl

were candidates for the office. Mar was chosen by a majoity of

"' Mclv. 226, Crawf, Mem. 20..
20

voices,.
3

voices. Amidst all the fierce dissentions, which had prevailed. so BooK VI..
long in Scotland, he had diftinguiihed himself by his moderation, 5' .'
his humanity, and his disinterestedness.. And as his power was far
inferior to. Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Morton's, he.
was, for these reasons, less formidable to the other nobles. His me--
rit, too, in having so lately rescued. the Leaders of the party from.
imminent deftrution, contributed not a little to his preferment..

WHILE these things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfic-Proceedings,
tions in England were no less interesting to Mary, and ftillmore f- in England

against Mary.

tal to her cause. The Parliament of'that kingdom, which met in
April, passed an ad, by which, it was declared to be high treason,
to claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen; to
affirm that the title of any other person was better than hers; or to
maintain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and to limit
the order of fucceffibn. This remarkable tfatute was intended not
only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb the restless
and intriguing spirit of the Scottish QLeen, and her adherents -.

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and theMarra e-
Duke of Anjou, the French King's brother, was well advanced..gociated be-

tween Eliza-
Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave out,,beth and the

Duke of AI-t.

with the utmost confidence, that it could not. fail of taking place.jou.
Neither of them, however, wihfed its success.; and they encouraged
it for no other end, but because it served to cover or to promote
their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of Medi-
cis was bent towards the accomplishment of her detestable project
for the dftruction of the Hugonot. chiefs;: and by carrying on a
negotiation for the marriage of her son with a Princess, who was
justly esteemed the protetrefs of that party, by yielding some things

t Camd. 436.

ini

aI..

BooK VI. in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference with regard

'L- to others, the hoped to amuse all the Protestants in Europe, and to

lull aleep the jealousy even of the Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth
flattered herself with reaping advantages of another kind. During
the dependance of the negociation, the French could not, with de-
cency, give any open assistance to the Scottish Queen; if they con-
ceived any hopes of success in the treaty of marriage, they would,
of course, interest themselves but coldly in her concerns; Mary herself
must be dejected at losing an ally, whom she had hitherto reckoned
her most powerful protector; and by interrupting her correfpon-
dence with France, one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues
which disturbed the kingdom, would be ftopt, Both Queens fuc-
ceeded in their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Elizabeth,
and blinded the Hugonots. The French discovered the utmost in-
difference about the interest of the Scottish Queen; and Mary, con-
fidering that court as already united with her rival, turned herself,

Norfolk'scon- for protection, towards the King of Spain *. Philip, whose dark and
spiracy in fa-
vour of Mary thoughtful mind delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had held a

secret correspondence with Mary, for ome time, by means of the
Bishop of Ross, and had supplied both herself and her adherents in
Scotland, with small fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the characer of a banker,
and who aed privately as an agent for the Pope, was the person
whom the Bishop intrusted with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to the Duke of
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to liberty, upon his
solemn promise to have no further intercourse with the Q/een of
Scots; which, however, he regarded o little, that lle took no Rep
in any matter of moment, without his advice. She complained in

* Dgges, 144, 148. Camd. 434.
22

: long letter, which she wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, BOOK VI..
with which the French court had abandoned her interest; he de- i-7.
dared her intention of imploring the assistance of the Spanish Mo-
narch, which was now her only resource; and recommended Ri-
dolphi to his confidence, as a person capable both of explaining,
and of advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded Hickford,.
his secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this letter; but whether
he had been already gained by the court, or resolved at that time
to betray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the order, and
hid the letter, together with other treasonable papers, under the
Duke's own bed.

RrDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of those

arguments, and spared none of those promises, which are the usual
incentives to rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum
in readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of Alva had
undertaken to land ten thousand men, not far from London. The
Catholicks, to a man, would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation had
turned their eyes towards him, and called on him to revenge
the unmerited injuries, which he himself had suffered; and to ref-
cue an unfortunate Queen, who offered him her person, and her
crown, as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved of the de-
sign, and though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, al-
lowed him to use his name, in negociating with the Pope, and Alva*..
The Bishop of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and im-
patience to procure relief for his mistress, was apt to run into rafl
and desperate designs, advised the Duke to assemble secretly a few of
his followers, and at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this the

* Anderson, 3. x 6i.

Dukeo

BOOK VI. Duke rejected as a scheme, equally wild and hazardous. Mean

·

1I. while, the English court had received some imperfect information

ricovered by of the plot, by intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an acci-
Elizabeth.
A!guft. dent happened, which brought to light all the circumstances of it.

The Duke had employed Hickford to transmit to Lord Herreis
some money, which was to be distributed among Mary's friends in
Scotland. A person not in the secret was intrudted with conveying
it to the borders; and he, fufpe&ing it from the weight to be gold,
whereas he had been told that it was silver, carried it directly to the
privy council. The Duke, his domestics, and all who were privy,
Sept. 7 or could befufpeaed of being privy to the design, were taken into

custody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover less
firmness; or servants betray an indulgent master, with greater base-
ness. Every one confessed the whole of what he knew. Hickford
gave direcions how to find the papers, which he had hidden. The
Duke himself, relying at first on the fidelity of his aflbciates, and
believing all dangerous papers to have been destroyed, confidently
asserted his own innocence; but when their depositions, and the
papers themselves were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's mercy. His
offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;
and Elizabeth thought it necessary to deter her fubjets, by his pu-
nifhment, from holding correspondence with the Queen of Scots,
or her emifaries. Being tried by his Peers, he was found guilty
of high treason, and after several delays, suffered death for the
crime .

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced many effeds, ex-
tremely detrimentalto Mary's interest. The Bishop of Ross, who ap-

* Anders. 3. 149. State Trials, 1. 85.

peared
24

peared by the confession of all concerned, to be the prime mover in BOOK VI.
every cabal againf Elizabeth, was taken into custody, his papers C57x.
searched, himself committed to the tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened with capital punishment, and after a long con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition that he hould leave the king-
dom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally eminent
for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, from that time, the
privilege of having an ambassador at the English court. The Spa-
nifh ambassador, whom the power and dignity of the Prince he
represented, exempted from such insults as Ross had suffered, was
commanded to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a ftriter guard than formerly, the number of her domestics
abridged, and no person permitted to fee her, but in presence of
her keepers t.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm which was Elizabeth de.

gathering on the continent against her kingdom, began to wish againest hey
that tranquillity were restored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's Quren's
late attempt against her government, he determined to a, with-
out disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the King's party. This re-
solution he intimated to the leaders of both factions. Mary, she t. 23;
told them, had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous conspiracies both
against her crown and life, that he would henceforth confider her
as unworthy of protection, and would never content to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She exhorted
them, therefore, to unite in acknowledging the King's authority.
She promised to procure by her mediation equitable terms for thole,
who had hitherto opposed it. But if they still continued refractory,

* Digges, 163. t Strype, Ann. 2. 50.
VOL. II. E she

BOOK VI. she threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them to sub.
7'','" mit t. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate es-

fe&; though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his brave-
ry, and good conduct, had routed the King's adherents in the North,
in many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's
sentiments contributed not a little to animate one party, and to de-
press the spirit and hopes of the other *.

i$72. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's forces, lay at Leith,

Hollities
carried o be- and Kirkaldy ifill held out the town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce
tween them. a day passed without a kirmiih. And while both avoided any de-

cifive action, they harrafled each other by attacking small parties,
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations,
though little memorable in themselves, kept the passions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrought them up,
at last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them regardless not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this.
implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and without
trial. Great numbers suffered in this hocking manner; the un-
happy victims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and it
was not till both fides had finarted severely, that they discontinued
this barbarous practice, so reproachful to the charader of the na-
tion +. Mean while, those in the town and castle, though they
had received a supply of money from the Duke of Alva 11, began to
susser for want of provisions. As Morton had detfroyed all the

: Sec Append. No. IV. * Cald. 2. 289, 294. Strypc, 2. 76.
+ Crawf. Mem. 218, 220.. 1| Cald. 2. 345.

t mills;

-27

mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted small garri- BooK VI.
sons in all the houses of strength around it, scarcity daily increased. 52
At last all the miseries of famine were felt, and they mufR have been
soon reduced to such extremities, as would have forced them to ca-
pitulate, if the English and French ambassadors had not procured a
suspension ofhoftilities, between the two parties *.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage, between Elizabeth and League be-

the Duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and she were ,edandEn
desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between the two crowns. France.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the best device for blinding
the Protestants, against whom the conspiracy was now almost ripe
for execution; but as a good precaution likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious measure might expose
him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a single ally,
now saw her kingdom so threatened with intestine commotions, or
exposed to invasions from abroad, that he was extremely solicitous
to secure the assistance of so powerful a neighbour. The difficul-
ties, arising from the situation of the Scottish Queen, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some terms of advan-
tage for Mary, and her party. Elizabeth refued to lifen to any
proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint efforts
of the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so much as men-
tioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scottish affairs, a hort Apil.
article was inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to this pur-
pose, " That the parties contracting hall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any stranger to enter, and to foment the sac-
tions there; but it flall be lawful for the Qeen of England to
chastise, by force of arms, those Scots who flall continue to har-
bour the Englifl rebels now in Scotland ." In confcquence of

* Id. 346. t Digges, 170, 19r. Camd. 444.

E 2

this

BOOK VI. this treaty, France and England affe&ed to a in concert with re-

2 gard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared

there, in name of their refpetive Sovereigns. By their mediation,
a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and during that time,
conferences were to be held between the leaders of the opposite
factions, in order to accommodate their differences, and restore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval
of tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South; but in the
North, it proved fatal to her interest. Sir Adam Gordon had fill
maintained his reputation and superiority there. Several parties,
under different officers, were sent against him. Some of them he
attacked in the field; againfi others he employed fitatagem; and
as his courage and conduc were equal, none of his enterprizes
failed of success. He made war, too, with the humanity, which
became so gallant a man, and gained ground by that, no less than
by the terror of his arms. If he had not been obliged, by the truce,
to suspend his operations, he would, in all probability, have brought
that part of the kingdom to submit entirely to the Queen's autho-
rity *.

Proceedings NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and success, Mary's in-
in England terest was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but among
against Mary.

the English. Nothing could be more offensive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the prospect of the Spanish yoke,
than her negociations with the Duke of Alva. The Parliament,
which met in May, proceeded agaiift her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn conference between
the Lords and Commons, both houses agreed in bringing in a bill
to declare her guilty of high treason, and to deprive her of all

Crawf. Mm.

right
a8

right of succession to the crown. This great cause, as it was then BooK VI.
called, occupied them during the whole session, and was carried 572
on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though she applauded their
zeal, and approved greatly of the course they were taking, was
satisfied with {hewing Mary what he might expect from the resent-
ment of the nation; but as he did not yet think it time to proceed
to the most violent extremity against her, he prorogued the par-
liament *.

THESE evere proceedings of the English parliament were not The French

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglect of her allies nte ert.
the French. The Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came over
to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a hew ofinterefting him-
self in favour of the Scottish Queen; but inflead of folliciting for her
liberty, or her restoration to her throne, all that he demanded was
a flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprisonment. And even
this small request, he urged with so little warmth or importunity,
that no regard was paid to it --.

THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfaion, The massacre

and the expeced from it a great increase of security. She now turn- of Paris.
ed her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animofities of
the two factions were still so high,. and so many interfering inte-
refts to be adjusted, that a general pacification seemcd to be at a
great diflance. But while she laboured to bring them to some
agreement, an event happened which filled a great part of Europe
with afloniflhment, and with horror. This was the maitacre of Paris;
an attempt, to which there is no parallel in the hiflory of mankind,
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or for the cruelty and

* D'Ewcs Journ, 206, &c. t Jebb, a. 512.

barba-

29

BooK VI. barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By the most solemn

572 promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the ProteRants
1572.

were drawn to court; and though doomed to detrucion, they
were received with caresses, loaded with honours, and treated, for
seven months, with every possible mark of familiarity, 'and of con-
Augu 2. fidence. In the midst of their security, the warrant for their de-

ftrudion was issued by their sovereign, on whose word they had
relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen, their fellow
citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in their blood.
Ten thousand Protestants, without diftin&ion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The fame barbarous or-
ders were ent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time, applauded in Spain;
and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings were offered to God, for its
success. But among the Protestants it excited incredible horror; a
striking picture of which is drawn by the French ambassador at the
court f England, in his account of his first audience after the
massacre. " A gloomy sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence,
as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on each fide,
all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed through them, not one
bestowed on me a civil look, or made the least return to my fa-
lutes *."

Detrimental BUT horror was not the only passion, with which this event in-
to ary's in spired the Protestants; it filled them with fear. They confidered

it as the prelude to ome greater blow, and believed, not without
much probability, that all the Popilh Princes had conspired the de-

* Carte, 3. 522.

ftruction
30

nti-uion of their sect. This opinion did no small diflervice to Ma- BooK VI.
ry's affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Protestants; 72

1572.

and, though they wished her restoration, were not willing, on that
account, to sacrifice the faith which they professed. They dread-
ed her attachment to a religion, which allowed its votaries to vio-
late the most solemn engagements, and prompted them to perpe-
trate the most barbarous crimes. A general confederacy of the
Protestants seemed to them, the only thing that could uphold the
Reformation against the league, which was formed to overturn it.
Nor could the present establishment of religion be long maintained
in Britain, but by a ftrid union with Elizabeth, and by the con-
currence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it, as a com-
mon cause *.

THE Regent took hold of this favourable conjunture for nego- The Regent

endeavours to.

ciating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpose, with unlte both
the utmost zeal, and the adverse facion placed entire confidence in partie.
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed of being fuc-
cefsful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement with
him, that scarce any thing remained, except the formality offigning
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the disappointment he
met with in his pretensions to the Regency; his abilities, his wealth,
and the patronage of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the Regent himself; and he took plea-
sure in thwarting every measure pursued by him. He was afraid
that if Maitland and his associates recovered any hare in the admi-
niftration, his own influence would be considerably diminifiied; and
the Regent, by their means, would regain that acendant, which
belonged to his station. With him, concurred all those, who were
in poffelilon of the lands, which belonged to any of the Queen's.

Digges, 2.1, 267..

party.

31

BOOK VI. party. And his ambition, and their avarice, frustrated the Regent's

L _

. pious intentions, and retarded a blessing so necessary to the kingdom,
I572.

as the establishment of peace *.
His death. SU CH a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition, which reigned

among his party, made a deep impression on the Regent, who loved
his country, and wished for peace with much ardor. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on a fettled melan-
choly, that ended in a distemper, of which he died on the 29th of
O&ober. He was, perhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who
could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy, and have
left it, without loss of reputation. Notwithstanding their mutual
animofities, both factions acknowledged his views to be honourable,
and his integrity to be uncorrupted f.

Morton cho- No competitor now appeared against Morton. The Queen of
fen Regent. England powerfully upported his claim, and notwithstanding the
Novem. 24.

fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was eleced
Regent; the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held that
dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the first of January, this gave

him an opportunity of continuing the negociations with the oppo-
site party, which had been et on foot by his predecessor. They
produced no effects, however, till the beginning of the next
year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, ome events, hitherto untouched,
deserve our notice.

* Melv, 233. Crawf. Mei. 237. t Id. 241.

TIE
32

-THE Earl-of Northumberland, who had been kept :prisoner inBooK VI.
Lochlevin, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year 569, was x 7'
given up to Lord Hunfdon Governor of Berwiok; and being car-
ried to York, suffered there the punishment of his rebellion. The
King's party were so sensible of their dependence on Elizabeth's pro-
tetion, that it was scarce possible for.them to refuse putting into
her hands a person who had taken up arms against her. But as a
fum of money was paid, on that account; and hared between Mor-
ton and Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of whom, during his
exile in England, had been much indebted to Northumberland's
friendship, the abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in such a man-
ner, to certain destruction, was deemed an ungrateful and merce-
nary action *.

THIS year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in the Affars of the

government of the church. Soon after the Reformation, the Popish l'urch'
Bishops had been confirmed by law in possession of part of their be-
nefices; but the spiritual jurifdiaion, which belonged to their or-
der, was exercised by fuperintendants, though with more moderate
authority. On the death of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, Mor-
ton obtained from the Crown a grant of the temporalities of that
fee. But as it was thought indecent for a layman to hold a bene-
fice, to which the cure of fouls was annexed, he procured Douglas,
rector of the University of St. Andrew's, to be chosen Archbishop;
and allotting him a finall pension out of the revenues of the fee, re-
tained the remainder in his own hands. The nobles, who saw the
advantages they might reap from such a practice, supported him
in the execution of his plan. It gave great offence, however, to the
clergy, who, instead of perpetuating an order, whose name and
power was odious to them, wifled that the revenues which had

*Crawf. Mem. 55, 222. Camd. 445.
VOL. II. F belonged

34
BooK Vt. belonged to it, might be employe in supplying such parishes' as

were iit unprovided with fettled- pastors. But oa the one hand, it
would have been raff in the Clergyto haveirriitated,. too much noble-
men, on whom the very existence of the Protetant Church in Scot-
land depended; and Morton, on the other, conduced his scheme
with fueh dexterity, and managed them with so much art, that it
was, at last, agreed, in a convention composed of the leading men
among the Clergy, together with a committee of privy council,
", that the name and office of archbishop, and bihop, should be con-
tinued during the King's minority, and thee dignities be conferred
upon the best qualified among the ProteftantMinifters; but that with
regard to their spiritual j.urifditions, they lhould be subject to the
general assembly of the Church." The rules to be observed in
their elecion; and the persons who were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in
times of Popery, were likewise particularly pecified *. And the
whole being laid before the General assembly, after ome exceptions
to the names of ArchbiJ7fop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protefta-
tion that it should be confidered only as a temporary conflitution,
till one more perfec could be introduced, it obtained the approba-
tion of that court t. Even Knox, who was prevented from attend-
ing the Assembly by the ill slate of his health, though he declaimed
loudly against the Simoniacal paction, to which Douglas owed his
preferment, and blamed the nomination of a person, worn out with
age and infirmities, to an office, which required unimpaired vi-
gour both of body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the Assembly,
approved of ome of their regulations with refped to the election
of Biflops, as worthy of being carefully observed . In confe-

* Cald. 2. 305. j Id. 354. $ See Append. No. V.

quence

quence o tihe Affimbly's coerfrt to the plan agreed upon in the BOOK VI.
Convention, Douglas was infafed in 'his office; and at the fame 57-
time, an archbishop of Glasgow, and a -bihop of Dunkeld, were
chosen from among the Protestant Clergy. They were all admit-
ted to -the place in parliament, whidh belonged to the ecclesiastical
order. But in imitation of the example set by Morton, such -bar-
gains were made with them by different noblemen, as gave them
possession only of a very small part of the revenues, belonging to
their fees *.

SOON after the diifflution of this assembly, Knox, the prime in- Nov. 27.

Death and

ftrument of spreading and establishing the Reformed religion in chara&er of
Scotland, ended his life, in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intre- Knox.
pidity, disinterestedness, were virtues which he possessed, in an e-
minent degree. He was acquainted, too, with the learning culti-
vated in that age; and excelled in that species of eloquence, which
is calculated to rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however, were
often too severe, and the impetuosity of his temper excessive. Rigid
and uncomplying himself, he shewed no indulgence to the infirmi-
ties of others. Regardless of the diftintions of rank and character,
he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more
apt to irritate than to reclaim. This often betrayed him into inde-
cent and undutiful expressions, with refpe& to the Qeen's person
and conduc. Those very qualities, however, which now render
his charater less amiable, fitted him to be the inifrument of Pro-
vidence for advancing the Reformation among a fierce people, and
enabled him to face dangers, andto surmount opposition, from which,
a person of a more gentle spirit would have been apt to shrink
back. By an unwearied application to study, and to business,

* Spotf.i 26

as

BooK VI. as well, as by the frequency and fervour of his public discourses

I'-2' he had. worn out.a. constitution, naturally strong. During a linger-
1572.

ing. illness, he discovered the utmost fortitude; and met the ap-
proaches of deaths with a magnanimity inseparable from his cha-
raacer. He was constantly employed in acts of devotion, and com-
forted himself with those prospects of immortality, which not only
preserve. good men from desponding, but fill them with exultation
in their last moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present at
his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few words, the more ho-
nourable for Knox, as they came from one, whom he had often cen-
fured with peculiar severity.. There lies He,, who never feared. the
face of man ."'

THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such generous mo-

1573'.

The Regent tives as the former Regent,.he laboured, however, in good earnest,
treats with the
Queen'sparty. to ieablifh it. The public confusions and calamities, to which he

owed his power and importance when he was only the second per-
son in the nation,, were extremely detrimental to him, now that he
was raised to be the first. While so many of the nobles continued
in arms againsts him,, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of extinguishing the
flame, which she had- kindled and kept so long alive in Scotland t.
She had discovered the alliance with France, from. which flie had
expeted such advantages, to be no foundation of security. And
though the appearances of friendship still subsisted between her
and that court, and. Charles daily renewed. his protestations of in-
violable adherence to the treaty, he was convinced, by a fatal ex-
ample, how little she ought to rely on the promifcs or oaths of that
perfidious Monarch. Her ambassador warned her that the French

' Spotfw. 266. Cld . 2. 273

t Digges, 299.

held.
36;

held a secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, BOOK II.
and encouraged them in their obitinacy *. The Duke of Alva 573
carried on his intrigues in that kingdom, with less disguise. She
was persuaded that they would embrace the first serene interval,
which the commotions in France and in the Netherlands would
allow them, and openly attempt to land in Scotland. She refolv-
ed, therefore, to prevent their getting any footing in the island, and
to cut off all their hopes of finding any assistance there, by uniting
the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Regent to carry His overtures
on his negociations with them to great advantage. They were now jreieed by

on his ngtions

with them to

great advantage. They were now Maitland and

divided into twofaations. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe- Kirkaldy.
rault, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the.
other. Their high rank, their extensive property, and the num-
bers of their followers, rendered the former considerable. The lat-
ter were indebted for their importance, to their personal abilities,
and to the strength of the caitle of Edinburgh, which was in their
poflefiion. The Regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the fame treaty; but as he dreaded the Queen's party, if it rtmain-
ed entire, would be able to thwart and embarrass his adminiitration,
he resolved to divide and weaken it, by a separate negociation. He
made the first overture to Kirkaldy and his associates, and endea-
voured to renew the negociation with them, which, during the
life of his predecefir, had been broken off by his own artifices.
But Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of government, to
be very different from those of the former Regent. Maitland con-
fidered him as a personal and implacable enemy. They received re-
peated assurances of protection from France. And though the siege
of Rochelle employed the French arms at that time, the fame

* Id. 296, 3 1 2.

hopes,

-~~ and they expeted that the obstinacy of the HTugonots vouM fioon
I 573.

'be subdued, and that Charles would then be at -ibetty to a& witfl
; vigour in Scotland. Mean while, a fupply.of money was sent, and

if the castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effeAual aid was .
promised --. Maitland's genius delighted in forming schemes, that
were dangerous; and Kirkaldy possessed the intrepidity, necessary
for putting them in execution. The castle, they-knew, was so
situated that it might defy all the Regent's power. Elizabeth, they
hoped, would not violate the treaty with France, by fending for-
ces to his afliftance and if the French hould be able to land any
considerable body of men, it might be poflible to deliver the Queen
from captivity, or at least to balance the influence of France and
England, in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the difho-
nourable dependance on the latter, under which it had fallen. This
splendid, but chimerical project, they preferred to the friendship of
Morton. They encouraged the negociation, however, because it
served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame purpose, that
the whole of the Queen's party ihould be comprehended in it,
and that Kirkaldy hould retain the command of the cattle, fix.
months after the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the
Regent to reject the former; his penetration discovered the danger
of complying with the latter; and all hopes of accommodation va-
nifhed II.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the city

of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom he
had expelled, was devoted as zealously, as ever, to the King's cause.

I DigSes, 314, I Melv. 235, &c.

But

T.-H E 1-1 1 T O T

j
38

But as the Regent hadnow et on. foot a treaty with Chatelherault BOOK VI.
and Huntly, the cessation of arms still continued with them. 57

1573.
THEY were lets scrupulous than the other party, and listened Accepted by

C hatelherault

eagerly to. his overtures. The Duke was naturally unsteady, and and Huntly.
the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and aversion to
action. The miseries of civil discord had afflited Scotland, alioft
five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, inflead of doing service, had been detrimental
to the Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had gained much ho-
nour; both had suffered great losses;, and had exhausted their own
estates, in wafting those of their adversaries. The commons were'
in the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace, which might
terminate this fruitless, but deftrudive quarrel.

A GREAT ftep was taken towards this desirable event, by the Articlesof the

treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hand, and Febty
Chatelherault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of
Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador -. The chief articles in it were:
there; that all the parties comprehended in thetreaty should declare
their approbation of the Reformed religion, now eftabliflled in the
kingdom; that they hould submit to the King's government, and
own Morton's authority as Regent; that they should acknowledge
every thing done in opposition to the King, since his coronation,
to be illegal; that on both fides, the prisoners who had been taken
fmtould be set at liberty, ,and the lands restored to their proper own-
ers; that the ad of attainder passed against the Queen's adherents,
flould be repealed, and indemnity granted for all the crimes of
which they had been guilty since the 15th of June 1567; and

*Sec Append. No. VI.

that.

BOOK VI. that the treaty hould be ratified, by the common content of both

. .~-.J parties, in parliament *.
573.

si$ge of th3 KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates, who neither
catie of Edi..- to
b,:g. 'discovered follicitude, nor made provision for his safety, did not lose

courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation -. And
though all Scotland had now Submitted to the King, he flill re-
solved to defend the castle, in the Queen's name; and to wait the
arrival of the promised succours. The Regent was in want of
every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who
determined, at any rate, to bring the dissentions in Scotland to a pe-
riod, before the French could find leisure to take part in the quarrel,
soon afforded him sufficient supplies. Sir WilliamDrury marchedinto
Apiil z5. Scotland, with 5oo foot, and a considerable train of artillery. The

Regent joined him, with all his forces; and trenches were opened,
and approaches regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great um of money, remitted
to him from France, and which fell into the Regent's hands,
through the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man

* Crawf. Mcm. 25r .

1- Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who joined with Kirkaldy in the

defence of the cafile, and who was himself firongly attached to their party, aferts that
Kirkaldy offered to accept of any rafonable terms of composition, but that all his offers
were rjected by the Regent, Melv. 240. But as Elizabeth was, at that time, extreme-
ly desirous of refloring peace in Scotland, and her ambassador Killegrew, as well as
the Earl of Rothes, used their utmost endeavours to persuade Kirkaldy to accede to the
treaty of Perth, it seems more credible to impute the continuance of holtilities to Kirkal-
dy's obflinacy, his distrust of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than to any other
cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the positive teflimony ofSpotfw. 269,

270. Camd. 448. Johnft. Hilt. 3, 4. Digges, 334. Crawford's account agrees, in the
main, with theirs, Mem, 263.

7

of

of that age, defended himfelfwith bravery, augmented by despair. BooK VI.
Three and thirty days he resifted all the efforts of the Scots and 1573.
English, who pushed on their attacks, with courage, and with
emulation. Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications were
battered down, and one of the wells in the castle dried up, and the
other choaked with rubbish. Even then,' his spirit was unfubdued,
and he determined rather to fall gloriously behind the lafi intrench-
ment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison
was not animated with the fame heroic or desperate resolution,
and rising in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered May 29.
himself to Drury, whopromifed, in the name of his miitrefs, that
he hould be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about 60 soldiers were made pri-
foners *.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-coun-
tries, and entering into the service of the States, added by their gal-
lant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue, which has al-
ways been the charateriftic of the Scottish nation.

THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, and the cviewoftr he
surrender of the cafftle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought to cl';lari of

both parties.

a period. When we review the slate of the nation, and compare
the trength of the two fations, Mary's partizans among the
nobles appear, manifeffly, to have been superior both in numbers,
and in power. But thee advantages were more than counterbal-
lanced by others, which their antagonifis enjoyed. Political abi-

* Cald. 2. 408. Mclv. 240. Crawf. Mem, 265.

4I
VOL. II.

C;

lities,

BOOK VI. lities, military kill, and-all the talents, which times of aftion form,

or call forth, appeared chiefly on the King's fide. Nor could their
'573..~

enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur-
ray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity of Morton;
the subtle genius, and insinuating address of Maitland; or the
successful valour of Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed
in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the one fide,
measures were concerted with prudence, and executed with vi-
gour; on the other, their resolutions were rash, and their conduct
feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompted
by indignation against the Queen, warmly supported the King's
cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their popularity into
the fame scale. By means of these, as well as by the powerful
interposition of England, the King's government was finally efta-
blifhed. Mary lofl even that shadow of sovereignty, which, amidst
all her sufferings, he had hitherto retained among part of her own
fubjeds. And as she was no longer permitted to have an ambaf-
fador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity which he
had, for ome time, enjoyed there, he must henceforth be con-
fidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally deserted or forgotten
in the other.

Kirkaldy put KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Drury's cuflody, and
to deat. were treated by him with great humanity, till the Queen of England,

whose prifoncrs they were, lhould determine their fate. Morton
infifled that they hould susser the punifllment due to their rebel-
lion and obstinacy; and declared that so long as they were al-
lowed to live, he did not reckon his own person or authority fe-
curc; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his

promises
42

43

promises in her name, gave them up to the Regent's disposal. He BOOK VI.
first confined them to separate prisons; and, oon after, with Eli- - "

1573.

zabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hang- Auguii 3.
ed at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not exped to be
treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a public execu-
tion, by a voluntary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil, as-
ter the old Roman fashion *."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains

of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison.
At the fame time her health began to be much impaired by con-
finement, and want of exercise. At the intreaty of the French am-
baffador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her imprison-
ment. Cecil, who lately had been created Baron of Burleigh, and
Lord High Treasurer of England, happened to be there at the fame
time. And though no miniser ever entered more warmly into the
views of a Sovereign, or gave fironger proofs of his fidelity and at-
tachment, than this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's difiruft
of every perfor, who approached the Qeen of Scots, that her
suspicions extended even to him; and while Mary juffly reckoned
him her most dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty in per-
fuading his own miffrefs, that he was not partial to that unhappy
Queen .

THIE duke of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppressive adminiftra-
tion rouzed a spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhauffed
its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Requefens, who

* Mclv. 242. t Strype, 2. 248, 288.

G 2 succeed-

BOOK VI. ueceeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enterprising

-- genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
1573'

quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the Scottish Queen,
and his zeal for her interest.

1 74. TIOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace,, many

The ellge"'5°t' of the evils, which accompany civil war, were fill felt. The re-
tion becomes firaints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little re-
odiou,.

garded even by civilized nations, were totally defpifea by a fierce
people, unaccustomed to the regular administration ofjuftice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and under the protection of the one, or the other faction, crimes of
every kind were committed with impunity. The Regent set him-
felf'to redress there, and, by his industry and vigour, order and fecu-
rity were re-established in the kingdom. But he loft the reputation,
due to this important service, by the avarice, which he discovered,
in performing it; and his own exations became more pernicious to
the nation, than all the irregularities, which he restrained -f. Spies
and informers were every where employed; the remembrance
of old offences were revived; imaginary crimes were invented;
petty trespasses were aggravated; and delinquents were forced to
compound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time, the current coin was debated *; licences were fold.

1t See Append. No. VI..

* The corruption of the coin, during Morton's adminifiration, was very great;

Although the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gradur
ally increased by former princes; the standard or finenefa suffered little alteration,
and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame, withlwhat is now used. But Morton:
mixed a fourth part of alloy, with every pound' of ilver, and funk, by confequcnce,
the value of coin, in proportion. In the year x581, all the money coined by him was.
called in, and appointed to be recoined. The standard was reflored to the fame pu-
rity as formerly. Ruddim. Praf. to Andcrf Diplom. p 74.

for
46

for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, unusual taxes Boot VIt
were imposed on commodities; and all the refinements in opprelion, , 574
from which, nations so imperfectly polished as the Scots are usually
exempted, were put in pratice. None of these were complained of
more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injustice towards the
Church. The thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy received:
their fubfifance, had always been fowly and irregularly paid to col-
lectors appointed by the General Assembly; and during the civil:
wars, no payment could be obtained in several parts of the kingdom.
Under colour of redressing this grievance, and upon a promise of
assigning every Minister a tfipend within his own parifl, the Re-
gent extorted from the Church the thirds to which they had right
by law. But the Clergy, instead of reaping any advantage from this
alteration, found that payments became more irregular and dilatory
than ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with the care of
four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and the Re-
gent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a new

misfortune to the Scottish Queen. Henry III. who succeeded him,.
had not the fame attachment to her person, and his jealousy of the
house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Queen Mother, greatly
alienated him from herintereft.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault must likewise be 1575.

conlidered as tome loss to Mary. As the parliament had frequently January .
declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great
refpe among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than any:

*Crawf. Mcm. 272. Spotrw. 273. Cald. 2. 420, 427.

other

BooK VI. other person in the kingdom, to counterballance the Regent's

1575. power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scottish and English marches, a scuffle happened, in which
the English were worfte4; a few killed on the spot; and Sir James
Forester, the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too fen-
fible of the advantage, which resulted from the good understanding
that fubfil-ed between the two kingdoms, to allow this flight acci-
dent to interrupt it.

Attempts of THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in ome danger
the Clergy
again the of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons, raised
decop or to the dignity of biflops, poffefled very small revenues, and a very

moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent and all
his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions tfeal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such small beginnings, the hierarchy
might grow, in time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever. The
chief author of thee suspicions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man,
diftinguiflhed by his uncommon erudition, by the severity of his
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends which he pursued, than
to the means which he employed for promoting them, he often de-
feated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and imprudence with
which he carried them on. A question was moved by him in the
assembly, " whether the office of bishop, as now exercised in the
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?" In the ecclefiafti-

cal

cal judicatories, continual complaints were made of the bishops, BOOK VI.
for neglec of duty; many of which, their known remifnefs too well ' '

- x575.

justified. The bishop of Dunkeld, being accused of dilapidating
his benefice, was found guilty by the Assembly. And the Regent,
instead of checking, connived at these disputes about Ecclesiastical
government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy from attend-
ing to his daily encroachments on the patrimony of the Church *.

THE weight of the Regent's oppressive administration had, hi- I576.
therto, fallen chiefly on those in the lower, and middle rank; but Heirriates

some of the

he began now to take such steps, as convinced the nobles, that their nobles.
dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the eftecs of his
power. An accident, which was a frequent cause of dissention
among the Scottish nobles, occasioned a difference between the Earls
of Argyll and Athole. A vassal of the former had made ome de-
predations on the lands of the latter. Athole took arms to punish
the offender; Argyll, to protec him; and this ignoble quarrel they
were ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by interposing
his authority, obliged them to disband their forces. Both of them
had been guilty of irregularities, which, though common, were
contrary to the letter of the law. Of these the Regent took advan-
tage, and resolved to found on them a charge of treason. This de-
sign was revealed to the two Earls by one of Morton's retainers.
The common danger, to which they were exposed, compelled them
to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close confederacy, for their
mutual defence. Their jundtiop rendered them formidable; they
despised the summons which the Regent gave them to appear before
a court of justice; and he was obliged to desist from any further

* Cald. Aflcmblies, 1574, &c. Johnft. Hi. x1.

47
8

pro-

B00K VI. prosecution. But the injury he intended made a deep impreflion on

ó- their minds, and drew on him evere vengeance *.

:576.
1577. NOR was he more fuccefsfulin an attempt, which he made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
fpiracy against his life. Though those, who were supposed to be
his accomplices, were seized, and tortured, no evidence of any thing
criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circumstances dif-
covered his innocence, as well as the Regent's secret views, in im-
puting to him such an odious design t.

'They turn THE Scottilh nobles, who were almost equal to their Monarchs
,their eyes to-
vards the in power, and treated by them with much diftintion, observed
king.

there arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indigna-
tion. The people, who under a form of government extremely
simple, had been little accustomed to the burden of taxes, com-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards the young King, from whom they expeced the
redress of all their griev ances, and the return of a more gentle, and
more equal adminiitration.

James's edu- JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Queen,
cation and soon after his birth, had committed him to the care of the Earl of
dirpofition.

Mar, and during the civil wars, he had resided securely in the castle
of Stirling. Alexander Erskine, that nobleman's brother, had the
chiefdirection of his education. Under him, the famous Buchanan
ated as preceptor, together with three other matters, the most emi-
nent, the nation afforded, for kill in those fcielces, which were
deemed necessary for a prince. The young King hewed an un-

* Crawf Mm. 285.
2

1. Crawf. Mem. 287.

common
.48

*common passion for learning, ani m ade great progress in it. And BoOK V.
the Scots fancied that they already discovered in him all those vir- i577
tues, which the fondness or credulity of fbjecs usually ascribe to
princes, during their minority. But as James was till far from that
age,. at which the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to the sentiments
*of the people, nor refle, how naturally thee prejudices in his
favour might encourage the King to anticipate that period. He
not only neglected to ,secure the fiendfhip of those, who were about
the King's person, and who pofleffed his ear, but had even exafpe-
rated some of them, by .personal injuries.. Their resentment con-
curred witht-he ambition of others, in infusing into the King early He is p ci
£ufpicions ofMorton's power, and designs. A King, they told him, ous of the Re-

gent's power.

:had often reason to fear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, andiby interest, he would endeavour to keep the Prince
in perpetual. infancy, at a-diftance from his fubjeds, and unacquaint-
td with business. A small degree of vigour, however, was fuffici-
:ent to break the yoke. Subje&s naturally reverence their Sovereign,
and become impatient of the temporary and delegated jurisdiCtion
of a Regent. Morton had governed with a rigour, unknown to
the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groaned under his
·oppressions; and would welcome the first profpea of a milder admi-
niftration. At present the King's name was scarce mentioned in
Scotland, his friends were without influence, and his favourites with-
out honour. But one effort would discover Morton's power to be as
feeble, as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himself
in poffefflon of his just authority, and rescue the nation from into-
lerable tyranny. If he did not regard his own rights as a King,
let him liften, at least, to the cries of his people *.

* Melv. 249.
VOL. II.

I

THes E

BooKVI. THESE suggestions made a deep impression on the young King,

L'-' who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command.
1577.

A plot formed His approbation of the design, however, was of small consequence,
againfi the
Regent. without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyll and

Athole, two of the most powerful of that body, were animated
with implacable reientment against the Regent. To them the Ca-
bal in Stirling-calile communicated the plot, which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, who, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
had the command of that fort, and the custody of the King's per-
son, admitted them secretly into the King's preence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his fubjeds, under the Re-
gent's arbitrary administration; they complained loudly of the in-
juRfice, with which themselves had been treated; and besought the
King, as the only means for redressing the grievances of the nation,
to call a council of all the nobles. James consented, and letters
were issued, in his name, for that purpose; but the two Earls took
care that they flould be ent only to such as were knowil to bear
no good will to Morton. *

1578. THE number of these was, however, so considerable, that on
March 4. the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles assembled at

Stirling; and so highly were they incensed against Morton, that al-
though on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's interview
with the King, he had made a feint as if he would resign the Re-
gency, they advised the King, without regarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his office, and to take the administration of govern-
ment into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chancellor, and
Herreis, were appointed to signify this resolution to Morton, who

* Spots. 278.

was

was at that time in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence. No- BOOK VI.
thing could equal the'joy, with which this unexpeted resolution 1578
filled the nation, but the furprize occasioned by the seeming ala- He resigns his

office and re-

crity, with' which' the Regent descended from so high a station. tires.
He neither wanted sagacity to foresee the danger of resigning, nor
inclination to keep possession of an office, for the expiration of
which, the law had fixed so distant a term. But all the sources,
whence the faction of which he was head, derived their strength,
had either failed, or now supplied his adversaries with the means
of humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edinburgh, the
Clergy, were all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied op-
pressions. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself by treaty, to fend
a considerable body of troops to the assistance of the inhabitants of
the Netherlands, who were Rruggling for liberty, had little leisure
to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as fie had nothing to dread
from France, in whose councils the Princes of Lorrain had not, at
that time, much influence, she was not displeased, perhaps, at
the birth of new factions in the kingdom. Even those nobles,
who had long been joined with Morton in fation, or whom he
had attached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindsey, Ruthven,
Pitcairn the secretary, Murray of Tillibarden Comptroller, all de-
ferted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at Stirling.
So many concurring circumstances convinced Morton of his own
weakness, and determined him to give way to a torrent, which was
too impetuous to be resifted. He attended the chancellor, and M,ch ,1.
Herreis to Edinburgh; was present when the King's acceptance
of the government was proclaimed; and, in the pretence of the
people, surrendered to the King, all the authority to which he
had any claim in virtue of his office. This ceremony was ac-
companied with fich exceflive joy and acclamations of the mnul-
titude, as added, no doubt, to the anguish which an ambi-

IH 2 tious

51

BOOK VI. tious spirit must feel when compelled to ren6unce supreme power -

and coivinced Morton how entirely he had loft the affections of
his countrymen. He obtained, however, from the King, an a,
containing the approbation of every thing done by him in the exer--
cife of his office, and a pardon, in the mos ample forms that his
fear or caution could devise, of all palt offences, crimes, and trea-
sons. The nobles, vho adhered to the King, bound themselves,,
under a great penalty, to procure the ratification of this adt, in the:
first parliament .

Ao COUNCIL of twelve peers was appointed to assist the King ir

Continues to,
watch dte mo- the administration of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own
tions of the
adverse prrty. party, and unable to struggle with the faction, which governed ab--

folutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and. seemed to enjoy
the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amusements, of a
country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all:
the uneasy reflections, which accompany disappointed ambition;
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even in
this retreat, which the people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and
abilities rendered him. formidable. And the new Counsellors were
so imprudent as to rouze him, by the precipitancy with which
they hastened to firip him of all remains of power. They re-
quired him to surrender the castle of Edinburgh, which was still in.
his possession. He refused at sirs to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
and repulsed a part of the garrison, which was lent out to guard.
a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that important
fortress, without resistance. This encouraged his adversaries to
call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply their de-
mands upon him, in such a manner,, as convinced him that no-.

* Spots 278, Crawf. Mem, 289. Cald. 2. 522.

thing
52

8

thing ess than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate ha- BooKVI.
tred. 1578.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began already to de-

eline.. The Chancellor,. the ablest and most moderate man in the
party, having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter
between his followers, and those of the Earl of Crawford; Athole,
who was appointed his successor in that high office, the Earls of
Eglinton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at
court, were either avowed Papifis, or fufpefted of leaning to the
opinions of that fe&.. In an age, when the return of Popery was,
so much, and so justly dreaded,, this gave universal alarm. And as
Morton had always treated. the papists with rigour, this unfeafon-
able indulgence made all zealous Protestants remember that circum-
fiance in. his administration, with great praise *.

MORTON, to whom none of these particulars were unknown,.Reumes his

former autho-

thought this the proper juncture for setting to work the inftru- rity.
ments, which he had been preparing. Having gained the con-
fidence of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother, he
insinuated to them that Alexander Erlkine had formed a plot to
deprive his nephew of the government of Stirling-caftle, and the
euftody of the King's person; and easily induced an ambitious wo-
man, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent this sup-
posed injury. The Earl repairing, suddenly, to Stirling, and being
admitted, as usual, into the cafile with his attendants, seized the
gates early in the morning, and turned out his uncle, who dreaded
no danger from his hands. The soldiers of the garrison submitted
to him as their governor, and, with little danger, and no effusion

* Spots 283,

of

BooK VI. of blood, he became master both of the King's person, and the

8'! fortress *
I578.

AN event so unexpeaed occasioned great consternation. And

though Morton's hand did not appear:in the execution, he was
universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety, to change
their measures, and instead of pursuing him with such implacable
resentment, to enter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
fary, still so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkeith. And when they had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too sagacious not to improve the advantage,
May 24. which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded him,

set out in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Murray of
Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into the castle;
and managing matters there with his usual dexterity, he soon had
more entirely the command of the fort, than the Earl himself. He
was likewise admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired
the fame ascendant in it f.

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at Edin-

burgh now approached, this gave him ome anxiety. He was
afraid of carrying the young King to a city, whose inhabitants were
so much at the devotion of the adverse faction. He was no less
unwilling to leave James behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this
dilemma, he ifflued a proclamation, in the King's name, changing
the place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-caftle. This,
Athole and his party represented as a ftep altogether unconstitutional.

* Cald, . 535. 1. Cald, 2. 536.

The

,The King, aid they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended Coun-BooK VI.
fellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may re- 578.
pair without fear, and where they may deliberate with freedom, is
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after disorders of such
long continuance. But in an assembly, called contrary to all form;
held within the walls of a garrison, and over awed by armed men,
what safety could members expet ? what liberty could prevail in
debate ? or what benefit result to the public ? The parliament met, July 25.
however, on the day appointed, and notwithstanding the protefta-
tion of the Earl of Montrose and Lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to business. The King's acceptance of the govern-
ment was confirmed; the a granted to Morton, for his security,
ratified; ome regulations, with regard to the numbers and autho-
rity of the privy council, were agreed upon; and a pension for life
granted to the Countess of Mar, who had been so inilrumental in
bringing about the late revolution *.

MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their followers, took arms, Argyll and
upon.the specious pretence of rescuing the King from captivity, and Athole take

arms againfi

the kingdom from oppression. James himself, impatient of the ser- him.
vitude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long been
taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprize; though, at the
fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in public, but
to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by proclamation,
that he was perfectly free from any confiraint, either upon his per-
son, or his will. Both fides quickly took the field. Argyll and
Athole were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus, Mor-
ton's nephew, met them with an army 5000 strong; neither party, Augult i.
however, was eager to engage. Morton diflrufted the fidelity of

*Cald. 2. 547. Parl. V. Jac. VI.

his

55

Boox V1. hi -own -troops. The two Earls cre nfibsle-tatatingec viy,

8'1g' however -cornpleat, would not be decisive; nd ,s tey iwerein n0

condition to undertake the fige of StirliFi -caffle,. where theJKii g
was kept, their ftength-would fooaibe ehaufied 'while MQri'!s
own wealth, and the .patronage of -the Queen of England, might
furnish him withedLles resources. SBy .the mediation -of Bowes,
,whom Elizabeth had sent intoScoland ,to inegociate -an ;accono-

Elizabeth ne- dationbetween the two fadions, a 'treaty was- ceslded, inacoofe-
gociates an
accommoda- quence of which, Argyll -and Athole-were admitted into the K-ing's
tihonbetween -,presence; -some of .their party were added ,to the privy council.;

and -a Convention of nobles called, in order to-bring all-remaining
;differences 'to an amicable.iffue *,

So'foon as James aflumedsthe government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling *to inform:Elizabeth of
that event; to offer to renew the alliance between- thetwo king-
doms; and to demand poffeflion of the elate, which had lately
.fallen to him, by the death of his grandmothether.the Countes of
Lennox. That .Lady's second son had left-one-daughter, Arabella
-Stewart, who was born in England. And as the.chief objestion
-against the pretensions of the Scottili line to .the.crown. of England,
was .that maxim of Englilh law, which excludes aliensfrom any
right of inheritance within the kingdom; Elizabeth, by granting
,this: emand, would;haveeftaLblihed a .precedent in James's,.favour,
-that might have been- esteemed deciiive, with regard ;to a point,
:which it.had been her constant care to.keep undecided. Without
-uffering .thisdelicate queftion-to be tried, or. allowing any new light
,tobe thrown on that, ,which ifhe confidetd ,as the great myJtery
kbf her reign, - he-commanded the rents 6f te.eftate to be fequef-

* Crawf. Meim. 307.

tered
56

tered by Lord Burleigh, mater of the wards; and by this method BOOK VI.
of proceeding, gave the Scottish King early warning how necessary 578
it would be to court her favour, if ever he hoped for success in
claims of greater importance, but equally liable to be controvert-
ed t

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending t579t

nobles were at last brought to ome agreement. But it was fol-
lowed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcilement, April z4.
having. invited the leaders of the opposite party. to a greatenter-
tainment, Athole the chancellor was, soon after taken ill, and died
within'a few days. The symptoms and violence of the disease gave
rife to firong suspicions of his being poisoned; and though the
physicians, who opened his body, differed in opinion as to the
cause of the distemper, the Chancellor's relations publickly accused
Morton of that odious crime. The advantage which visibly accrued
to him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and averse from
all his measures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the people,
who are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent persons to
extraordinary causes *.

THE office of Chancellor was bellowed upon Argyll, whom this Morton's -

legal roteed~

preferment reconciled, in a great measure, to Morton's admi- ngs aganlt
niftration. He had now recovered all the authority he possesed amito"1 f
during his Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the power
and cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained
to be the objects of isjealoufy, or to obfltru his designs, but that
of Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never
recovered the flock, which he received from the ill success of his

+ Camd. 461, * Spotfwood, 306.
VOL. II.

I

,pafioa

. T HE'H IrrS' R Y
BOOK VI.pafion for the Queen, and had now altogetherloft his reason; Lord

John, the second brother, was in possession of the family estate. Lord
Claud was Commendator of Paifiey; both of them young men,
ambitious, and, enterprising. Morton dreaded their influence in
the kingdom; the courtiers hoped to share their spoils among them;
and as all princes naturally view their successors with jealousy and
hatred, it was easy to infuse these pafiibns into the mind of the young-
King. A pretence was at hand to justify the most violent proceed-
iflgs. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth, did not ex-
tend to those, who were accessary to the murder of the Regents
Murray or Lennox. Lord John and his brother were-fufpeed
of being the authors of both these crimes, and. had been included
in a general a of attainder on that account. Without summon-
ing them to trial, or examining a single witness to prove the charge,
this attainder was now- thought sufficient to, fubjeat them to all the
peialties which they would have incurred by being formally conviit-
ed. The Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton, together with the
Lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commission to seize
their persons and: estates. On a few hours warning, a considerable
body of troops was ready, and marched towards Hamilton, in he-
tile array. Happily, the two brothers made their escape, though
with great difficulty. Blt their lands were confiTcated; the castles
of Hamilton and. Draffan besieged.; those who defended them pi-
nifled. The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his situation,
of committing any crime, was involved, by a hameful abuse of
law, in the common ruin of his family; and as if he, too, could
have been guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These pro-
ceedings, so contrary to.the fundamental principles of justice, were
all ratified in the subsequent parliament *.

* Crawf. Meln 311. Spotfw. 36.

ArouT

ABOUT' this time Mary ent, by Naue her secretary, a letter to BOOK VI.

her son, together with fomejewels of value, and a vest embroidered -579.
with her own hands. But as he gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without being admitted
into his pretence *

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular reason Negociations

for a marriage
to fear any attempt of the Popish Princes, in Mary's favour, between Eli-

zabeth and

she frill continued to guard her with the fame anxious care. the Duke of
The acquisition of Portugal on the one hand, and the defence Aienon.
of the Netherlands, on the other, fully employed the councils
and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces by intestine commo-
tions, and under a weak and capricious Prince, despised and dif-
trusted by his own fubjeds, was in no condition to disturb its
neighbours. Elizabeth had long amused that court by carrying
on a treaty of marriage with the Duke of Alencon, the King's
brother. But whether, at the age of forty-five, he really in-
tended to marry a Prince of twenty ? whether the pleasure of
being flattered and courted, made her liften to the addresses of
so young a lover, whom she allowed to visit her at two differ-
ent times, and treated with the most diftinguihfing respect ? or
whether considerations of interest, predominated in this, as well
as in every other tranfation of her reign, are problems in
history which we are not concerned to resolve ? During the pro-
grefs of this negociation, which was drawn out to an extra-
ordinary length, Mary could expect no affiflance from the French
court, and seems to have held little correspondence with it. And
there was no period in her reign, wherein Elizabeth enjoyed
more perfect security.

F Craw. MIem. 314.

I 2 MORTON

BOOK VI. MORTON seems, at this time, to have been equally secure; but

-,-' his security was not so well founded. He had weathered out
I579. '
Two favou- one storm, had crushed his adversaries, and was again in pof-
rites gain an
afcendantover session of the sole diretion of affairs. But as the King was now
James. of an age, when the characer and dispositions of the mind begin

to unfold themselves, and to become visible, the smallest attention
to thee might have convinced him, that there was reason to expect
new and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early dif-
covered that exceflive attachment to favourites, which accompanied
him through his whole life. This passion, which naturally arises
from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his age,
far from being culpable; nor could it well be expeced that the
choice of the objects, on whom he placed his affedions, hould be
made with great kill. The most considerable of them, was Efme
Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second brother of the
Earl of Lennox. He was diftinguihed by the title of Lord
D'Aubigne, an etate in France, which descended to him from his
ancestors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their-va-
Septcmber P. lour, and services to the French crown. He arrived in Scotland,

about this time, on purpose to demand the estate and title of Len-
nox, to which he pretended a legal right. He was received at first,.
by the King, with the i'efpet due to so near a relation. The
gracefulness of his prfon, the elegance of his dress, and his court-
ly behaviour, made a great impreflion on James, who, even in
his more mature years, was little able to refill tlhee frivolous
charms; and his afftion flowed with its usual rapidity, and pro-
fuEfon. Within a few days after Stewart's appearance at court,
he was created Lord Aberbrothock, oon after Earl, and then Duke
of Lennox, Governor of Dumbarton castle, Captain of the guard,
firfl Lord of the bedchamber, and Lord High Chamberlain. At
the fame time, and without any of the envy, or emulation, which

is:
6o

is usual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, the BooK VI..
second son of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But I579-
notwithstanding this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were
persons of very opposite characters. The former was naturally
gentle, humane, candid; but unacquainted with the itate of the
country, and milled, or misinformed by those, whom he trusted;
not unworthy to be the companion of the young King, in his
amusements, but utterly difqualified-for ating as a Minister, in di-
reting his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices, which
render a man formidable to his country, and a pernicious coun-
fellor to his Prince; nor did he possess any one virtue, to coun-
terballance these vices, unless dexterity in conduting his own de-
signs, and an enterprizing courage, fuperiqr to the sense of dan-
ger, may pass by that name. Unrestrained by religion, regard-
less of decency, and undismayed by opposition, he aimed at ob-
jets, seemingly unattainable; but under a Prince, void of expe-
rience, and blind to all the defets of those, who had gained his
favour, his audacity was successful; and honours, wealth, and
power, were the reward of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their whole addrcfs, They labour
to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obfl-ruCted their full to udermine'

Mortonl's au-

possession of power. And as James had been bred up with an aver- thority.
sion for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the
authority of a Tutor, than to at with the obfequioufiefs of a Mi-
nifter, they found it no difficult matter to accomplish their design.
Morton, who could no longer keep the King shut up within the
walls of Stirling-caffle, having called a parliament to meet at Edin-
burgh, brought him thither. James made his entry into the capital,
with great solemnity; -the citizens received him with the loudest

accla.
1

BOOK VI. acclamations ofjoy, and with many expensive pageants, according
'-""' to the mode of that age. After a long period of thirty-feven years,

1579

during which Scotland had been fubjeEted to the delegated power
of Regents, or to the feeble government-of a woman, and had sus-
sered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign
armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more in the hands
of a King. Fond even of that fladow of authority, which a Prince
of fifteen could poiefs, the Scots flattered themselves, that union,
order, and tranquillity would now be restored to the kingdom.
James opened the parliament with extraordinary pomp, but nothing
remarkable passed in it.

THESE demonstrations, however, of the people's love and attach-

ment to their Sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue their
insinuations against Morton; and as the King now resided in the
palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his fubjeAts had access, the
cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger, and the intrigue, which
occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

i 58o. MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and edeavoured to
Mvorueton put a stop to the career of Lennox's preferment, by representing
prevent them. him as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religion, a secret

agent in favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the house of
Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
spread the alarm among the people. But Lennox, either out of
complaisance to his master, or convinced by the arguments of some
learned Divines, whom the King appointed to inftrud him in the
principles of the Protestant Religion, publicly renounced the errors
of Popery, in the Church of St. Giles, and declared himlelf a mem-
ber of the Church of Scotland, by signing her Confession of Faith.

This,

This, though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence ome BooK VI.
zealous preachers, abated,.in a great degree, the force- ofthe accu- 580
fation.*.-

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was pre-

paring to seize the King's person, and to carry him into England,
Whether despair of maintaining his power, by any other means, had
driven him-to make any overture of that kind to the English court,
or. whether it was a calumny, invented by his adversaries to render
him odious; cannot now be determined.with certainty. As. he de-
clared at his death, that such a design had never entered into his
thoughts, the latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a pretence,
-however, for reviving the office' of Lord Chamberlain, which had
been for some time disused. That honour was conferred on Len-
nox. AlexanderErfkine, Morton's capital enemy, was his deputy;
they had under them a band of Gentlemen, who were appointed con.
ftantly to attend the King, and to guard his person t.

MORTON was not ignorant of what'his enemies intended'to in- Elixabetll in

terpolfs in hiii

sinuate, by such unusual precautions for the King's safety. And as belalf.
his last resource, applied to -Elizabeth, whose protection had often
food him in stead in his greatest difficulties. In consequence of
this application, Bowes her envoy accused Lennox of practices
against the peace of the two kingdoms, and infifled, in her name,
that he fllould instantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered by the Counsellors, as an
affront to the King, and an encroachment on the independence of
the kingdom. They affeded to call in question the Envoy's powers,
and upon thatpretence, refuted him faither audience; and he retir-

* Crawf.' Mem. 319. Spotfw. 308. 1 Crawf. Mem, 320.

2~~~~~~~~~~~l Crw, ee,3g

4

ing
2

BOOK VI. ing in disgust, and without taking leave; Sir Alexander Home was

-58o. lent to expostulate with Elizabeth on the subjeA. After the treat-

ment, which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought it below
her dignity to admit Home into her preence. Burleigh, to whom
he was commanded to impart his commiflion, reproached him with
his Maser's ingratitude towards a benefacrefs, who had placed the
crown on his head, and required him to advise the King to beware
of sacrificing the friendship of so necessary an ally, to the giddy hu-
mours of a young man, without experience, and trongly fufpeded
of principles, and attachments, incompatible with the happiness of
the Scottish nation.

Morton ac- TiIS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all probability, Mor-
cmuer of the ton's fall. The aa of indemnity, which he had obtained when he
murder o the
late Xing. resigned the Regency, was worded with such scrupulous exatnefs,

as almost screened him from any legal prosecution. The murder of
the late King was the only crime, which could not, with decency,
be inserted in a pardon, granted by his son. Here Morton fill lay
open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stewart, who
Shunned no ation, however desperate, if it led to power, or to
Dcemer 30. favour, entered the council chamber, while the king and nobles

were assembled, and falling on his knees, accused Morton of being
acceflary, or according to the language of the Scottifil law, art and
part, in the conspiracy againfi the life of his Majesty's father, and
offered, under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dence. Morton, who was present, heard this accusation with firm-
ness; and replied with a disdainful fiile, proceeding either from
contempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
fcioufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known zeal, in punifl-
ing those who were fufpeed of that deteitable crime, might well

4 exempt

exeImpt:hit!fplf fropi any,,ffpiciojf,,ehiftg~cc:ffatyto it, never- BOOK VI.
thelefs, he would cheerfully fubitto'a ttrial, hetherji that place, ' 80
or in any, other court-; ,and doubted not but his own innocence,
and the malice; of, his.enemies, would.then appear in the clearest .
light." :;tewat,, ,ho. was.,ill on his knees, begun to enquire how
he would4 repincile;.his bestowing so. many honours on Archbald
Douglas, ,whon he certainly -knew to be one of the murtherers,
with his, pretended, zeal against. that crime. Morton was ready to
answer. But the King .commanded both of them to be removed.
The Earl was confined, firlt, of all, to. hiss own house, and then I58r.
commited to the castle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erskine January z.
was Governor; .and as if it had :not been a sufficient indignity to
fubjeathimto the power, of one of his enemies, .he was, soon after,
cariied to :D.nb:arton, of which Lennox- had the command.' A January 18.
warrant was, ,rikewvife , issued for apprehending Archbald Douglas;
but he, having received timely intelligence of the approaching dan-
ger, fled'into England*. -

... ~

, ~,

, , ; ; l

^ . .; . . :

--'.THE, Earlof: Argus, who imputed these violent proceedivgs
not to hatred against Morton alone, but to the ancient enmity
between the: houses of Stewart and of Douglas, 'and who be-
lieved that a eonfpiracy ;was, now formed for' the deftrudion
of the. whole 'name,, Whas ,readyito take arms in order to- ref-
cue 'his kinsman. But Morton ,absolutely sorbad any such at-
tempt, and. declared that he would rather.-fuffer ten thousand
deaths, than bring.,an imputation ,on his own character by
seeming to declrine a trial't. 'i1
: : , ; ,' ,

,

'· · ,

*Cravf. Mem. 323. , ! . . ti Johnit. 64. Spotfw. 311.

VOL.. I. K ELIZA-
. ..

BOOK VI. ELIZABETH did not fail tointerpofe, with warmth, in behalf of

81. a man, who had contributed so much to preserve her influence over.

Elizabeth's Scotland. The late tranfa&ions in that kingdom had given her
mearures in
order to save great uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquired inde-

him. pendant of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambafladors had

met with, differed greatly from the refpe&, with which the Scots
were in use to receive her ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an intention to sow the
feeds of discord between the two nations, and to seduce James into
a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with ome Popih
Princess. Full of these apprehensions, she ordered a considerable
body of troops to be assembled on the borders of Scotland, and dif-
patched Randolph as her ambassador into that kingdom. He ad-
dressed himself not only to James, and to his council, but to a Con-
vention of estates met at that time. He began with enumerating
the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had conferred on the
Scottish nation: That without demanding a single foot of land for
herself, without encroaching on the liberties of the kingdom in the
smallest article, he had, at the eipence of the blood of her sub-
jets, and the treasures of her crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, established among them true Religion, and
put them in poffeflion of their ancient rights: That from the begin-
ning he had protected those, who espoused the King's cause, and
by her aflliftance alone, the Crown had been preserved on his head,
and all the attempts of the adverse fa&cion baffled: that an union,
unknown to their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had subsisted for a long periodof years, and though so many
Popilh Princes had combined to disturb this happy state of things,
her care, and their constancy, had hitherto defeated all there efforts:
That The had observed, of late, an unusual coldness, difiruft, and

2 etfrange-
66

estrangement in the Scottish Council, which she could impute to BOOK VI,
none but Lennox, a fubje& of France, a retainer to the house of 158.
Guise, bred up in the errors of Popery, and still suspected of favour-
ing that superstition. Not satisfied with having mounted so fail to
such an uncommon height of power, which he exercised with all
the rashness of youth, and all the ignorance of a stranger; nor think-
ing it enough to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the authority,
due to his abilities, and experience, he had conspired the ruin of
that nobleman, who had often exposed his life in the King's cause,
who had contributed more than any other subjed to place him on
the throne, to resist the encroachments of Popery, and to preserve
the union between the two kingdoms. If any zeal for religion re-
mained among the nobles of Scotland, if they wished for the conti-
nuance of amity with England, if they valued the privileges of
their own order, he called upon them, in the name of his Miffrefs,
to remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lennox from the pretence
of the young King, to rescue Morton out of the hands of his avowed
enemy, and secure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial trial:
And if force were necessary towards accomplishing a design so faluta-
ry to the King and Kingdom, he promised them the protetion of
his Mistress in the enterprize, and whatever assistance they flould de-
mand either of men or money *.

BUT these extraordinary remonfirances, accompanied with such

an unusual appeal from the King to his fbjects, were not the only
means employed by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and againfl
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour of complimenting James on account

* Cald. 3. 6. Strype, 2. 621,

67
K 2

of

BoOK VI. of the valour, which many of his fubjets had displayed in the
--- service of the States, to enter into a long detail of the relilefs en-
158.

terprizes of the Popill Princes against the Protetfant Religion; to
beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their danger-
ous cabals; and above all things, to distrust the insinuations of those,
who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
British nations, which all the Protestants in Europe beheld with so-
much pleafuie *.

James deter- JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the deftruion of

iceen ai

to po their enemy to lifen to these remonfirances. The officious inter-
him. position of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's

message, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjeds to rebel against
their Sovereign, were confidered as unexampled insults on the Ma-
jelly and independance of a crowned head. A general and evasive
answer was given to Randolph. . James prepared to aflert his own
dignity with spirit. All those fufpeted of favouring Morton were
turned out of office, ome of them were required to surrender
themselves prisoners; the fencible men throughout the kingdom
were commanded to take arms; and troops were levied, and pofled,
on the borders. The English ambassador, finding that neither the
public manifesto which he had delivered to the Convention, nor
his private cabals with the nobles, could excite them to arms, fled
in the night-time out of Scotland, where libels against him had
been daily published, and even attempts made upon his life. In
both kingdoms every thing wore an hotfile afpeat. But Eliza-
beth, though he wished to have intimidated the Scottish King by

Cald. 3. .

her

OF S-CO.T-LANDt

her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war with him, BoOK VI.
and the troops on the borders, which had given such umbrage, 158,
were soon dispersed *.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's safety,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
deftrudion. Captain Stewart his accuser was first appointed Tutor
to the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and estate of his
unhappy ward, to which he advanced some frivolous claim, were
conferred upon him. The new-made Peer was commanded to
condua Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh; and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expect,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his deadly enemy already
loaded with honours, in reward of the malice with which he had
contributed to his ruin.

THE records of the court of zfliciary.at this period are loft. The He is tried

account which our historians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate ed condemn-
and unfatisfatory. The whole proceedings seem to have been vio-
lent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order to extort evidence,
tortured several of the Earl's domestics with unusual cruelty. Dur-
ing the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in dif-
ferent parts of the city. The jury was compoed of the Earl's
known enemies; and though he challenged several of them, his
objections were over-ruled. After a flhort consultation, his peers
found him guilty of concealing, and of being art and part in the
[ conspiracy against the life of the late King. The first part of the
verdit did not furprize him, but he twice repeated the words art

*Crawf. Mem. 328. Strype, 2. Append. 138.

and
1

BOOK VI. anld pars with some vehemence4 and added, " God knows it is

58 1 " not so." The doom, which the law decrees again/t a Traitor,

was pronounced. The King, however, remitted the cruel and ig-
nominious part of the sentence, and appointed that he should sus-
ser death next day, by being beheaded *.
Jsjca~t,. DURING that awful interval, Morton possessed the utmost com-

pofure of mind. He fupped chearfully; slept a part of the night,
in his usual manner; and employed the reft of his time in religious
conferences, and in as of devotion, with some Ministers of the
city. The Clergymen who attended him, dealt freely with his con-
science, and preled his crimes home upon him. What he con-
fffed with regard to the crime for which he suffered is remark-
able, and fupplies,.in some measure, the imperfection of our records.
He acknowledged, that on his return from England, after the death
of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy againfi the
King, which the Queen, as he told him, knew of and approved;
that he follicited him to concur in the execution of it, which, at
that time, he absolutely declined; that, oon after, Bothwell him-
self, and Archbald Douglas, in his name, renewing their follicita-
tions to the fame purpose, he had required a warrant, under the
Qeen's hand, authorizing the attempt, and as that had never been
produced, he had refused to be any farther concerned in the matter.
, But, continued he, as I neither consented to this treasonable at,
" nor assisted in the committing of it, o it was impoflible for me to
,' reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I make the discovery ?
, The Qeien was the author of the enterprize. Darnly was such

a changeling, that no secret. could be safely communicated to him.

* Spots. 31$. JQhnfl65. Crawf. Mm. 332. Cald. 3. 45.

" Huntly

* Huntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief sway in the kingdom, BooK VI.
' were themselves the perpetrators of the crime." These circum- 158
flances, it must be confessed, go ome length towards extenuating
Morton's guilt; and though his apology for the favour he had
shewn to Archbald Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the con-
fpirators, be far less fatisfa&ory, no uneasy refletions seem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account *. When his keepers told
him that the guards were attending, and all things in readiness,,
(' I praise my God, said he, I am ready likewise." Arran com-
manded there guards; and even in those moments, when the most
implacable hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could
not forbear this insult. On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm;
his countenance and voice unaltered; and after some time spent in
devotion, he suffered death with the intrepidity, which became the
name of Douglas. His head was placed on the publick jail of Edin-
burgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, co-
vered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to the
usual burial-place of criminals. None of his friends durst accom-
pany it to the grave, or discover their gratitude and refpe& by any
ivmptoms of sorrow -f.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than audacious in hisOdious con

public condudt, oon after drew the attention of his countrymen, du& ofArran.
by his infamous marriage with the Countess of March. Before he
grew into favour at court, he had been often entertained in her
husband's house, and without regarding the laws f hospitality or
of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of his
benefador, a woman young and beautiful, but, according to the

* Crawf. Mem. Append. 3. t CrawEf Mem. 334. Spotfw. 313.

defcrip-

BoOK VI. description of a cotemporary Historian,'" intolerable in all the im-

-"8. perfections incident to her sex." Impatient of anyrefiraint upon

their mutual desires, they, with equal'ardor, wished to avow their
union publickly,' and to legitimate, by a marriage, the offspring
of their unlawful paflion. The Countess petitioned to be divor-
ced from her husband, for a reason, which no modefi woman will
ever plead.' The Judges, over-awed by Arran, pased entence
jtly 6. without delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a mar-

riage, solemnized with-great pomp, and'beheld by all ranks of men
with the utmost horror *.
oaober 24. .A Parliament was held this year, at the opening of which ome

disputes arose between Arran and the Earl now created Duke of
Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition began-to affect an equality with the Duke, under whose
protection he had hitherto been contented to place himself. After
various attempts to form a party in the council against Lennox, he
found him fixed £o firmly in the King's affections, that it was im-
possible to shake him, and rather than lose all interest at court, from
which he was banished, he made the most humble submissions to
the favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This rupture
contributed, however, to render the Duke flill more odious to the
nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affected to court the
Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the Protestant Religion,
arid laboured to confirm the suspicions, which were entertained of
his rival, as an emissary of the house of Guise, and a favourer of
Popery. As he was fuppofed.to be acquainted with the Duke's
Mnoft secret designs, his calumnies were listened to with more cre-

* Spotfwood, 315.

dit,
-1

'it, than was due to his character. To the fame cause, we must BooK VI.
ascribe several as of parliament, uncommonly favourable to the 1i58-i
Church, particularly one, which abolished the praftice, introduced
-by Morton, of appointing but one minister to several parihes.

No notice hath been taken for some years of Ecclefiiafical as- Ecc!efiaical

alThuirs.

fairs. While the civil government underwent so many extraordi-
nary revolutions, the Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objects, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy. The one
was the forming a system of discipline, or Ecclesiastical polity.
After long labour, and many difficulties, this was at lass brought to
some degree of perfection. The Assembly solemnly approved of
it, and appointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order
to obtain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, dur-
ing his administration, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution; and
by starting difficulties, and throwing in objections, prevented it from
receiving a legal fan&ion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The bishops were so devoted to the
King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the function it-
self was by some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being al-
lowed a feat in parliament, and distinguished by titles of honour,
these not only occasioned many avocations from their spiritual em-
ployments, :but soon rendered their charader and manners extreme-
ly different from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles view-
ed their power with jealousy; the populace confidered their lives
as profane; and both wifled their downfal with equal ardour.
The personal emulation between Melvil and Adamson, a man of
learning, and emineint for his popular eloquence, who was promo-

VOL. II. L ted,

73

74-

ooK VI. ted, on the death of Douglas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's,.
l- .--. mingled itself with the paflions on each fide, and heightened them..

Attacks. were made, in every aembly, on the order of biflops;
their privileges were gradually circumscribed; and at last an a-
was pased, declaring the office of bishop, as it was then exercised
within the realm, to have neither foundation nor warrant in the
word of God; and requiring, under pain of excommunication, all:
who now pofeffed that office, initantly to resign it, and to abtfain.
from preaching or adminiftring the sacraments, till they hould re-
ceive permission from the aembly. The court did not acquiesce-
in this decree. A vacancy happening, soon after, in the fee of'
Glasgow, Montgomery, Minifler at Stirling, a man vain, fickle,.
presumptuous, and more apt, by the blemishes in his character,,
to have alienated the people from an order already beloved, than:
to reconcile them to one which was the object of their hatred,
struck up an infamous bargain with Lennox, and on his recom-
mendation was chosen Archbiflop.- The Presbytery of Stirling, of
which he was a member, the Presbytery of Glasgow, whither he
was to be translated, the General Assembly, vied with each other
2 in prosecuting him on that account. In. order to creen Montgo-

mery, James made trial both of gentle and of rigorous measures,,
and both were equally ineffecual. The General Aflembly was
just ready to pronounce. against him the sentence of excommunica-
tion, when an Herald entered and commanded them, in the King's
name, and under pain of rebellion, to stop further proceedings.
Even this injunction they despised. And though Montgomery, by
his tears, and eeming penitence, procured a short respite, the
sentence was at last issued by their appointment, and published!
in. all the churches throughout tie kingdom,

THE firmness of the Clergy, in a collective body, was not BooK VI.

greater than the boldness of some individuals, particularly of the i582.
Minifeers of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily against the cor-
ruptions in the adminifiration, and, with the freedom of speech,
admitted into the pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as
the chief authors of the grievances, under which the church and
kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained to
the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of the Clergy. In or-
der to check the boldness of their discourses, James iflued a procla-
mation, commanding Dury, one of the most popular Ministers,
not only to leave the town, but to abrtain from preaching in any
other place. Dury complained, to the judicatories of the Church,
of this encroachment upon the immunities of his office. They
approved of the doctrine which he had delivered; and he deter-
mined to disregard the royal proclamation. But the magistrates
being determined to compel him to leave the city, according to the
King's orders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, after pro-
telling publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against the violence,
which was put upon him. The people accompanied him to the
gates, with tears and lamentations; and the Clergy denounced the
vengeance of heaven against the authors of this outrage *.

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; the authority of

itsjudicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit re-
strained, when a sudden revolution in the civil government pro-
cured them unexpected relief.

TiiE two favourites, by their ascendant over the King, poffefled I-is favourites

cngage the
uncontrouled power in the kingdom, and exercised it with the Jiiig ill un-

popular mca-
* Cald. Affemb. I576-582. Spotfw. 277, &c. us

L 2 utmost

Boo K VI. utmost wantonness. James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinreil;,

8 .,' the feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended by such. com--

pany, and employed in such amusements, as did not suit his digni,
ty. The services of those, who had contributed moit to. place the-
Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who had
opposed him with the greatelt virulence, enjoyed the rewards and
honours, to which, the others were entitled. Exalted notions of
regal prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the confitution of Scot-
land, being intfilled by his favourites into the mind of the young
Monarch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impression
there,. and became the source of almost all his.fubfequent errors in
the government of both kingdoms *. Courts ofjuftice. were held
in almost every county, the proprietors of land were called before
them, and upon the slightest neglect of any of the numerous forms,,
which are peculiar to feudal holdings, they. were fined with un-
usual and intolerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the
obsolete jurifdition of his office over the Burroughs, and they were
fubjedted to, exactions no less grievous, A design seemed, likewiSe,
to have been formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the
alliance with her, which.all good Protestants esteemed the chief fe-
curity of. their religion in Scotland. A close correspondence was set
on foot between the King and his mother, and considerable progress.
made towards uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty-
of association, as Maitland had projected.;, which.could not fail of
endangering or diminishing his authority, and must have proved
fjital to those, who had a&ed against her with greatetr vigour .f..

ALL there circumstances irritated the impatient spirit of the.

oifpnreblc Scottish nobles, who resolved to tolerate no longer the insolence of
gaint them. thc two minions, or to Iland by, while their presumption and in-

* Qald.3. 152. 1' Cald, 3, 157.

experience.
76.

experience ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who, BOOK VI.
during the administration of the four Regents, had the entire direc- 1.582..
tion of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence
in that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and was ready to
countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into measures, so repugnant to
all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven,
lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tu-
tor of Glamis, the Mailer of Oliphant, with several Barons and
gentlemen of diflinaion, entered into a combination for that pur-
pose; and as changes in administration, which among polished na-
tions, are brought about slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue,
were in that rude age effected suddenly and by violence, the King's
situation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the con-
fpirators to have immediate recourse to force.

JAMES, after having resided some time in Athole, where he en- Seize the

King's person

joyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now returning to- in Rugthen.r
wards Edinburgh, with a finall train. He was invited to Ruth-
ven-caftle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeded no danger;
he went thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of itran- Augurs 22.
gers whom he found there gave him some uneasiness; and as those
who were in the secret arrived every moment from different parts,
the appearance of so many new faces increased his fears. He con-
cealed his uneasiness, however, with the utmost care; and next
morning prepared for the field, expecting to find there some oppor-
tunity of making his escape. But just as he was ready to depart, the
Nobles entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented a memo-
rial againit the illegal and oppreflive actions of his two favourites,
whom they represented as most dangerous enemies to the religion.

and:

77

BooK VI. and liberties of the nation. James, though he received this remon-

8 -.-' firance with the complaisance which was necessary in his present si-

tuation, was extremely impatient to be gone; but as he approached
the door of the apartment, the Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped
him. The King complained, expotulated, threatened, and finding
all these without effect, burif into tears; " No matter, said Glamis
fiercely, better children weep than bearded men." These words
made a deep impreflion on the King's mind, and were never forgot-
ten. The conspirators, without regarding his tears or indignation,
dismissed such of his followers as they fufpeEted; allowed none but
their own party to have access to him; and though they treated him
with great refpe, guarded his person with the utmoff care. This
entcrprize is usually called, by our historians, the raid of Rzuthven *.

Commit Ar- LENNOX and Arran were aonifhed to the last degree at an event
ran to prison.

so unexpeced, and so fatal to their power. The former endeavour-
ed, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh to
take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from captivity. The
latter, with his usual impetuosity, mounted on horseback the mo-
ment he heard what had befallen the King, and with a few fol-
lowers, rode towards Ruthven-catle; and as a considerable body
of the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of Mar, lay
in his way ready to oppose him, he separated himself from his com-
panions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the caflle.
At the fight of a man so odious to his country, the indignation
of the conspirators rose, and inflant death muff have been the
puniflhment of his raflnefs, if the fiiendflip of Gowrie, or some
other caufc not explained by our hiltorians, had not saved a life,
so pernicious to the kingdom. lie was confined, however, to

* Cald. 3. 134. Spotf\v. 320. Mlv. 357.
78

the
3

the castle of Stirling, without being admitted into the King's pre- BOOK VI.
fence. ' 58.

THEr King, though really the prisoner of his own fubjeas, with Command

Lennox to
whose condut he could not help discovering many symptoms ofleave the

kingdom.

difgufi, was obliged to publish a proclamation, signifying his appro-
bation of their enterprize, declaring that he himself was at full
liberty, without any restraint or violence offered to his person; and
forbidding any attempt against those concerned in the Raid of Ruth-
ven, under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
fame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before the zoth Augut 28.
of September "

SOON after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as ambassadors The Confpi.

rators Coun-

from Elizabeth. The pretext of their embassy was to inquire after tenanced by,
the King's safety; to encourage and countenance the confpiratorsElizaeth.
was the real motive of it. By their interceflion, the Earl of Angus,
who, ever since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile,
obtained leave to return. And the accefion of a nobleman so pow-
erful and so popular strengthened the faction -.

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured him

many friends, and who received private assurances that the King's
favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at
first, to pay no regard to a command, extorted by violence, and no
less disagreeable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to him-
self. But the power of his enemies, who were mailers of the King's
person, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and openly ap-
plauded ly the Clergy, deterred him from an enterprize, the success

!: Cald. 3 135, 38. '{ Cald. 3. 152,

of

79

BOOK VI. of which was dubious, and the danger certain both to himself, and

I to his Sovereign. He'put off the time of his departure however by

various artifices, in expectation either that James might make his
escape from the conspirators, or that fortune might present ome
more favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief

Their conduet ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous
aprroved
by an Aftem not only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
bly adton a ome legal fanEion of their enterprize. For this purpose they
of elates. publilhed a long declaration, containing the motives, which had

induced them to.venture on such an irregular ftep, and endeavoured
to heighten the public indignation against the favourites, by repre-
senting, in the itrongeft colours, their inexperience and insolence,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of the privileges of
the Church, and their oppreflion of the people. They obliged the
King, who could not with safety refuse any of their demands, to
grant them a remission in the moit ample form; and not satisfied
oober 3 with that, they applied to the Assembly of the Church, and easily

procured an a, declaring, " that they had done good and accept-
able ferviceto God, to their Sovereign, and to their native country;"
and requiring all sincere Protestants to concur with them in carry-
ing forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add the greater
weight to this a, every Minister was enjoined to read it, in his
own pulpit, and to inflict the censures of the Church on those who
set themselves in opposition to so good a cause. A Convention of
estates, assembled a few days after, passed an ad to the fame effect,
and granted full indemnity to the conspirators for every thing they
had done *

* Cald. 3. 177, 187, 200. Spotfw. 322.

JAMES
8o

JAMES was conducted by them, first to Stirling, and afterwards BOOK VI.

to the Palace ofHaly-rud-houfe; and though he was received every 8""'
where with the external marks of refped due to his dignity, his Lennox's de-

parture fromnt

motions were carefully oberved, and he was under a reitraint no Scotland.
less ftrit, than at the firfi, moment when he was seized by the con-
fpirators. Lennox,.-after eluding many commands to depart out of
the kingdom, was, at-laft obliged to begin his journey. He lingered,
however, for some. time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if
he had itill intended to make one effort towards restoring the King
to liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own disposition,
averse to blood-shed and the disorders of civil war, or from
some other cause,. unknown to us, he abandoned the design,
and set out for France, by the way of England. The King if- Decem. 3o.
sued the order for his departure, with no less reluctance than
the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a eparation, which
neither of them had power to prevent. Soon after his arrival
in France, the fatigue of the journey, or the anguish of his
mind, threw him into a fever. In his last moments, he disco-
vered such a firm adherence to the Protestant faith, as fully vin-
dicates his memory from the imputation of an attachment to
Popery, with which he had been uncharitably loaded in Scot-
land *. As he was the earliest, and best beloved, he was, per-
haps, the most deserving, though not the most able of all
James's favourites. The warmth and tenderness of his Master's
aefeion for him was not abated by death itself. By many ats
of kindness and generosity towards his posterity, the King not
only did great honour to the memory of Lennox, but set his
own character in one of the most favourable points of view.

* Spotfwood, 324.
VOL. II.

M

BOOK VI. THE faccefs of the conspiracy, which deprired James of liberty,

I582. made great noise over all Europe; and at las reached the ears of
Mary's anxie- Mary in the prison to which he was confined. As her own expe-
ty about her
Eo. rience had taught her what injuries a captive Princeis exposed to

susser; and as: many of those, who were now concerned in the enter-
prize against her son, were the fame persons whom Lhe confidered
as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural for the
tenderness of a mother to. apprehend that the fame calamities were
ready to fall on his head; and such a profpe& did not fail of adding
to the distress and horror of her own situation. In the anguish
of her heart, he wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bitterest
terms of the unprecedented rigour, with which mhe herself had been
treated, and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the mercy of
her rebellious fubjeds; nor permit him to be involved in the fame
misfortunes, under which he had so long groaned. The peculiar
vigour and acrimony of flyle, for which this letter is remarkable,
discover both the high spirit of the Scottilh Qeen, unfubdued by
her sufferings, and the violence of her indignation at Elizabeth's
artifices and severity, But it was ill adapted to gain the end he
had in view; and accordingly it neither procured any mitigation
of the rigour of her own confinement, nor any interposition in
favour of the King *.

1583. HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated the Princes of

Anbafradors Guise, was often obliged to court their favour, interposed with
France and warmth, in order to extricate James out of the hands of a party so

entirely devoted to the English interest. He commanded M. de la
Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at the court of England, to repair
to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmost endeavours towards
placing James in. a situation, more suitable to his dignity, As Eli_

* Camd. 489.

zabeth
4

zabeth could not, with decency, refuse him iberty to eecute this BOOK VI.
commission, fle appointed avifobn to' attend him into Scotland as 583
her Envoy, under colour of coricurring with him in the negocia-
tion, but in reality, to be a spy upoin his motions, and to obftrut'
his success. James, whose title to the Crown had not hitherto
been recognized by any of the Princes on the continent, was, ex-
tremely fond of such an honourable' ermaffy from the French Mo-
narch; and,' on that account,, as well as for the fake of the errandJanuary 7.
on which he came, received: Fenelon with great refpe t. The no.
bles, in' whose power the KIing wag, did not relish this interpbfitioai
of the' French- court, which had. long lo.i its ancient influence over
the affairs of Scotland. The Cltrgv' were alarmed at the danger
to which religibn. would be exposed, if the' Princes of Guise should
recover any ascend'ant over the public councils. And. though the
King triedi every method for reftrairing them within the bounds of
decency;- they declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise;- against the ambaflidor,- against entering into any
alliance with f£ich notorious-perfecuitors of thie:Chxurch of God, witht
a- vehemence, which no regular government would now tolerate,
buty which was then extremely!commin. The ambafiador,. watched
by Davibfn,, diftuted by the nobles, and exposed to; the infuts
of the Clergy; and' of the people,. retturned intoB Englnd: with.
out procuring any chiange in the King's, fituatioin, o receiving any
answer to a propofal'which- he made, that the governnen hliould
be carried-on in. the joinr names. of James aid the OQeen his
mother *.

M.EANW-ILE, James,. though he difembled:with great art be- James efcapea

out of the

came: every. daymore uneasy under hi on is
fienmentc hit unealinei hands of the

confpiraton:
* Cald. 3. 207. Spotfwood,. *,- S Append. No. VIII.

M rendered

T HE HISTORY
BooK VI. rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper opportunity

o583 for making his escape; and to this attention he at last owed his liber-

ty, which. the King of France was not able, nor the Queen of Eng-.
land. willing to procure for him. As the conspirators. had forced Len-
nox out of the kingdom, and kept Arranat a distance from court, they
grew secure; and imagining that time had reconciled the King tot
them, and to his situation, they watched him. with little care. Some:
occasions of discord had arisen among themselves; and the French,
ambaifador,. by fomenting these, during the time of his residence
in Scotland, had weakened the union, in which alone their safety;
consisted *. Colonel William Stewart, the commander of the band,
of gentlemen,. who guarded the King's Person, being gained by;
James, had the principal merit in the scheme for restoring his maf,.
'ulne 27. ter to liberty. Under pretence of paying a vifit.to the Earl of March

his grand uncles James, was permitted to go from Falkland to St.
Andrew's.. That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged at,
first, in an.open, defenceless. house in the town,. but pretending a,
curiosity to fee the cafle, no sooner was he entered with. tome of
his attendants whom he could: trust, than. colonel, Stewart com-
manded the gates to be ibut, and excluded all. the reft of his train,
Next morning the Earls. of Argyll, Huntly, Crawford,. Montrose,.
Rothes, with others to whom the secret had been communicated,.
entered the town with their followers; and though Mar, with e-
veral of the leaders of the faction, appearedin arms, they found
themelves sofar out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of re.
covering poffeflion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James was naturally of so
soft and dutile a temper, that those who were near his person, com-
monly made a.deep impression on his heart, which was formed.to

* Camd. 48..,..

IJe:

be under the sway of: favourites. As he remained implacable and BooK VI..
unreconciled to the conspirators, during so long a time, and at a I583
period of life, when resentments are rather violent than lasting,.
they muff either have improved the opportunities of insinuating'
themselves into favour with little dexterity, or the indignation,.
with which' this. first insult to his person and authority filled him,.
muff have been very great;

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He refolved,Refolve».

however, to
however, by the advice of Sir James Melvil, and his wisest coun- treat them

with modera;-

fellors, to act with the utmost moderation. Having called intotion..
his presence, the leaders of both facions, the neighbouring gen-
try, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs, the Ministers and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that although. he had been held
under restraint for. some time by violence, he would not impute,
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the. irregu-
larities, which. had been so frequent during his minority, would.
pass a general. a of oblivion, and govern all his. fubjeats with un--
distinguishing and equal affection. And as an evidence of his, fin-.
cerity, he vifitedthe Earl of Gowrie at Ruthven castle, and grants.
ed him a full pardon of any guilt, he had contracted, by. the crime.
committed in that very place *..

BUT James did not. adhere. long to this prudent and moderatesut Atan re.

gains his as-

plan. His former favourite, the Iarl of Arran, had been per- endastover:
mitted for tome time to refitd at Kinleil, one of his country feats.him'
As soon as the King felt himicl iat lil-,:lt y, his love for him began
to revive, and he exprefld a firon., ' i;c , 1;t:c him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the rcturi; : '. ..i;'.)u, xvIliu insolent and.

*. Mclv 27:'.

BOOK VI. overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detefled his
*-' -' crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and promi-

sing that he should continue with him no longer than one day, they
were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient affection;
the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his ascendant over him;
and within a few days resumed the exercise of power, with all the
arrogance of an undeferving favourite, and all the rashness peculiar
to himself *.

And the King THE first effec of his influence was a proclamation with regard
pursues an-
other plan. to those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven. They were required

to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner;. andthe King
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their future conduct
were such, as did not oblige him to remember past miscarriages. The
tenor of this proclamation was extremely different from. the afc of
oblivion, which the conspirators had been encouraged to expect.
Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely on a promise, clogged.
with such an equivocal condition, and granted by a young Prince,,
under the dominion of a Minister, void of faith, regardless of de-
cency, and transported, by the desire of revenge, even beyond the,
usual: ferocity of his temper. Many of the leaders, who had at
firit appeared openly at court, retired to their own houses; and
foreseeing the dangerous storm which was gathering, began to
look out for a retreat in foreign countriest-.

Elizabeth's ELIZABETH, who had all alongprote&ced. the conspirators, was
solicitations
in behalf of extremely disgusted with measures which. tended so visibly to their
the confipra- destruction, and wrote to the King a harlh and haughty letter, re-
Augul 7. proaching him in a style, very uncommon among Princes, with

* Melv. 274.

t Melv. 278. Spotfw.,3a6. Cald. 3. 330.

breach
86

breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudence BooKi VI.
in proceeding so rigorously against his best and most faithful fubjecs. 1583.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that promises extorted by
violence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were no longer bind-
ing, when these were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chufe what Ministers he would employ in his service; and that
though he resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven with the
utmost clemency, it was necessary, for the support of his authority,
that such an insult on his person hould not pass altogether uncen-
fured t.

ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by Walsingham her Sept. .

secretary, whom he appointed her ambassador to James, and who embafry into
appeared in the Scottiff court, with a splendor and magnificence, cotla
well calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince. Walsingham
was admitted to several conferences with James himself, in which
he insisted on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former answers.

AFTER suffering everal indignities, from the arrogance of Arran,

and his creatures, he returned to England, without concluding any
new treaty with the King. Walsingham was, next to Burleigh, the
Minister on whom the chief weight of the English administration
refted; and when a person of his rank, ftept so far out of the or-
dinary road of business, as to undertake a long journey, in his old
age, and under a declining state of health, ome affair of confe-
quence was supposed to be the cause, or ome important event was
expected to be the effete of this measure. But as nothing confpi-
cuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy, it is probable
that Elizabeth had no other intention in employing this agacious
Miniter, than to discover, with exaCtness, the capacity and dif-

+ Mbel. 279o

position

87

BOOK VI. position of the Scottish King, who was now arrived at a time of life,

Io'
; when with tome degree of certainty, conjedures might be formed

concerning his characer and future condut. As James possessed
talents of that kind, which make a better figure in conversation,
than in action, he gained a great deal by this interview with the
English secretary, who notwithstanding the cold reception he met,
with, gave such an advantageous representation of his abilities, as
determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward, with more decen-
cy and respect *.

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to protect the conspirators rendered

James more violent in his proceedings against them. As they had
all refused to accept of pardon, upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Angus alone complied; the reft
either fled into England, or obtained the King's licence to retire
Dccem, 17. into foreign parts. A Convention of etfates was held, the mem-

bers of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's, de-
clared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven to have been guilty
of high treason; appointed the a passed last year approving of
their conduct to be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost rigour
of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done any thing that was

uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous nobles, and under an
unsettled state of government, must be acknowledged to have been
guilty of an at of treason against their overeign; and James, who
confidered their conduct in this light, had good reason to boast of his

*Melv. 293. Cald. 3. 258. Jcbb, 2. 536.

clemency,
88:

clemency, when he offered to pardon them, upon their confessing BOOK VI.
their crime. But, on the other hand, it must be allowed that, C....

158.

after the King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion, they had
some reason to complain of breach of faith, and could not, without
the most unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in Arran's
power.

THE interest of the Church was considerably affected by these 1584.

contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept pofTefion offiTh Clergy
power, the Clergy not only recovered, but extended their privileges. cofrpirators
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they the King.
took ome bold measures towards exterminating the Episcopal
order out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's
dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate, all the Bishops in Scotland. When the
King recovered his liberty, things put on a very different afpe&.
The favour beflowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the most zealous defenders of the Protestant cause, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church. The
Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this im-
pending danger in silence. Dury, who had been restored to his
office as one of the Ministers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit, at which the King was so enraged,
that notwithstanding ome symptoms of his fubmiflion, lie com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mel-
vil, being summoned before the privy council to answer for the
dotrine he had uttered in a fcrmon at St. Andrew's, and accuscd
of comparing the present grievances of the nation with those under

VOL. II. N James

89

BOOK VI. James III. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be redref-

-

7 -8 dsed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave with
1584.

greater firmness. He declined the jurifdiaion of a civil Court, in
a cause which he maintained to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Pref-
bytery of which he was a member had, as he contended, the sole
right to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the firfl infiance, of
the doctrine delivered by Preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the Church. This exemption from civiljurifdiaion was a
privilege, which the Popish Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of what-
ever contributed to increase the lustre or power of their body, had
long struggled for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergy would have become inde-
pendant on the civil magistrate; and an order of men, extremely
useful to society while they inculcate those duties which tend to
promote its happiness and tranquillity, might have become no less
pernicious by teaching, without fear or controul, the most dange-
rous principles, or by exciting their hearers to the most desperate
and lawless ations. The King, jealous to excess of his prerogative;
was alarmed at this daring encroachment on it; and as Melvil, by
his learning and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of
head of the party, he resolved to punish him with the rigour, which
that preeminence rendered necessary, and to discourage, by a timely
severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage by flying into England; and the pulpits resounded
with complaints that the King had extinguished the light of learn-
ing in the kingdom, and deprived the Church of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline :.

* Spots. 330. Cald. 3. 3o4.

THES
9o

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measure; BooK VI.

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The ccn- 1584
fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still possessed great
influence there; and as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of
Arran, they never ceased folliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had sub-
mitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, oon repented of a
ftep which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining the
confidence of the other: and, after suffering many mortifications
from the King's negleCt, and the haughtiness of Arran, he was
at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a scheme for furprizing the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little perfwafion was necessary to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the
execution of their enterprize. His lingering so long at Dundee,
without any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointed the fuccefj of the con-
fpiracy. Colonel William Stewart surrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamis, seized
the castle of Stirling, and erecting their standard there, published a
manifesto declaring that they took arms for no other reason but to
remove from the King's pretence, a minion who had acquired power
by the most unworthy actions, and who exercised it with the most
intolerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it to treachery on

9'
N 2

his

BOOK VI. his part, and fufpeted that as he had formerly deserted, he had

i 5.4.. now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fum of money, with which

Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly paid, and
their friends and vassals coming in slowly, they apppeared irresolute
and difheartned; and as the King, who ated with great vigour,
advanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men, they fled pre-
cipitately towards England, and with difficulty made their escape *.
This rash and feeble attempt produced such effects, as usually fol-
low disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause, for which
it was undertaken, but added firength and reputation to the King;
confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their mea-
fures with more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie was the first
victim of their resentment. After a very informal trial, a jury of
peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publickly beheaded
at Stirling.

May zz. To humble the Church was the King's next ftep. But asit be-
A parliament
held. came necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the legislative

authority, a parliament was hastily summoned; and while so many
of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom or forbidden to
appear in the King's presence; while Arran's haughtiness kept ome
at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting consisted only
of those, who were absolutely at the devotion of the court. In

Severe laws order to conceal the laws which were framing from the knowledge
Cturlth of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were sworn to secrecy;

and when fome.of the Ministers, who cither fufpecded, or were
informed of the danger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was seized at the palace-gate,
and carried to a distant prison. Others attempting to enter the parlial

* Home's Illif. of HoufeofDougl. 379. Spots. 330.

ment

93

ment house, were refused admittance *; and such laws were pas- Boot VI.
fed, as totally overturned the constitution and discipline of the 584
Church. The refuting to acknowledge the jurifdiion of the privy May 22.
council; the pretending an exemption from the authority of the ci-
vil courts; the attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of
any of the three estates in parliament, were declared to be high
treason. The holding Afiemblies, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical,
without the King's permission or appointment; the uttering, either
privately, or publickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any false
and scandalous reports against the King, his ancestors, or ministers,
were pronounced capital crimes -.

WHEN thee laws were publifled at the cross of Edinburgh,

according to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St.
Cuthberts, and one of the Lords ofSeffion, solemnly protested a-
gainft them, in the name of his brethren, because they had been
passed without the knowledge or consent of the Church. Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories had
both been esteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had been
accustomed to censure, and admonish, with unbounded liberty.
In the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and independant ju-
rifdidion. The blow was now aimed at both these privileges.
These new statutes were calculated to render churchmen as incon-
liderablc, as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the nobles
had stripped them of the wealth, the King's ambition was about
to deprive them of the power which once belonged to their or-
der. No wonder the alarm was universal, and ihe complaints loud.
All the Miniflers of Edinburgh forifok their charge, and fled into
England. The moil eminent Clergymen, throughout the king-

*Cald. 3. 365.

j' Parl. 8. Jac. VI.
3

dom,

BooK VI.dom, imitated their example. Desolation and aftonithment ap-

5c84. peared in every part of the Scottish Church; the people bewailed

the loss of Pastors whom they esteemed; and full of consternation,
at an event so unexpe~ded, openly expressed their rage against Ar-
ran, and began to fufpedc the King himself to be an enemy to the
Reformed Religion *.

* Spofw. 333.

THE
-94.

# BOOK VII.

T 1 E
THE
H I S T O R Y

OF
SCOTLAND.

BO O K VII.

H I L E Scotland was torn by intestine factions, Eli- Book VIIL
zabeth was alarmed with the rumour of a project in 1584
agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Throgmor-

ton's conspi-

Cheshire gentleman, was fufpeaed of being deeply concerned in the racy againt
design, and on that suspicion he was taken into custody. Among Elizabeth
his papers were found two lifts, one of the principal harbours in
the kingdom, with an account of their situation, and of the depth
of water in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman Catho-
lics in England. This circumstance confirmed the suspicion against
him, and ome dark and desperate conspiracy was supposed just
ready to break out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and
declared that the two papers were forged by the Queen's Ministers,
in order to intimidate or insnare him; and he even endured the
rack with the utmost fortitude. But being brought a second

time

Book VII. time to the place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not

J only acknowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with
J584.

the Queen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to in-
vade England. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnifl
troops, and to conduct the enterprize. The Pope and King of
Spain were to supply the money, neceflary for carrying it on; all
the English exiles were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics
at home would be ready to join them, at their landing; Mendoza
the Spanish ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared
no pains in fomenting the spirit ofdifaffetion among the Englifl,
or in hastening the preparations on the Continent; and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his possession. This confession he retrated at his trial;
returned to it again after sentence was pafled upon him; and retrat-
ed it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming our opini-

on of this matter, by the light which timne and hiflory have thrown
tpon the designs and characters of the Princes of Guise, many cir-
cumftances in Throgmorton's confeion appear to be extremely re-
mote from truth, or even from probability. The Duke of Guise
was, at that juncture, far from being in a situation to undertake
foreign conquests. Without either power or office at court; hated
by the King; and persecuted by the favourites; he had no leisure
for any thoughts of disturbing the quiet of neighbouring flates, and
his vast and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the foun-
dation of that famous league, which shook the throne of France.
But about the time Elizabeth detected this conspiracy, the close union
between the house of Guise and Philip II. was remarkable to all

* Holingnied, 1370.

Europe,
96

Europe, and as their great enterprize against I-enry II. was not Book VI.
yet disclosed, as they endeavoured to conceal that under their 584.
threatnings to invade England, Throgmorton's dif:ovcry appeared
to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently
all the parties mentioned by him wifled her downsld, thought tat
she could not guard her kingdom with too much care. Tie idif- D^czs of
creet zeal of the Eng!iilh exiles increased her fears. Not Satisfied rcts a,.i.f
with incessant outcries against her severity towards the Scottiash Eliza'l'
Queen, and her cruel persecution of her Catholic fulbjcQs, nor
thinking it enough that one Pope had threatened her with the fen-
tence of excommunication, and another had actually pronounced
it, they now began to disperse books and writings, in which they
endeavoured to persuade their disciples, that it would be a merito-
rious action to take away her life; they openly exhorted the
maids of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holofernes, and by such
an illustrious deed, to render their own names honourable and fa-
cred in the Church, throughout all future ages *. For all these rea-
sons, Elizabeth not only inflicted the punishment of a traitor on
Throgmorton, but commanded the Spaniih ambassador instantly to
leave England; and that Ihe might be in no danger of being at-
tacked within the island, flhe determined to use her utmost efforts,
in order to recover that influence over the Scottiffi councils, which
She had for some time entirely loft.

THERE were three different methods, by which Elizabeth mightshe endea-

hope to accomplish this; either by furnifliing such effetual aid toVr;S1 to r
the banished nobles, as would enable them to resume the chiefil"luence il

Scotland, b

direction of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with Mary, gainilg Ar
as might intimidate her son, who being now accustomed to go-

* Cmd. 497.
VOL. II.

O

v'-I 1,

Book VII vern; would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than resign the:

"-1584' sceptre, or admit.an associate in the throne-; or by'gaining the Earl

of Arran, to secure the direction of the King his maIter. The last
was not only the easiest, and fpeedieft, but most likely to be fuc-
cefsful. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying the.
other two altogether aside. With this view, he ent Davison,.
one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and address, into-
Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hated by his own coun-
trymen, and holding his power by the most precarious of all te-
nures,.the favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers
without hesitation, and esteemed the acquisition of. her protection
to be the most; solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon after,.
A.gguft 3. he consented to an interview with Lord Hunfdon the Governor of

Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous title. of Lieute-
nant General for the King, he appeared at the place appointed, with
a splendid train. In Hunfdon's presence, he renewed his promises
of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English interest, and.
assured him that James hould enter.into no negociation, which
might tend to interrupt the peace between. the two kingdoms;
and as Elizabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jealousies con-
cerning the King's marriage, which had formerly disquieted her
with regard to his mother's, he undertook to prevent James from
liflening to any overture of that kind, till he had previously obtain-.
ed the Queen of England's content,*.

scvce po- THr. banifled Lords and their adherents soon felt tihe effets of
;.'ij1 ti blcba- Arran's friendflip with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
,i, L.r.l. tlcm to take refuge in her dominions, and.feveral of her Miniflcrs

were of opinion that flhe ought to employ her arms in defence of

: Cald,. 3. 49I. Mcl.v 3 See Append. N°. IX.

their

-their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which retrained'Book VII.
James and his favourite from proceeding to such extremities against I58.
them, as might have excited the pity or indignation of the English,
:and have prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in their
*behalf. But every apprehension of this kind being now removed,
they ventured to .call a parliament, in which an at- was passed, at- Autgu z.
tainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number ds their follow-
.ers. Their eflates devolved to the Crown, and according to the
practice of the Scottish Monarchs, who were obliged to reward
the fation which adhered to them, by dividing with it the spoils
*of the vanquished, James dealt out the greater part of .these to
Arran, and his associates *.

NoR was the treatment of the Clergy'lefs rigorous. All Minis- Aginit ic

teis, readers, and professors in Colleges were injoined to subscribe, ClcgS
within forty days, a paper testifying their approbation of the laws
concerning the Church enacted in last parliament. Many, over-
awed, or corrupted by the Court, yielded obedience; others stood
out. The ltipends of the latter were sequestered, ome of the
more active committed to prison, and numbers compelled to fly the
kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the suspicion of acting
from mercenary or ambitious motives. Those who stiffered, ac-
quired high reputation, by giving such convincing evidence of their
firmness and sincerity. The judicatories of the Church were almofl:
entirely fupprelcd. In ome places, scarce as many Miniflcrs re-
mained, as to perform the duties of religious worship; they soon
funk in reputation among the people, and being prohibited not only
from discoursing of publick affairs, but obliged, by the jcaloui of
the adminifration, to frame every sentiment and exprcflion in fitch

'. Cald, 3. 527.

0 2

.a mallnncr,

Book VII. a manner, as to give the court no offence, their sermons were deem-
; 84.- ' ed languid, insipid, and contemptible; and it became the general

opinion, that together with the most virtuous of the nobles, and.
the most faithful of the Clergy, the power and. vigour of Religion
were now banished out of the kingdom *..

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitless

negociations with the Q.een of Scots, which it had become almofl
matter of form to renew every year. They served not only to a-
muse that unhappy princess with some profpea of liberty; but fur-
nifhed an apology for eluding the follicitations of foreign powers
in her behalf; and were of use to overawe James, by thewing him
that he could, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to dispute his
authority. These treaties he suffered to proceed to what length
he pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking them off,
when they became no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot
was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it; the
reasons, however, which rendered it ineffectual. were far from be-
ing frivolous.

New confpi- As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scotland,
racy against the. ship on board of which he was a passenger, happened to be
;lizabeth.

chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces ofme papers iii his cuf,
tody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary acci-
dent, the wind blew them back into the flip,.and they were im-
mediately taken up by some of the passengers, who carried them to
Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He, with great indufsry
and patience, joincd them togetler, and they- were found to con-

~, CAld, 3 59s,

tain
I00

tain the account of a plot, said to have been formed by the King BookVII.
of Spain, and Duke of Guise, for invading England. The peo- 584
pie were not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned
by the conspiracy, in which Throgmorton had been engaged, and
as his discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by additional evi-
dence, not only all their former apprehensions recurred, but their
consternation became general and excessive. As all the dangers,
with which England had been threatened for ome years, flowed.
either immediately from Mary herself, or from those, who made-
use of her name to justify their infurretions and conspiracies, this.
gradually diminished the compassion due to her situation, and the.
English, instead of pitying, began to fear and to hate her.. Eliza-
beth, under whose wife and pacific reign the Englifll enjoyed tran-
quillity, and had opened sources of wealth unknown to their an-
ceftors, was extremely beloved by all her people; and regard to her.
safety, not less than to their own interest, animated them.againft
the Scottifl Qeen. In order to discourage her adherents, it. occafons an
was thought necessary to convince them, by ome public deed, ofaffociation in

opposition to

the attachment. of he English to their own Sovereign, and that Mary.
any attempt againrf her life would.prove fatal to her rival.. With
this view, an A/bciation was. framed, the subscribers of which ofober 19..
bound themselves by the most solemn oaths, to defend the
( Queen against all her enemies foreign and domeflic;. and if

violence hould be offered to her life, in order to favour the

"title. of any pretender to the Crown, they not only engaged
"never to allow or acknowledge the person, or persons,. by
" whom, or for whom, fuich a deteffable at flould be commit-
" ted, but vowed, in the presence of the Eternal God, to pro-

fecute such person, or persons, to the death, and to pursue
them, with their utmost vengeance, to. their utter overthrow

c" and,.

roI

BookVII." ard extirpation *." Persons of all ranks subscribed this com-
'- 84 bination with the greatest eagerness and unanimity t.
Which great- MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed de-

yls sign to exclude her from all right of succession, but as the certain

and immediate forerunner of her deftrucion. In order to avert
this, she made such feeble efforts as were sti'll in her power, and
sent Naue her secretary to court, with offers of more entire refig-
nation to the will of Elizabeth, in every point, which had been the
occasion of their long enmity, than all her ufferings hitherto had
been able to extort . But whether Mary adhered inflexibly to her
privileges, as an independant Sovereign, or yielding to the neceffiy
of her situation, endeavoured, by conceflions, to ooth her rival,
she was equally unsucce.ssful. Her firmness was imputed to.obiti-
nacy, or to the secret hope of foreign assistance; her conceflions
were either believed to be insincere, or to flaw from the fear of some
imminent danger. Her present willingness, however, to comply
*with any terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly urged his
Mistress to come to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth was
persuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the association, which
had rendered her so passive and compliant. She always imagined
that there was something myfierious and deceitful in all Mary's ac-
tions, and fufpeted her of carrying on a dangerous correspondence
with the Englifl Catholics, both within and without the kingdom,
Nor vwre her suspicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had,
about this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging
him to haften the execution of what she calls the Great plot or Dc-
fignmcnt, without hcfitating on account of any danger in which it

*.State Trials, . 22. ' 1' Camid, 499. :1: Camd. Ibid.

might

7
·10,2

Io3:

might involve her life, which she would most willingly part with, Book VII.
if, by that sacrifice, ihe could procure relief for so great a number 584-
of the oppressed children of the Church -. Inflead, therefore, of She is eated

with greater

hearkning to the overtures which the Scottifl Queen made, orrigour.
granting any mitigation of the hardships of which file complained,
Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury,
to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust with great
fidelity, during fifteen years, but,.at the fame time, had treated Mary
with gentleness and respect, and had always sweetened harfl com-
mands, by the humanity, with which he put them in execution.
The fame politeness was not to be expected from men of an inferior
rank, whose feverevigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommen-
dation to that employment, and the only merit, by which they
could pretend to -gain favour or preferment t.

As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive the banifled Gray, nev-

favourite of

nobles of Elizabeth's protecion, he appointed the Master of Graythe King's..
his ambassador to the court of England, and intrusted him with
the conduct of a negociation for that purpose. An honour for
which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl of
Arran. Gray possessed all the talents of a Courtier; a graceful per-
son, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France, he had been ad-
nitted into the most intimate familiarity with the Duke of Guise,
and in order to gain his favour, had renounced the Protestant Re-
ligion, and profenfd the utmost zeal for the captive Qeen, who
carried on a icrct correfpondencc with him, from which fle ex-
peetcd great advantages. On his return into Scotland, he paid

* Stryp', . 2)t6. 'I' CarnJ, sco.

court

.Book V. court to James with extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplish-
~.^-.ai ments did not fail to make their usual imprcffion on the King's heart.
I$584.

Arran, who had introduced him, began quickly to dread his grow-
ing favour; and flattering himself, that absence would efface any
sentiments of tenderness from the mind of a young prince, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in the
kingdom, for an embafly of such importance: and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften his fall. Eliza-
beth, who had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper in-
ftruments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by carefies, and
by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The former flattered his
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied his profuseness, which
was still greater. He abandoned himself without reserve to Eliza-
beth's direaions, and not only undertook to retain the King under
the influence of England, but acted as a spy upon the Scottish Queen,
and betrayed to her rival every secret, that he could draw from her
by his high pretensions of zeal in her service *.

*His interest GRAY'S credit with the English court was extremely galling to
with thecourt.the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing

:her power to reflore them; he found it easier to govern Scotland,
by corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with Gray's
illicitations, he commanded the exiles to leave the north of Eng-
December3.3land, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This ren-

dered it difficult for them to hold any correspondence with their
partizans in Scotland, and almost impossible to return thither with-
out her permission. Gray, by gaining a point which James had so
much at heart, rivetted himself more firmly than ever in his fa-

* Strypc, 3. 302. Melv. 36.

Your;

vour ;. and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable of ferv- Book VII.
ing Elizabeth with greater success *. 1584.

ARRAN had now poffiefed, for some time, all the power, the r585.
riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could desire, Arran's cor-

raption, and

or the fondness of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality tb- insolence.
wards his favourites, could bestow. The office of Lord Chancel-
lor, the highest and most important in the Kingdom, was conferred
upon him, even during the life of the Earl of Argyll, who succeed-
ed Athole in that dignity t; and the public beheld, with astonish-
ment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of fortune, ig-
norant of law, and a contemner of justice, appointed to preside in
parliament, in the privy council, in the court of session, and in-
trusted with the supreme disposal of the property of his fellow sub-
je&s. He was, at the fame time, governor of the castles of Stir-
ling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Provofi
of the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all there accumulated digni-
ties his merit were not sufficiently recompenced, he had been creat-
ed Lieutenant General over the whole kingdom. No person was
admitted into the King's presence without his permission; no favour
could be maintained but by his mediation. James, occupied with
youthful amusements, devolved upon him the whole regal authority.
Such unmerited elevation increased his natural arrogance, and ren-
dered it intolerable. He was no longer content with the condition
of a subject, but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo Duke
of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his title to the Crown was
preferable to that of the King himself. But, together with thefc
thoughts of royalty, he retained the meanness, suitable to his pi-
mitive indigence. His venality as a judge was scandalous, and was
exceeded only by that of his wife, who, in defiance of decency,

* Cald. 3. (43. 1. Crawf. Offic of State, pp. 447.
VOL. II.

made
p

Book VII. made herself a party in almost every question which came to be de-

--"
.0 cided, employed her influence-to corrupt, or to overawe the judges,

and almost openly dicated their decisions *. His rapaciousness as a
Minister was insatiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many
offices; with the estate, and honours which belonged to the family
of Hamilton; or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands, which
had fallen to his hare; he grasped at the possessions of several of
the nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to. exchange part of his
estate for the forfeited lands of Kinneil; and because he was unwil-
ling to quit an ancient inheritance for a possession so precarious, he
stirred up against him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of Johnston,
and involved that corner of the kingdom in a civil war. He com-
mitted to prison the Earl of Athole, Lord Home, and the Mailer of
Caffils; the first, because he would not divorce his wife, a daughter
of the Earl of Gowrie, and entail his estate on him; the second, be-
cause he was unwilling to part with tome lands, adjacent to one of
his estates; and the third, for refusing to lend him money. His
spies and informers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves
into every company. The nearest neighbours difirufted and feared
each other. All familiar society was at an end. Even the common
intercourses of humanitywere interrupted, no man knowing in whom
to confide, or where to utter his complaints. There is not perhaps
in hiflory, an example of a minister so universally detestable to a
nation, or who more justly deserved its detetlation -.

ARRAN, notwithstanding, regardless of the sentiments, and de-

spifing the murmurs of the people, gave a loose to his natural tem-
per, and proceeded to ats flill more violent. David Home of Ar-
gaty, and Patrick his brother, having received letters from one of

* Cald. 3, 331. Scotftarvet's Staggering State, 7. t Spotfw. 337h 338.

the
. o6

the banished Lords, about private business, were condemned and Book VII.
put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels. Cunning- ~-5-'
hame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of
honour and reputation, were accused of having conspired, with
the exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A single witness only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence was un-
answerable; their accuser himself not long after acknowledged that
he had been suborned by Arran; and all men believed the charge
against them to be groundless: they were found guilty, notwith- February 9.
flanding, and suffered the death of traitors *.

ABOUT the fame time, that these gentlemen were punished for a Parry's con-

pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was indangered by a real one. Erlzaeth, '
Parry, a DoEor of laws, and a Member of the House of Com-
mons, a man vain and fantaftick, but of a resolute spirit, had lately
been reconciled to the Church of Rome; and fraught with the
zeal of a new convert, he offered to demonstrate the incerity of his
attachment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Eli-
zabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a book, to prove the mur-
der of an excommunicated Prince to be not only lawful, but a me-
ritorious action. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits both
there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the design.
The Pope himself exhorted him to persevere; and granted him, for
his encouragement, a plenary indulgence, and remission of his fins.
Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But
though he often got access to the Qeen, fear, or some remaining
sense of duty, restrained him fiom perpetrating the crime.' Hap-
pily, his intention was at last discovered by Nevil, the only person
in England, to whom he had communicated it; and he himself

* Spotfw. 338. Cald. 3. 794.

P 2

havitlng

Book VII. having voluntarily confeled -his guilt, he suffered the puniiflnent
u_..-8 which it deserved *.

z 58 5.

March z.

A evcre fl- THE SE repeated conspiracies against their Sovereign awakened the
tute, which indignation of the English parliament, and produced a very extra-
proved fatal
to Mary. ordinary atute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the Qgeen of

Scots. By this law the Association in defence of Elizabeth's life was
ratified, and it was further enated " that if any rebellion shall be

excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of
, her Majesty's person, by or for any person pretending a title to

the Crown, the Queen shall impower twenty four persons, by a
' commission under the great feal, to examine into, and pass fen-
( tence upon such. offences; and after judgment given, a procla-
, mation shall be issued, declaring the persons whom they findguil--
" ty, excluded from any right to the Crown; and her Majesty's sub-
' jeds may lawfully pursue every one of them to the death, with
' all their aiders and abettors: And if any design against the life of
" the Qeen take effet, the persons by orfor whom, such a detest-

able ad is executed, and their iffees, being any wife afienting
or privy to the fame, hall be disabled for ever from pretend-
ing to the Crown, and be pursued to death in the like man-
ner -F." This a was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots ;-

.and whether we confider it as a voluntary expreflion of the zeal
and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we im--
pute it to the influence, which that artful Princess preserved over
her parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general:
principles of justice, or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered
accountable not only for her own actions, but for those of others;:

* State Trials, Vol.. . 103. t State Trials, Vol . 123.

in
o108

in coihfcqereof which, he might forfeit her right of succession, Book VII.
and even her lif ifeflf. 1585.

MARY juitly confidered this at, as a warning to prepare for The rigour

withwhich fle

the worst extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had was treated,,
resolved, by this time, to take away her life; and suffered books increased.
to be publihed, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel and
unprecedented meafire was not only necefiary, but just *. Even!
that hort period of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardlhip, and indignity, which it was in
their power to inflic. Almost all her servants were dismissed; she
was treated no longer with the refpea due to a Queen; and though
the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
iitution, he was confined to two ruinous chambers, scarce habi-
table, even in the middle of summer, by reason of cold. Notwith-
Aanding the scantiness of her revenue, she had been accustomed to,
ditribute regularly ome alms among the poor in the village ad-
joining to the castle.. Paulet, now, refused her liberty to perform
this pious and humane office, which had afforded her great con-
folation, amidt her own sufferings. The cafile, in which he re-
fided, was converted into a common prison; and a young man, sus-
peaed of Popery, was confined there, and treated, under her eye,
with such rigour, that he died of the ill usage. She often com-
plained to Elizabeth of there multiplied injuries, and expofiulated
as became a woman, and a Qeen; but as no political reason now
obliged that Princess to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes,.
far from granting any redress, he did not even deign to give her
any answer. The King of France, closely allied to Elizabeth, on
whom he depended for afliftance, was afraid of espousing Mary's

* Strypc, 3. 299.

cauie.,.
2

Book VII. cause, with any warmth; and all;:his follicitations in, her behalf

-" 'were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French
1585.

ambassador, whose compaiflon and zeal for the unhappy Queen
supplied the defe&ts in his inftru&ions, remonstrated with such vi-
gour against the indignities, to which lhe was expo1ed, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her removed to Tuth-
bury; though he was confined, the greater part of another winter,
in her present wretched habitation *.

A breach be- NEITHER the insults of her enemies; nor the neglect of her
,tween Mary
;ad her son. friends, made such an impression on Mary, as the ingratitude of her

son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial refpet,
and had even entered into negociations with her, which gave um-
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this :good
correspondence hould continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly increased by the
success of his embassy, perfwaded him to write a harsh and unduti-
ful letter to his mother, in which he exprefly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
connected, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her ma-
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow, and despair.
" Was it for this, said he in a letter to the French ambassador,
March 24. < that I have indured so much, in order to preserve for him the in-

heritance, to which I have a just right ? I am far from envying
his authority in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor wili to
set my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure of

" once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto loved with too ten-
" der affecion. Whatever he either enjoys, or expects, he derived
" it from me. From him, I never received affitance, supply, or

Jebb, 2. 576-598.

" benefit

¢r benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him any longer as a Book VII.
" King; he holds that dignity by my content; and if a speedy -g-.
,, repentance does not appease my just resentment, I will load him
" with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with all my pre-
" tensions, to one, who will receive them with gratitude, and de-
,< fend them with vigour *." The love which James bore to his-
mother, whom he had never known, nay whom he had been early
taught to confider as the most abandoned person of her sex, cannot
be supposed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any
pains to regain her favour. But whether her indignation at his un-
dutiful behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Popery,
prompted Mary at any time to think seriously of disinheriting her
son; or whether these threatnings were uttered in a sudden sally
of disappointed affection, it is now no easy matter to determine.
Some papers which are till extant seem to render the former not
improbable -.

CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting, occupied Eliza- Da'ge°u"

situation of

beth's thoughts. The calm which he had long enjoyed, seemed Elizabeth,
now to be at an end; and such storms were gathering in every quar-
ter, as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring nations.
had undergone revolutions, extremely to her disadvantage. The
great qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his youth, and.
which raised the expecations of his fubjeds so high, vanished on
his acending the throne; and his acquiring supreme power seems
not only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his un-
derllanding. He oon loft the esteem and affection of the nation;.
and a life divided between the austeritics of a fupcrftitious devotion,.
and the extravagancies of the most diflolute debauchery, rendered

* Jebb, 2. 571. See Append, N°. X. 1 Sec Append. N°. XI.

him

Iti

Book VII. him as contemptible as he was odious on account of his. rapacious-

5"-' nes, his profusion, and the fondnefi with which he doted on many

unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother, those fen-
timents of the people burst but with violence. Henry had no chil-
dren, and though but thirty two years of age, the succession of the

.from the pro- Crown was already confidered as open. The King of Navarre,
grefs of the
g.gue;te a distant descendant of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to

the Crown, was a zealous Protestant. The profpea of an event,
so fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France,
alarmed all the Catholics in Europe, and the Duke of Guise,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romish faith, and the aferter of the
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In order-to unite the
party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diftinguifled by the name
of the Holy League. All ranks of men joined in it with emulation.
The spirit spread with the irresistible rapidity, which was natural to
religious passions, in that age. The deftrudion of the Reforma-
tion not only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to- be the ob-
ject and wish of the whole party; and the Duke of Guise, the
head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority in the
kingdom, far superior to that, which the King himself possessed.

from the Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly increased the
Philip 1 naval power of Spain, and had at last reduced under his dominion all

that portion of the Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean
mountains, and which nature seems to have deflined to form one
great Monarchy. William Prince of Orange, who first encouraged
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to aflert their liberties, and whose
wisdom and valour formed and protected the rising commonwealth,
had fallen by the hands of an aflafin. The filperior genius of the
Prince of Parma had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in
the Low Countries; all his cnterprizes, concerted with consummate

flill,

Ikill, and executed with equal bravery, had been attended with Book VI.
fucefs; and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on IS85.
the point of falling under the dominion of their ancient master.

NONE of those circumstances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto Herwife and

vigorous con-

owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive no ad- dua.
vantage from the jealousy, which had subsisted between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his'.confederacy with the Duke of
Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms. The
Hugonots were unable to contend with the power of the league;
-and little -could be expedted from 'any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands .could long employ the
arms, or divide tl strength of Spain. In this situation of the
affairs of Europe, it became necessary. for Elizabeth to form a new
plan of conduct.;: and her wisdom in -forming. it,. was not greater
than the vigour with. which she carried it on. The measures,
most fuitabl ito her natural temper,'. and which he had hitherto
pursued, were cautious and safe; those she now adopted were
enterprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was not
afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by necessity, not
only of defending herself with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness, which averted danger from her own dominions.
She immediately furnished the Hugonots with a considerable
supply in. money.. She carried on a private negociation with
Henry II-I. who, though compelled to join the league, hated
the leaders of it, and wished for their deftrution. She openly
undertook the protection of the Dutch commonwealth, and sent a
powerful army to its assistance. She endeavoured to form a general
confederacyof the Protestant Princes in opposition to the Popish Rocs to
league. She determined to proceed with the utmost rigour againfl n';i to gai
the Queen of Scots, whose fuf'erings and rights affordcd her ce- tlC K:1ia

VOL. II. Q( n ics

1"3

Book VII..mies a specious pretence for invading. her dominions.. She refolvedl

to redouble. her endeavours in order to..effe&t a, closer union withi
Scotland. and to extend and perpetuate her influence ove. the counm
cils of'that nation.

SHEn found it. nod:ifficult matter, to induce-mofi' of the Scottifhl

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray. Sir John Maitland,
who had been advanced to the office of Secretary,. which his brother,
formerly held,. Sir Lewis: Bellende;the Jiufice ClerkC who hadi
ay- '9' succeeded Gray as the King's.refident at London,.. were the persons .

in whom she chiefly. confided.. In order to dired and quicken .their-
motions, fhe-difpatched Sir Edward Wotton along with Bellenden:
into Scotland' This' man was gay, well-bredi and entertaining;.
he excelled in-all the exercises, for which James had a pafion;; and.
amused the young King by. relating the. adventures' he' had met
with, and the obfervations.he had made,..during a long residence in
foreign countries; but under the veil of there superficial qualities, he
concealed;:a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He oon grew into high.
favour with James, and while he was feeningly, attentive only to.
pleasure and diversions, he acquired inflence over the. public coun--
cils, toa degree.whiclr was indecent .for a ftrangerto pissess .*..

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to the.ination;.,

Propores than. the proposal. he made of a stria alliance.between. the two
league with
S~and. kingdoms in defence of the Reformed Religion.,. The rapid and '

alarming progress of. the.popfih league seemed to call on all Protef- -
tant Princes,, to unite. for the preservation of their common faith..
july 29. James embraced the overture with warmth, and a Convention.of

estates impowered him to conclude such .a treaty, and engage tos

* Melv. 317.

ratify-
rr4

ratify it in parliament t. The alacrity with which James con- BookVII
curred in this measure, must not be wholly ascribed either to his I-8
own zeal, or to Wotton's address; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's
liberality. As a mark of her motherly affecion for the young
King, he fettled on him an annual pension of 5000 pounds; the
fame fum which her father had allotted her, before she ascended
the throne. This circunftance, which fe took care to mention,
rendered a um, which in that age was far from being inconfide-
rable, a very acceptable present to the King, whose revenues, dur-
ing a long minority, had been almost totally dissipated *.

BUT the chief obje& of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Arran. Underm:nes

Arran's

While a minion 9 odious to the nation continued to govern the power.
King, his assistance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunfdane, had ap-
peared extremely zealous for her interest, he could place no great
confidence in a man, whose conduct was so capricious and irregular,
and wh6, notwithisanding his protestations to the contrary, still
continued a secret correspondence both with Mary, and with the
Duke of Guise. The banished Lords were attached to England
from affection, as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency, he could
thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left London, they had been
summoned thither, under colour of vindicating themselves from his
accusations, but, in reality, to concert with him the most proper
measures sot reltoring them to their country. Wotton pursued this
plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for execution; and it was greatly
facilitated by an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir

4 Spotfw. 339 * Cald. 3. 505

Qa2 John

li

Book VII. John Foriftr,,and.Ker ofFerniherff, the Englilh.and,Scottifh war--

_"". .' dens of the middle marches, having met, according to the custom

.of the borders, about- mid-summer, a fray arose, and. Lord Ruflel,
the Earl of Bedford's eldeft.fon, happened to be killed. This scuffle
was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to. confider it as.a design
formed. by Ker, at the inlligation, of Arran, to involve, the two
kingdoms in war.. She insisted that both. of them Should be deli-
vered up to. her , and though James eluded that demand,, he was
obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's,.. and Ker in Aberdeen.

Affils te During his. absence from court; Wotton and.his associates carried
banidled no-.
b:es. on their intrigues without interruption. By their advice, the baniflh-

ed nobles endeavoured to accommodate their differences- with Lord
John, and Lord" Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two.fons, whom
Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom; Their com-
mon sufferings,. and conimon interefl, induced both parties to bury
oet. 16. in oblivion the ancient discord, which had fubfifled-between the:

houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's permission, they.
returned in a body to the borders. of Scotland. 'Arran, who had
again recovered favour, infifedon putting. the kingdom in a posture.
of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted
all his.meafures. Some necessary orders they prevented from being
issued; others they rendered ineffectual, by the manner of exe-
cution.; and all, of them were obeyed slowly, and. with reluc*-
tance *..

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano.

ther, and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to seize tfte
Ring, and to carry him by force into England. But the design;

* Spotfw. 340.,

was.,
TZ H·· E·- . ·I' 9.. CP; R r,~

II7

was happily discovered; and in order to avoid the punishment his BookVII.
treachery merited, he departed without taking leave *. I585.

MEANWH ILE the banished Lords hastened the execution of their They return

into Sco:!and,
enterprize; and as their friends and vassals were now ready to join and are recon--

ciled to the

them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came,. they were Kingth
welcome as the deliverers of their country, and the most fervent
prayers were addreffed.o Heaven for the success of their arms. They
advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stirling at the head
of Io,ooo men. The King, though he had assembled an army
superior in number, could not venture to meet them in the field,
with troops, whose loyalty was extremely dubious,. and who,. at befl,
were far from being. hearty in the cause; nor was either the town
or castle provided for. a siege. The gates, however, of both were
hut, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night they Nov. 2.
furprized. the town, or more probably it was betrayed into their
hands; and Arran,. who had undertaken to defend it, was obliged
to save himself by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invest-
ed the castle, in-which there were not provisions for twenty four
hours; and James was necessitated immediately to hearken to terms
of accommodation. They were not so elated with success, as to
urge extravagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to make
every reasonable concefflon. They obtained a pardon in the most-
ample form, of all the offences they had committed; the prin-
cipal forts in the kingdom were, by way of security, put into their
hands; Crawford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart were removed
from the King's presence; and a parliament was called, to establish.
tranquillity in the nation -..

t Cald, 3. 795.

TrOUGui
* MelV.. 335;

585 ' federate nobles, and their adherents, they were far from discovering
A parliament. a vindictive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an a, restoring them

Pember Cto their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying the pardon grant-

,ed by the King, they seemed willing to forget all pall errors in the ad-
:ministration, and pared James the mortification of feeing his Mi-
niters branded with any public note of infamy. Arran, alone,
deprived of all his honours, stripped of his borrowed poils, and
.declared an enemy to his country by public proclamation, funk back
into obscurity, and must, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive
title of Captain James Stewart. As he had been, during his un-
tmerited prosperity, the objed of.the hatred and indignation of his
countrymen, ;they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all his sus-
ferings mitigate their resentment in the least degree.
:Church as- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no redress of

fairs. their grievances by this revolution. The confederate nobles had, all

.along, affected to be confidered as guardians of the privileges and dif-
,cipline ofthe Church. In all their manifestos they had declared their
resolution to restore thee, and by that popular pretence, had gained
nany friends. Itwasnow naturaltoexpeafomefruitofthefepromifes,
and tome returns,of gratitude towards many of the most eminent
preachers who had fufTred in their cause, and who demanded the
repeal of the laws pased the preceding year. The King, how-
ever, was resolute to maintain these laws in full authority; and as
the nobles were extremely folliitous not to disgust him, by inflting
on any disagreeable request, the claims of the Church in this, as well
:as in many former instances, were sacrificed to the interest of the
laity.. The Ministers gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and

their

tir: :imnpatience under the disappointment broke outin some ex- BbolVIL.
prefiaons, extremely difrefpetful even.towards the King himself *. 586..

THE' Arch6b op of St. Andrew's; too, felt the effects of their

enger.. The Provincial fynod of Fife summoned him to appear,.
and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former Assem--
blies, in presuming to exercise the funtion of a.Bifhop. And.
though he refused to acknowledge the jurifdicion.of the court; and
appealed' fiom it, to the King, a sentence of excommunication,,
equally. indecent and irregular, was pronounced against him. Apils3
Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his archiepiscopal ex-
communication against Melvil,. and some other. of his oppo--
nents..

SOON after; a General Assembly. was' held, in-which'the King,

with some difficulty, obtained an' a, permitting the name and;
office of a Bishop ill to continue in the Church.. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched; The exercise:
of discipline; and the infpedion of the life and doirine- of the:
Clergy, were committed to Prefbyteries, in which Bishops hould,
be allowed no other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as per-
petual moderators. They themfelveswere declared to be subjed, in.
the fame manner as. other pators, tothejurifdilion of the General
Assembly. And as the discussion of the Archbishop's appeal might:
have kindled unusual heats in the assembly, that affair was terminat--
ed by a compromise. He renounced any claim of supremacy over.
the Church, and promised to demean himself suitably to the cha-
rater of a Bishop, as described by St. Paul. The Assembly, with-
out examining the foundations of the sentence of excommunica.-

Spotfw. 343...

BookYII. tion, declared that' it ould be held of no effet, and restored him

-8.o` to all the privileges, which he enjoyed before-it was pronounced
z586._ t

Nbtwithftanding the extraordinary'tendernefs shewn for the.honour
of the fynod, and the delicacy:'and refpe&,' with which its jurifdic-
tion was treated, several members were so zealous as to protest
against this decision *.. ''

.A league with THE court of Scotland Was--ow filled with persons, so warmly
.elud cd.n attached to Elizabeth, that the league between:the two kiagdoms,

which had been proposed last year, met with no interruption; but
from D'Efneval the French Envoy. James himfelf.firft offered to re-
new the negociation. Elizabeth did not susser suc-h a favourable op-
portunity to flip, and inftantly'difpatched Randolph to conclude
.Jly '

a treaty, which he so much desired. The danger to which the Pro-
teflant religion was' exposed, by the late combination of the Popifli
powers for its deftruaion; and the necessity of a ftrit confederacy a-
mong those, who had embraced the Reformation, in order tod bfrud
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as' the foundation of the
league. The chief articles in it were, that both parties should bind
themselves to defend the Evangelic Religion; that the league hould
be offensive and defensive against all, who should endeavour to disturb
the exercise of religion in either kingdom ; that. if one of the two
parties be invaded, the other, notwithfsanding any former alliance,
lhould not, direcly or indirecly, assist the invader; that if England
be invaded in any part remote from Scotland, James fhduld assisi'
the Queen with 2000 horse, and 5ooo0 foot; that if the enemy
landed or approached within sixty miles of Scotland, the King should
take the field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as he
would do in defence of his own kingdom. Elizabeth,' in return,

* Cald. 3. 894. Spotfw. 346.

under-

undertook to a in defence of Scotland, if it hould be invaded. BookVII.
At the fame time, mhe assured the King that no ep should be 586'
taken, which might derogate in any degree from his pretensions
to the Englilh Crown *. Elizabeth expressed great fatisfadion
with a treaty, which rendered Scotland an useful ally, instead of
a dangerous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of security on that
fide, which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none of them had
been able to obtain. Zeal for religion, together with the bleflings
of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable
period, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, that
the King's conduct was universally acceptable to his own people -.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time, exposed James

to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply engaged in
the conspiracy againit the life of the King his father. Both Mor-
ton and Binny one of his own servants, who suffered for that crime,
had accused him of being present at the murder 1. He had escaped
punifthment by flying into England, and James had often required
Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her protection. He
now obtained a licence, from the King himself, to return into Scot-
land; and after undergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal, ra-
ther than to detect his guilt, he was not only taken into favour by
the King, but sent back to the court of England, with the honour-
able character of his ambassador. James was now of such an age,
that his youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse for
this indecent tranfaaion. It must be imputed to the excessive fa-
cility of his temper, which often led him to gratify his courtiers at
the expence of his own dignity and reputation .

* Spotrw. 351. Camd. 513 See Appendix, N XII.

t Spotfwood, 348. Cald. 3. 917.
VoL. IL R NOT

Book viI. No'b Iong afte-t, the inCtt&ierate afe':iof' of the Entlif Ctth^;.

1-586 lis tiairs Ma'y, and theit implacabte teittmrt againif Eliza`

Riic of Bab- beth, gave rife ro a cotippirtcy, which proved fatal tb the one Q een,
friac,.,gain left i ah itdelibl'e ftai n othe teputation of the other, and presented
]izabeth. a fpethacle to Eutopte, 'of which these had hitherto been no exafmpl

in the history 'makid.

DocToR Gifiord, Gilbert Gifford, asid Hodgibn, priefRs educated

in the seminary at Rheimns, had adopted an eXtavagant and enthu-
liaftic notion, that the Bull of Pits V. againit Elizabeth was di&ated
immediatel y by he Holy Ghot.. This *iild opitiin theyiftilled
into Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted for his furious
zeal, and -daring courage; and persuaded 'him that no service could
be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of an excomua-
AFril 26. nicated Heretic. -Savage, eage& to beaik' the 'Ctoi ' of'irttye-

dom, bound imfelf, by' a folehn v'oW, :'b kill. Eliftabeth-. -::Bal-.
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that tiime :-.c(Xe over to Paris and
solicited Mendoza the Spanfifh abashsador there, to 'ptou'e ati ;ir-
vafion of Englard, while the affairs of lth-ltagi ee e :re to tpre-
ious, and the iihgdom left naked by fending -f1 ay ob'the Qeen's
bet troops into the Netherlands. Paget ind the Engliih-eiles de-
m'onftrated the fruitle'iiefs of fIch an attempt, trnefs Elizabeth
were first cut off, or the invaders fecureddf a powerfuYl concurence
on their lanrdihg. If it could be hoped that eit'her of efe events
would happen, effeauatl aid was pronrifed; and in the mean time
M;,y 15. Ballard was sent back to renew his intrigues.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Babington, a young

gentleman in Derbyshire, of a plentiful fortune, and many amiable
qualities, who having contracted, during his residence in France, a
familiarity with the Archbifliop.of Glasgow, had been recommend-

ed by him to the Queen of Scots. He concurred with Paget in Book VII.
considering the death of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any 1586
invasion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would soon be put
to her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now in
London, waiting for an opportunity to strike the blow. But Ba-
bington thought the attempt of too much importance, to rely on a
single hand for the execution of it, and proposed that five resolute
gentlemen hould be joined with Savage in an enterprize, the fuc-
cess of which-was the foundation of all their hopes. He offered
to find out persons willing to undertake the service, whose honour)
secrecy, and courage, they might safely trust. He accordingly
opened the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury, Charles
Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John Travers, Robert
Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert
Polly, all of them, except Polly, whose bustling forward zeal intro-
duced him into their society, gentlemen of good families united to-
gether in the bonds of private friendihip, strengthened by the more
powerful tie of religious zeal. Many consultations were held; their J. ne.
plan of operations was at last fettled; and their different parts aflign-
ed. Babington himself was appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots;
Salibury, with ome others, undertook to excite fevcral countries The fclicnc
to take arms; the murder of the Queen, the most dangerous andO°f t co"'Pfi
.important service of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with four
associates. And so totally had their bigotted prejudices extinguifll-
ed the principles of honour, and the fcntiments.of humanity, uit-
able to their rank, that without scruple or compundioi, they utII-
dertook an a3ion, which is viewed with horror, even when com1-
mitted by the meaneit and nmot profligate of mankind. Thi:-
attempt, .on the contrary, appeared to thep no lss honourble thn
ii: was defpet¢ , and.in order to perpetuate the imemory of it, t!hcy

<R s. had

Book VII. had a pi&ure drawn containing the portraits of the fix affaflins, with

86. that of Babington in the middle, and a motto intimating that they

were jointly embarked in some hazardous design.
Dircovered by Ti-E conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in-

Wingha ' fiance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarce possible,

and neither difiruffed the fidelity of their companions, nor doubted
the success of their undertaking. But while they believed that their
machinations were carried on with the most profound and impene-
trable secrecy, every ftep they took was fully known to Walfing-
ham. Polly was one of his pies, and had entered into the confpi-
racy with no other design than to betray his associates. Gilbert Gif-
ford, too, having been sent over to England to quicken the motions
ofthe conspirators, had been gained by Walsingham, and gave him
sure intelligence of all their projecs. That vigilant Minister im-
mediately imparted the discoveries which he had made to Elizabeth;
and without communicating the matter to any other of the Coun-
fellors, they agreed, in order to understand the plot more perfectly,
to wait till it was ripened into some form, andt brought near the
point of execution.

They are AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to expose
fzed and her own life, and to tempt Providence any farther. Ballard, the
punilhcd.

prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was arrelled. His aflociates;
disconcerted and firuck with aonifhment, endeavoured to save
themselves by flight. But, within a few days, all of them, except
Windsor, were seized in different places of the kingdom, and com-
mitted to the Tower. Tho' they had undertaken the part, they
wanted the firm and determined spirit of affaflins; and influenced
by fear or by hope, discovered all they knew. The indignation of

-he

the people, and their impatience to revenge such an execrable corn- Book VII.
bination againf the life of their Sovereign, hallened their trial, and 1586.
all of them suffered the death of traitors *. Sept. 20.

Tius far Elizabeth's conduct may be pronounced both prudent Mary is ac-

cufed of be-

and laudable, nor can he be accused of violating any law of huma- ing an accom-
nity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were neceflary for ple in tphe
her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard to which,
posterity will pass a very different judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rah young men accounts sufficiently

for all the wild and wicked deligns which they had formed. But
this was not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose
to place the conspiracy. They represented Babington and his affo-
ciates to be instruments employed by the Queen of Scots, the real
though secret author osso many attempts againf the life of Eli-
zabeth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters,
which they ascribed to her, in support of this charge. These, as
they gave out, had come into their hands, by the following singular,
and mysterious method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into
England, had been intrusded by ome of the exiles with letters to
Mary; but in order to make a trial of his fidelity or address, they
were only blank papers, made up in that form. These being safe-
ly delivered by him, he was afterwards employed without farther
scruple. Walsingham having found means to gain this man, he,
by his permiflion, and the connivance of Paulet, bribed a trades-
man in the neighbourhood of Chattley, whither Mary had been
conveyed, who deposited the letters in a hole in the wall of the
castle, covered with a loose stone. Thence they were taken by

* Cam. g15. State Trials, vol .
I. o.

the

I25

BookVII. the Queen, and in the fame manner, her anfweis returned. All
t.-. these were carried to Walsingham, opened by him, decyphered,

fealed again so dexeroufly that the fraud could not be perceived, and
then tranfinitted to the persons to whori they were directed. Two
letters to Babington, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Englefield,
and the English fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It was
given out that in thee letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and
even of the assassination; that the direced them to proceed with the
utmost circumfpeaion, and not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries
were ready to join them; that he recommended the Earl of Arun-
del, his brothers, and the young Earl of Northumberland, as proper
persons to conduct and to add reputation to their enterprize; that fle
advised them, if possible, to excite at the fame time some commotion
in Ireland; and above all, besought them to concert with care the
means of her escape, suggesting to them several expedients for that
purpose.

The indigna- ALL these circumitanees were opened at the trial of the con-
tion of the
English a- fpirators. And while the nation was under the influence of those
that account terrors which the association had railed, and the late danger had

augmented, they were believed without hesitation or inquiry, and
spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her religion was well known;
and in that age, examples of the violent and sanguinary spirit which
it inspired, were numerous. All the cabals against the peace of the
kingdom for many years had been carried on in her name; and it
now appears evidently, said the Englilh, that the safety of the one
Queen is incompatible with that of the other. Why then, added
they, hould the tranquillity of England be sacrificed for the fake
of a iranger ? Why is a life so dear to the nation exposed to the
repeated afflaults of an exafpcrated rival ? The cafe firppofed in the

affocia-

aflociation, has now happened, the sacred person of our Sovereign BookVII.
has been threatened, and why hould not an injured people execute ~'""'

1586.
that just revenge which they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than there to Elizabeth Elizabeth re-

olves to pro-

and her Miniilers. They themselves had at first propagated them ceed to tle
among the people, and they now served both as an apology, and a mities againtr
motive, for their proceeding to such extremities againfl the Scot-her.
tifh Queen, as they had long meditated. The more injuries Eli-
zabeth heaped on Mary, the more lfle feared and hated that unhap-
py Queen, and came at last to be persuaded, that there could be
no other security for her own life but the death of her rival. Bur-
leigh and Walsingham had promoted so zealously all her measures
with regard to Scottish affairs; and had aed, with so little reserve,
in opposition to Mary, that they had reason to dread the most vio-
lent effects of her resentment, if ever he flould mount the throne
of England; and therefore they endeavoured to hinder an event so
fatal to themselves, by confirming their Mifirefs's fear and hatred of
the Scottiih Q.een.

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unusual vigilance, and !-rerdomncfics,

great care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the ,re sized.
conspiracy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court, to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with which she was
loaded as acceflary to that crime; and 'he furprizcd her with the
account, just as she had got on ho'rseback to ride out along with
her keepers. She was itruck with aftoniflmcnt, and would have
returndd ito her apartment. But she was not permitted : and in her
absence, her private closet was broke open, her cabinet and papers,
were seized, fealed, and ent up to court. Her principal domceflics,

i too,

BookVII. too, were arrested, and committed to different keepers. Naue and
t-~S8ó JCurie, her two secretaries, the one a native of France, the other of

i586.
Sept. zo. Scotland,. were carried prisoners to London. All the money in her

cuitody, amounting to little more than 2000 pounds, was secured.
And after leading her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
house to another, the was conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong castle
in Northamptonshire *.

Deliberates No farther evidence could now be expeced against Mary, and
concerning
the method of nothing remained but to decide what should be her fate. With re-
proceeding.

g ard to this, Elizabeth and those Ministers in whom he chiefly con-

fided, seem to have taken their resolution; but there was still great
variety of sentiments among her other Counsellors. Some thought
it sufficient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her under
such close restraint, as would cut off all poflibility ofcorrefponding
with the enemies of the kingdom; and as her conflitution, broken
by long confinement, and her pirit deje&ted with so many cares,
could not long support such an additional load, the Queen and na-
tion would oon be delivered from all their fears. But though it
might be easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible to di-
minifh the reverence which the Roman Catholics had for her name,
or to extinguish the compassion with which they viewed her susser-
ings; while these continued, infurre&tions and invasions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effec of any new ri-
gour would be to render them more frequent and dangerous. For
this reason the expedient was rejected.

Determines to A PUBLIC and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was
ti ykhr pub-judged the most unexceptionable method of proceeding; and it had
hckly. ux pti l

* Camd. 57.

at

at the-fame time, a emblance ofjuftice accompanied with an air BookVII.
of dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient records, for any I 86.
statute or precedent, to justify such an uncommon ftep, as the trial
of a foreign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom in arms,
but had fled thither for refuge. The proceedings against her were
founded on the a& of last Parliament, and by applying it in this
manner, the intention of those who had framed that severe fta-
tute became more apparent *.

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumstance of pomp or solemnity

thould be wanting, which could render this tranfation such as be-
came the dignity of the perfbn to be tried. She appointed, by a
commission under the great eal, forty persons, the most illustrious
in the kingdom, by their birth or offices, together with five of
the judges, to hear and decide this great cause. Many difficulties
were ltarted by the lawyers, about the name and title by which
Mary hould be arraigned; and while the eflentials of justice were
so grofly violated, the empty forms of it were the objects of their
care. They at length agreed that he Should be itiled, " Mary,
" daughter and heir of James V. late King of Scots, commonly
1f called Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France -."

AFTER the many indignities which she hadlately suffered, Mary

could no longer doubt but that her deftru6tion was determined. She
expeted, every moment, to end her days by poison, or by tome of
those secret means, usually employed againuftcaptive Princes. And
left the malice of her enemies, at the fame time that it deprived
.her of life, mhould endeavour likewise to blast her reputation, fie

* Camd. 59. Johlft. I1ft, ;3. t &trype, 3. 362.

129
VOL. ILI

S$

wrok

BookVII. wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in the strongest
' 8-"J terms, from the imputation of encouraging or of being acceflry-
z586.

to the conspiracy for affafluiating Elizabeth *.' In the solitude of
her prison, the strange resolution of bringing her to a public trial
had not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so unpre-
cedented, and so repugnant to regal Majesty, once enter into her
thoughts.

The trial at ON the eleventh of Ocober, the commiflioners. appointed by
Foteringay. Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they delivered

a letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches
and accusations, she informed her, that- regard to her own safety
had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a public enquiry into
her conduct, and therefore required her, as he had lived so long
under the protection of the laws of England, to submit now to tile

M.iry refuses trial, which they ordained to be taken of her crimes. Mary, tho'
atriirltoplea-furprized at this meflage, was neither appaled at the danger, nor

unmindful of'her own dignity. She protested, in the most solemn
manner, that lte was innocent of the crime laid to her charge, and
had never countenanced any attempt against the life of the Queen
of England; but, at the fame time, refused to acknowledge the
jurifdi&.tion of her commissioners. " I came into the kingdom,"
said fle, " an independent Sovereign, to implore the Queen's as-
" fiftance, not to subjet myself to her authority. Nor is my
,, spirit so broken by its past misfortunes,. or so intimidated by
" present dangers, as to sloop to any thing unbecoming the Ma-

jefty of a crowned head, or that will disgrace the ancestors from

" whom I am descended, and the son to whom I hall leave my
'" throne. If I mutft be tried, Princes alone can be my Peers..

Jcbb, 2. 283.

" The

I3I

" The Qeen of England's fubjecs, however noble their birth Book VII.
' may be, are of a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival ' '
" in this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner. Its laws
" never afforded me any protection. Let them not now be per-
" verted in order to take away. my life."

THE commissioners employed arguments and intreaties to over-

come Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed ac-
cording to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against her
on account of her contumacy in refuting to plead; she persisted,
however, for two days to decline their jurifdiEtion. An argu-
ment urged by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain at last prevailed.
He told her, that by avoiding a trial, he injured her own re-
putation, and deprived herself of the only opportunity of setting
her innocence in a clear light; and that nothing would be
more agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the Queen
their Mistress, than to be, convinced, by undoubted evidence,
that she had been unjustly loaded with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible ihould impose on the un-.ntsow

wary Qeen, or that he, unaftiled, at that time, by any friend cer. ofol.
or counsellor, should not be able to detedt and elude all the
artifices of Elizabeth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equal-
ly melancholy, and under circumitances nearly filnilar, her Grand-
ton Charles I. rfufed, with the utmost firnnefs, to acknow-
ledge the uurped jurisdiction of the I-igh Court of Jutlice;
and posterity has approved his condu&t, as suitable to the dig-
nity of a King. If Mary was less conflant in her refJlution,
it mufl be imputed folcly to her anxious desire of indicating
her own honour.

S a , AT .

BookVI. AT her appearance before thejudges, wo were feared n the

86 -'great hafi of the castle, where they received her with much cere-
oa, 1. mony, he took care to protest, that by copdefcending to hear and

to give an answer to the accifations, which hould be offered a.
gainft her, he neither acknowledged the jurifdi&ion of the court,
nor admitted of the validity and justice of those as, by which they
pretended to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-protefation, endeavoured to vin-

dicate the authority of the court.

The accufa- THEN the Queen's Attorney and SoLBicitor opened the charge,
tion againi against her, with all the circumstances of the late colnpiracy. Copies

of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and Paget were
produced. Babington's confession, those of Ballard, Savage, and
the other conspirators, together with the declarations of Naue and
Curie her Secretaries, were read, and the whole ranged in the mot
specious order, which the art of the lawyers could devise, a
heightened by every colour, their eloquence could add.

MARY listened to their harangues attentively, and without emo-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who
was then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being accessory to
the conspiracy, he broke out into this tender nd generous excla-
mation: " Alas ! how much has the noble house of Howard sus-
" (ered for my fake !"'
Her defence. WHEN the Queen's council had finished, Mary flood up, and

with great magnanimity, and equal pretence of mind, began her
defence. She bewailed the unhappiness of her own situation, that,
after a captivity of nineteen years, during whichf he had suffered

treatment

treatment no less cruel than unmerited, he was at last loaded with Book VII.
an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her right ofs
succession, and to deprive her of life itself, but to tranfinit her
name with infamy to future ages: That, without regarding the
sacred rights of sovereignty, she was now fubjeded to laws framed
againfl private persons; though an anointed Queen, commanded
to appear before the tribunal of fubjeds; and, like a common cri-
minal, her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers,
capable of wresting her words, and of misrepresenting her ations
That, even in this dishonourable situation, she was denied the pri-
vileges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her
own defence, without the preence of any friend with whom to
advise, without the aid of council, and without the use of her own
papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in the accrfation,

She absolutely denied any correspondence with Babington: The
name of Ballard was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretended letters to them were produced; though nothing
less than her hand-writing or subscription was sufficient to convict
her of such an odious crime: No proof could be brought that the
letters were delivered into her hands; or that any answer was re-
turned by her direaion: The confeflions of wretches condemned
and executed for such a detestable ation, were of little weight
fear or hope might extort from them many things inconsistent with
truth, nor ought the honour of a Quen to be stained by such vile
testimony. The declaration of her Secretaries was not more con-
clufive; promies and threats might easily overcome the resolution
of two trangers; in order to screen themselves, they might throw"
the blame on herj but they could direover nothing to her preju-
dice, without violating, in the firt place, their oath of fidelity; an

their

Book VII. their perjury, in one instance, rendered them unworthy of credit in

"/"' another: The letters to the Spanish Ambassador, were either nothing
1586.

more than copies, or contained only what was perfectly innocent:'
, I have often," continued fle, " made such efforts for the reco-
" very of my liberty, as are natural to a human creature. And
, convinced, by the fad experience of so many years, that it was
( vain to expect it from the justice or .generosity of the Queen of
· England, I have frequently solicited foreign Princes, and called.
( on all my friends to employ their whole interest for my relief. I

have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the Englifl Catholics
"rome mitigation of the rigour with which they are now treated;

and if I could hope, by my death, to deliver them from oppref-,
sion, I am willing to die for their fake. I wifl, however, to
"imitate the example of Esther, not of Judith, and would rather

make intercession for my people, than hed the blood of the
meanest creature in order to five them. I have often checked
the intemperate zeal of my adherents, when either the severity
of their own persecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of
( injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate them in-
( .to violent councils. I have even warned the Queen of dangers
"to which these harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn

out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the profpet of a

". Crown is not so inviting, that I flould ruin my foul in order to
" obtain it. I am no itranger to the feelings of humanity, nor
( unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor the detelt-
"able crime of afaflination, as equally repugnant to both. And,
"if ever I have given consent by my words, or even by my
( thoughts, to any attempt againit the life of the Queen of Eng-
( land, far from declining the judgment of men, I illall not even
" pray for the mercy of God *".

* Camd, 520, &c.

Tvo

,'p
i34-

vJ r U

I Li I 1N J

U I35

; Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and in BookVII.
every part.of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity of a 1586.
Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

THE commiflioners, by Elizabqth's express command, adjourn- Sentence a-

ed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in ganSher.
Westminster. When assembled in that place, Naue and Curie
were brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration
upon oath.- And after reviewing their whole proceedings, the
commissioners unanimously declared Mary " to be accessory to Ba-
" bington's conspiracy, and to have imagined diverse matters tend-

ing to the hurt, death, and deftrution of Elizabeth, contrary
to the express words of the statute, made for the security of
the Queen's life *."

-IT is no easy matter to determine'whether the injustice in ap- rrregularit-s.
pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conducting it, were great- in the trial.
eft and most flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim autho-
rity over an independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply
with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could the fubjets
of another Prince become her judges ? Or if such an insult on roy-
alty were allowed, ought not the common forms of justice to
have been observed ? If the testimony of Babington and his as-
fociates was so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a
few weeks, and by confronting. them with Mary, overwhelm her
with the full convidion of her crimes ? Naue and Curie were both
alive, wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for what
reason were they produced in the Star-chamber, where Mary was
not present to hear what they deposed ? Was this suspicious evi-

* Camd. 55 ..

dcnce'
n v?

Bbok VlT . dence enough to condemn ai aQeetn Oogt e e ns crih. al

t'86.I to have been fond guilty, upon-fuc feeble nd incncndhfe prooft?
i'tg6.

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced at her trial, that

the sentence against Mary was founded, That served as a pretence
t5 justify, but was not the cause of the violent teps taken by Eliza-
beth and her Miniffers towards her deftrudzion and was employed
to give some appearance of jufnlce, to what was the offspring of
jealousy and fear. And the nation, blinded with refententagaint
Mary, and flicitous to focure the life of its own Sovereign from
every danger, observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and at-
tended to no defe&s in the proof, but grasped at fufpicionsand pro-
babilities, as if they had been irrefragable demonstrations.

ThearliaHE

Parlia E ariaent met a few days after sentence was pronounced
the s"ne, again Mry. In that iltnrious Tfembly, more temper and dif-

cernmen, than are to be found among the people, might have been
expeted. Both Lords and Common however, were equally un-
der the dkoinion of popular predndices and passions, and the fame
eceffes of zeal or of fear, wiich prevailed in the nation, are ap-
parent in all their proceedings. They entered with impatience
'upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers which threat-
ned the Quen's life, and the peace of the Kingdom. All the pa-
pers, which had been produced a Fotheringay, were laid before
them. And after many violent invetives against the Queen of
Scots, both bouses, unaninoufiy, ratified the proceedings of the
Pommiflioners hy whom he had been tried, and declared the fen-

and depand tence against her to be just and well-founded. Not satisfied with
the xcution this, they presented a joint address to the Queen, beseeching her,
of it.

as he regarded her own safety, the preservation of the Protestant

religion,
r36

'religion, the welfare and wilhes of her people, to publish the fen- Book VII.
tence; and without farther delay to inflic on a rival, no less irre- r586.
claimable than dangerous, the punishment which fle had merited
by so many crimes. This request, dictated by fears unworthy of
that great Assembly, was enforced by reasons still more unworthy.
They were drawn not from justice, but from conveniency. The
most rigorous confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's
intriguing spirit; her address was found, by long experience, to be
an overmatch for the vigilance andjealoufy of all her keepers: The
severest penal laws could not restrain her adherents, who, while
they believed her person to be sacred, would despise any danger to
which themselves alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes were
ready to second their attempts, and waited only a proper opportu-
nity for invading. the kingdom, and asserting the Scottifih Qeen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons, was incompatible
with Elizabeth's safety; and if she were spared out of a false cle-
mency,'the Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the king-
dom, could not be one moment secure. Necefity required that file
/hould be sacrificed in order to preserve these; and to prove this fa-
crifice to be no less just than necessary, several examples in hiRlory
were produced, and many texts of scripture quoted, but both
the one and the other were misapplied, and dilsorted from their
true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to ,Elizabet! than E1i;zfl ].',

dillnU i tulUui.

an address in this firain. It extricated her out of a situation, ex-
tremely embar'affing; and without depriving her of the power o'
Sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with les appearance of
blame. If fie choe the former, the whole honour would redound
to her own clemency. If hce determined on the latter, whatever

VOL. II. T wah

BookVl;l was rigorous might now. seem to be extorted by the follicitations off

h"" er people, rather than to flow forom her-own ihclination. Her
answer, however, was in aftile, which ihe.often used, ambiguous:
and evasive under the appearance of openness and candor; full of
such professions of regard for her people, as served to heighten their-
loyalty; of such complaints. of Mary's ingratitude, as were calcu--
lated to excite their indignation;: and of such insinuations that her,
own life was in danger, as could.not fail to keep alive their. fears..
In the end, she besought them to fave-her the infamy and the pain
of delivering up a.Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment.;:
and to confider whether it might not till be pofiible to provide
for the public security,, without forcing her to. imbrue.her hands in,
royal blood.

THE true. meaning of. this reply was easily understood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former. request, with additional
importunity, which was far from being either unexpeted, or-of-
fenfive. Elizabeth. did. not, return any: answer more. explicit;.
and having obtained. fuch..a public fantion of her proceedings, there
was no longer-any reason for protra&ing this fcene.ofdiffimulation ;..
there was even some danger that-:her feigned.. difficulties. might at
last be treated as real ones; he..therefore adjourned the parlia-
ment, and reserved. in..her.own' hands the sole .difppfal of her rival's.
,fate .

Fiance inter. ALL the Princes in Europe olbferved the proceedings against
n bfehlfo Mary, with.aftonifhment and horror.;.and even Henry III. notwith-

Mary. sanding his known, aversion to the-houfse of Guise, was obliged to

intekpofe in her behalf, and to appear in .defence of the common

* Camd. 526. D'Ewes, 375.

rights -

rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambaflador, and Bellie- BookVIL
vere who was ent with an extraordinary commission to the fame ' '15

1586.

purpose, interceded for Mary with great appearance of warmth. Nov. 21.
They employed all the arguments which the. cause naturally fug-
gested; they pleaded from justice, generosity, and humanity; they
intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all thee Elizabeth
continued deaf and inexorable, and having received ome intima-
tion of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of the Scottish Queen,
and knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, fle trufRed,
that thee loud remonstrances would be followed by no violent
resentment *.

SHE paid. no greater regard to the follicitations of the Scottifl Jfames cn(!a-

King, which, as they were urged. with more sincerity, merited more ';, ,oiar,
attention. Though her commiflioners had been extremely careful ife-
to sooth James,. by publifling a declaration that their sentence against
Mary did,, in no degree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate
any title which he formerly possessed; he beheld the indignities to
which his. mother had been exposed with filial concern, and with
the sentiments. which became a King. The pride of the Scottish
nation was rouzed, by the insult offered to the blood of their Mo-
narchs, and, called upon- him to employ the most vigorous efforts,
in. order to prevent or to revenge the Queen's death.

AT' first, he could farce believe that Elizabeth would venture

upon. an. aion. so. unprecedented, which tended so visibly to'
render the persons of Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people,

* Camd 531.

T 2

and

BookVIL and which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times;

- ',- fhe'was so remarkably jealous. But as oon as the extraordinary,
I586.

steps which he took discovered her. intention, he dispatched Sir
William Keith to London; who, together with Douglas his am-
bafl'ador in ordinary, remonfirated, in the strongest terms, again ft
the injury done to an independent Qeen, in fubjeting her to be-
tried like a private person, and by laws to which she owed no obe--
(hence; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by susser--
ing a sentence unjust in itself, as wellas dishonourable to the King-
of Scots, to be put in execution*.

ELIZABETH returning no answer to these remonfirances of his

ambassador, James wrote to her with his own hand, complaining in
the bitterest terms of'her conduct, not without threats that both his
duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her friendihip;
and to a as became a on when called to revenge his mother's
wrongs t. At the fame time he assembled the nobles, who promif-
ed to tfand by him in so good'acaufe. He appointed ambassadors to-
France, Spain, and Denmark, in order to-implore the aid of these-
courts; and took other feps towards executing his threats with vi-
gour. The high firain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to such a de-
gree, that she was ready to dismiss his ambassadors without any reply.
But his preparations alarmed and embarrassed her Ministers, and at,
their intreaty he returned a soft and evasive answer, promising to
liflen to any overture from the King, that tended to his mother's
fifety; and to suspend the execution.of the sentence, till the arrival,
of new ambassadors from Scotland .

* See Append. No XIIt. t Birch, Mem. . 52. 1: Spotfw, 251. Cald. 4. 5.

MEAN-.
140

MEANWHILE, the commanded the sentence against Mary to be BookVII.

published, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was ex- !586
torted from'her by the repeated inttreaties of both houses of parlia- December 6.

The sentence.

ment. At the fame time, the dispatched Lord Buckhurft and Bealea;ainft Mary
to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how importunately the
nition demanded the execution of it; and, though the had not
hitherto yielded to these follicitations, he advised her to prepare for
an event, which might become necessary for securing the Proteiant.
religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary re-
ceived the message: not only without symptoms of fear, but with
expressions of triumph. " No wonder, said the, the English
( hould now thirst for the blood of a foreign Prince, they have.
" often offered violence to their own. Monarchs, But. after so.
" many sufferings,. death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I
"am proud to think that my life is eteemed of importance to:
" the Catholic religion,, and as a martyr for it,I am now willing
" to die -t."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was firipped- ofheis treatel

with the ut-

every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of fiate in her not rigour..
apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap-
proached her person without ceremony; and even appeared covered
in her presence. Shocked with there indignities, and offended at
this gross familiarity, to which fle had never been accustomed,,
Mary once more complained to Elizabeth; and at the fime time,
as her last request, intreated that she would permit her servants to
carry her dead body into France, to be laid among her ancetfors, December 19.;
in, hallowed ground; that ome of her domestics might be present

-[ Cand, 528. Jcbb, 291.

at

14I?

.BookVII. at her death, to'bear witness of her innocence, and firm adherence

8 to the Catholic faith; that all her servants might be fufered to leave

the kingdom, and to enjoy those fmall:legacies, which mte ihould
:bestow on them, as testimonies of her affection; and that, in the
mean time, her almoner, or ome other Catholic Priei, might be
allowed to attend her, and to assist her in preparing for an eternal
world. She besought her in the name of Jesus, by.the foul and
memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their near
consanguinity, and the royal dignity with which they were both in-
veIted, to gratify her in these particulars, and to, indulge her so far
as to signify her compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whe-
ther Mary's letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid' to her requests. She was
offered a Protestant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them she re-
jeded; and without any Clergyman to direc her devotions, she pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which he
.now believed to be at no great distance *

1587. JA ME s, without losing a moment, sent new~ ambassadors to Lon-
James rinews don. There were the master of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In,
his follicita-
bionsi her order to remove Elizabeth's. fears they offered' that their Master
January 1. would' become bound- that. no- conspiracy fliould be undertaken,.

againif her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's con-
~sent; and for the faithful! performance of this, would- deliver some
.of the most considerable. of the Scottih nobles, as- hostages. If. this
were not thought sufficient, they promised that Mary should resign
all' her rights and pretensions to her son, from whom nothing inju-
rious to the Protestant religion, or inconsistent with Elizabeth's-

* Camd. 528. Jebb, 2. 295.

safety,

3
I* 4a2

safety, could be feared. The former proporal, Elizabeth rejeced BookVIT..
asinfecure; the latter, as dangerous. The anibaffadors were then .f587
inftruaed to talk in an higher tone; and Melvil executed the com-
miflion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with his usual per-
fidy, deceived his Master who trusted him with a negociation of bfo
much importance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was employed.
to save. He encouraged.and urged Elizabeth, to execute the fen-
tence againff her rival. He often repeated the old proverbial fen-
tence, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever should happen,.,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at least to prevent any
violent effects of his resentment %

ELIZABET'H, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the Elizabeth's,

aganxiety and

moRt violent agitation rid disquietude of mind. She shunned so- ditYmulation..
ciety, le was often found in a melancholy and musing posture, and
repeating, with much emphafis,.thefe sentences which ihe borrowed
from. some of the devc'es then in. vogue; ut sier aut feri; ne.
feriare, feri.. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness inuft
be imputed to difimulatron; it was impossible, however that a.
Princess, natufally f cautious as Elizabeth, should venture on an
aEion, hich. might expose her memory to infamy, and her life.
and kingdom to danger, without reflecting deeply~ and hesitating
long. The people waited.her determination in fufpence and anxi--
ty; and left their fear or their zeal should subside, rumours of
danger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmost in-
duftry; Aubefpine, the French ambassador, was accused of having
Cfbdrned an aaffin to nurder the Queen. The Spanish fleet was
said by fbme to be already arrived at Milford-haven. Others as~-

* Spptt. 352. Murdin, 568.. See Append. N° XIV.

firmed.

im w

.BookVII. firmed that'the Duke of;Guife had landed with a firong army, in

''.7 .Suffex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were up
1587.

.in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with all their
-forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing
the Qeen, and.burning the city. The panic grew every day more
violent; and the people, astonished and enraged, called for the exe-
cution of the sentence against Mary, as the only thing which could
restore tranquillity to the kingdom i.

W'arrant for WHILE there sentiments prevailed among her fubjecls, Elizabeth
tionyig.ed.c thought he might safely venture to firike the blow, which she had
'ebru"ary so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fecreta-

ries of state, to bring to her the fatal warrant; and her behaviour,
on that occasion, plainly hewed that it is not to humanity, that we
must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment he
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman, a Queen, and her
,own nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner, he was
capable ofjetfing. " Go, fays she to Davison, and tell Walfing-
ham what I have now done, though I am afraid he will die for
grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety was how to secure the
advantages which would arise from Mary's death, without appear-
ing to have given her consent to a deed so infamous. She often
hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as ome other courtiers, that
now was the time .to discover the sincerity of their concern for her
-safety; and that he expected their zeal would extricate her out of
.her present perplexity. But they were wife enough to seem not to
underhand her meaning. Even after the warrant was signed, fle
commanded a letter to be written to Paulet, in less ambiguous

* Cad. 533, 534.

terms;
*1i44

terms; complaining of his remifflefs in sparing so long the life of BookVII.
her capital enemy, and begging him to remember at last what was
incumbent on him as an affectionate subject, and to deliver his So-
vereign from continual fear and danger, by hortening the days of
his prisoner. Paulet, though rigorous and harmh, and often brutal
in the discharge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. He rejeced the
proposal with disdain; and lamenting that he hfould ever have
been deemed capable of acting the part of an aaffin, he declared
that the Queen might dispose of his life at her pleasure, but he
would never stain his own honour, nor leave an everlasting mark of
infamy on his posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a
crime. On the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became extreme-
ly peevish; and calling him a dainty and precifefellow, who would
promise much, but perform nothing, he proposed to employ one
Wingfield, who had both courage and inclination to strike the blow -.
But Davison remonitrating against this method, as no less dangerous
than dishonourable, he again declared her intention that the fen-
tence pronounced by the commissioners hould be executed accord-
ing to law; and as he had already signed the warrant, the begged
that no farther application might be made to her on that head. By
this the privy counsellors thought themselves sufficiently authorized
to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for the
Queen's safety, or instigated, as is more probable, by the appre-
henfion of the danger to which they would themselves be exposed,
if the life of he Queen of Scots were spared, they assembled in the
Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their hands, empowered
the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, together with the High Sheriff
of the County, to fee the sentence put in execution *.

1. Biogr. Britan. ArticleDavi/in. * Camd. 534. Strype, 3. 36r, 364.
VOL. II. U ON

I45

BookVII. ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived it So-
"-I-' theringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her presence
I587.

Mary's beha- the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare to die next
death er morning. Mary heard them to the end without emotion, and'

crossing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, " That foul, said Ihe, is not worthy of the joys
of Heaven, which repines because the body must endure the stroke
of the executioner; and though I did not expec that the Qeen of
England would set the first example of violating the sacred perfoi
of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that which Providence
has decreed to be my lot." And laying her hand on a Bible, which
happened to be near her, he solemnly protested that fle was inno-
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carried on against Eli-
zabeth's life *. She then mentioned the requests contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtaihed no fatisfacory answer. She es--
treated, with particular earnefntiefs, that now in her last tmomeiits,
her Almon'er might be suffered to attend her, and that fle might
enjoy the consolation of those piios iftitutions prescribed by her
religion. Even this favour, which is ufi'ally granted to the vilftl
criminals, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,.

and though overawed by the presence of the two Earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Sh'rews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their MiftreTs, and burst out into
the most passionate expreflions of tenderness and sorrow. Mary,
however, not only retained perfet composure of mind, but endea-
voured to moderate their excessive grief. And falling on her knees,.
·with all her domestics around her, she thanked Heaven that her

Jcbb, 2. 301.

fffer-
i46

sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that tne might BookVII.
be enabled to endure what till remained with decency, and with 587
fortitude. The greater part of the evening he employed in set-
tling her worldly affairs. She wrote her Testament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her cloaths, he distributed
among her servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote
a short letter to the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender, but magnanimous sentiments, and recom-
mended her foul to their prayers, and her afflicted servants to their
proteacion. At supper, he eat temperately, as usual, and converted
not only with ease, but with chearfulnefs; he drank to every one
of her servants, and aiked their forgiveness, if ever the had failed
in any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time he
went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning
Ihe retired into her closet, and employed a considerable time in
devotion. At eight o' clock the High Sheriff and his officers en-
tered her chamber, and found her fiill kneeling at the altar. She
immediately tfarted up, and with a majestic mien, and a counte-
nance undismayed, and even chearful, advanced towards the place
of execution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was dref-
fed in a mourning habit, but with an elegance and splendor, which
/he had long laid aside, except on a few feflival days. An Agnus
Dei hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her girdle;
and in her hand he carried a crucifix of ivory. At the bottom of
the flairs, the two Earls, attended by several gentlemen from the
neighbouring counties, received her; and there Sir Andrew Mel-
vil, the master of her houlhold, who had been secluded, for some
weeks, from her pretence, was permitted to take his last farewell.
At the fight of a Mistress whom he tenderly loved, in such a fitug-
tion, he melted into tears; and as he was bewailing her condition,

U and
4

BookVII.and complaining of his own hard fate, in being appointed to carry

I-p-'
S the account of such a mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied,

5 c Weep not, good Melvil, there is at present greater cause for re-
joicing. Thou shalt this day, fee Mary Stewart delivered from all
her cares, and such an end put to her tedious sufferings as he has
long expected. Bear witness that I die constant in my religion;
firm in my fidelity towards Scotland; and unchanged in my assec-
tion to France. Commend me to my son. Tell him I have done
nothing injurious to his kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights;
and God forgive all those who have thirsted, without cause, for my
blood"

WITH much difficulty, and after many intreaties, she prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was ereced in the fame hall where the had been tried, raised a little
above'the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cushion, and
block, with black cloth.. Mary mounted the steps with alacrity,.
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered countenance,.
and signing herfelfwith the cross, he fat down in the chair. Beale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which she
listened with a careless air, and like one occupied in other thoughts..
Then the Dean of Peterborough began a devout dilcourfe, suitable-
to her present condition, and offered up prayers to Heaven in her-
behalf; but he declared that he could not in conscience hearken to;
the one, nor join with the other;. and falling on her knees, re-
peated' a Latin prayer. When the Dean had finished. his devotions,,
she, with an audible voice, and in the Engliih tongue, recommend-
ed unto God the afflited fiate of the church, and prayed for pro--
fperity to her son, and for a tong life and peaceable reign to Eliza-
beth. She declared that Ihe hoped for mercy only through the death:

of'

of Chrit, at the foot of whose image he now willingly Ihed her Book VII.
blood; and lifting up, and kissing the crucifix, he thus addressed ". '
it,." As thy-arms, O Jesus, were extended on the cross; so with the
outfretched arms of thy mercy, receive me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil, and up-

per garments; and one of the executioners rudely endeavouring to
afift, she gently checked him, and said, with a fnile, that ihe
had not been accuflomed to undress before so many fpeEators, nor
to be served by such valets. With calm, but undaunted fortitude,
The laid her neck on the block; and while one executioner held
her hands, the other at the second stroke, cut off her head, which
falling out of its attire, discovered her hair already grown quite grey,
with cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up still freaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, " So perish all Queen Eliza-
beth's enemies,". the Earl of Kent alone answered Amen. The
reft of the fpedators continued silent, and drowned in tears; be-
ing incapable, at that moment, of any other sentiments, but those
of pity or admiration *.

SUCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of Scots, after a life Scn'iments of

.hiltorians con-

of forty four years and two months, almost nineteen years of which cerning her.
file passed in captivity. The political parties which were formed
in the kingdom during her reign, have subsisted, under various
denominations, ever since that time. The rancour, with which
they were at first animated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been perpetuated, and
even augmented. Among Historians, who were under the domi-
nion of all thee passions, and who have either ascribed to her
every virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed to her all the'

* Camden, 534. Sots. 35. Jcbb, 2. 300. Strype, 3. 383.

vices

I50
BookVII. vices, of which the human hert is fu epible, we farch in vain

8--r-c for Mary's real chara&ter. She neither merited the exaggerate4
I 57' praises of the one, nor the undiffinguifhing censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of exter-

nal form, lie added those accomplishments, which render their im-
pression irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating, prightly, and ca-
pable of speaking and of writing with equal ease and dignity. Sud-
den, however, and violent in all her attachments; because her heart
was warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction; because
she had been accustomed from her infancy to be treated as a Queen.
No firanger, on ome occasions, to dissimulation; which, in that
perfidious court where she received her education, was reckoned
among the neceflary arts of government. Not insensible of flat-
tery, or unconscious of that pleasure, with which almost every
woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we admire;
she was an agreeable woman, rather than an illustrious Qeen.
The vivacity of her pirit, not sufficiently tempered with found
judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not, at all
times, under the reltraint of discretion, betrayed her both into
errors, and into crimes. To fay that he was always unfortunate,
will not account for that long and almost uninterrupted fucceflion of
calamities which besel her; we muff likewise add that ihe was often
imprudent. Her passion for Darnly was rash, youthful, and ex-
ceffive. And though the sudden transition to the opposite extreme
was the natural effet of her ill-requited love, and of his ingrati-
tude, insolence, and brutality; yet neither there, nor Bothwell's
artful address, and important services, can justify her attachment to
that nobleman. Even the manners of the age, licentious as they
were, are no apology for this unhappy passion; nor can they induce

us

us to look on that tragical and infamous scene which followed Book VII.
upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over '

1587.

this part of her character which it cannot approve, and may,
perhaps, prompt some to impute her ations to her situation, more
than to her dispositions; and to lament the unhappiness of the
former, rather than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's
sufferings exceed, both in degree and in duration, those tragical
distresses which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commifera-
tion: and while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her
frailties, we think of her faults with less indignation, and approve
of our tears, as if they were shed for a person who had attained
much nearer to pure virtue.

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circumstance not to be

omitted in writing the history of a female reign, all cotemporary
authors agree in ascribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of coun-
tenance, and elegance of shape, of which the human form is capa-
ble. Her hair was black, though, according to the fahion of that
age, he frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different colours.
Her eyes Were a dark grey; her complexion was exquisitely fine;
and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to ihape and
colour. Her stature was of an height that rose to the majestic..
She danced, he walked, and rode with equal grace. Her tafle
for music was just, and she both sung and played upon the lute,,
with uncommon kill. Towards the end of her life, ihe began,
to gow fat; and her long confinement, and the coldness of the
houses in which she had been imprisoned, brought on a rheuma-
tifmh, which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man, ays.
Brantome, ever beheld her person without admiration and love, or
will read her history without sorrow.

NoN.

I5I

BookVII. NONE of her women were suffered to come near her dead body,

.-
-- which was carried into a room adjoining the place of execution,

where it lay, for ome days, covered with a coarse cloth torn
from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the
executioners, and every thing Rained with her blood were redu-
ced to ashes. Not long after Elizabeth appointed her body to be
buried in the cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnificence.
But this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the. pageantry of
a pompous funeral did not efface the memory of those injuries,
which laid Mary in her grave. James, oon after his acceflion to
the English throne, ordered her body to be removed to Weftmin-
fter-abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs of Eng-
land.

Elizabeth as- ELIZABETH affe&ed to receive the accounts of Mary's death,'
fM's ldeath. with the most violent emotions of furprize, and of concern. Sighs,

tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to dilplay
the reality, and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks of diffimu-
lation and artifice may be traced through every period of Elizabeth's
proceedings, against the life of the Scottish Queen. The com-
mission for bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly extorted
from her, by the intreaties of her privy counsellors. She delayed
publifling the sentence against her, till ahe was twice solicited by
both houses of Parliament. Nor did she sign the warrant for execu-
tion, without the utmost apparent reluctance. One scene more of the
boldest and most solemn deceit remained to be exhibited. She
undertook to make the world believe that Mary had been put to
death without her knowledge, and against her will. And Davi-
bon, who neither fufpeaed her intention, nor his own danger, was
her infirument in carrying on this artifice, and fell a victim to it.

IT
152'

IT was his duty as Secretary of State to lay before her the war- Book VII.

rant for execution, in order to be signed; and by her command, 1587
he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
she had charged him not to communicate what he had done to
any person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands, with-
out her express permission; that, in contempt of this order, he
had not only revealed the matter to several of her Ministers, but
had, in concert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors, by
whom, without her content or knowledge, the warrant was if-
sued, and the Earls of Shrewibury and Kent ipowered to put
it in execution. Though Davison denied all this, and with cir-
cumftances which bear the AIrongeff marks of truth and cre-
dibility; though it can scarce be conceived that her Privy Coun-
cil, composed of the persons in whom she most confided, of her
Ministers and favourites, would assemble within the walls of her
palace, and venture to tranfad a matter of so much importance,
without. her privity, and contrary to her inclination; yet so far
did She carry her dissimulation, that, with all the signs of dif-
pleasure and of rage, he banished most of her Counsellors out
of her presence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, o harlhly,
and with such marks of disgust, that he gave up himself for loft,
and in the deepest affliction wrote to the Queen begging leave to
resign all his places, that he might retire to his own estate.
Davison the instantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a March.
solemn trial in the Star Chamber, condemned to pay a fine of
10,000 pounds, and to be imprisoned during the Queen's plea-
sure. He languished, several years, in confinement, and never
recovered any degree of favour or of power. As her jealousy and
fear had bereaved the Queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate

VOL. II. X this

I

54
BookVII.this part of her condui, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing

the reputation and happiness of one of the moil virtuous and able
187.

men in her kingdom *.

Elizabeth en- THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furnished
deavours to
sooth James. Elizabeth., however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As

the profped of his mother's danger had excited the King's filial
care and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and resentment. His fubjets felt the dishonour done to him and.
to the nation. In order to ooth both, Elizabeth instantly dif-
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter
expressing her extreme affliction onr account of that miserable ac-
cident, which, as fie pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment, or intention. James would. not permit her messenger
to enter Scotland; and with ome difficulty received a memorial he
sent fr.omBerwick. It contained the tale concerning PDvifon, dref-
fed up with all the ciicumftances,. which tended to exculpate Eli-
zabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his raflinefs or treach-
ery. Such a defence gave little fatisfation, and was confidered as
mockery added to insult; and many..of the nobles, as well as the
King, breathed nothing but -revenge ; Elizabeth was extremely
solicitous to pacify them, and neither wanted instruments, nor rea-
sons to gain her end. Leicester wrote to the King, and Walfing-
ham to secretary Maitland. They represented the certain deftruc-
tion, to which James would expose himself, if with the forces of.
Scottand- alone,. he should venture to attack a kingdom, so far fu-
perior in power; that the history of past ages, as well as his Mo-
ther's fad experience, might convince him that nothing could be
more dangerous or deceitful than dependance on foreign aid; that.

* Camd. 536, Strype,,3.. 370.
8; , the

the King of France would never with to fee the British kingdoms BookVII.
united under one Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince so 1 57
nearly allied to the house of Guile, with such formidable power;
that Philip might be a more ative ally, but would certainly prove
a more dangerous one, and under pretence of assisting him, would
assert his own right to the English Crown; which he already be-
gan openly to claim; that the fame statute, on which the sentence
of death against his Mother had been founded, would juflify the
excluding him from the succession to the Crown; that the' Eng-
lifh, naturally averse from the dominion of strangers, would not
fail, if exasperated by his hostilities, to apply it in that manner;
that Elizabeth was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mo-
ther had suffered, by her tenderness and affection towards the son;
and that by engaging in a fruitless war, he would deprive himself
of a noble inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he mufft
infallibly obtain. These representations, added to the consciousness-
of his own weakness, to the smallness of his revenues, to the muti-
nous spirit of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others,
and to the influence of that faction, which was entirely at Eliza-
beth's devotion, convinced James that a war with England, how-
ever just, would, in the present juncture, be altogether impolitical.
All thee considerations induced him to stifle his resentment; to ap-
pear satisfied with the punishment inflited on Davison; and to pre-
serve all the semblances offriendfhip with the Englifl court *. In
this manner did the cloud which threatned such a storm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, remained unaven-
ged by any Prince; and whatever infamy Elizabetl might incur,
flhe was exposed to no new danger, on that account.

* Spotfwood. Strype, 3. 3,77.

1S5
X 2

MARY'S

BookVII. MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to'the Master of Gray, and
1-57"' loft him the King's favour which he had for some time possessed.
x587.

D;ifrace of He was become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire
the Mafler of
Gray. power without merit, and exercise it without discretion, usually are.

The treacherous part, which he had aed during his late embafly,
was no secret, and filled James, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers observed the fymp-
toms of disgust arising in the King's mind. His enemies seized the
opportunity, and Sir William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy
May o. with which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain James, publicly

accused him before a Convention of nobles, not only of having
contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to take away the life of
the Queen, but of holding correspondence with Popish Princes, in
order to subvert the religion established in the kingdom. Gray, un-
supported by the King, deserted by all, and conscious of his own
guilt, made a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual ba-
nifhment, a punishment very unequal to his crimes. But the King-
was unwilling to abandon one, whom' he had once favoured so
highly, to the rigour ofjuftice; and Lord Hamilton his near rela-
tion, and the other nobles who had lately returned from exile, in
gratitude for the zeal with which he had served them,. interceded
warmly in his behalf.

HAVING thus accomplitied the deffrucion of one of his enemies;

Captain James thought the juncture favourable for prosecuting his
revenge on them all. He fngled outfecretary Maitland, the most
eminent both for abilities and enmity to him; and' offered to prove
that he was no less accessory than Gray to the Qeen's death, and.
had even formed a design. of delivering up the King himself into
the hands of the nglifh. But time and absence had, in a great

measure,,

measure, extinguished the King's affection for a minion, who foBookVIT,
little deserved it. All the courtiers combined againi him as a I587'
common enemy. And instead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon Mait-
land, who, together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and
influence of a prime Minister.

In the Aflembly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Bishops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their encroachments, appeared. But as the King was now offul
age, and a Parliament was summoned on that occasion, the Clergy
remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to repre-
sent their grievances to that court, from which great things were
expected.

PREVIOUS to this meeting of Parliament, James attempted aTheKing at-

tempts to -

work worthy of a King. The deadly feuds which subsisted be- nite the no-
tween many of the great families, and which were transmitted
from one generation to another, weakened the strength of the king-
dom; contributed, more than any other circumifance, to preserve
a fierce and barbarous spirit among the nobles; and proved the oc-
cafion of many disasters to themselves, and to their country. As-
ter many preparatory negociations, he invited the contending par-
ties to a royal entertainment in the Palace of Holy-rood-houfe;
and partly by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained their
promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual oblivion. From
thence he conducted them, in solemn procession, through the
streets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand with
his enemy. A collation of wine and sweet-meats was prepared
at the public Cross, and there they drank to each other, with all
the signs of reciprocal forgiveness, and of future friendflip. The

peoplei.
4

I57

I58
Book VII. people, who were present at a fpe&acle so unusual, conceived the
- - most sanguine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillity eflabliihed
1587.

in every part of the kingdom, and testified their fatisfaation by re-
peated-acclamations. Unhappily the effects of this reconciliation
were not correspondent either to the pious endeavours of the King,
:or the fond withes of the people.

THE firit care of the Parliament was the security of the Protef-

tant religion. All the laws passed in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified; and a new and evere one was enacted a-
gainft seminary Priefis and Jesuits, whose restless industry in making
proselytes brought many of them into Scotland about this time.
Two as of this Parliament deserve more particular notice, on
account of the consequences with which they were followed.

General an- TIIE one refpeded the lands of the Church. As the public re-
nexatian or
Chrc-lanis. venues were not sufficient for defraying the King's ordinary char-

ges; as the administration of government became more complicat-
ed and more expensive; as James was naturally profuse, and a iran-
ger to ceconomy; it was necessary, on all these accounts, to pro-
vide some fund proportioned to his exigencies. But no confider-
able um could be levied on the Commons, who did not enjoy the
benefit of an extensive commerce. The nobles were unaccustomed
to bear the burden of heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
were the only source whence a proper supply could be drawn. Not-
withstanding all the depredations of the laity since the Reforma-
tion, and the various devices which they had employed to seize
the Church-lands, ome considerable portion of them remained still
unalienated, and were held either by the Bishops who possessed the
;benefices, or were granted to laymen during pleasure. All these

lands

lnds were, in this Parliament, annexed, by one general law *, to Book VII.
the Crown, and the King was impowered to apply the rents of 1587
them to his own use. The tithes alone were reserved for the
maintenance of the persons who served the cure, and the principal
Manfion-houfe, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe, allot-
ted for his residence. By this great accession of property, it is na-
tural to conclude, that the King must have acquired a vast increase
of power, and the influence of the nobles have suffered a propor-
tional diminution. The very reverse of this seems, however, to
have been the cafe. Almost all grants of Church-lands; prior to
this a, were thereby confirmed.; and titles, which were formerly
reckoned precarious, derived from thence the fandtion of parliamen--
tary authority. James was likewise authorized, during a limited
time, to make new alienations; and such was the facility of his
temper, ever ready to yield to the solicitations of his servants, and
to gratify their most extravagant demands, that not only during the-
time limited, but throughout his whole reign, he was continually
employed in betlowing, and his Parliament in ratifying grants of
this kind to his nobles; hence little advantage accrued to the Crown!
from that which might have been so valuable an addition to its reve-
nues. The Bishops, however, were great fufterers by the law. But-
at this juncture, neither the King nor his Ministers were solicitous
about the interests of an order of men, odious to the people, and:
persecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted the law with
the utmost zeal. The profpet of haring in their spoils induced
all parties to content to it; and after a ltep so fatal to the wealth and
power of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult matter to intro-
duce that change in the government of the Church which oon as-
ter took place t.

* Parl, . Jac. VI . c. 9. Spots. 365.

THi

BookVII. THE change, which the other statute produced in the civil con-
'~ 8'7 ft itution, was no less remarkable. Under the Feudal system, every
Lefler Barons Freeholder, or vassal of the Crown, had a right to be present in Par-
admitted into
Parliament byliament. These Freeholders were, originally, few in number, but
their reprefen-
tativ'es. poIeffed of great and extensive property. By degrees, these vast

possessions were divided by the proprietors themselves, or parcelled
out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The number of
Freeholders became greater, and their condition more unequalf
betides the ancient Barons, who preserved their estates and their
power unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were far inferior.
But, in those rude ages, when the art of government was ex-
tremely imperfect, when Parliaments were seldom assembled, and
deliberated on matters little interesting to a martial people, few
of the Le/ser Barons took their feats, and the whole parliamentary
jurifdition was exercised by the Greater Barons, together with
the ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imitating the forms of
the English constitution to which he had been long accustomed,
and desirous of providing a counterpoise to the power of the great
nobles, procured an a in the year 1427, dispensing with the
personal attendance of the lesser Barons, and impowering those'
in each county to chufe two commissioners to represent them in
Parliament. This law, like many other regulations of that wife
Prince, produced little effet. All the King's vassals continued,
as formerly, possessed of a right to be present in Parliament, and,
unless in ome extraordinary conjunctures, none but the greater
Barons attended. But by means of the Reformation, the confti-
tution had undergone a great change. The ariftocratical power of
the nobles had been much increased, and the influence of the Ec-
clefiaftical order, which the Crown usually employed to check their
usurpations, and to ballance their authority, had diminished in

pro-
x6o

proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had been erected into BookVII.
temporal peerages; and the Protestant Bishops, an indigent race of I587
men, and odious to the nation, were far from possessing the weight
and credit, which their predecessors derived from the exorbitant
wealth, and the fuperfitious reverence of the people. In this si-
tuation, the King had recourse to the expedient employed by
James I. and obtained a law reviving the flatute of 1427; and from
that time the Commons of Scotland have lent their representatives
to parliament. An ad, which tended so visibly to abridge their au-
thority, did not pass without opposition from many of the nobles.
But as the King had a right to summon the lesser Barons to attend
in person, others were apprehensive of feeing the house filled with
a multitude of his dependants, and consented the more willingly
to a law, which laid them under the reitridion of appearing only
by their representatives.

THE year I588 began with an universal expetation throughout 1588.
all Europe, that it was to be distinguished by wonderful events The approach

of the Spanilh

and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of Armado.
cotemporary hiltorians, had predicted his; and the situation of affairs
in the two principal kingdoms of Europe was such, that a sagacious
observer, without any supernatural intelligence, might have hazard-
ed the prediction, and have foreseen the approach of ome grand
crisis. In France, it was evident from the alonifhing progress of
the league, conduted by a leader whose ambition was reflrained by
no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto surmounted all difficul-
ties; as well as from the timid, variable, and impolitic councils of
Henry III. that either that Monarch nuft submit to abandon the
throne, of which he was unworthy or by some sudden and daring
blow, cut off his formidable rival. Accordingly, in the beginning

VoL. II. Y of

Book VII. of the year, the. Duke of Guie drove, his. Maltter out of his capital.

city, and forced him to, cenudu a

a peace, which left him only

the shadow of royalty and before the year expired, hehimifef
fell a viaim. to Henry's fears, and to his. wn! fecuity. In. Spain,,
the operations were filch as .prtmiied something, ftilk nmre uncom-
mon. During three years,, Philip bhad employed all- the. power of
his European dominions, and exhaufled..the treasures of the Indies,,
in vast preparations for. war. A fleet, the greatest that had ever
appeared in- the ocean, was ready to fail from.Libon~ and a nu-
merous, land army was assembled. to embark on board of it. I Its
destination. was. fill: unknown,. thougha many circumfiances. made it,
probable that the- blow was aimed;, in the firif place, againfl Engt-,
land. Elizabeth had long given: ecret aid, to the revolted provinces
in the Low Conntries, and.no, ppenly, afforded them her protecó-,
tion. A numerous body of her troops was ini t-eir fervic;iithe'
Earl of Leicester commanded their armies; she had great sway in
the civil government of the republic ,, and ome of its.moft confi-
derable towns were ih.her.poffeffion.,, Her fleets had instiltd the.
coasts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons fiom the Weft ,jnies, ,and,
threatened the colonies there.. Roused by so many injuries, allured
by views of ambition, and animated by a fupeftitious zeal for pro-
pagating the Romish Religion, Philip resolved not only to invade;,
but to conquer England, to which his descent from the house. of.
Lancaster, and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his.
own opinion, a double title.

Condua of ELIZABETH aw. the danger approach, and prepared to en-
James on that
occmison. counter it with the utmost intrepidity. The measures- for the-

defence of her kingdom were concerted, and carried on, with.the
wisdom, andvigour, which diflinguifled her reign. Her chief

care

care was to secure the friendship of the King of Scots. She had BookVII.
treated the Queen his Mother with a rigour unknown among i588.
Princes; itle had often used himself harshly, and with contempt;
and though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his resentment of
thee injuries, the did not believe it to be altogether extinguished,
and was afraid that in her present situation, it might burst out
with a fatal violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance with
Scotland would facilitate his enterprize, courted James with the ut-
inoft assiduity. He excited him to revenge his Mother's wrongs;
he flattered him with the hopes of iharing his conquests; and offer-
ed him in marriage his daughter the Infanta Ifabela. At the fame
time, Scotland swarmed with priefis his emissaries, who seduced
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes and
promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a faction
which openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwel, ar-
riving from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to take
arms, that he might be ready to.join the Spaniards. In order to
counter-ballance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest. profef-
sions of friendship to the King; and Afhby, her ambassador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promises. He assured. him
that his right of fucceflion to the Crown should be publickly ac-
knowledged in England; that he should be created a Duke in that
kingdom; that he flould be admitted to some flare in the govern-
ment; and receive a considerable pension annually. James, it is
probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on these promises. But he understood his own interest in
the present juncture, and pursued it with much steadiness. IIe re-
jeded an alliance with Spain, as dangerous. He refused to admit
into his pretence an ambassador from the Pope. He seized Colonel
Scmple, an agent to the Prince of Parma. He drove many of
the trafficking Priefls out of the kingdom. He marched filddenly

I63
Y 2

to

to Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a convention of the nobles he declared his resolution to adhere
inviolably to the league with England; and, without listening to the
suggestions of revenge, determined to as in concert with Elizabeth,
against the common enemy of the Protestant faith. He put the
kingdom in a posture of defence, and levied troops to obftrut the
landing of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's
assistance, and told her ambafadors that he expected no other favour
from the King of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised
to Ulysses, that when he had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his last morsel *.

THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not inferior to

that of the King; and the extraordinary danger, with which they
were threatened, suggested to them an extraordinary expedient for
their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
Religion, and the defence of the King's person and government,
in opposition to all enemies foreign and domestic. This contained
a confession of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises, in the name, and
through the strength of God, of adhering to each other in sup-
porting the former, and contending against the latter, to the utmost
of their power . The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
people subscribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon
as such a combination may now appear, many circumstances con-
tributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. When rouzed by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of Israel were accuf-
tomed to bind themselves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhere to that

* Camd. 544 JohnLf. 139. Spotfw. 369.
+ Dunlop's Collc&t. ofConfcnf, Vol. ii. o18.

Religion,
BookVII.

1588.

A national
covenant in
defence of
Religion.
164

Religion, which the Almighty had etablifhed among them; this Book VII.
the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to 1588.
imitate. In that age, no considerable enterprize was undertaken
in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned
reckoned neceflary for their security. The form of this religious con-
federacy is plainly borrowed from those political ones, of which
so many instances have occurred; the articles, tfipulations, and pe-
culiar modes of expression, are exaaly the fame in both. Almost
all the considerable Popish Princes were then joined in a league for
extirpating the Reformed religion, and nothing could be more na,
tural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-affo-
ciation, in order to oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy.
To these causes, did the Covenant, which is become so famous
in history, owe its origin. It was renewed at different times dur-
ing the reign of James *. It was revived with great solemnity, though
with considerable alterations, in the year 1638. It was adopted by
the English, in the year i643, and enforced by the civil and eccle-
fiaftical authority of both kingdoms. The political purposes to
which it was then made subservient, and the violent and unconfti-
tutional measures which it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at the juncture, in which it was firil
introduced, we may pronounce it to have been a prudent and lau-
dable device for the defence of the religion and liberties of the na-
tion; nor were the terms in which it was conceived, other than
might have been expected from men alarmed from the impending
danger of Popery, and threatned with an invasion by the molt
bigotted, and most powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not inspire him either
with the vigour or dispatch neceflary to insure the success of so

* Cald. 4. 129.

mighty

Book VII. mighty an enterpriZe. His fleet, which ought to have failed in April,

S did not enter the English channel till the middle of July. It ho-

vered many days on the coaft,-in expecation of being joined by
the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of Flan-

The Armado ders by a Dutch squadron Continual difaflers pursued the Spa-
defeated. niards during that time; successive storms and battles, which are

well known, conspired with their own ill conduct, to disappoint
their enterprize. And by the blessing of Providence, which
watched with remarkable care over the Proteflant Religion, and
-the liberties of Britain, the Englihi valour cattered and destroyed
the Armado on which they had arrogantly bestowed the name of
Invincible. After being driven out of the English eas, they were
forced to fleer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and Ire-
land. Many of them suffered shipwreck on these dangerous and
unknown coasts. Though James kept his subje&s under arms to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in
an hostile manner, he received with great humanity 700 who were
forced ashore by a tempest, and after supplying them with necef-
saries, permitted them to return into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth ent an ambassador

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generosity, he had discovered during a conjunture so dan-
gerous. But none of Afhby's promises were any longer remem-
bered; that Minister was even accused of having exceeded his
powers, by these too liberal offers,; and conscious of his own false-
hood, or ashamed of being disowned by his court, he withdrew
secretly out of Scotland *.

Philip's in. PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own ralhnefs in
triguesl in
Scotland. attempting the conquest of England, by a naval armament, equipped

* Johnfl. 134. Camd. 548.

at
r66

at so great a distance, .and fbjeted in all its operations, to the Book VII.
delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas and winds, 1588.
resolved to make his attack in another form, and to adopt the plan
which the Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of invading Eng-
land through Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might
be easily wafted over from the Low Countries to that kingdom, and
if they could once obtain footing, or procure assistance there, the
frontier of England was open and defenceless, and the northern
.counties full of Roman Catholics, who would receive them with
open arms. Meanwhile, a descent might be threatened on the
southern coast, which would divide the Englifl army, diftrad their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions.
In order to prepare the way for the execution of this design, he
remitted a considerable fum of money to Bruce, a seminary Priest
in Scotland,. and employed'him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits, to gain over as many persons of diitincrion
as poflible to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful infinua- Popiih nobles
tions of these emissaries, induced several of the nobles to favourco"fpire a-

gainfl the

a measure, which tended so manifestly to the deftrution of their ing.
country. Huntly, though the King had lately married him to the
daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warmly
attached, to. the Romish Church. Crawford and Errol were ani-
mated. wit the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
correspondence with, the Prince of Parma, and in their letters to
him, offered their service to the King of Spain, and undertook,
with the aid of 6000 men, to render him master of Scotland, and
to bring'fo many of their vasals into the field, that he should be
able to enter England, with a numerous army. Francis Stewart,
grandson of James V. whom the King had created Earl of Both-
well, though influenced by no motive of religion, for he flill
adhered to the Protestant faith, was prompted merely by caprice,.

1 and.

I67

BookVII. and the reflleffnefs of his nature, to join in this treasonable corref-

.- ...pondence.
February 17. ALL there letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth, alarm-

ed at the danger which threatned her own kingdom, lent them

The King's immediately to the King, and reproaching him with his former
maxims with
regard to Po- lenity towards the Popish party, called upon him to check this for-
pery. midable conspiracy, by a proper severity. But James, though firmly

attached to the Protestant religion, though profoundly versed in the
theological controversies between the Reformers and the Church of
Rome, though he had employed himself, at that early period of
life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in which he
proved the Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted, already,
those maxims concerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics,
to which he adhered through the reft of his life. The Roman
Catholics were at that time a powerful and active party in Eng-
land; they were far from being an inconsiderable faction in his own
kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain were ready to take part
in all their machinations, and to second every effort of their bigo-
try. The opposition of such a body to his succession to the Crown
of England, added to the averseness of the English from the go-
vernment of itrangers, might create him many difficulties. In
order to avoid there, he thought it necessary to tooth, rather than
to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to reconcile them to his fuccef-
sion, by the hopes of gentler treatment, and some mitigation of the
rigour of those laws, which were now in force against them. This
attempt to gain one party by promies of indulgence and a&ts
of clemency, while he adhered with all the obstinacy of a dif-
putant, to the doctrines and tenets of the other, has given an air
of mystery, and even of contradicion, to this part of the King's
charater. The Papiits, with the credulity of a fe& struggling

to

to obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly theirs ; and the Book VI.T
Proteflants, with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al- x589-
ready in possession, viewed every aA of lenity, s a mark of indif-
ference, or a symptom of apoftacy. And in order to please both,
James often aimed at an excessive refinement, mingled with diffi-
mulation, in which he imagined the perfection of government, and
of king-craft, to consist.

His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general His exceflive

lenity to te

maxims. Notwithstanding the follicitations of the Queen of Eng- conspirators.
land, enforced by the zealous remonfirances of his own Clergy, a
short imprisonment was the only punishment he inflicted on Hunt-
ly and his associates. But he soon had reason to repent an a of
clemency, so inconsistent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to assemble
their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor Mait-
land, an able minister, but warmly devoted to the Englifl interest, April ,
from the King's councils and preence, they attempted to seize
James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by Mait-
land's vigilance, and partly by their own ill conduct, they were forced
to retire to the North, where they openly ereted the ltandard of
Rebellion. But as the King's government was not generally un-
popular, or his ministers odious, their own vassals joined them
slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause. And the King, in per-
son, advancing against them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity of their troops,
which though superior in number, followed them with reluctance,
as to hazard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they furren- April 20.
dered to the King, and threw themselves on his mercy. Huntly,
Errol, Crawford and Bothwell were all brought to a public trial.
Repeated as of treason were easily proved against them. The

VOL. II. Z King,
* ,

i69

BookVII.King, however, did not permit any 'fetence to :b proniit'edi
L'-8 -and after keeping them a few month$ in confinement, he took oc.

cafion, amidst the public festivity and rejoicings, at the approach
of his marriage, to set them at liberty *.

The King's As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of
marriage with
Ann of Den- Scotland, in the direA line; as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the
mark. two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the Earl of Arran,

the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the King's mar-
riage was, on all these accounts, an event which the nation withed
for with the utmost ardour. He himfelfwas no less desirous of ac-
complifhing it; and had made overtures, for that purpose, to the
eldest daughter of Frederick II. King of Denmark. But Elizabeth,
jealous of every thing, that would render the accession of the house
of Stewart more acceptable to the English, endeavoured to perplex
James, in the fame manner he had done Mary, and employed as
many artifices to defeat or to retard his marriage. His Ministers,
gained by bribes and promises, seconded her intentions; and though
several different ambassadors were ent from Scotland to Denmark,
they produced powers so limited, or insisted on conditions so ex-
travagant, that Frederick could not believe the King to be in
earnest; and fufpe&ing that there was ome design to deceive, or
amuse him, gave his daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brunswick.
Not discouraged by this disappointment, which he imputed entirely
to the condut of his own ministers, James made his addresses to
the princess Anne, Frederick's second daughter. And though Eli-
zabeth endeavoured to divert him from this, by recommending Ca-
tharine the King of Navarre's sifter, as a more advantageous match;
though he prevailed on the privy council of Scotland to declare
against the alliance with Denmark, he perfifled in his choice. And
despairing of overcoming the obstinacy of his own ministers, in

* Spots. 373. Cald. 4. o13.

any

-* . Ir . .- - S c sQ rT Lr - . L.
L A I

. i other nanner, he secretly encouraged the citizens 'of Edin- BookVII.
.bfi teo Sike arms ,,They threatened to tear in pieces the Chan- I 589
!co1r, whom theyaccufed as the, perion,,whfe artifices had hither-
to dippointed the. withes of the King, and the expecations of
his people. In consequence of this, the Earl Marshal was lent in-
to Denmark, atthe head of a splendid embassy. He received ample
powers and inftruions, drawn with the King's own hand. The
marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and the young Q een
set fail towards Scotland. James made great preparations for her
reception, and waited her landing with all the impatience of a
lover; when the unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tempest
had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condition
so hattered, that there was little hope of its putting again to sea,
before the spring. This unexpeced disappointment, he felt with
the utmost sensibility. He instantly fitted out ome ships, and
without communicating his intention to any of his council, failed,
in person, attended by the Chancellor, several noblemen, and a ' z.
train of 300 persons, in quest of his bride. He arrived safely in
a small harbour, not far distant from Upflo, where the Queen then
resided. There the marriage was solemnized. And as it would Nov. 24
have been rash to trust those boisterous eas in the winter season,
James accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark, and repair-
ing to Copenhagen, passed several months there, amidst continual
feasting, and amusements, in which, both the Queen and himself
had great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider deviation from

his general character, than this sudden sally. His son Charles I.
was capable of that excessive admiration of the other sex, which

* Melv. 352. Spots. 377.

Z 2

arises

Book VII. arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by elegance of tafle
*-8^~ and the romantic air of his journey to Spain suited such a difpofi-

tion. But James was not susceptible of any refined gallantry, and
always expressed that contempt for the female characer, which a
pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire.
He was fretted, however, at the many obstacles which had been
laid in his way. He was anxious to Secure the political advanta-
ges, which he expected from marriage; and fearing that a delay
might afford Elizabeth, and his own Ministers, an opportunity of
thwarting him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of
preventing them, by a voyage from which he expeted to return
in a few weeks. The nation seemed to applaud his condu&, and
to be pleated with this appearance of amorous ardour; in a young
Prince. Notwithstanding his absence so long beyond the time
he expeced, the nobles, the clergy, and the people, vied with one
another in loyalty and obedience; and no period in the King's
reign was more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free from
any eruption of those factions, which so often disturbed the king-
doml.

T H E

# BOOK VIII.

r' ~" I '

THE
HIS TORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOOK VIII.
O N the sirs of May the King and Queen arrived at Leith,Book VInr

and were received by their fubjeds, with every possible ex-

1590.
preflion ofjoy. The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was con- The King and

Qeen arrive

duted with great magnificence; but so low had the order of Bi- in Scotland.
shops fallen, in the opinion of the public, that none of them were
present on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian
Minister of great reputation, set the Crown on her head, admini-
fired the sacred unction, and performed the other customary cere-
monies.

THE zeal and success, with which many of the clergy had

contributed towards preserving peace and order in the kingdom,
during his absence, reconciled James, in a great degree, to their per-
sons, and c.vcn to the Presbyterian form of government. In pre-

fence:

BookVII. fence of an Alembly, which ete thi year, .he made high encomi-

59 urns on the discipline, as well as the doctrine of the church, pro-
August 4. mifed to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the Assembly to

frame'fuch acs, as gradually abolished all the remains of epifppal
jurifdiltion, and paved the way for a full and legal eifablifhment of
the Presbyterian model *.
59I AN event happened soon after, which afforded the Clergy no small

triumph. Archbishop Adamson, their ancient enemy, having fallen
under the King's displeasure, having been deprived of the revenues
of his fee in consequence of the ad of annexation, and being op-
pressed with age,, with poverty, and diseases, made the meanest sub-
mission to the clergy, and delivered to the Assembly a formal recan-
tation of all his opinions concerning Church government, which
had been matter of offence to the Presbyterians. Such a confession,
from the most learned person of the order, was confidered as a tef-
timony, which the force of truth had extorted from an adver-
fary .

Dilorders in MEANWHILE, the King's excessive clemency towards offenders
the kingdom. multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such ads of vio-

lence, as brought his government under contempt, and proved fa-
tal to many of his subjects. The history of several years, about
this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between
the great families, and of murders and assassinations perpetrated
in the most audacious manner, and with circumstances of the ut-
most barbarity. All the defets in the feudal aristocracy were now
felt more sensibly, than at any other period in the history of Scot-
land, and universal licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce

* Cald. 4. 204. + Spotfwood, 385. Cald. 4. 214.

consistent

'O"F?. 8'C0 T LA ND. I7

consistent' :vith the prgfervation of society. While the King, too Book VIII.
gentle to punish, or too feeble to at with vigour, suffered all these i59 i.
enormities to pass with impunity.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, which An attempt of

Bothwell's a-

is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and those gainft the
fufpeaed of it, felt the whole weight of his authority. ManyKing
persons neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which were
usually held to be certain indications of this crime, but masters of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age of
life were seized and tortured; and though their confessions con-
tained the most absurd and incredible circumifances, the King's pre-
judices, those of the clergy, and of the people, conspired in be-
lieving their extravagancies without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy sufferers
accused Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and having employed their art, to
raise the storms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and had
detained James so long in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that no-
bleman was committed to prison. His turbulent and haughty spirit
could neither submit to the refiraint, nor brook such an indignity.
Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, and imputing the
accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancellor, assembled
his followers, under pretence of driving him from the King's
councils. Being favoured by ome of the King's attendants, he
was admitted, by a secret paflage, under cloud of night, into the
court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfe. lHe advanced directly to-
wards the royal apartment, but happily, before he entered, the
alarm was taKen and the doors shut. While he attempted to burst December27
open rome of them, and to set fire to others, the citizens of Edin-

Ij ~burgh

Book VIII. burgh had time to run to 'their arms, and he escaped with the ut-

I 59. mot difficulty; owing his safety to the darkness of the night, and

the precipitancy with which he fled*.

HE retired towards the North, and the King having unadvisedly

given a commission to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him, and his
followers, with fire and sword; he, under colour of executing that
commiflion, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded the house
of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray
Feb. 8. himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such promising

virtues, and the heir of the regent Murray, the darling of the
people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh
rose in a tumultuous manner; and though they were restrained, by
the care of the magistrates, from any a of violence, they threw
aside all refpe& for the King and his ministers, and openly insulted
and threatened both. While this mutinous spirit continued, James
thought it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
dence for ome time at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered him-
self tojuftice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his crime,
and the clamours of the people, the power of the Chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and the King's regard for
the memory of the Duke of Lennox, whose daughter he had mar-
ried, not only prote&ted him from the sentence which such an odi-
ous ation merited, but exempted him even from the formality of
a public trial t.

Prenflytrian A STEP of much importance was taken, oon after, with regard
( hurch go.
c.nlment e- to the government of the Church. The Clergy had long com-
la'd by plained of the encroachments made upon their privileges and

* Melv. 388. Spots. 386. . Spots. 387.

jurif-
/'76

jurifdition, by the ats of the parliament 1584, and though these BookVIIt.
laws had now loft much of their force, they resolved to peti- 1592.
tion the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in
form. The juncture for puihing such a measure was well chosen.
The king had loft much of the public favour, by his lenity to-
wards the Popish faction, and fill more by his remissness in pur-
suing the murderers of the Earl of Murray. The chancellor had
not only a powerful party of the courtiers combined against him,
but was become odious to the people, who imputed to him every
false ftep in the King's conduc.. Bothwell still lurked in the king-
dom, and being secretly supported by all the enemies of Mait-
land's administration, was ready, every moment, to renew his au-
dacious enterprizes. James, for all these reasons, was extremely
willing to indulge the Clergy in their request, and not only con-
sented. to a law, whereby the ats 1584 were rescinded or explained,
but he carried his complaisance still further, and permitted the par-
liament to establish the Presbyterian government, its General Aflem-
blies, Provincial 3nods, Prefbyteries' and -Kirk sessions, with all
the different branches'of their discipline and jurifdition, in the molt
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the administration of Regents, from whom they might have
expected the most partial favour, could not obtain the sanction of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclesiastical government.
No Prince was ever less disposed than James to approve a system,
whose republican genius inspired a passion for liberty, so repugnant
to his exalted notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any aver-
sion be more inveterate than his, to the aufterc and uncomplying
character of the Prelbyterian Clergy in that age; who, more
eminent for zeal, than for policy, often contradicted his opiniolis,
and censured his conduc, with a freedom, equally ofl'nfive to his

VoL. II. A a dog-

Book VIII. dogmatism as a Theologian, and to his pride as a King. His itua-

tion however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to dissemble
his sentiments; and as he often disgusted his fubjeas, by indulging
the Popish faction more than they approved, he endeavoured to.
attone for. this, by concessions to the Presbyterian Clergy, more
liberal than he himself would otherwise have chosen to grant *.

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were attainted.

But he oon made a new attempt to seize the King at Falkland;
and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly defended
by others, who wished well to Bothwell, as the Chancellor's avow-
ed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert
Melvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's arociates :.

A new cn- SCARCELY was this danger over, when the nation was alarmed
lopih Lords with the discovery of a new and more -formidable conspiracy

George Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, beig -seized as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were found in
his cutfody, and among there, several blanks signed by the Earls
of Angus, Huntly, and Errolt By this? extraqrdinary precaution,
they hoped to escape any danger of discovery. But Ker's resolution
shrinking when torture was threatened, he confefled that he
was employed by these noblemen, to carry on a negociation with
the King of Spain; that the blanks subscribed; with their names
were to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were in-
Itructed to offer the faithful service of the three Earls to that Mo-
narch; and to follicit him to land a body of his troops, either in
Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook,
in the first place, to etablifh the Roman Catholic Religion in Scot-
land, and then to invade England, with the whole. forces of the

* Cald. 4. 248, 252. Spot, 388. t Melv. 402.

kingdom,
178

179

kingdom. Sir David Graham of Fintray, and Barclay of Lady-Book VIII.
land, whom he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were 592-
taken into custody, and confirmed all the circumstances of his
.confeflion *.

THE nation having been kept for ome time in continual terror 1593.

and agitation by so many fucceflive conspiracies, the discovery of Zelofthe
this new danger compleated the panic. All ranks of men, as if
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to stand forth in defence of their country. The Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commiflion, assembled a
considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide an
instant remedy against the impending danger. They seized the
Earl of Angus, and committed him to the castle; they examined
Ker; and prepared a remonstrance to be laid before the King, con-
cerning the state of the nation; and the necessity of prosecuting
*the conspirators with becoming vigour. James, though jealous And proceed-

ngrgs of the

of every encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with sub- KIIIg againit
jetrs, who infead of petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him,
found it necessary, during the violence of the ferment, not only
-to adopt their plan, but even to declare that no consideration should
*ever induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty of so odious
a treason. He summoned the Earls of Huntly and Errol to fur- Jats. 8.
render themselves to justice. Graham of Fintry, whom his peers
pronounced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to be publicly
beheaded; and marching into the North at the Head of an army,
the two Earls, together with Angus, who had escaped out of pri-

R Rymcr, 16. 19o.

A a 2 Ton,

'Bbok VIII. son, retired to the mountains. He placed garrifons.in the cafils,

1593. which belonged to them; compelled their vassals, and the Barons,

in the adjacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing professions
of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence- to the
Protestant faith; and, the better to secure the tranquillity of that
part of the kingdom, conffituted the Earls ofAthol, and Marfial,,
liis Lieutenants there *..

March 18. HAVING finished this expedition, James returned to Edinburgh,
Elizabeth
follicits him where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
to treat them
with rigour. the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a

conspiracy, which he confidered as no less formidable to her own,
kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his former
remiflnefs, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
Protestant religion, or the. dignity of his own Crown, to punish
this epeated treason with rigour; and if he could. not apprehend
the persons, at least to confiscate the estates of such audacious re-
bels. She weakened, however, the force of thee requests, by
.interceding& at the fame time, in. behalf of Bothwell, whom, ac.
cording to her usual policy in nourishing a faAious spirit among
the Scottiih nobles, she had taken under her protetion. James ab-
folutely refused to liften to any intercession in favour of one, who
had so often, and with so much outrages insulted both his go-
vernment and his person, With regard.to the popifl conspirators,
he declared his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but that
he might be the better able to do, so,. he demanded a frmall um of
money from Elizabeth, which he, diitruftful, perhaps, of the
manner in which he might. apply it, fIewed no inclination to grant.
The zeal, however,. and importunity of his own fubjedts obliged

* Spotflv39r. Cald..4. 291.

him..
3

'iim to call a parliament, in order to pass an a&t of attainder against Book VIII..
the three:Earls. -But before it met, Ker made his escape out of 9
prison, and on pretence, that legal evidence of their guilt couldnot
be produced, nothing was concluded against them.. The King him-
.self was universally fufpeced of having contrived this artifice, on
purpose to elude the requests of the. Queen of England, and to
disappoint the wishes of his own.people. And therefore, in order
to sooth. the. clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his conduct,
he gave way to the passing of an a, which ordained those who
ebftinately condemned the. censure of. the Church, to. be declared.
outlaws. *..

WHI-LE the terror excited by the Pbpifh conspiracy possessed the Bothwell

furprizes the

nation,. the. court. had. been divided by two rival fadions, which King.
contended for the chief diredtion of affairs. At the Head of'one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire confidence..
For that very. reason, perhaps,. he had fallen .early under the Queen's
displeasure. The Duke of Lennox,. the Earl of Athol, Lord:
Ochiltree, and all the name.of Stewart espoused her quarrel, and.
widened the breach, And James,. fond no less of domestic tran-
quillity, . than. of public peace, advised. his favourite to retire, for:
some time, in hopes that the Queen's resentment would subside.
But as he stood in need; in the present. juncture, of the afliftance
of so able a Minister, he had recalled him to court. In order to
prevent him from recovering his former power, the Stewarts had
recourse to an expedient. no less illegal, than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who. was of the fame surname, they
brought him back secretly into Scotland; and seizing the gates ofJ"uY 4.i
the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment with a nume-

* Cld. 4. 3 3. Sots, 393. ParI.Z3.JC. VI.C.. 164.:

rous.a

Book VIII. rous train of armed followers. James, though deserted by all his

g593. courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered more indignation

than fear, 'and reproaching them for their treachery, called on the
Earl to finish his treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored pardon. The King
was not in a condition to refuse his demands. And a few days
after he signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, to whom
he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound himfelfto grant him
a remission for all past offences, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament; and in the mean time, to dismiss the chancellor,
the matter of Glamis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
his councils and pretence. Both'well, on his part, consented to
remove from court, though he left there as many of his affo-
ciates, as he thought sufficient to prevent the return of the adverse
'faCtion.

Ile re(overs BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the King under the
his liberty. fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often fubjedt during

his minority. He discovered so much impatience to shake off his
fetters, that those who imposed, durst not continue, the reitraint.
Septen Ler 7. They permitted him to call a Convention of the nobles at Stirling,

and to repair thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing to be
so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced the insult offered
to the King's person and authority to be high treason, and declared
him absolved from any obligation to observe conditions, extorted
by force, and which violated so essentially his royal prerogative.
James, however, ill proffered him a pardon, provided he would
sue for it as an at of mercy, and promie to retire out of the king-
dom. These conditions Bothwell rejeced with disdain, and be-

takling
if

taking himself once more to arms, attempted to furprize the King, Book VIII.
but finding him on his guard, fled to the borders *. 1593;

THE King's ardour against Bothwell, compared with his flow and Sufpeted of

favouring the

evasive proceedings against the Popish Lords, occasioned a general Popih Lords.
disgust among his fubjeds; and was imputed either to an excessive
attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or to a secret par-
tiality towards their opinions; both which gave rife to no unrea-
fonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the
Protestant Religion, thought themselves bound, in such a juncure,
to take extraordinary steps for its preservation. And the provincial
fynod of Fife happening to meet at that time, a motion was made
to excommunicate all concerned in the late conspiracy, as obstinate Sept. 2;.
and irreclaimable Papists. And though none of the conspirators
resided within the bounds of the fynod, or were subjet to its ju-
rifdiction, such was the zeal of the members, that, overlooking
this irregularity, they pronounced against them the sentence of ex-
communication, to which the a of last parliament added new
terrors. And left this hould be imputed to a few men, and ac-
counted the at of a small part of the Church, deputies were ap-
pointed to attend the adjacent ynods, and to desire their approba-
tion and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which increased the His cnity to-

wards them.

people's suspicions of the King. As he was marching on an ex- oa 7.
pedition againfi the borderers, the three Earls coming suddenly
into his presence, offered to submit themselves to a legal trial; and
James, without committing them to cuffody, appointed a day for
that purpose. The conspirators prepared to appear with a formi-
dable train of their fiends and vaTfals. But, in the mean time,

the

i83
` Cld, 4. 326. Spacl£ 395.

I

'Book VIII.the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, aflembling at

·'53. Edinburgh, remonstrated against the King's extreme indulgence

.with great boldness, and demanded of him, according to the re-
guilar course of justice, to commit to sure custody persons charged
with the highest aas of treason, who could not be brought to a legal
trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the Church;
and to call a Convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding againit them. At the fame time they offered'
to accompany him in arms to the place of trial, left such auda-
cious and powerful criminals flould overaw justice, and dicate
.to the judges, to whom they pretended to submit. James, though
extremely offended both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it expedient to put
off the day of trial, and to call a Convention of estates, in order to
quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their suspicions began gradually to abate, and the
Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully, that he himself,
together with a few other members, was impowered to pronounce
a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much deliberation,
;Nov. 26. they ordained that the three Earls, and their associates, hould be

exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on account of
their correspondence with Spain; that, before the first day of
February, they ihould either submit to the Church, and publicly
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of the Kingdom;
that, before the first of January, they should declare which of
there alternatives they would embrace; that they should find surety
for their peaceable demeanour, for the future; and that if they
failed to signify their choice in due time, they should lose the be-
nefit of this at of abolition, and remain exposed to all the pains
.of law *.

* Cald. 4. 330. Spots. 397.

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much Book VIII.

reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the Popish super- 594
ftition, submissive to all the diCtates of their priests, and buoyed
up with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls refused to
accept of the conditions, and continued their treasonable correfpon-
dence with the court of Spain. A Convention of etfates pronounced jan Is.
them to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which were of-
ferred; and the King required them by proclamation, to surrender
themselves to juffice. The presence of the English ambassador con-
tributed, perhaps, to the vigour of thee proceedings. Elizabeth,
ever attentive to James's motions, and imputing his reluctance to pu-
nifh the Popiih Lords to afecret approbation of their designs, had
sent to Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger to which i
he exposed himself, by this false moderation; and to require him to.
exercise that rigour which their crimes, as well as the posture of as-
fairs, rendered necessary. And though the fleps now taken by the
King silenced all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful
of his charaCter as an ambaflador, entered into private negociations
with such of the Scottish nobles, as disapproved of the King's mea-
fures, and held almost an open correspondence with Bothwell,
who, according to the usual artifice of malecontents, pretendedmuch
follicitude for reforming thediforders of the common wealth; and
covered his own ambition with the specious veil of zeal against those
Counsellors, who restrained the King from pursuing the avowed
enemies of the Protestant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the
name of his Mistress, to take arms againif his Sovereign.

MEAN while, the King and the Clergy werefilled with mutual dif- A ncw

trust of each other. They were jealous, perhaps to excess, that his as- tm"pt of
feetions leaned too much towards the Popish faction; he fufpeced
them, without good reason, of prompting Bothwell to rebellion,

VOL. 11. B b and

I85

BookVlII. and even of supplying him with money for that purpose. Little

instigation, indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent spirit
as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprize. He appeared suddenly
within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of 400 horse. The pre-
tences, by which he endeavoured to justify this infurrescion, were
extremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Popery, concern
for the King's honour, and for the liberties of the nation. James.
was totally unprovided for his own defence; he had no infantry,
and was accompanied only with a few horsemen of Lord Home's
train. In this extremity, he implored the aid of the citizens of
Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage them to ac with zeal, he
promised to proceed against the Popifl Lords with the utmost rigour
of law. Animated by their Ministers, they ran chearfully to their
arms, and advanced with the King at their head against Bothwell;
but he, notwithstanding his success in putting to flight Lord Home,
who had raflly charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry,,
retired to Dalkeith without daring to attack the King. His followers
abandoned him oon after, and discouraged by so many successive
disappointments, could never afterwards be brought to venture into
the field. He betook himself to his usual lurking places, in the
North of England; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's
remonitrances, obliged him to quit that retreat *.

Frefni (hn,,ges No sooner was the King delivered from one danger, than he was

fronI the
Plopii L-.ds. called to attend to another. The Popish Lords, in consequence
A1"il 3 of their negotiations with Spain, received, in the spring, a supply

of money from Philip. What bold deiigns this might infpirc,
it was no easy matter to conjecture. From men under the domi-
nion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim, the

* Spots. 403 Cald. 4. 353.

8 mol

most desperate actions were to be dreaded. The afiembly of theBook Vlir.
Church immediately took the alarm; remonstrated against them ;-"-
with more bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified the fen-
tence of excommunication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife.
James himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude, and
afraid that his long forbearance would not only be generally dif-
plealing to his own fubjeas, but give rife to unfavourable fufFi-
cions among the English, exerted himself with unusual vigour.
He called a Parliament; laid before it all the circumitances, and Jue s.
aggravations of the conspiracy and though there were but few
members present, and several of these connected with the confpi-
rators by blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his influ-
ence and importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous sentence
the law can infli&. They were declared to be guilty of high trea-
son, and their estates and honours forfeited. At the fame time,
flatutes, more evere than ever, were enated against the profeflors
of the Popish religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of greater nat;le of

difficulty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of tlhecvat
country almofi inacceflible, surrounded with numerous vafalfs, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an over-
match for a Scottish Monarch. No intreaty could prevail on Eli-
zabeth to advance the moncy, necefllary for defraying the cxpen-
ces of an expedition against them. To attack them in person,
with his own forces alone, might expose him both to dilrracc and
to danger. He had recourse to the only expcdicnt which remain-
ed in such a situation, for aiding the impotcnce of Sovcrcign au-
thority; he delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll, and Lord
Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity with the conlfjilators;
and gave them a commission to invade their lands, and to fcize the

B b caflce

187

Book VIII. castles which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithitanding all

C594.' his high pretensions of zeal for the Protestant religion, having now

entered into a close confederacy with them, the danger became eve-
ry day more urging. Argyll, solicited by the King, and rouzed by
the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7000 men. Huntly and
Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in number,
but composed chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries mounted
on horseback, and who brought along with them a train of field-
O&ober 3. pieces. They encountered each other with all the fury, which

hereditary enmity and ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined cou-
rage. But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the first discharge
of the cannon, to which they were little accustomed, and unable
to resist the impression of cavalry, were soon put to flight. And
Argyll, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his friends
out of the field, weeping with indignation at their disgrace, and
calling on them to stand, and to vindicate the honour of their
name ..

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged to

pawn his jewels in order to raise money -, assembled a small body
of troops, and marched towards the north. He was joined by the
Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and other clans at enmity with
Huntly and Errol, who having loft several of their principal fol'
lowers at Glenlivat, and others refusing to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the mountains. James
wafted their lands; put garrisons in ome of their castles; burnt
others; and left the Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that
part of the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to restrain them
from gathering to any head there, or from infesting the low coun.

* Cald. 4. 408. t Birch, Mem. . 186.

try.
z88

try. Reduced at last to extreme difprefs, by the rigour of the Book VIII.
season, and the desertion of their followers, they obtained the

1594.
King's permission to go beyond eas, and gave security that. they Popilh Lords

'driven ot of

should neither return without his licence, nor engage in any new the kingdom.
intrigues against the Proteflant religion, or the-peace -of the king-
dom *.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-established in the North of I595
Scotland, and the firmness and vigour, which James had displayed Thlt: 1oman

Cacholics in-

in his last proceedings against them, regained him, in a great de--cenfed agair.ft
gree, the confidence of his Proteflant fubjecs. But he funk inJames
the fame proportion, and for the fame reason, in the esteem of the
Roman Catholics. They had asserted his mother's right to the
Crown of England with so much warmth, that they could not,
with any decency, rejec his. And the indulgence, with which
he affected to treat the professors of that religion, inspired them
with such hopes, that they viewed his acceflion to the throne as no
undesirable event. But the rigour with which the King pursued
the conspirators, and the severe statutes againit Popery to which
he had given his consent, convinced them that these hopes were
visionary; and they began to look about in quest of some new fuc-
ceffor, whose rights they might oppose to his. The English Pa-
pifts turned their eyes towards the Earl of Effex, whose generous
mind, though firmly eablifled in the Protestant faith, abhorred
the severities inflicted in that age, on account of religious opini-
ons. Those of the fame fed, who were in exile, formed a bolder
scheme, and one more fiitable to their situation. They advanced
the claim of the Infanta of Spain ; and Parsons the Jciiit publishcd
a, book, in which, by false quotations from history, by fabulous

Spot; 404. Cald. 373, &c.

gcnca-

190
Book VIIT. genealogies, and absurd arguments, intermingled with bitter invec-

595. tives againi the King of Scots, he endeavoured to prove the In-

fanta's title to the Englifll Crown to be preferable to his. And
Philip, though involved already in a war both with France and
England, and scarce able to defend the remains of the Burgundian
Provinces against the Dutch commonwealth, easily grasped at this
airy proieCd. The dread of a Spaniih Pretender to the Crown, and
the opposition which the Papists began to form against the King's
succession, contributed not a little to remove the prejudices of the
Protestants, and to prepare the way for that event.

Bothwell for- BOTHW'ELL, whose name has been so often mentioned, as the
ced to fly into
Spain. disturber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the king-

dom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen
of England, on account of his confederacy with the Popish Lords;
excommunicated by the Church for the fame reason; and deserted,
in his distress, by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safe-
ty to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after renoun-
cing the Protestant faith, he led, many years, an obscure and in-
digent life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery.
The King, though extremely ready to sacrifice the firongeft resent-
ments to the slightest acknowledgements, could never be softened
by his filbmiflions, nor be induced to liften to any interceflion in
his behalf *.

THlis year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an able Minister,

oni whom he had long devolved the whole weight of public affairs.
As James loved him, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of verses, which, when compared with the compo-
fitions of that age, are far from being inelegant.

* Winw. Mcm. . Spotfwood, 410.

I Id. 411.

SoON

SOON after his death, a considerable change was made in the BookVIII.

administration. At that time, the annual charges of government 596.
far exceeded the King's revenues. The Queen was fond of ex- A channe in

the ainiriitf-

pensive amusements. James himself was a stranger to conomy. tration.
It became necessary, for all these reasons, to levy the public re-
venues with greater order and rigour, and to husband them with
more care. This important trust was committed to eight gentle-
men of the law *, who, from their number, were called OScavians.
The powers vested in them were ample, and almost unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their content: and
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alienation
of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or order on the treasury,
should be held valid, unless it were ratified by the ftibfcription of
five of the commissioners; all their as and decisions were declared
to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in civil courts;
and in consequence of them, and without any other warrant, any
person might be arrested, or their goods seized. Such extensive
jurifdiAion, together with the absolute disposal of the public mo-
ney, drew the whole executive part of the government into their
hands. United among themselves, they gradually undermined the
reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every lucrative or honou-
rable office. The ancient fcrvants of the Crown repined, at being
obliged to quit their flations to new men. The favourites, and
young courtiers, murmured at secing the King's liberality stintcd
by their prescriptions. And the clergy exclaimed againl- tbome of
them as known apoftatcs to Popery, and fuifpedcd others of secretly
favouring it. They retained their power, however, notwithll-and-

* Alexander Seaton President of the SclTion, Waltcr Stewart Commcndator of

Bllhtyrc Lord Privy Scal, Davil Carnegy, John Lindsay, Jmcs Elphingflon, Tlo-
mas Hamilton, John Scnc Clerk Rcgielcr, and Peter Young Elymofynar.

ing

I9r

Book VIII. ing this general combination againif them; and they owed it en-

-5'91 tirely to the order and ceconomy which they introduced into the

administration of the finances, by which the necessary expences of
government were more easily defrayed, than in any other period
of the King's reign *.

Violence of THE rumour of vafl preparations, which Philip was aid to be
the nation
aairna the carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with the
Popih Lords. dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the de-

fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the zeal of the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive;
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their eates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the a of forfeiture ineffecual, by supporting
March 24. the avowed enemies of the Proteflant faith. The assembly of the

Church took under consideration the slate of the kingdom, and hav-
ing appointed a day of public failing, they solemnly renewed the
Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to the Pro-
teftant faith, and to defend it againfi all aggressors. A committee,
confiling of the mofl eminent clergymen, and of many Barons,
and gentlemen of diilintion, waited on the King, and laid before
him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the preferva-
tion of religion. They urged him to appropriate the estates of
the banished Lords, as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers; to
take the firideft precautions for preventing the return of such tur-
bulent fubjets into the country; and to pursue all who were sus-
pe&ed of being their adherents, with the utmot rigour.

The ICil's NOTHING could be more repugnant to the King's schemes, or
remifflnci5
with regard more disagreeable to his inclination, than these propositions. Averse
to them.

* Spotfwood, 413, 43S.

through

through his whole life, to any course, where he expected oppofi- BookVIII.
tion or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the character 596.
of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed with con-
cern the prejudices against him, which were growing among the
Roman Catholics, and resolved to make ome attonement for that
part of his conduc, which had drawn on him their indignation,
Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her life had lately been
in danger; if any Popiih competitor hould arise to dispute his right
of succession, a faction, so powerful as that of the baniflied Lords,
might be extremely formidable; and any division among his own,
subjects might prove fatal, at a juncture, which would require
their united and most vigorous efforts. Inflead, therefore, of the
additional severities which the assembly proposed, James had
thoughts of mitigating the punishment, which they already suffered.
And as they were surrounded, during their residence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment might dispose them to
liften more favourably, than ever, to their fuggeflions; as delpair
might drive them to fill more atrocious actions; he resolved to recall
them, under certain conditions, into their native country. Encou-
raged by these sentiments of the King in their favour, of which they
did not want intelligence, and wearied already of the dependant and
anxious life of exiles, they ventured to return secretly into Scotland.
Soon after, they presented a petition to the King, begging his per-
mifllon to reside at their own houses, and offering to give security
for their peaceable and dutiful behaviour. Janhes called a Conver.
tion ofeftates to deliberate on a matter of such importance, and by
their advice he granted the petition.

So soon astheywereinformed of this, themembers of a committee, the rh
appointed by the lat assembly, met at Edinburgh, and with all thepre- ft'heCl'

VOL. II. C c cip;tancy snd1I-'oplI

,13

Book VIII. cipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such r'esolutions as they th'outgh

G6. necessary for the safety of the kingdom. They wrote circular let-

ters to all the Preflyteries in Scotland; they warned them of the
approaching danger; they exhorted them to fir tp their people' to the
defence of their jus rights; they commanded them to publifih, in
all their pulpits, the a. excommunicating the Popihl Lords; and
enjoined them to lay all those who' were fufpeted of favouring Po-
pery under the fane censure, by a fummapy sentence, .and without
observing the usual formalities of trial. And as the danger seemed
too pressing to wait for the flated meetings of hejudicatories of the
Church, they made choice of the most eminent clergymen iih
different corners of the kingdom, appointed them to reside constant-
ly at Edinburgh, and to meet every day with the Ministers of that
city, under the- name of the. Standing Council of the Church, and.
vested in this body the supreme authority, by enjoining it, in inita-
tion of the ancient Roman form, to take care that the Church
Should receive no detriment.;

THESE proceedings, no lefs.unconftitutional than unprecedented,

were manifest encroachments on the royal prerogative, and bold.
tfeps towards open rebellion. The King's conduct, however, jus-
tified in some degree such excesses. His lenity towards the Papiits,
so repugnant to the principles of that age; his pardoning the con-
fpirators, notwithstanding repeated promises to the contrary; the
refpe t.he paid to Lady Huntly, who was attached to the Romif
religion, no less than her. husband; his committing the care of his.
daughter the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady Levingiton, who was
infected with the fame fuperition; the contempt with which he
talked, on all occasions, both of the characer of Ministers, and
of their funtion; were circumstances which might have filled:

8., minds,

minds,. not prone by nature tojealoufy, with orne suspicions; and Book VIII.
might have precipitated into rash councils, those, who were far re- 1596
noyed- from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful the motives
might be which influenced the Clergy, or however laudable the
end .they had in view, they conduced their measures with no ad-
*dress, and even witth little prudence. James discovered a frong
inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and jealous as he
was of his prerogative, would willingly have made many concessions
for the fake of peace. By his command, ome of the Privy Coun-
fellors had an interview with the more moderate among the Clergy,
and enquired whether Huntly and his associates might not, upon
making proper acknowledgments, be again received into the bosom
ofthe church, and be exempted from any further punishment, on
account of their past apoflacy and treasons. They replied, that
though the gate of mercy flood always open for those who repent-
ed and returned, yet as there noblemen had been guilty of idolatry,
a crime deserving death both by the law of God, and: f man, the
civil magistrate could not legally grant them a pardon; and even
though the Church hould absolve them, it was his duty to inflict
punillment upon them. This inflexibility in those, who were rec-
koned the most compliant of the order, filled the King with indig-
nation, which the imprudence and obflinacy of a private Clergy-
:man heightened into rage.

MR. DavidBlack, Minister at St. Andrew's, discoursing in onescdito,,,

of his Sermons, according to custom, concerning the ilate of the tdoaugltb
nation, affirmed that the King had permitted the Popifil Lords to 31l'ck
return into Scotland, and by that action, had dilcovcrcd the trea-
chery of his own heart; that all Kings were the Devil's children;
that Satan had now the guidance of the court; that the Queen of

C -c .2 England

I:9

Book VII. England was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and bri-

96. bers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the Privy Counsellors

cormorants and men of no religion; and in his prayer for the Queen,
he used these words,, We mull pray for her for fashion fake, but
we have no cause, he will never do us good.. James commanded'

Nov. io. him to he summoned before the Privy Council, to answer for fucli
The Clergy
ioufe hi seditious. expressions; and the clergy, inflead of abandoning him-

to the punishment,. which such a petulant and criminat attack on
his superiors deserved, were so imprudent as to espouse his cause,;
as if it had been. the common one of the whole order. The con--
troverfy concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of'
the Clergy to testify against vices of every kind, which had'
been agitated. in 584, was now revived. It was pretended, that
with regard, to their sacred funcion, Minifters.were subjed to the:
Church alone; that it belonged only to their ecclefitAical'fuperiors:
to judge of the truth. or fallhood of doctrines, delivered in the-
pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, the King usurped this
jurifdicionr the church would, from that moment, fink under-
servitude to the civil magistrate;. that- instead of reproving vice,.
with that honest boldness, which had often. been of advantage to
individuals, and salutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to.
flatter the passions of the. Prince, and to connive at the vices of'
others; tht thie King's eagerness to punish the indiscretion of a
Protestant Mihifter, while lie was so- ready to pardon the. crimes of'
Popish conspirators, called on them to fland on. their guard.; and
that now was, the time to contend for their: privileges, and to pre-
vent any encroachment on those rights. of which the church had
been in pofieffion ever fiuice the Reformation. Influenced by.thefe
Considerations, the council of the Church enjoined Black to. decline
the jurifdition of the Privy council. And he, proud of such an,

oppor,-
196

opportunity to diplay his zeal, presented a paper to thatpurpofe Book VI II..
and with the utmost firmness refused to plead, or to answer the I596.
questions which-were put to him. In order to add greater weight
to these proceedings, the council of the Church tranfinitted the
declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom, and
commanded every Minister to subscribe it; in testimony of his ap-
probation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour than they were at,

tacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority must
fall, if the clergy, houldbe permitted, publickly, and with impu-
nity, to calumniate his miniflers, and even to censure himself; and
knowing, by former examples, what an equal reparation for such,
offences he might expet'from the judicatories of the church, he
urged on the inquiry into Black's conduct, and-iffued a proclama-
tion, commanding the members of the, council of the church to
leave Edinburgh, and to returnto their-own parishes. Black, in-
stead of submitting, renewed his declinature; and'the council, in
defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as they met' by the
authority-of the church; obedience to itwas a duty fill more fa-
cred, than.that which they owed to the King himself. The Privy
council, notwithstanding Black's refuting to plead, proceeded in the
trial; and, after a solemn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the
crimes of which he had been accused; but referred it to the King,,
to appoint what punilhment he should susser.

MEAN whil many endeavours, were used to bring matters to

accommodation. Almost every day produced some new.fcheme of
reconcilement; but through the King's fickleness, the obflinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all proved inef-
fetual, Both parties appealed.to the people, and by reciprocal:

an.d i

x97'

.Book VIII. and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render each other

596. odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes with which

James charged the Clergy; while they made the pulpits reound
with complaints of his exceflive lenity towards Papists, and of the no
less excessive rigour, with which he opprefled the eflablithed Church.
Exasperated by their bold inveAives, he, at last, entenced Black
to retire beyond the river Spey, and to reside there during his plea-
fire; and once more commanding the members of the flanding
council to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the miniflers
in the kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to submit,
in the fame manner as other subjects, to the jurisdiction of the civil
courts, in matters of a civil nature.

A tumult in THIS decisive meifiure excited all the violent pafions, which
Edinbugh. -possess disappointed factions; and deeds no less violent immediately

followed. These must be imputed in part to the artifices of ome
.courtiers, who expedced to reap advantage from the calamities of
their country, or who hoped to lessen the authority of the Oda-
vians, by engaging them in hoflilities with the church. On one
hand, they informed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh
-were under arms every night, and had planted a ftrong-guard round
.the houses of their ministers. James, in order to put a flop to this
.imaginary insult on his government, iflued a proclamation, com-
manding twenty four of the principal citizens to leave the. town
within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to the ministers,
advising them to look to their own safety, as Huntly had been fe-
cretly admitted to an interview with the King, and had been the au-
:thor of the revere proclamation againfi the citizens of Edinburgh *.

They

T Though matters were induftlioufly aggravated by persons, who wifled both par-
ties to:purfue violent meafuires ncither of these reports were altogether deflitute of

foun-
198

I99'

They doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than the Book VIII.
King had done of that which he received, and fell as blindly into '159"ó.
the snare. The letter came to their hands, just as one of their num-
ber was going to mount the pulpit. They resolved that he should ec. 17.
acquaint the people of their danger; and he painted it, with all the
ftrbng colours, which men naturally employ, in describing any
dreadful and instant calamity. When the sermon was over, he de-
fired the nobles and gentlemen to aflemble in the Little Church.
The whole multitude, terrified at what they had heard, crowded
thither; they promised and vowed to fland by the church; they
drew up a petition to the King, craving the redrcfs of those grie-
vances, of which the Clergy complained, and beseeching him to
deliver them from all'future apprehensions of danger, by removing
such of his Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the
Protestant religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Burgefies,
and two Ministers, were appointed to present it. The King hap- The K ing in
pened to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court ofDang
session was fitting, The manner in which the petition was de-
livered, as well as its contents,- offended him. He gave an
haughty reply; the petitioners insisted with warmth; and a pro-
mifcuous multitude prefling into the room, James retired abruptly
into another apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut be-
hind him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who were
still assembled, and to whom a minifterhad been reading, in their
absence, the tory of Haman. When they reported that the King
had refused to liften, to their petitions, the Church was filled in a

foundation. As their Minilters were fuppdfed to be in danger, some of the more
zealous citizens had determined to defend them, by force of amas, Birch. Mem. 2.
250. Huntly had been privately in Edinburgh, where he had an interview, if not
with the King, at least with some of his ininifcrs, Birch. Ibid. 230.

momentl

Book VIII. moment with noise, threatnings, execrations, and all the outrage

óc"J and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their arms;
i$96.

ome to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried, the sword of
the Lord and of Gideon; and rushing out with the most furious
impetuosity, urrounded the Tolbooth, threatening the King him-
self, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The magifirates of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell the tu-
mult; the King attempted to ooth the malecontents, by promising
to receive their petitions, when presented in a regular manner;
the Ministers, sensible of their own raihnefs in kindling such a
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the populace, subsiding as
suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed, and the King returned
to the palace; happy in having escaped from an infurretion, which
though the instantaneous and unconcerted effect of popular fury,
had exposed his life to imminent danger, and was confidered by
him as an unpardonable affront to his authority *.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents assembled,

in order to prepare their petition. The punishment of the Popish
Lords; the removal of those Counsellors, who were suspected of
favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the late as
of council, subversive of the authority of the Church; together
with an a approving the proceedings of the standing council;
were the chief of their demands. But the King's indignation was
till so high, that the deputies, chosen for that purpose, durst not
ventur, that night, to present requests which could not fail of kind-
ling his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with all his at-

Spots, 417, &c. Cald. 5. 54, &c. Birdh, Mem. 2. 235.

tendants,

.3

attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the session, and other courts Book VIII.
ofjuftice, were required to leave a city, where it was no longer con- 596.
fiftent either with their safety, or their dignity to remain; and the He leavc,

Edinburgh,
noblemen and barons were commanded to return to their own an'dproceeds

with feverit?

houses, and not to reassemble without the King's permiflion. The againlt tie
vigour, with which the King ated, truck a damp upon the spirits cLzen&.
of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
susser by his absence, and the removal of the courts of justice, re-
pented already of their condut. The Ministers alone resolved to
maintain the contest. They endeavoured to prevent the nobles
from dispersing; they inflamed the people by violent invectives
against the King; they laboured to procure subscriptions to an as-
fociation for their mutual defence; and conscious what lustre and
power the junction of ome of the greater nobles would add to their
cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that
the people, moved by the word of God, and provoked by the in-
juries offered to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to protect the Protestant Religion, which
owed its establishment to the piety and valour of their ancestors; that
they wanted only a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less than his noble birth,
entitled him to that honour: They conjured him therefore not to
disappoint their hopes and wishes, nor to refuse the suffering Church
that aid, which he so much needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of
complying with their desire, carried the letter directly to the King,
whom this new insult irritated to such a degree, that he commanded
the magiflrates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their Minifers, as
manifest incendiaries, and encouragers of rebellion. The magi'-
trates, in order to regain the King's favour, were preparing to

VOL. II.D d obey;

IT HE I S T O R-
Book VIII. obey; and the Ministers, who aw no other hope of safety, fled

-,_ towards England *.
1597.

The King THIS unsuccessful insurrection, inflead of overturning, establish-
humbles the ed the King's authority. Those concerned in it were confounded
power of the
Church. and dispersed. And the reft of his subjects, in order to avoid sus-
)an. 3'

picion, or to gain his favour, contended who should be most for-
ward to execute his vengeance. A Convention of estates being
called, pronounced the late infurretion to be high treason; ordain-
ed every Minister to subscribe a declaration of his submission to
the King's j.urifdi&ion, in all matters civil and criminal; impowered
magistrates to commit, inflantly, to prison any Minister, who
in his sermons, hould utter indecent reflections on the King's
conduct; prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet, without
the King's licence; commanded that no person should be elected a
magistrate of Edinburgh, for the future, .without the King's ap-
probation; and that, in the mean time, the present magistrates.
should either discover, and inflic condign puniflment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself fould be fubjeated tQ
all the penalties of that treasonable action t.

Ab, ;idge: the ARMEDwiththeauthorityofthefcdecrees, James resolved to crufl
plivilees of entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjeds. As the Clergy had, hi-
the cities o
Jilbhrgh. therto, derived their chief credit and strength from the favour and zeal

of the citizens of Edinburgh, his firt care was to humble them. Though
the magistrates submitted to him in the most abject terms; though
they vindicated themfelvcs, and their fellow citizens, from the most
distant intention of violating his royal person or authority; though,.
after the firiteft scrutiny, no circumiances that could fix on them.

a Spotfw. 451. Cald. 5. 1z6.

+ Cald. 5. 147.

the

the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been discovered; though Book ilTI.
many of the nobles, and such of the Clergy as fill retained any '9
degree of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither acknowledge-
ments, nor interceflions, were of the leafi avail *. The King
continued inexorable, the city was declared to have forfeited its pri- Feb. z8.
vileges as a Corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties of trea-
son. The capital of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, de-
ferted by its ministers, abandoned by the courts of Jutice, and proi
fcribed by the king, remained in desolation and despair. The
courtiers even threatened to raze the city to the foundation, and to
erea a pillar where it flood, as an everlasting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At last, in
compliance with Elizabeth, who interposed in their favour, and
moved by the continual follicitations of his nobles, James absolved March 2.
the citizens from the penalties of law, but, at the fame time, he
firipped them of their most important privileges; they were neither
allowed to elet their own magistrates, nor their own Ministers'
many new burdens were imposed on them; and a great um of
money was exaded by way of peace-offering -.

JAMES was, mean while, equally afliduous, and no less success- New regula..

tions with re-

ful, in circumscribing thejurifdidion of the Church. Experience had glad to the
discovered that to attempt this, by as of parliament, and sentences Chulch.
of privy council, was both ineffectual, and odious. He had re-
course, now, to an expedient more artful, and better calculated for
obtaining his end. The Ecclefiaflical judicatories were comnpofed
of many members; the majority of the clergy were extremely
*indigent, and unprovided of legal stipends; the ininifters in the

1 Cald. 5. 149. t Spotfw. 434, 414.

D d2

neiglh-

Book VIII. neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the parity establish-

r .. ed by the Presbyterian government, had assumed a leading in. the

Church, which filled their brethren with envy; every numerous body
of men is susceptible of sudden and strong impressions,, and liable to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by there confide-
rations, James thought it possible to gain the Clergy, whom he had
in vain, attempted to subdue. Proper agents were set to work all
over the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were employed;
the usurpations of the brethren near the capital were aggravated
the jealousy of their power,, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different General Aflemblies were
held, in both which, notwithstanding the zeal and boldness, where-
with a few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of the Church,
n majority declared in favour of those measures, which were agree-
able to the King. Many practices, which had continued since the
reformation, were condemned; many points. of discipline, which
had hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given
up; the licence, with which ministers discoursed of political mat-
ters, was restrained.; the freedom, with which they inveighed
against particular persons, censured; sentences of summary excom-
munication declared unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly,
without the King's permission, prohibited;, and the right of no-
minating ministers, to the principal towns, vested in the Crown.
Thus, the Clergy themselves frrendered privileges,. which it
would have been. dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted
to a yoke more intolerable than any James would have ventured to
impose by force; while those who continued to oppose his measures,
instead of their former popular topic of the King's violent enr
croachments on a jrifdition which did. not belong to him, were

ob.,
204

205

obliged to turn their outcries against the corruptions of their own Book VIII
order *
.

'597.

BY the authority of these assemblies, the Popish Earls were al- Popifn Lord.

lowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were absolved pardoned.
from the sentence of excommunication; and received into the
bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to the church of
Rome, and by their apoflacy juflified, in ome degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE Miniffers of Edinburgh owed to the interceflion of these

assemblies, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridged
their power. The city was divided into distinct parishes; the num-
ber of Ministers doubled; persons on whose fidelity the King could
rely were fixed in the new parishes; and thee circumstances, ad-
ded to the authority of the late decrees of the Church, contributed
to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclesiastical affairs, which
James poffefied during the remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfations of this period scarce deserve to be remem-
bered. The Ocavians, envied by the other courtiers, and pjlit-
ing into factions among themselves, resigned their commiflion; and
the administration of the revenue returning into its former channel,
both the king and the nation were deprived of the benefit of their
regular and frugal oeconomy.

* Sotfw. 433. Cald. 5. 189, 233.

TOWARDS

Book VIII. TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was held in order

597 to restore Huntly, and his associates, to their estates and honours,
Dec. 19. by repealing the a&t of forfeiture passed againf them.. The authority

of this supreme court was likewise imployed to introduce a farther
innovation into the Church; but conformable to the system which

Fcclefiaf.ics the king had now adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife
restored to a P
feat in par- .from the Clergy themselves. As the act of general annexation, and
ianmient. that eflablifhing the Presbyterian government had reduced the few

Bishops, who still survived, to poverty and contempt; as those
who possessed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere laymen, arid
many of them temporal Peers, few or none of the Ecclesiastical
order remained to vote in parliament, and by means of that, the
influence of the Crown was considerably diminished there, and a
proper balance to the power and number of the nobles was want-
ing. But the prejudices, the nation had conceived against the
lname and character of Bishops, were so violent, that James was ob-
liged, with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a design to
revive that order. He prevailed therefore on the commifion ap-
pointed by last assembly to complain to the parliament, that the
Church was the only body in the kingdom destitute of its repre-
fentatives in that supreme court, where it so nearly concerned every
order to have ome, who were bound to defend its rights; and
to crave that a competent number of the Clergy flould be ad-
mitted, according to ancient custom, to a feat there. In compliance
with their request, an at was pased, by which those Ministers,
-on whom the King flould confer the vacant Bifliopricks and -Ab-
beys, were intitled to a vote in parliament; and that the. Clergy
might conceive no jealousy of any encroachment on their privileges,
it was remitted to the General Assembly, to determine what fpiri-

tual

tualjurifdicion or authority in the government of the Church these Book VIIIi
persons should possess *. 5

THE King, however, found it no easy matter to obtain the con-

currence of the Ecclesiastical judicatories, in which the a of par-
liament met with a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy per-
ceived how much lustre this new privilege would refleA upon their
order; though they were not insensible of the great accefion of
personal power and dignity, which many of them would acquire,
by being admitted into the supreme council of the nation, their
abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and to that, they facri-
siced every consideration of interest or ambition. All the King's
professions of regard for the present constitution of the Church
did not convince them of his sincerity ; all the devices that could
be invented for restraining and circumscribing the jurisdiction
of those, who were to be raised to this new honour, did no dimi-
nifh their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy advances,
and though admitted at first with moderate authority, and under
specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion. '( Varnish
over this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen, with what
colours you please ; deck the intruder with the utmost art; under
all this disguise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments
prevailed among many of his brethren, and induced them to re-
jec power, and honours, with as much zeal, as ever those of their
order courted them. Many, however, were allured by the hopes
of preferment; the King himself and his Ministers employed the
fame arts, which they had tried so successfully last year; and after lal ,
long debates, and much opposition, the General Afemnbly declared.

* Spotfv. 450. Parl. i5th Jac. VI. . 235.

that
7

BookVII . that it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a feat in parliament;

1598. that it would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have its re-

presentatives in that supreme court; and that fifty one persons, a
number nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics, who were an-
ciently called to parliament, should be chosen from among the
Clergy for that purpose. The manner of their election, toge-
ther with the powers to be vested in them, were left unde-
cided for the present, and furnified matter of future delibe-
ration *.

1C99. As the profpet of succeeding to the Crown of England drew
amers windtearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it cer-
fuccefstogain tain. As he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
a party in
England. marriage, he sent ambaifadors extraordinary to their several courts,

in order to explain the justness of his title to the English throne,
and to desire their aflitance, if any competitor should arise to dif-
pute his undoubted rights. These Princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid they could afford him was
distant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of
Kinlofs, his ambaflador at the English court, follicited Elizabeth,
with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by tome public deed,
and to deliver her own fubje&ts from the calamities, which are
occasioned by an uncertain or disputed fucceflion. But age had
trengthened all the paflions, which had, hitherto, induced Eliza-
beth to keep this great question obscure, and undecided; and a
general and evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As no
imprefion could be made on the Queen,. the ambaflador was com-
manded to found the disposition of her fubjets, and to try what
progress he could make in gaining them. Bruce poreffeed all the

* Spotfw. 450. Cald. 5. 278.

talen ts

talents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite for conducing Book VIII.
a negociation, no less delicate, than important. A Minister of 599'

'599.

this character was intitled to the confidence of the English. Ma-
ny of the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him without re-
serve, and gave him repeated assurances of their resolution to as-
fert his master's right, in opposition to every Pretender *. And as
several pamphlets were dispersed, at this time in England, contain-
ing objections to his title, James employed ome learned men in
his kingdom to answer these cavillers, and to explain the advan-
tages which would result to both kingdoms, by the union of the
Crowns. These books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little
to reconcile the English to that event. A book published this year,
by the King himself, produced an effect still more favourable. It
was intitled Baflicon Doron, and contained precepts concerning the
art of government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Notwith-
standing the great alterations and refinements in national tafle since
that time, we must allow this to be no contemptible performance,
and not to be inferior to the works of most cotemporary writers,
either in purity of flyle, orjuftnefs of composition. Even the vain
parade of erudition with which it abounds, and which now ditgufls
us, raised the admiration of that age; and as it was filled with
those general rules, which speculative authors deliver for rendering
a nation happy, and of which James could discourse with great
plausibility, though often incapable of putting them in pracice;
the English conceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expedt-
ed an increase of national honour and prosperity, under a Prince so
profoundly skilled in politics, and who gave such a specimen both
of his \wildon, and of his love to his people f-.

* Johnl. 2 2. .1 Carnd. Spotfwood, 457.

209
E

Ti ti;:
Voj.. II.

Book VIII. THE Queen of England's sentiments concerning James, were

1599.

I59 very different from these of her fubjets. His exceflive indulgence

towards the Popish Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popish Archbishop of
Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the time of the Refor-
mation, to the poireflion of the temporalities of that benefice; the
appointing him his Ambassador at the court of France; the applause
he befftowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the
Queen his mother, Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of
a mind alienated from the Protestant religion; and fufpedted that

Accuses him he would soon revolt from the profession of it. These suspicions
ofcorrefpond-
ing with the seemed to be fully confirmed by a discovery which came from the
Ppe. Master of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and who, ra-

ther than susser his intriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himself
so far as to ac as a spy for the English court. He conveyed to Eli-
zabeth the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Clement VIII.
in which the King, after many exprefions of regard for that pontiff,
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in order to render the
intercourse between the court of Rome and Scotland more frequent
and familiar, he olicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop
of Vaizon, a Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardinal *. Elizabeth,
who had received, by another channel -t, some imperfec intelli-
gence of this correspondence, was filled with just furprize, and im-
mediately dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully
into the truth of the matter, and to reproach James for an acion so
unbecoming a Protestant Prince. He was no less aflonilhed at the
accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing but the conscious-
ness of innocence could inspire, affirmed the whole to be a mere

* Cald. 333. f Win. Mem. vol. i. 37, 2.

calumny,

calumny, and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on pur- Book VIII.
pose to bring his sincerity in religion to be fufpeaed. Elphingfton 599-
the Secretary of state denied the matter with equal solemnity. It
came to be known by a very singular accident, which happened some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth had received was
well founded, though at the fame time the King's declarations of
his own innocence were perfectly consistent with truth. Cardinal
Bellarmine, in a reply which he published to a controversial treatise,
of which the King was the author, accused him of having aban-
doned the favourable sentiments which he had once entertained of
the Roman Catholic religion, and as a proof of this quoted his let-
ter to Clement VIII. It was impossible any longer, to believs this
to be a fiction; and it was a matter too delicate to be passed over
without ftric inquiry. James immediately examined Elphingfton,
and his confession unravelled the whole mystery. He acknowledged
that he had shuffled in this, letter, among other papers, which he
laid before the King to be signed, who, fufpeding no such deceit,
subscribed it together with the reft, and without knowing what it
contained; that he had no other motive, however, to this action,
but zeal for his majesty's service; and, by flattering the Roman Ca-
tholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government, he
imagined that he was paving the way for his more easy acceflion to
the English throne. The Privy Council of England entertained
very different sentiments of the Secretary's conduct. In their opinion,
not only the King's reputation had been exposed to reproach, but
his life to danger, by this rafl imposture; they even imputed the
gun-powder treason to the rage and disappointment of the Papills,
upon finding that the hopes which this letter inspired were fiuf-
trated. The Secretary was ent a prisoner into Scotland, to e tried

E c2 for

211

212
Book VIII. for high-treaion. His peers f6dfd him guilty; but, by the Queen's

, intercefion, he obtined a pardon*.
599'

ACCORDING to the account of other historians, James himself

was no stranger to this rrefpondence with the Pope; and, if we
believe them,. Ephingfton being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of the Earl of Dun-
bar, concealed some circumflances in his narrative of this tranfac-
tion, and falsified others; and, at the expence of his own fame,
and with the danger of his. life, endeavoured to draw a veil over this
part of his master's condu -.

James atgreat BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre-
pains to gain tary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that,
the Roman
Catholics. about this time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the friendflip

of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a. necessary precaution towards
facilitating his accession to the English. throne. Lord Home, who
was himself a Papist, was entrusted with a secret commiflion to
the Pope ; the Archbishop of Glasgow was an aive instrument
with those of his own religion |I. The Pope expressed such fa-
vourable sentiments both of the King, and of his right to the Crown
of England, that James thought himself bound, ome years after,
to acknowledge the obligation in a public manner **. Sir James
Lindsay made great progress in gaining the English Papists to ac-
knowledge his Majefly's title. Of all these intrigues Elizabeth re-
ceived obscure hints, from different quarters. The more imper-
sealy he knew, the more violently he fufpested the King's de-
signs, and the natural jealousy of her temper increasing with age,
she observed his conduct with greater solicitude than ever.

* Spots. 456, 507. Johnft. 448. t Cald. vol. v. 322. vi, 147.

Wiiw, Mem. vol. ii. 57, Il Cald. ol. vi, 47. ** Ibid. vol. v. 604.

T'Hi

THE, questions with regard to the election and power of the re- Book VIII.

presentatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by the 6oo.
General Assembly, which met at Montrose. That place was March z8.

His regula-
chosen, as most convenient for the ministers of the north, among tions with re-

gard to the

whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And although great num- church.
bers resorted from the northern provinces, and the King employed
his whole interest, and the authority of his own presence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with difficulty agreed
on. That the General Assembly fiall recommend fix persons to
every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat in Parliament,
out of whom the King shall nominate one; that the person so eiet-
ed, after obtaining his feat in Parliament, shall neither propose, nor
consent to any thing there, that may affect the interest of the church,
without special inftruCions to that purpose; that he ihall be an-
fwerable for his conduc to every General Assembly; and submit to
its censure, without appeal, upon pain of infamy and excommu-
nication; that he shall discharge the duties of a Pallor in a particu-
lar congregation; that he shall not usurp any ecclesiastical jurif-
didtion, superior to that f his other brethren; that if the church
inflict on him the censure of deprivation, he (hall, thereby, forfeit
his feat in Parliament; that he hiall annually resign his commission
to the General Assembly, which may be restored to him, or not,
as the Aflembly, with the King's approbation, filall judge most ex-
pedient for the good of the church *. Nothing could be more re-
pugnant to the idea of Episcopal government, than these regulations.
It was not in consequence of rights derived from their office, but of
powers conferred by a commiiffon, that ecclesiastical persons were
to be admitted to a feat in Parliament; they were the reprefenta-
tives, not the Superiors of the clergy. Deftitutc of all spiritual au-

* Spotfwood, 453, 457. Cald. vol. v. 368.

thority,

2r3

Book VIII. thority, even their civil jurifdictin was temporary. James, how-

x600. ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able to shake off

these fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges which belong-
ed to the episcopal order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing.
And he contended for, and they opposed the nomination of these
commiflioners, not so much on account of the powers then vested
in them, as of those, to which it was believed they would soon
attain *.

Gowry's con- DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil-
fpiracy. lity. The clergy, after many struggles, were brought under great

fubje&ion; the Popish Earls were restored to their estates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the conent of the
church; the reft of the nobles were at peace among themselves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midst of this fe-
curity, the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a con-
fpiracy altogether unexpected, and almost inexplicable. The au-
thors of it were John Ruthven Earl of Gowrie, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1584. Nature had adorned both thee young men, especially the
elder brother, with many accomplishments, to which education had
added its most elegant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than is common at
their age of life; generous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far
from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the
most sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwithstanding all
these noble qualities, ome unknown motive engaged them in a
conspiracy, which, if we adhere to the account commonly received,
muff be tranfinitted to posterity, as one of the most wicked, as

* Spotfwood, 44.

I well
214

well as one of the worst concerted, of which history makes any Book VII.
mention. 1600.

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who resided during the

hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out to his sport
early in the morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruthven,
who, with an air of very great importance, told the King, that the
evening before he had met an unknown man, of a suspicious aspet,
walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a
vast quantity of foreign gold; that he had immediately seized both
him and his treasure, and without communicating the matter to
any person, had kept him confined and bound in a solitary house;
and that he thought it his duty to impart such a singular event, first
of all to his Majesty. James immediately fufpeted this unknown
person to be a trafficking priest, supplied with foreign coin, in or-
der to excite new commotions in the kingdom; and resolved to im-
power the Magistrates of Perth to call the person before them, and
inquire into all the circumtfances of the flory. Ruthven violently
opposed this resolution, and with many arguments urged the King
to ride direcly to Perth, and to examine the matter with his own
eyes. Mean while the chace began; and James, notwithstanding
his passion for that amusement, could not help ruminating on the
firangenefs of the tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At last, he
called him, and promised when the sport was over, to set out for
Perth. The chace, however, continued long; and Ruthven, who
all the while kept close by the King, was flill calling on him to make
haste. At the death of the buck, he would not allow James to
stay till a fresh horse was brought him; and observing the Duke of
Lennox and the Earl of Mar preparing to accompany the King, he
entreated him to countermand them. This James refused; and

though

215

Book VIII. though Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the apparent

600. perturbation in his whole behavionr, raised ome suspicious in his

mind; yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on
him to let out for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruth-
ven rode forward to inform his brother of the King's arrival, though
he had already dispatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by several of the
citizens, met the King, who had only twenty persons in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no pains to attone,
by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he treated
his guests. When the King's repast was over, his attendants were
led to dine in another room, and he being left almost alone, Ruth-
ven whispered him, that now was the time to go to the chamber
where the unknown person was kept. James commanded him to
bring Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, instead of that,
Ruthven ordered him not to follow: and conducting the King up
a stair-case, and then through several apartments, the doors of which
he locked behind him, led him at last into a nfall study, in which
there stood a man clad in armour, and with a sword and dagger
by his fide. The King, who expected to have found one disarmed
and bound, itarted at the fight, and inquired if this was the per-
son; but Ruthven snatching the dagger from the girdle of the
man in armour, and holding it to the King's bread, " Remember,

said he, how unjustly my father suffered by your command; you
"are now my prisoner; submit to my disposal without refinance, or

outcry; or this dagger shall inltantly avenge his blood." James

expoftulated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him. The
man, whom he found in the fludy, stood, all the while, trembling,
and difinayed, without courage either to aid the King, or to fe-

cond
2 r6

cond his aggressor. Ruthven protefled that if the King railed no Book VIII.
outcry, his life fiould be safe; and, moved by ome unknown rea- 16oo.
son, retired in order to call his brother, leaving to the man in ar-
mour the care of the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make
any noise during his absence.

WHILE the King was in this dangerous situation, his attendants

growing impatient to know whither he had retired, one of Gowry's
attendants entered the room hastily, and told them that the King had
just rode away towards Falkland. All of them rushed out into the
fireet; and the Earl, in the utmost hurry, called for their horses.
But, by this time, his brother had returned to the King, and swear*
ing that now there was no remedy; he behoved to die; offered
to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was, he scorned to submit
to that indignity; and closing with the affaflin, a fierce struggle
ensued. The man in armour stood as formerly, amazed and mo-
tionlefs; and the King dragging Ruthven towards a window, which
during his absence he had persuaded the person with whom he
was left, to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Trea-
son ! Treason! Help! I am murdered!" His attendants heard,
and knew the voice; and saw at the window, a hand which grasped
the King's neck with violence. They flew with precipitation to his
affiflance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal flair-cafe, where they found all the doors shut, which they
battered with the utmost fury, endeavouring to burfl them open.
But Sir John Ramsay entering by a back-ftair, which led to the
apartment where the King was, found the door open; and rufling
upon Ruthven, who was lill fRruggling with the King, firuck him
twice with his dagger, and thrust him towards the stair-case, where
Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hugh H-erreis met and killed him ; he

VOL. II. F f crying

2 17

Book VII. crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this:

600. " action." During this scuffle, the man, who had been concealed

in the study, escaped unobserved. Together with Ramsay, Erskine,
and Herreis, one Wilson a footman entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to shut the door, Gowrie rushed
in with a drawn sword in each hand, followed by seven of his atten-
dants well armed,. and with a loud voice threatened them all with in-
ltant death. They immediately thrust the King into the little fludy,
and hutting the door upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwith-
tlanding the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsay pierced Gowrie:
thro' the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a word; his
followers having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the conflict. A dread-
ful noise continued still at the opposite door, where many persons
laboured in vain to force a passage; and the King being assured that
they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened on
the inside. They ran to the King, whom they unexpectedly found
safe, with transports of congratulation; and he, falling on his knees,
with all his attendants round him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a.wonderful deliverance. The danger, however, was not
yet over. The inhabitants of the town, whose provost Gowrie was,
and by whom he was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the
two brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded thehoufe, threatening
revenge, with many insolent and opprobrious speeches against the
King. James endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by
speaking to them from the window; he admitted their magistrates
into the house; related to them the whole circumstances of the
fadc; and their fury subsiding by degrees, they dispersed. On search-
ing the Earl's pockets for papers, that might discover his designs and
accomplices, nothing was found but a finall parchment bag, fill.

7 of
2I8

of magical characters, and words of enchantment; and if we may Book Vr.
believe the account of the conspiracy published by the King, " while 600,
,' these were about him, the wound of which he died, bled not;
a but as soon as they were taken away, the blood gushed out in
, great abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of this busy
day, the King returned in the evening to Falkland, having commit-
ted the dead bodies of the two brothers to the custody of the Ma-
giftrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the King gave of The motive

of the confpi-,

all the circumstances of this conspiracy against his life, the motives rators notea-
which induced the two brothers to attempt an acion so deteftable,y
the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose aid they
depended, were altogether unknown. The words of Ruthven to
the King gave ome grounds to think, that the desire of revenging
their father's death had instigated them to this attempt. But, what-
ever injuries their father had suffered, it is scarce probable that they
could impute them to the King, whose youth and fubje&tion, at that
time, to the violence of a faction, exempted him from being the object
ofrefentment, on account ofactions which were notdone by his com-
mand. James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the
father had suffered, by benefits to his children; and Gowrie himself,
sensible of his favour, acknowledged it with the warmest expref-
sions of gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being conviced
of assisting him in this assault on the king's servants, were executed
at Perth; but they could give no light into the motives, which had
prompted their master to an action so repugnant to these acknow-
ledgments. Diligent search was made for the person concealed in
the fudy, and from him great discoveries were expected. But
Andrew Henderson the Earl's fleward, who, upon a promise of

F f 2 pardon,

-zr9

220
Book VIII pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as much a stranger to

60 his mater's designs as the reft; and though placed in the study by

Gowrie's command, he did not even know for what end that station
had been assigned him. The whole tranfa&ion remained as impe-.
netrably dark as ever; and the two brothers, it was concluded, had
concerted their scheme without either confident' or accomplice, with
unexampled secrecy as well as wickedness

,Sprot's di AN accident, no less Rtrange than the other circumifances of the
coveriescon- iory, and which happened nine years after, discovered that this
cerning it.

opinion, however plausible, was ill founded-; and that the. two,
brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone. One
Sprot, a notary, having whispered among several persons that he knew
fbme secrets relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confeflion was partly voluntary, and partly
forced from him by torture. According to his account, Logan of
Reftalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of dissolute
morals, was privy to, all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with him,, in order to concert the plan. of their operations; the
Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose; and one
Bour, Logan's confident, was trusted with the secret, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour were now dead.
But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters, written both by Gowrie
and Logan, on that occasion; and, in confirmation of his testimony,
several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to himself had
prompted Sprot to ileal from among Bour's papers, were produced *.

These

* Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another to Gowrie, and three
of them without any direction; nor could Sprot discover the name of the person to.

whom.

221

These were compared, by the-privy council, with papers of Lo- Book VIII.
gan's hand writing, and the resemblance was manifest. Persons of .6oo..
undoubted credit, and well qualified: to' judge of the matter, exa-
mined them, and swore to their authenticity. Death itself did not
exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones were dug up, and tried
for High Treason, and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal *,

his

whom they were written. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Hinourable.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the letter, Crcm. 95. that
there were several persons privy to the conspiracy. The date of the first letter is
July 18th. Mr. Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan only five days be-
fore. Ibid. It appears from the original summons of Frfaulture against Logan's
heirs, that Bour, though he had letters addressed to him with regard to a confpi-
racy equally dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read.
"' acobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, dicti Georgii opera in legendis omnibus
: fcriptis ad eum miflis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is altogether flrange;
and nothing but the capricious chara&er of Logan can account for his. chufing such
a confident.

* By the Roman law, perf6ns guilty of the crime of'High Treason might be tried

even after death. This practice was adopted' by the Scots, without any limitation,
Parl. 1540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was fTon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown was laid' under proper reftricions, by an a& A. D.
1542. which has never been printed. The words of it are,. " And'becaufe the said
Lords (i. e. the Lords of articles) think the said act (viz. in 1540) too general, and
prejudicial to. the Barons in the realm, therefore ltatutes and'ordains that the said
act shall have no place in time coming, but against the heirs of them that notori-
ouly commits or shall commit lefe majefly againf the Kihg's person, against the
realm for averting the fame, and against them that hall happen to betray the King's
army allenarly, and' being notourly known in their time; and! the heirs of there
persons to be called and judged within five years after the decease of the said per-
sons committers of the said crimes; and the said time being bypast, the said heirs
never to be purfied for thefiame." The sentence against Logan violated this flatute
in two particulars. He was not notourly known during his life to be an accom-
plice in the crime for which he was tried; and his heirs were called in queflion more
than five years after his death. It is remark'able that this statute. seems not to have

been

T I!E HIS.TORY
Book VIII. his lands-were forfeited, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot

.i600. was condemned to be hanged for misprision of treason. He ad-

hered to his confession to the last, and having promised, on the
scaffold, to give the Spectators a sign in confirmation of the truth
of what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was
.thrown off the ladder by the executioner *.

B UT though it be thus unexpectedly discovered that Gowrie did

not aat without afociates, little additional light is thrown, by this dif-
covery, on the motives and intention of his condu&c. It appears
almost incredible that two young men of such distinguished virtue,
should revolt, all at once, from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It appears flill more
improbable, that they Should have concerted their undertaking with

so

been attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another ingular cir-
cumftance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of juflice that no person can be tried
in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms, and often absurd
in their devices for preserving them, they contrived that in any process against a
dead person, his corps or bones hall be presented at the bar. Examples of this
occur frequently in the Scottilh history. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead
body of the Earl of Huntly was presented in parliament, before sentence of for-
faulture was pronounced against him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowrie
and his brother were preserved, in order that they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mackenz. Crim.
Law, Book . Tit. 6. §. 22.

* It appears that Archbishop Spotfwood was present at the execution of Sprot.

Crom. 15 : and yet he seems to have given no credit to his discoveries. The man-
ner in which he speaks of him is remarkable, " Whether or not I Ihould mention
" the arraignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at Edinburgh,
" I am doubtful. His confession, though voluntary and constant, carrying small

probability. This man deposed, &c. It seemed to be a very fiction, and a
" mere invention of the man's own brain, for neither did he shew the letter, nor

" could

si little foresight and prudence. If they intended that the deed
Should have remained concealed, they could not have chosen a more
improper cene for executing it than their own house. If they
intended that Henderson hould have struck the blow, they could
not have pitched on a man more destitute of the courage, that must
direct the hand of an' assassin; nor could they expect that he, unfo-
licited, and unacquainted with their purpose, would venture on
such a desperate ation. If Ruthven meant to flab the king
with his own hand, why did he withdraw the dagger after it was
pointed at his breat ? How could he leave the King, after such a
plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not preposterous to com-
mit him to the keeping of such a timid and false associate, as Hen-
derfon ? For what. purpose did he wafle time, in binding the hands
of an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched with

" could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went about the treason so secretly,
" would have communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be."
p. 508. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had
beei tried, and of the' proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. He him-
self was probably present in parliament at the trial. The earl of Dunbar, of whom
he always speaks with the highest refpeEt, was the person who dirested the process
against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against the truth of Sprot's evi-
dence, notwithstanding all there circumstances, is furprizing. Sir Thomas Hamil-
ton, the King's advocate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, repre-
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convincing; and in an ori-
ginal letter of his to the King 21ft of June 1609. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after men-
tioning the manner in which the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on.

" When the probation of the summons was referred to the Lords of Articlcs' votes,

they found uniformly, all in one voice, the said summons to be so clearly proved,
that they feetned to contend who fliould be able most zealously to expcefs the satis-
faltion of his heart, not only by the moll pithy words, but by tears of joy ; diverse
of the belt rank confeing, that that whereof they doubted at their entry into th
house was now so maniflt, that they behoved to ecteern the traitors, who flould
ally longer refute to declare their assured rfolttior. of the truth of that treason."

his

223
Book VIII..

i6oo.

*

'T H E S T.O R Y
Book VlII. his sword ? Had providence permitted them to embrue their

600. hands in the blood of their Sovereign, what advantage could have

accrued to them by his death? and what claims or pretensions
could they have opposed to the rights of his children * ? Inevitable
and inilant vengeance, together with perpetual infamy, were the
only consequences they could expec to follow such a crime.

ON the other hland, it is impossible to believe that the King had

.forr.ed any design against the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-
gree, the objets of his jealousy or hatred-I-; nor was he of a spirit

so

· It has been aferted, that, in consequence of the King's death, the Earl of Gow-

fie might have pretended to the Crown of England, as the son of Dorothea Stew-
art daughter of Lord Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce
from the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband. Burnet Hist.
of his own times. But this assertion is ill founded. It appears, from undoubted evi-
dence that Lord Methven. had only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its
infancy, and Dorothea' Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen Margaret,
but of Janet Stewart Lord Methven's second Wife, a daughter of John Earl of
Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Gowrie had really been descended from the
blood royal of England, the King had at that time a son and a daughter; and besides
them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox had a preferable
title to the Crown of England.

+ Sir Henry Nevile, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes the death of the

two brothers to a cause not mentioned by any of our Hifltorians. " Out of Scot-
land we hear that there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence be-
twixt the King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery of some
affeEtion between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother (who was killed with him)
was the truefd cause and motive of that tragedy." Winw.Mem. vol. . 274. Whe-
ther the following paflages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that fufpi-
oion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 22, 16o2, he mentions the rc-
turn of Gowrie's two younger brothers into Scotland, and adds, the coming in

of

to sanguinary, or so noted for raih and desperate valour, as to haveBookVIII.
attempted to murder them in their own house, where they were fur- 16oo0
rounded with many domestics, he only with a slender and unarmed
train; where they could call to their assistance the inhabitants of a
city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a distance
from all aid; and least of all would he have chosen for his associates,
in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke of Lennox,
the former connected in close friendship with the house of Gowrie,
and the latter married to one of the Earl's fiflers.

WHICHSOEVER of these opposite systems we embrace; whether A conjeaure

we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie, or to the King; thinentioa
insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, myf- of the coa-
tery and contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole con-
fpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it from a
more remote cause, we may discover it to be less crininal.

To keep the King of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great object of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this he sometimes
soothed him; and sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites
and when he failed of attaining her end by thee means, isle

of these two, and the Qeen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and
furnilhing Mrs. Beatrix [their fifler] with such information as Sir Thomas Erfline
has given, hath bred great suspicion in the King of Scots that they come not in
but upon some dangerous plot." In another letter January r, 1603. " The day
of writing my la(t Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was brought by the Lady Pailly, and Mrs.
of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into the court in the cvening, and flowed
in a chamber prepared for her by the Queen's direftion, where the QVeen had
much time and conference with her. Of this the King got notice, and hewed his
dislike thereof to the Queen, gently reproving her for it, and examining quietly of
the Queen's servants of the fame, and of other matters thercunto belonging with
such discretion and secrecy as requires such a matter."

VOL. II. G g encouraged
8

225

Book VI I1.encouraged the Clergy to render ny adminiration ihe dirirlled

6-o-.. unpopular, by decrying it, or flirred utp foie faSlion of the nobles

to oppose, and to overturn it. They, untacquaianted with the 'arts
of undermining a Ministry by intrigues, had recourse to the ruder
pradice of rendering themselves mnafers of the King's :person, that
they might thereby obtain the directions of his councils. Those
nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of Ruthven, were infli-
gated, and supported by her. Bothwell in all his wild attempts,
enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connections which James had been forming of late with the Ro-
nar Catholic Princes, his secret negociations in England with her
fubjeds, and the maxims by which he governed his own kingdom,
all contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded ome great
Revolution in' Scotland to be approaching, and it was her interest
to prevent it. The Earl of Gowrie was one of the inmCR ;powerful
of the Scottish nobles, and descended from ancefors warmly at-
tached to the Englifl intereit.. He had adopted the fame system,
and believed the welfare of his country to be inseparably connet-
ed with the subsistence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his residence at Paris, hehad contraded an inrtimate friendlhip
with Sir HFenry Nevill, the Queen's ambassador there, and'was re-
commended by him to his Court, as a person of whilo great use
might be made ". Elizabeth received him, as lle passed through
England, with distinguished marks of refped and favour. From
all these circumstances, a filpicion may arile, that the. plan of the
conspiracy against the King was formed at that time, in concert
with her. Such a suspicion prevailed in that age, and from the
letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears.
not to be deflitute of foundation. An English (hip was observed.

* Winw. . 156.

hovering,
226

hovering, for ome time, in the mouth of the firth of Forth.Book VIII
The Earl's two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill i6oo.
fuccef$ of the conspiracy, and were proteded by Elizabeth. And
James himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great
umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's in-
trigues in Scotland tended to hurt the King's person, but only to
circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest safeguard of her own, and restrained the Popish pre-
tenders to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts,
to which their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged
them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an a of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of the two brothers.
Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. When these proved more numerous than
was expected, the Earl employed a iratagem in order to feparats
tbm from the King, by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, and by calling hastily for their horses, that they might
follow him. By shutting James up, mean while, in a distant corner
of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands, their design
seems to have been rather to seize than to affLuinate him. And
though Gowrie had not collected his followers, so as to have been
able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of the kingdom,
by open force, he might soon have been conveyed aboard the
English flip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and lie inilht
have been landed at Fafl--Caflle, a house of Logan's, in which,
according to many obscure hints in his letters, some rcndczvous
of the conpirators was to be held. Amid(- the iirpriizc and ter-
ror, into which the King lntit ha;ve been thrown by the violence
offered to him, it was extremely natural for him to conclude that
his life was fought. It was the intcrcf o(f jl his followers t con-

G g 2 fim

227

Book VIII. firm him in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add

760o. to the iportance, and merit of their own services. And thus his

fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder, which the
contemplation of any great and tragical event, when not fully un-
derftood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole tranfadion. On
the other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the circum-
stances, which were added, detrated from the credit of those,
which really happened; and even furnished pretences for calling in
question the truth of the whole conspiracy.

Many dilbe- THE account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh
lieve the ac-
coint pub- next morning. The privy council commanded the Minifers of that
I'lhed by the
King. city instantly to assemble their people; and, after relating to them

the circumflances of the conspiracy formed against the King's life,
to return public thanks to God, for the protection which he had so
visibly afforded him. But as the firfl accounts transmitted to Edin-
burgh, written in a hurry, and while the circumflances of the
conspiracy were but imperfectly known, and thepaffions which it
excited firongly felt, were indiftina, exaggerated, and contradicto-
ry, the Ministers laid hold of this; and though they offered to give
public thanks to God for the King's safety, they refused to enter in-
to any detail of particulars, or to utter from the chair of truth,
what appeared to be still dubious and uncertain,

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edinburgh; and though

Galloway, the Minilter of his own Chapel, made an harangue to
the people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circum-
flances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hearing,
confirmed his account; though he commanded a narrative of the
whole tranfacion to be published; the Ministers of that city, as well
as many of their brethren, flill continued incredulous, and uncon-

vinced..
228

vinced. Their high eeem of Gowrie, their jealousy of every part of Book VIII.
the King's conduct, added to ome false and many improbable cir- 1.60o
cumitances in the narrative, not only led them to fufpet the
whole, but gave their suspicions an air of credibility. But at length,
the King, partly by arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they were convinced
of the truth of the conspiracy. He could be brought no further
than to declare, that he reverenced the King's account of the tranf-
aftion, but could not fay that he himfel'fwas perfwaded of the truth.
of it.. The scruples or obstinacy of a single man would have been,
little regarded; but as the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread!
among the people, the example of one, in so high reputation for
integrity and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King was
at the utmost pains to convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it
impossible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his benefice,
and after repeated delays, and many attempts towards a reconcile-
ment, banished him, the kingdom *.

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any scruples Proceedings
of this fort. The dead bodies of' the two brothers were produced of ,rliamelt

againi the

there, according to law; an indictment for High Treason was pre-cnrfpirators.
ferred againt them; witnesses were examined;, and, by an unani-
mous sentence, their eflates and honours were forfeited; the
punishment due' to traitors were inflicted on their dead bodies;
and as if the punishment liitherto in use did not express sufficient de-
teftation of their crimes, the parliament enacted that the surname
of Ruthven should be abolished, and in order to preserve the memory
of the King's miraculous escape, and to declare the sense which the
nation had of the divine goodness, to all future ages, appointed

* Spots 46, &c. Cald. 5, 389, &c.

thie

229

T H E HI S T O R Y
Book VIII. the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day of public

}ó00^ fthankfgiving *

THo tUGH

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King published a dif-

course f their vile and unnatural ojfpiracy againjl his life. In the year r713, George
Earl of Cromertie publifled " an Hifrorical account of the conspiracy by the arl
·' of Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Reflalrig againfi James VI." He seems
not to have seen the account which the King himself had given of that matter,
and borrows the whole hiflorical part firom Spotfwood, and other authors; but he
has extra'ted from the public records the depositions of the witnesses produced by
the King's Council, in order to make good the charge againfi the two brothers
and Logan their aflociatc. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the ma.
terial circumfances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which they con-
tain, one would expec to be authentic and decisive. An account of a sac, still
recent, published by royal authority, and the original depositions of persons exa-
mined in presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a degree of
evidence seldom attained in historical relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt
and uncertainty. But as every thing with regard to this transaction is dark and
problematical, the King's account and the depositions of the witnesses not only vary,
but contradict each other in so many circumstances, that much room is still left for he-
fitation, and historical scepticism. The teflimony of Henderson is the fullef and
most important, but in several particulars the King's account and his are contra-
ditory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the
dagger at his breast, " the fellow in the tfudy flood quaking and trembling." Disc.
17. But Henderson fays that he himself wrested the dagger out of Mr. Ruthven's
hand. Disc. 53. Crom. 50. Henderson likewise boalted to his wife that he had
that day twice saved the King from being flabbed. Disc. 54. Cron. 53. II. The
King aerts that Henderson opened the window duing Mr. Ruthlven's absence.
Dife. 23. Icnderfjn deposes that he was only attempting to open it when Mr.
Ruthvcn returned, and that during the struggle between the King and him, he
opened it. DiTc. 53, 54. Crom. 5S, 52. IlI. If we may believe the King, the
fellow in the ludy tsood, during the iruggle, behind the King's back inactive and
trembling all the time. Disc. 27. lint llenderfon affirms th:tL he snatched away
the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the King; that he pulled
back Ruthvcn's hand while he was cndeavouring to flop the King's mouth, and
that he opened the window. Disc, 5.1. Crom. 52. IV. By the King's account,

Mr.

TOUGH GCowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a great Bodk VTII.
alarm, it was followed by no consequences of importance, ad I6joi

having E1ex's con-

fpiracy
gainfl Eliza-

llr,. Ruthven left him ia t'he fludy, and went away in order to meet with his bro- beth.
ther, and the Earl came -up the flairs for'the fame purpose. Disc. 23. Pender-
son depdfes that when:Mr. RtTthven left the King, " he believes that he did not pals.
fiom the door." Crom. 51:. It is apparent both from the fitnation of the house,
and from other circumlances, that there could not possibly have been any interview
between the brothers at this time. Disc. 23.

Henderson was twice exanined, fills at Falklancf before the privy council in Au-

gtift, and next at Edinburgh before'the Parliament in November. Not to mention
some lesser variations between these depositions, we hall point out two which are
remarkable. In his firfl deposition Mr. Henderson relates the most material circum-
flanceof the whole in these words. " Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger
" and held the fame to his Majefly's brealt, faying, remember you of my father's
fs murder; you fhali now diefor it, and minting to his Highnesse's heart, with the dag-
.ger, the deponent threw the fame out of'Mr. Ruthven's hands, and swore that

as Cod halljudge his foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his

" hand, the space a man may go fix fleps, he would have firicken the King to the
" hiltswith it." Disc. 5.2. But at his second examination he varied from this in two
material circum(fances. Firfl, the words which he at that time put in Mr. Ruthven's
mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breast, are, " Sir, you mni/ be my pri-
-- finer; retmmnber on my father's dlrat." Secondly, when he threatened him with death,
it was only to deter him from making any noise. " IHoll y,'.u tingue, or hy, Ci.'!/1 you
/hall die." 2. In his firfl deposition, the words of Mr. Ruthven when he returned
to the chamber where he had left the King, are ' There is n rem. l', by God jlt in'J
c die." But in his second depofiticn. " By God there is no remedy, and ofle:l'd to
" bind his majefly's hands." Crom. 5g. The material words you mzt/l die are omitted.
The first deposition feeins plainly to intimate that it was Ruthvcn's intention to
murder the King. The second would lead us to conclude that lie had no otlcr de-
sign than to detain him as a prifoncr.

There are likewise some remarkable contradiilions in the tcllimecnics of the other

witnclfes. . In the difcourl b Iublilhed by authority it is infinlltcd that the tu-
mult of tlhc inhabitants wa; rlilUd auainfll the KiiL;l, a11 tllat it required fne art

10

Book VIII. having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any as-

601. Sfociates, or with such as were unknown, and choe to remain so,

the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after, a
conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
the first danger was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effects,
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal and unhappy.
As James was deeply interested in that event, it merits our particu-
lar notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided between two

powerful facions, which contended for the supreme direction of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of
Effex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh, was
at the head of the other. The former was the most accomplished,
and the most popular of all the Englifl nobles; brave, generous,
affable; though impetuous, yet willing to liften to the councils
of those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable
enemy; a friend no less constant, than warm; incapable of dif-
guising his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
better fitted for a camp, than for a court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the administration, with a spirit

to pacify them. Disc. 32. The Duke of Lennox confirms this in his deposition.
Crom. 41. An at of privy council summoning the Magistrates of Perth to answer
for that riot is fill extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town,
deposes that he himself raised the people, and that they took arms in order to
affilt the King. Cron 66. 2. Hendcrfon deposes that he gave an evalive answer
to Mr. John Moncricf, who enquired where he had been that morning, because the
Earl had commanded him not to let any man know that he had been at Falkland.
Disc. 54. Moncrief deposes to the lfame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet George
Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chanccllor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, dc-
pose that the Earl, in their prcfence, askcd -Ienderfon, " Whom he found with
the King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71. Which queflion eems to prove that he
did not aim at keeping that journey a fccret.

which
232

which fcorried the fecoiid, as belbw his merit. He was oon dif- Bo'k VIII.
tinguifhed by the Qen,; who, with a profusion uncommon to her, i6o7
conferred on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest honours,
anld most important offices. Nor did this diminish the esteem and
affedio6n of his'countrymen; but; by a rare felicity, he was at once
the favourite ofhis Sovereign, and the darling of the people. Ce-
cil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a
father, deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, insinuating, indus-
trious; and though posseTsed of talents, which fitted him for the
highest offices, 'he did not' rely upon his merit alone for at-
taining themi but availed himself of every advantage, which his
own address, or the' mistakes of others afforded him. Two such
men were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Effex despised the
arts of Cecil, as low aid base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity
appeared to be presumption and folly. All the'military men, except
Raleigh, favoured Effex. Most of the courtiers adhered to Cecil,'
whose manners more nearly resembled their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle between these His core-

-'fpondence

fations became more violent. ETfex, in order to trengthen him- with the
self, had early courted the friendship of the King of Scots, forscottih King
whose right of succession he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correspondence both with him, and with his principal Minis-
ters. Cecil, devoted to the Qeen alone, rose daily to new ho-
nours, by the afliduity of.his services, and the patience, with
which he expeEted the reward of them. While the Earl's high
spirit and impetuosity sometimes exposed him to checks fiom a
Mistress, who, though partial in her affeacion towards him, could
not easily bear contradiction, and conferred favours often unwilling-
ly, and always slowly. HIis own follicitations, however, seconded
maliciously by his enemies, who wished to remove him at a dif-

VOL. II. I 11 tance

'2a4
Book vl;.. tancc fiom coutt advacQd lair* to tlh comPans. oif ltb epc-

"69j7 ployrd in; !irelad, against Tyronne, ad4 tq te ossi$e of Lord Lieut-

tenant of that lingdom,; w ith: a cQmrmitf n aotaoft unimi t

d :

Hi

fuczfs, in_ that expedition, did not equai eithei his. pA n'P iBs,.
or the etpeations of Elizabeth. The QC n, pIevl i ftia her
difappintment,. and exasperated agairA Ex by h artieficsof his.
gne,,nes, wrote him. a harQl lettt;, ftill.o- cufaions andreproaches;
These, his impatient.fpirit cQuld4 npot. bear,, and,. in the sirs taanf-
ports of his refentnient, be proposed to carr- over a part of hie-
army into England,, and by driving his enemies, fro. the Q.een'S-
preftnce, to reinstate himself in fvour,, andi: power; But, upon
more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rah. design,. and sett/ing:
fail with a few officers,. devoted- to his. perfpn lnded in England,,
.nd posted; direfly to, coust, Elizabetk received, himn, withont:
any symptom either of affe1ion- or o displeasure.; By proper
compliances and, acknowledgmnents, he: night have regained his.
former ascendant over the Queen. But. e thought. himself too~
deeply injured to submit to these; Elizabeth, on the other hand,,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; andthough her: severity
drew from him the moss humble letters, he confined him - to the'
Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commifliners to try him, both.
for his conduc during his government of Ireland, and. for leaving
that kingdom without her permission. By their sentence he was
suspended' from all his offices, exceptthat of Mater ofthe horse, anc.
continued a prifonerduring the Queen's pleasure. Satisfiedwith having.
mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not susser the sentence to ,
be recorded, and soon after allowed him to retire to his own house.
During these tranfations, which occupied several months, Effex fluc-
tuated between the allegiance he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire
of revenge; and sometimes leaned to the one, and sometimes to the
other. In one.. of the.intervals when the latter prevailed, he ent

3 a mef-
! .:

i messenger into Scotland to encourage the King to assert his own Book VII .
right to the fucceflion by force of arms, and to promise that, be- 1601.
fides the afllftance of the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord
Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
ooo5000 men, from that kingdom. But James did not chufe to hazardJames's cau'i-
the losing a kingdom, which was juss ready to fall into his hands, ous con
by a premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the
enterprize, and Eflex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

THIS moderation, which was merely the effec of disgust and rhewiillat-

teiIbpts of

disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the Queen,Ealx.
having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant, which he had
formerly bestowed, but to admit him into her pretence, that new
injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and now much fretted,
to absolute despair. His friends, inflead of soothing his rage, or
refraining his impetuosity, added to both, by their imprudent and
interested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he determined
to attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. And conscious how
unpopular such an enterprize would be, if it appeared to proceed
from motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it the
semblance of public utility, by mingling the Kingof Scotland's i terest
with his own. He wrote to James, that the faction which now
predominated in the English court, had resolved to support the pre-
tensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown; that the places of
the greatest importance in the kingdom were put into the hands of
his avo*ed enemies j and that unless he lent ambaffado-sb without
delayb to insist on the immediate declarationof his right offucceffion,
their measures were so well concerted that all his hopes would be
desperate. James, who knew how disagreeable such a proposal
would be to the Queen of England, was not willing rashly to ex-

H h 2 ,poic

Book VI II. pose himself to. her displeasure. But Effex, blinded by resentment
'-i'-~-~~ and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to these pafiions, and

aded like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers, incompletely armed, he attempted to assault a.
throne, the best established in Europe. Sallying, at their head,
out of his own house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wished to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to. take arms,. and to follow his ftan-
dard. He advanced towards.the palace, with an. intention to drive
Cecil and his faction out of the Queen's preence, and to obtain,
a declaration of the Scottish King's right of succession *. But,
though almost adored by the citizens, not a man would join him
in this wild enterprize; Dispirited by their indifference, deserted
by' some of his. own attendants, and almost surrounded by the.
troops, which marched under different leaders into the city, 'he re-
treated to his own houses and- without any bold effort, suitable to
his present condition, or worthy. of his former reputation for cou-
rage, he surrendered to his enemies..

As soon as James heard of Essex's ill. success, he appointed the

Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his ambaffa-
dors to the court of England. The former of thee was the per-
son, by whose means Effex had carried on his correspondence with
the King. He was a pafionate, admirer of the Earl's characer, and
disposed to attempt every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a clofs friendship with Mar, was ready to second
him with equal zeal. Nor was the purpose of the ambafly less:
friendly to Effex, than the choice of the ambassadors; they were
commanded to follicit, in the warmest manner, for the Earl's life,

* Birch, Mem, 2. 477,

and..
236

and if they found that the King, by avowing his fiiends, could Book VIII.
either promote their designs, or contribute to their safety, they were 16.
impowered to lay aside all disguise,. and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due to him, by force
of arms *. But before the ambassadors could reach London, Es'ex
had suffered the punishment he merited by his treason. Perhaps His death.
the fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his-pardon, hastened
his death. Elizabeth continued, for some time, irresolute concern-
ing his fate, and could. not bring herself to consign into the hands
of the- executioner, a man, who had once possessed her favour so
intirely, without a painful struggle between her resentment against
his late mifcondud, and her ancient affection towards him. The
distress to which he was now reduced tended naturally to soften the
.former, while it revived the latter with new tenderness; and the in-
terceffion of one faithful friend, who had interest with the Queen,
might perhaps have saved his life, and have procured him. a remif-
sion, which, of herself, he was ashamed to grant. But. this generous
nobleman had at that time no such. friend. And Elizabeth, folli-
cited incessantly by her Ministers, and offended with the haughti-
ness of Effex, who, as he'imagined, fcorned.to sue for pardon, at
latt commanded the sentence to be put in execution. No sooner
was the blow struck, than he repented of her own rashness, and be-
wailed his death with the deepest sorrow. James always confidered
*him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his service, and after his
accession to the English throne, restored his son to his honours, as
well as all his associates in the. conspiracy, and diftinguidled them.
with his favour -f.

* Johnt. 289. Birch. Mem. 2. 3o. -. Camd. Spots. 464.

TIrE

Book VIII. THE Scottish ambassadors finding that they had arrived too late

I6Q0. to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not only

James con- concealed that part of their instructions, with the utmost care;
tinues his in- '
trigues in but congratulated the Queen, in their Mater's name, on her happy
,E ngand. escape from such an audacious conipiracy. Elizabeth, though no

itranger to the King's correspondence with Effex, or to that no-
bleman's intention ofafferting James's right to the Crown, was not
willing .that .these hould be known to the people, and for that
reason, received the congratulations of the Scottish ambassadors
with all possible marks of credit, and good will; and in order to
sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union between the
two courts, increased the subsidy which he paid him annually.
The ambafladors resided for some time in England, and were em-
ployed, with great success, in renewing and extending the intrigues,
*which Bruce had formerly entered into with the Englidh nobles.
As Elizabeth advanced in years, the English turned their eyes
more and more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent each
,other in courting the favour of their future Monarch. Aflurances
,of attachment, profefions of regard, and promies of support, were
offered to James from every corner of the kingdom., Cecil him-
self perceiving what hopes Effex had founded on the friendihip of
the Scottish King, and what advantages he might have derived
from it, thought it prudent to sand no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his Master. But being sensible,
at the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Mistress naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew stronger
with old age; though he entered into a correspondence with him,
he carried it on with all the secrecy and caution necessary in his
situation, and peculiar to his character. And James, having gained
the man whose opposition and influence he had hitherto chiefly

dreaded,
32

dieaded, waited, in perfee9 security, till that event should happen, BookVIII.
which would open his way to the throne of England. It was, I60.
wi& bome difficulty, that he- refrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who labouring to ditinguifh themselves
hy that officiousa zeal, with which a Prince who has a near profpeft
of mounting the throne, is. always served, urged him to. allow a
motion.to be made in parliament. for declaringhis right of fucceflion
to the Crown.. James prudently discouraged that design'; but it
was- with no fmal- fatisfaition that he observed the afcendant:he
waasacquiing in, a court, whos& di(ates he had.been, f6 long, obliged.
to-obey.;- and which had either precribed or thwarted.every itep he.
had; taken during the. whole.courfe of his reign *...

N:on .WT H;,sTAXD N G.- the violent:ftruggles of the political sac- 16b02.

tions which-divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which ctie'p tho
had happened there, nce the King first took the .reins of govern- Highlander..
ment into his own.hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tranquillity,
being undisturbed by.any foreign enemy,. and free from any intestine
commotion of long continuance. - During this period, James endea-
voured? to civilize the Highlands and. the Iles, a part of his domi-.
nions almolt totally.neglted by former Monarchs, though the re-
formation of it was al: objet highly worthy. of their care. The.
long: peace, with: England: had.. afforded. an opportunity of subduing
the licentious? spirit of the borderers,.- and- of restraining their de-
predationsi often no leTs ruinous to their countrymen, than to their
enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began,. gradually,
to forgeb the use. of arms, and to become attentive to the arts of.
peace. But the Highlanderss retaining their natural fierceness,
avefre, from labour, and inured to rapine, infelted their more.induf-

* Spr/tf 467, 47I , Birch, Mem.. . 514.,

trious

Book VIII.trious neighbours, by their continual incursions. James being fol-

1602. ,citous- not only to repress their inroads,. but to render them useful

fubjeds *, had at'different times enacted many wife laws extremely
.conducive to these ends. All landlords, or Chiefs'of Clans, were
.enjoined.to permit no persons to reside in their estates, who could
not find sufficient surety for their good behaviour; they were. re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons under their jurifdic-
,tion, to bind themselves to deliver them.up to justice, and to in-
demnify those, who should susser by their robberies; and, in order
to ascertain the faithful performance of there articles, the chiefs
themselves were obliged to give hostages to the King, or to put
pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might serve as a retreat
for the industrious, and a nursery for arts and commerce, were ap-
pointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands; one in Can-
tyre, another in Lochabar, and'a third in the isle of Lewis; and,
in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all the privileges of Royal
Boroughs were to be conferred on them. Finding it, however, to
be no easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of.thofe countries with
the love of industry, a resolution was taken to plant among them,
colonies of people fromthe more iinduffrious countries. The firt
experiment was made in the Isle of Lewis; and as it was advan-
tageoufly situated for the fishing' trade, a source 'from which Scot-
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony transported
thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well
flkilled in that branch of commerce. But before they had remained
there long enough to nanifeft the good effeAs'of this infitution, the
islanders, enraged to fee their country occupied by those intruders,
took arms, and furprizing them in the night-time, murdered
fbme of them, and compelled the reft to abandon the settlement.

* Basil. Dor, 159.

The King's attention being oon after turned to other objeas, we Book VIII.
hear no more of this salutary proje&. Though James did not 1602.
pursue the design, with that fleady application and perseverance,
without which it is impossible to change the manners of a whole
people, he had the glory, however, not only of having first con-
ceived the thought, but of having sirss pointed out the proper me-
thod of introducing the civil arts of life into that part of the Illand*.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of health, the effet of Elizabeth's

last illness and

a found conflitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and death.
temperance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having re-
moved on a very stormy day from Westminster to Richmond, whi-
ther he was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She had
no formed fever; her pulse was good; but he eat little, and could 1603.
not sleep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from a deep melan- January 31.
choly, which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour. She
delighted in solitude, he fat constantly in the dark; and was often
drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons

of all ranks, and of all different seis and parties, redoubled their
applications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in pro-
sessions of attachment to his person, and in promises of fubmifion
to his government. Even ome of her own servants, weary of the
length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of the
burden of gratitude for pas: benefits, and expecting to liare in
the liberality of a new Prince, began to desert her. And crowds
of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the fa-
vour of the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying homage
to him.

* Parl. 1587, 1594, 1597. Spots. 468.

241
VOL. II.

i

MEAN

Book VIII. MEAN: while, the Queen's disease increased, and her melancholy
1- * J appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjetures were

formed concerning the causes of a disorder, from which she seemed
to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper. Some-
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-
don the Earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion had for many years created
her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from observing
the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her people, who
beheld her health declining with most indecent indifference, and
looked forward to the accession of the Scottish King, with an impa-
tience, which they could not conceal. The most common opinion,.
-at that time, and perhaps the most probable, was that it flowed from
grief for the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary regard
for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman; and though he
often complained of his obstinacy, seldom mentioned his name-
without tears . An accident happened soon after her retiring to
Richmond, which revived her affection with new tenderness, and.
imbittered her sorrows. The Countess of Nottingham, being on
her death-bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, he could not die in peace..
When. the Queen came into her chamber, he told her, that while
Eifex lay under sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring.
pardon in the manner which the Qeen herself had prescribed,.
by returning a ring, which during the height of his favour he had:
given him, with a promise that, if in any future distress, he sent
that back to her as a token, it hould intitle him to. her protection ;
that Lady Scroop was the person. he intended to employ in order to
present it; that by a. mistake, it was put. into her hands instead of
Lady Scroop's; and that ahe having communicated the matter to her
husband,. one of Eflex's mofl implacable enemies,. he had forbid.

* Birch. Merm 2. 5.05.

her
242

her either to carry the ring to the Queen, or to return it to the Book VII.
Earl. The Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the 1603.
Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice
of the Earl's enemies, and how unjustly he had suspeCted him of
inflexible obstinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never
can ;" and left the room in great emotion--. From that moment,
her spirit funk entirely; she could scarce taste food; he refused all
the medicines prescribed by her physicians; declaring that he
wished to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could pre-
vail on her to go to bed; he fat on cushions, during ten days and
nights, pensive, and silent, holding her finger almost continually
in her mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The
only thing to which he seemed to give any attention, were the
ads of devotion, performed in her apartment, by the Archbishop
of Canterbury; and in there he joined with great appearance of
fervour. Wafted, at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long

f This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first publilled by Osborne, Mem. of

Eliz p. 23; is confirmed by the teftinony of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and by the tra-
ditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman, published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 206.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death as one of the causes of her me-
lancholy. Some original papers remain, which prove that this was commonly believed
at the time. Birch. Mem. 2. 506. Eex, however, had been beheaded two years be-
fore her death, and there seems to have been no other reason, but that which we have
assigned, why her sorrow should revive with so much violence at o great a distance
of time. As the death of the Counters of Nottingham happened about a fortnight be-
fore the Queen's death, the coincidence of these events, together with the other evi-
dence mentioned, adds so much probability to the flory related by Osborne, as will
entitle it to a place in hiflory. The only objection to the account we have given of
Elizabeth's attachment to Efiex, arises from her great age. At the age of 68, the a-
morous paflions are commonly abundantly cool, and the violence of all the palions,
except one, is much abated. But the force of this objection is entirely removed by an
Author who has illuflrated many paflhges in the Engliflu Iliflory, and adorned more.
Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors. Article Elfcx.

I i 2 abiliencce,

Book VIII. abstinence, heexpired without a struggle, on Thursday the 24th day

1603 of March, in the 7oth year of her age, and the 45th of her reign *.
I-tr chaac- FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indifference and dif-

ter. relpet towards their Princes. But without reason; no people are

more grateful than they to those Monarchs, who merit their grati-
tude. The names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the English of this age, with the fame warmth, as they were
by those, who hared in the blessings and splendor of their reigns.
The memory of Elizabeth is flill adored in England. And the
historians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her people;
her sagacity in discerning their true interest; her steadiness in pur-
suing it; her wisdom in the choice of her ministers; the glory he
acquired by arms; the tranquillity he secured to her fubjeas; and
the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce, which were the
fruits of all these; jufly rank her among the most illuifrious Prin-
ces. Even the defects in her character, they observe, were not
of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excessive frugality was
not accompanied with the love of hoarding; and though it pre-
vented some great undertakings, and rendered the success of others
incompleat, it introduced economy into her administration, and
exempted the nation from many burdens, which a Monarch, more
profuse, or more enterprising, must have imposed. Her slowness
in rewarding her servants sometimes discouraged useful merit;
but it prevented the undeferving from acquiring power and wealth,
to which they had no title. Her extreme jealousy of those Prin-
ces, who pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led ler to
take such precautions, as tended no less to the public safety, than
to her own; and to court the affetions of her people, as the firm-

* Camd. Birch. Men. 2.

5o6. Birch Negoc. 206.

BStrypc, 4. 373.
248

et

eft support of her throne. Such is the picure the English draw Book VIII.
of this great Queen. I o3

603.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the Hiflory of Scotland finds him-

self obliged, frequently, to view her in a very different, and in a
less amiable light. Her authority in that kingdom, during the
greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which she pof-
sessed in her own. But this authority, acquired at first by a service
of great importance to the nation, she exercised in a manner ex-
tremely pernicious to its happiness. By her indultry in fomenting
the rage of the two contending factions; by supplying the one with
partial aid; by feeding the other with false hopes; by ballancing
their power so artfully, that each of them was able to distress, and
neither of them to subdue the other; she rendered Scotland long
the feat of discord, confusion, and blood(hed: and her craft and
intrigues, effecting what the valour of her anceflors could not ac-
complifh, reduced that kingdom to a tate of dependance on Eng-
land. The maxims of policy, often little consonant to those of
morality, may, perhaps, justify this condut. But no apology can
be offered for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene of diflimula-
tion without necefity; and of severity beyond example. In almost
all her other actions, Elizabeth is the object of our ligheft admi-
ration; in this, we must allow that fle not only laid aside the mag-
nanimity, which became a Queen, but the feelings, natural to a
woman.

THOUGH Elizabeth would never permit the question concerning Jamcs pro-

claimed King

the right of fucceflion to the Crown to be determined in Parlia- ol Encgl;d.
ment; nor declare her own sentiments concerning a point, which
ihe wished to remain an impenetrable myfery; flec had, however,

formed

Book VIII. formed no design of excluding the Scottilh King from an inheri-

-60- tance, to which his title was undoubted. A short time before her

death, he broke the silence, which she had so long preserved on that
subjet, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, ( That her throne was
the throne of Kings; that he would have no mean person to ascend
it, and that her cousin the King of Scots hould be her successor."
This she confirmed on her death-bed. And as oon as she breathed
her last, the Lords of the Privy-Council proclaimed James King
of England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour
of the Infanta, all the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to sip-
port the titles of Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford, difap-
peared in a moment; and nobles, and people, forgetting their anci-
ent hostilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of
ltrangers, teflified their fatisfaation with louder acclamations, than
were usual at the accession of their native Princes. Amidfl this tu-
mult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots, who proposed to
prescribe ome conditions to the fucceflor, and to exact from him
the redress of ome grievances, before they called him to the
throne, was scarce heard; and Cecil, by lifling it, added to his
flock of merit with his new Maier. Sir Charles Percy, brother of
the Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset the Earl of
Worcester's son, were dispatched to Scotland, with a Letter to
the King, signed by all the Peers and Privy Councellors then in
London; informing him of the Queen's death, of his accession to
the throne, of their care to recognize his title, and of the universal
applause, with which the public proclamation of it had been attend-
ed. They made the utinoft haste to deliver this welcome message;
but were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord I-Iunfdane's
youngest son, who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's death,
arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night, just as the King had gone

to
246

to bed. He was immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and Book VIII.
kneeling by the King's bed, acquainted him with the death of Eli- 1503
zabeth, saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ire-
land, and as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he brought,
presented him a ring, which his sifter Lady Scroop had taken from
the Queen's finger after her death. James heard him with a decent
composure. But as Carey was only a private messenger, the infor-
mation he brought was not made public, and the King kept his
apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somerset. Then his titles
were solemnly proclaimed; and his own subjes expreied no less
Joy, than the English, at this increase of his dignity, As his pre-
fence was absolutely necessary in England, where the people were
extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepared to set
out for that kingdom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to
follow him within a few weeks. Hle committed the government
of Scotland to his Privy Council. He intrudted the care of his
children to different noblemen. On the Sunday before his de-
parture, he repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the preacher displayed the greatness of the divine
goodness in raising him to the throne of such a powerful kingdom
without opposition or bloodlhed, and exhorted him to express his,
gratitude, by promoting, to the utmost, the happiness and prosperity
of his fubjeds; the King rose up, and addressing himself to the peo-
ple, made many profeflions of unalterable arfedtion towards them;
promised frequently to visit Scotland; assured them that his Scottish
fubjets, notwithtfanding his ablence, flhould feel that lie was their
native Prince, no less than when he resided among them; and might
hill trust that his ears hould be always open to their petitions,
which he would answer with the alacrity and love of a parent. His
words were, often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audience;.

wlho>

Book VIII. who, though they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted in-

1603. to sorrow by these tender declarations *.

Takes posses- ON -the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a splendid,
sion of the
tllrone. but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick.

Wherever he came, immense multitudes were assembled to welcome
him; and the principal persons, in the different counties through
which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnificence in
entertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Elizabeth had
reigned so long in England, that most of her fubjeAs remembered
no other court but hers; and their notions of the manners and de-
corum suitable to a Prince were formed upon what they had ob-
served there. It was natural to apply this standard to the behaviour
and ations of their new Monarch, and to compare him, at firfl
figlt, with the Queen, on whose throne he was to be placed.
James, whose manners were extremely different from hers, suffered
by the comparison. He had not that flowing affability, by which
Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people; and though easy a-
mong a few whom he loved, his indolence could not bear the
fatigue of rendering himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no less a firanger to that dignity, with which Elizabeth tem-
pered her familiarity. And instead of that well-judged frugality,
with which fie conferred titles of honour, he bestowed them with
an undiftinguifhing profusion, that rendered them no longer marks
of diftinftion, or rewards of merit. But these were the reflexions
of the few alone; the multitude continued their acclamations;
and amidst these, James entered London on the 7th of May, and
took peaceable poffeflion of the throne of England.

* Spotfwood, 476,

T u s
248

THus were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliest ac- Book VIII.

counts of time, but deitined, by their situation, to form one great Concufon.
monarchy. And by this jundcion of its whole native force, Great
Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe which
England and Scotland could never h.ve attained.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs as next heirs A vv of the

Revolutions
to the Englifl throne, that they had full leisure to refled on all in the confi-

tution ofScot-

the consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But land since the
dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful ene- James V.s
my, relying on the partiality of their native Prince, and in full
expectation of haring liberally in the wealth and honours he would
now be able to bellow, they attended little to the moif obvious con-
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his accession to the
throne of England, as if it had been no less beneficial to the king-
dom, than honourable to the King. They soon had reason, how-
ever, to adopt very different sentiments; and from that period, we
may date a total alteration in the political constitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Arifirocracy, which had been subverted in mohl

nations of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had
been undermined by the progress of commerce, frill fbfifted with
full force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually
to augment the power of the Scottifl nobles; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it prevailed added
to the authority of the Monarch, had increased their wealth and
influence. A King, possessed of a fiaall revenue, with a prerogative
extremely limited, and unsupported by a tlanding army, could not
exercise muchauthority over such potent iiubjegts. He was obliged to
govern by expedients; and the laws derived their force not fiom his
power to execute them, but from the voluntary fubmiflion of the

VOL. II. K k nobles,

Book VIII. nobles. But though this produced a species of government feeble
-..-J. and irregular beyond example; though Scotland, under the name;

and with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was really sub-
jec to an Ariltocracy, the people were not altogether unhappy;
and even in this wild form of a constitution, there were principles;
which tended to their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no ad of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims and
pretensions were many, though his power was small, were afraid
of irritating their dependants by unreasonable exactions, and tem-
pered the rigour of ariflocratical tyranny, with a mildness and
equality to which it is naturally a stranger. And while the military
genius of the feudal government, remained in vigour, the vassals
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not only free from op-
pression, but courted by their superiors, whose power and impor-
tance were founded on their attachment and love.

BUT, by his accession to the throne of England, James acquired

such an immense accession of wealth, of power, and of splendor,
that the nobles, astonished and intimidated, thought it vain to.
struggle for privileges which they were now unable to defend. Nor
was it from fear alone that they submitted to the yoke; James, par-
tial to his countrymen, and willing that they should partake in his
good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours; and the hope.
of his favour concurred with the dread of his power,. in taming
their fierce and independent spirits. The will of the Prince be-
came the supreme law in Scotland; and the nobles firove, with emu-
lation, who hould most implicitly obey commands, which they
had formerly been accuflomed to contemn. Satisfied with having
fubjeted the nobles to the Crown, the King left them in full pof-

feflion
25

feilion of their ancient jurisdiCtion over their own vaflals. The Book VIll
extensive rights, vested in the feudal Chief, became in their hands
dreadful instruments of oppression, and the military ideas on which
these rights were founded, being gradually loft, or disregarded,
nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the rigour with which
they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the
expence of frequent attendance upon the English court, and by at-
tempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their more wealthy
neighbours, multiplied exactions upon the people, who duri scarce
utter complaints which they knew would never reach the ear of
their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any redress. And
from the union of the Crowns, to the Revolution in 688, Scot-
land was placed in a political situation of all others the most fingu-
lar, and the most unhappy; fubjeted at once to the absolute will
of a Monarch, and to the oppressive jurisdiction of an Aristocracy,
it suffered all the miseries peculiar to both these forms of govern-
ment. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were slaves and ty-
rants ; and the people groaned under the rigorous domination of
both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

fliake off the yoke, and to rogain their antient independency. After
the death of James, the Scottish nation was no longer viewed by
our Monarchs with any partial affection... Charles I. educated among
the English, discovered no peculiar attachment to the kingdom of
which he was a native. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to
be now in hands less fiiendly, and swayed by a Prince with whom
they had little conneAion, and over whose councils they had little
influence, no longer submitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on their order, and

K k z apprc-

25

Bbok VII. apprehensive of others, the remains of their ancient spirit began' t
t.-. a appear. They complained, and remonlrated And the people

being at the fame time, violently disgusted at the innovations in
Religion, the nobles secretly heightened this disgust;. and their ar-
tifices, together with the ill conduct of the court, raised such a
spirit, that the whole nation took arms agaimft their Sovereign, with
an union and animosity of which there had formerly been no ex-
ample. Charles brought against them. the- forces of England, and
notwithlfanding their own union, and the zeal of the people, the-
nobles must have funk in the ifruggle. But, the difaffeacion which
was growing among his English fubjecs,. prevented the King from
acing with vigour. A. civil war broke out in both. kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are well known,
the Scottish nobles, who firit began the war, were involved in the
fame ruin with the throne. At the Retoration, Charles II. re--
gained full possession of the royal prerogative in- Scotland; and the-
nobles, whose etates were wafted, or their pirit broken by 'the
calamities to which they had been exposed, were less able and less
willing than ever to refill the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that· of James VII. the dictates of the Monarch were
received in Scotland with mot abject submission. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always,
negleced, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by. their Princes..

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into the government'

of Scotland. To increase the authority of the Prince, or to secure
the privileges of the nobles, had hitherto been almof the sole ob-

jet

je& of our laws.. The rights of the people were scarce ever men- Book VIII...
tioned, were disregarded, or unknown. Attention began, hence-
forward,--to be paid to the welfare of the people. By the claim of
.rig, their liberties were secured. And the number of their re-
presentatives being: increased, they gradually acquired -new weight
and consideration in parliament. As they came to enjoy more fe-
curity, and greater power, their minds began to open, and to form.
more extensive plans of commerce, of industry, and of police. But
the ariftocratical pirit, which still predominated, together with
many other accidents, retarded the improvement and happiness of
the nation.

ANOTHER great event compleated what the revolution had be-

gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the
union of the two crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of
the. two kingdoms. Inflead of making a part, as formerly, of the
supreme assembly of the nation, instead of bearing the most confi-
derable sway there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into the British
.Parliament by their representatives only, and form but an inconfide-
rable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative authority is
vested. They themselves are excluded absolutely from the house of
Commons,, and even their eldest sons arc not permitted to represent
their countrymen in that august assembly. Nor have their feudal
privileges remained,, to compensate for this extinction of their po -
litical authority. As commerce advanced in its progress, and go-
vernment attained nearer to perfeAion, thele were inlenfibly cir-
cumfcribed, and at last, by laws no less salutary to the public,
than fatal to the nobles, they have been almost totally abolilhed.
As the nobles were deprived of power, the people acquired liberty.
Exempted from burdens to which they were formerly fuljeCt,

fcreenedi
3

Book VIII. screened from oppreflion, to which they had been long expoled,

and adopted into a constitution, whose genius and laws were more
liberal than their own, they have extended their'commerce,' refined
their manners, made improvements in the elegances of life, and cul-
tivated the arts and sciences.

THIs survey of the political state of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned ratherthan developed, en-
ables us to point out three aeras, from each of which we may date
*some great alteration, in one or other of the three different mem-
bers of which the supreme legislative assembly in our conititution
is composed. At the Accefion, the Kings of Scotland, once the
most limited, became, in an initant, the most absolute Princes in
Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their Parlia-
ments were unable to controul, or their nobles to resist. At the
Union, the feudal ariftrocracy, which had subsisted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the Scottish
nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar
to their order, and reduced themselves to a condition, which is no
longer the terror and envy of other fubjeas. Since the Union, the
Commons, anciently neglected by their Kings, and despised by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity; and being admitted to a parti-
cipation of all the privileges, which the English had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, must now be esteemed a body not
less considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long been in
the other.

TIIE church elt the effecds of the absolute power which the

King acquired by his acceflion; and its revolutions too, are wor-
.thy of notice. James, during the latter years of his adminiftra-
tion in.Scotland, revived the name and office of Bishops. But they

7 possessed
254

pofleffed no ecclesiastical jurisdiction or pre-eminence; their reve- Book VIII.
nues were inconsiderable, and they were scarce distinguished by any
thing, but by their feat in parliament, and by being the object of
the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The King, delighted
with the splendor and authority which the English Bishops enjoyed,
and eager to effec an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved to bring both
Churches to an exac conformity with each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bishops at London. From them their bre-
thren were commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed. And though the clergy, less obfe-
quious than the nobles, boldly opposed those innovations, James,
long pradifed and well skilled in the arts of managing them, ob-
tained at length their compliance. But Charles I. a superstitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and
precipitant in all the measures he pursued in that kingdom, pressing
too eagerly the reception of the English liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of church lands, kindled the flames of
civil war; and the people being left at liberty to indulge their own
withes, the episcopal church was overturned, and the Presbyterian
government and discipline were re-established with new vigour.
Together with monarchy, Episcopacy was restored in Scotland. A
form of government, so odious to the people, required force to
uphold it; and though the whole rigour of authority, and all the
barbarity of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was insurmountable, and it fubifted with difficulty.
At the Revolution, the inclinations of the people were thought wor-
thy the attention of the legislature, the Preflyterian government
was again eflablilhed, and being ratified by the Union, is flill main-
tained in the Kingdom.

Nol

255

Book VIII. NoR did the inmfuence of the Accefion extendo .he civil 'ana ee

. clefiaftical constitutions -alone; the genius of tae ;iation, its taste

and spirit, things of a nature 1ill .more delicate, 'were sensibly as-
feted by that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in a state equal-
.ly barbarous, devoid of elegance, 'es vtigour, and even of perificui-
ty. No author thoughtof -writing :in languages foill adapted to ex-
press and embellish his sentiments, or of ereting a work for immor-
tality, with such rude and peri(hing materials. And as thefpirit, which
prevailed at -that time, did not owe its rite to any original effort
of the human mind, hut was excited by admirnaion of theancients,
their cornpofitions were esteemed not only the ifandards of tafle, and
of featiment, 'but of flile; and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar and almost consecrated to learn-
ing and the mtifes. Not only the manner of the ancients was
imitatea, buttheir.language copied; and, extravagant as the attempt
imay appear to write in a dead tongue, in which men were not ac-
customed to think, and which they could not speak, or even pro-
-nounce, the success of 'it was astonishing. As they 'formed their
ftie upon 'the purest models, as they were uninfeted with -rhofe
barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, 'the as-
fetation of courts, intercourse with frangers, and a thousand other
causes introduce into living 'languages, many moderns 'have attained
to a degree of elegance in their latin compositions, which the
Romans themselves scarce pofeffed beyond the limits of the Au-
guitan age. While this was almost the only species ofcompofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common language, could be
brought to a nearer comparison, the Scottif writers were not in-
ferior to those of any-other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
.equally formed to excel in prose and in verse, more various, more ori-

ginal,
2-5 6

ginal, and more elegant, than that of almost any other modern BookVIII.
who writes in Latin, reflects, with regard to this particular, the
greatest lustre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead tongue was irk-

some; the unequal return for their indultry which authors met with,
who could be read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of wafting half
their lives in learning the language of the Romans, began to re-
fine and to polilh their own. The modern tongues were found to
be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal to those
of the ancient ones, were at least more attainable. And the Ita-
lians having first set the example, Latin was no longer used in the
works of taste; it was confined to books of science; and the politer
nations have banished it even from there. The Scots, we may pre-
fume, would have had no cause to regret this change in the public
taste, and would still have been able to maintain fomne equality with
other nations, in their pursuit of literary honour. The Englilh
and Scottiib languages, derived from the fame sources, were, at
the end of the sixteenth century, in a slate nearly similar, differ-
ing from one another somewhat in orthography, though not only
the words, but the idioms were much the fame. The letters of
several Scottish statesmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the Englifl Ministers with whom they
corresponded. James himself was mafler of a fiile far from con-
temptible; and by his example and encouragement, the cottifh
language, might have kept pace with the Englifli in refinement,
Scotland might have had a ferics of authors in its olwn, as well
as in the Latin language, to boast of; and the improvenents
in taste, in the arts, and in the sciences, which fprcad over the

VOL. II. L 1 other

257

Book VIII. other polished nations of Europe, would not have been unknown

L'- ' there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were beginning to drop

the use of Latin in works of tafle, and to make trial of the firength
and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to be a king-
dom. The transports of joy which the Accession at first occasioned,
were Loon over; and the Scots, being at once deprived of all the
objects that refine or animate a people, of the presence of their Prince;
of the concourse of nobles, of the splendor and elegance of a court;
an universal dejeaion of spirit seems to have seized the nation. The
Court being withdrawn, no domestic standard of propriety and cor-
retnefs of speech remained; the few compositions that Scotland
produced were tried by the English tfandard, and every word or
phrase that varied in the least from that, was condemned as barbarous;
whereas, if the two nations had continued diftinC, each might have
retained idioms and forms of speech peculiar to itself; andtthefe,
rendered fashionable by the example of a court, and supported by the
authority of writers of reputation, would have been confidered in
the fame light with the varieties occasioned by the different dialedts
in the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties, and,
in many cafes, used promiscuously by the authors of both nations.
But by the accession, the English naturally became the folejudges
and lawgivers in language, and rejected as solecisms, every form of
speech to which their ear was not accustomed. Nor did the Scots,
while the intercourfc between the two nations was inconsiderable *,

and

* A remarkable proof of the little intcrcourfe between the Englif and Scots,

befole the union of the Crowns, is to be found in two curious papers, one published
by Haynes, the other by Strypc. In the year 1567, Elizabeth commanded the Bi-
fliop of London to take a furvcy of all the llrangers within the cities of London and
Wclfhinftcr. By his report, which is very minute, it appears that the whole

number

259

and ancient prejudices were flill so violent as to prevent imitation, pof- Book Vi i.
fess the means of refining their own tongue according to the purity of -
the English standard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed
into it from every different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that
age, were more eminent for piety than for learning; and though
there did not arise many authors among them, yet being in possel-
sion of the privilege of discoursing publickly to the people, and their
sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hafy pro-
dutions could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrect
modes of expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
profession having furniffed more authors, and the matters of which
they treat mingling daily in common discourse and buiinefs, many
of those vicious forms of speech, which are denominated ScotticiJals,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did either
the language or public talfe receive any improvement in parliament,
where a more liberal and more correct eloquence might have been
expected. All business was transacted there by the Lords of Arti-
cles, and they were so servilely devoted to the court, that few de-
bates arose, and none were conduted with the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular aflembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century, the English were

gradually refining their language, and their tafle; in Scotland the
former was much debased, and the latter alinoft entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations vwere cmerging out of
barbarity; but the diflance between them, which was then incon-

number of Scots was at that time 58. Hayncs 455. A survey of the fimnc kind was
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor A. D. 1568. The number of Scots had
then increared to 88. Strype 4. Supplement N0 I. On the Acccflion of James a con.
fiderable number of Scots, especially of the higher rank, rceortcd to England; but
it was not till the union that the intcrcourfe between the two kingdoms became great.

L 1 z fiderable,

Book VIII. fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after science

1- ' had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking back

into ignorance and obscurity; and acive and intelligent as they na-
turally are, they continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a itate of languor and stupe-
faction. This, however, mut be imputed to the unhappiness of
their political situation, not to any defec of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to dif-
play itself. The aEt abolishing the power of the Lords of Articles,
and other salutary laws passed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottish Parliament, eloquence, with all
the arts that accompany or perfect it, became immediate objects
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sus-
ficient to shew that the Scots were flill capable of generous senti-
ments, and, notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were able to ex-
press themselves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the diftintions which had subsisted for
many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the fame
manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame authors are
read and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame standard of take, and of purity
in language, is established. And the Scots, after being placed, dur-
ing a whole century, in a situation no less fatal to the liberty than
to the tate and genius of the nation, were at once put in poffeflion
of privileges more valuable than those which their ancestors had for-
merly enjoyed; and every obftrudion that had retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was totally removed.

APPE N-
260

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D IX.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. I8c.)
A ME MO R IA L of certain points meet for the retoring the

realm of S c o T L A ND to the antient weale.

MPRI MIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity that Scotland can have, .sth August,
is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to Ig59, Cotton..
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one island, di- Lib.Cal.B.io.
vided from the reft of the world. fol. 17. From

IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with England, then must a copy in fe-

it necessarily be provided, that Scotland be not so subjeCt to the appointments ofcretary Cecils.
France, as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England, feeketh always and.
to make Scotland an infirument, to exercise,. thereby, their malice upon England,
and to make a foot-stool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland shall come into the hands of a mere Scottifi man

in blood, then may there be hope of such accord, but as long as it is at the com-
mandment of the French, there is no hope to have accord long betwixt these two
realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French King's commandment by reason of his

wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that until file have children,
and during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the
house of the Hamiltons, flould have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought
to force that the laws and the old cufloms of the realm be not altered, neither that
the country be not impoverished by taxes, empreft, or new imposts, after the man-
ner of France ; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French
king and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and commons joined with

the next heir of the crown, to seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the French grow too itrong
and insolent.

FIRnsr, That it may be provided, by conlent of the three eflates of the land,

that the land may be free from all idolatry like as England is, fbr jullification where-
of, if any free general council'may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the
feat of judgment, they may offer to fhcw their cause to be moll agreeable to Christ's
religion,

NEXT, to provide that Scotland might be governed, i all rules and offices, by
the alticnt blood of the realm, without either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as

all
.

: all other Princes govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in the
hands of mere Scottifl men.

THTIDLY, That they might never be occasioned to enter into wars againfl Eng-
land,. exceptEngland hould give the firfl cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, That'no nobleman of Scotland fllould receive pension of France,

-except it, were whilst he did serve in France, for otherwise thereby the French would
.flortly corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given to any but
mere Scottifi men, by the aflnt of the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, That there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the queen's absence, to
govern the whole realm, and in those cafes not to be directed by the French.

SEVENTHLY, That it be by the said three estates appointed how the queen's reve-

nue of the realm shall be expended, how much the queen liall have for her portion
:and eflate during her absence, how much fhail be limited to the governance and de-
fence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points, if the French king and the queen be found un-

willing, and will withfland hefe provisions for the weale of the land, then hath
the three estates of the realm authority, forthwith. to intimate to the said king and
queen their humble requelts; and if the fame be not effectually granted, then hum-
bly they may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown, bind-
ing the fame also to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen hall be unwilling to this, as it likely (he will, in re-

fpet of the greedy and tyranous affection of France, then it is apparent that Al-
mighty God is pleated to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of
it, and this time must be used with great circumfpetion, to avoid the deceipts and
tromperies of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once made free, what

means may be devised by God's goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for
time to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all
princes be.

No. II. (Vol. 1. p. 88.)
A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus directed.

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

t January i UNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, that discoursing with

Cot. Lib Cal. zor countrymen upon the matter of Scotland, and comoditeys may ensew to
B. ix. From that realm, hereafter giffze presently aifl ws with zour forces, ze find a nombre
the original i of the contrary advifc, douting that we fall not at length be found trufly fiends,
;his owni h;nd. nor mean to contynev in conltant ametyc, albeit we promise, but only for avoyd-

ing the present danger make zow to serve our turne, and after being delivered, becum
enemies as of before. For profc quhareof, they alledge things have pall betwixt ws
heretofore, and a few prefumpiiones tending to the fam end, all grounded uponmii-
trust; quhilks, at the irt ficht, have some hewe of apparence, gif men wey not the
circumstances of the matter ; but gif they will confer the tyme past with the prc-
sent, confider the nature of this caus, and eflate of our contrey, I doubt not but
jugement fal be able to baunifl miftruf. And firl, 1 wad wifl ze flould examyne

the

the caures off the old inmitye betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, and
quhat moved our anceltours to enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhilks by our
storeys and regiftres off antiquiteys appear to be these. The princes of England,
some tyme, alledging a certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm; some tyme
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bordourares, and semblable oc-
cafions, mony tymes enterprifed the conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by
force off armes, that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by loss of our princes,
our noblemen, and a good part of our cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that
our owne itrength was fcarfe sufficient to withstand the force of England. The
Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confidering well how nature had fa placed ws in
a iland with zow, that na nation was able fa to annoye England as we being ene-
myes, foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that meane to dctourne
zonr armyes from the invasion off France, and occupy zow in the defence offzour
country at hame, offering for that effect to betlowe Ibme charges upon ws, and for
compassing off theyr purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the matter, quhen the
frefche memory of injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely prented on
our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how to be revenged, and arme our-
selfes with the powar off a forayne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

THIS wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At quhilk tyme, our

cronicles maks mention, that some off the wyfclt foresaw the perril, and small frute
hould redound to ws thereof at lenth : zit had affection fa blinded jugement, that
the advise of the maift part owercame the best. The maift part of all querells be-
twixt ws since that tyme, at leait quhen the provocation came on our fyde, hes
ever fallen, out by theyr procurement rather than any one cans off our selfes: and
quhenfaever we back the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to es-
chew the'conqueft intended by that realm. But now hes God's providence fa al-
tered the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that how lies the Frenfche taken
zour place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous to have zow in theyr rowme.
Our eyes are opened, we spy how uncareful they have been of our weile at all
tymes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maift dangerous
weys for theyr commodite, and nevertheless wad not fyck, oft tymes, againff the
natour of the ligue, to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fee that their ftp-
port, o.late zeres, wes not grantit for any affection they bare to ws, for pytie they
had off our estate, for recompense off the lyke friendship fchawin to theym in tyme
offtheyr affliftiones, but for ambition, and infacialle cupidite to reygne, and to mak
Scotland ane accessory to the crown of France. This was na friendly office, but
mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of theyr deserving; a hale
realm for the defence of a part. We fee theym manifeIlly attempt the thing we fs-
pected off zow ; we feared ze ment the conquest off' Scotland, and they are planely
fallen to that work; we hated zow for doubt we had ze ment evi!l towards ws, and
fall we love theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about to bring ws in
mails vile fcrvitude ? Gif by zour firendly support at this tyme, ze fall declare that
not only fute ze not the ruyne off our country, but will prcferve the libertic thereof
from conquest by firangeares, fall not the occasion off all inimitic with zow, and
liguet with theym, be taken away ? The causes being removed, how fall the ctl;ftcs
rcmane ? The fear of conquet made ws to hate zow and love theym, the cais chan-
ged, quhen we fee theym planely attempt conqueff, and zow Ichaw ws frendilhip,
fall we not hate tlceyin, and favour zow ? Gif we have fchawnc f great conilanec,
continuing fa mony zeares in amity with theym, olf quhome we had fa lnall coom-

modte. .,

modite; quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all nationes may do ws
greatefl plefour ?

BUT ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyled, and then frends as off before.

I think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but off this ze may be assured, we will
never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we wil be content to forgo the ametye
.of England. nor do any thing may bring ws in suspicion with zdw. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes the
loffe off eflimation and discrediting offourfeltes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maift manifeil danger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid
could we implore, being deflitute of zour friendship, gif they off new wald attempt
theyr formar enterprise ? Quhat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff
they might ? and it is lyke eneuch, they will not flick hereafter to tak theyr tyme
offws, quhen difplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydcs, feeing am-
bition has fa impyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had ever done any thing
myght offend theym, but by the contrary pleased theym by right and wrang,
they did not flick to attempte the subversion of our hale slate. 1 wald ze flould
not eteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot forefe our awne perril;
or fa foolifche, that we will not fludy by all gode means to entertayne that thing
may be our fafetye; quhilk consistes all in the relaying of zour frendfhips. I pray
zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the days of zour princes offmaift noble me-
mory king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes wer opened offamy-
tye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the difference of religion the
onley flay they wer not embraced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power
of theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort ? But now has God off
his mercy removed that block furth off the way : now is not theyr praftife lyke
to tak place any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off doctrine, and pro-
fes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to be the firayteft knot off amitye
can be devised. Giff it may be alledged, that ome off our countrymen, at ony
tyme, violated theyr promis ? giff ze liss to way the circumflances, ze fall fynd
the promis is rather brought on by neceffite, after a great owerthraw off our men,
then comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great incommodite and decay
cffour haill state, at leift fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation off our
libertie be infeperably joined with the keping off promcffe, and the violation off
our fayth calt ws in maift miserable servitude. Sa that giff neyther the feare off
God, reverence of man, religion, othe, promise, nor warldly honefye wes fffi-
cient to bynd ws, yet fall the zeale off ournativecountrey, the maintenance off
our owne slate, the safety of our wyffls and childrene from slavery, compell ws
to kepe promiffe. I am aflured, it is trewly and sincerely ment on our part to
contincw in perpetual ametyc with zow; it fall be uttered by our procecdings.
Giff ze be as defyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devyfed, quharby all par-
tycs will be out of doubte. There be gode meanes to do it, fit instruments for
the purpos, tyme fervcs wcill, the inhabitants of baith realms wilh it, God he;
wrought in the people's hartc; on bayth parties a ccrtainc flill agreement upon it,
never did, at any tyme, tb mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the dif
position off asew, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak up the hale. I hope
he quha hcs begun this work, and maintcyned it quhile now, by the cxpectation
of man, tle perfytc it.

I pray
3

I pray zow, let not zour men ldryve tyme in consultation, qullether ze fall flip-

port ws or no. Seyng the mater fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the
defence off our caus, giffze have any refpec for zour awne sveill. Their preparatives
in France, and levying of men in Germany (quheyroffl am lately advertised) ar not
altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the maik they flote at; they fecle our reallme, but
for ane entrey to zours. Gift' they should directly fchaw holtilite to zow, they
knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme ; therefor they do, by indirect meancs, to blind
zow, tle thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte. 'hey fcmc to invade us to
th' end that having assembled theyr hale forces fa nere zour bordoum s, they may unlok
it to attack zow: It is ane off theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to lyght
on ancothcr. Remember how covertly zour places about Boulougne were afliizcit,
and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How thie enterpi ifc or Calais was fylnly
dissembled, I think ze have not fa lone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent thcyr
policy by prudence. Giffze fe not the lyke dilpoiition presently in theym, ze fe na-
thing. It is a grosse ignorance to minfnaw, what all nations plancly fpeks off. Talc
hede ze sav not hereafter, " I-ad I wifl ;" ane uncomely sentence to proccd off a
wyfe man's mouth. 'That is onwares chanced on to zoow, quhilk zow commonly
wiffed, that this countrey might be divorfed from the Frenllhe, and is fa comme to
pass as was maift expedientfor zow. For giff by yotr intyfcment we had tken the
mater in hand, ze myght have suspected we would have been ontrufty frends, and
na Linger continued ftedfafle, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen ol our
self, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that thcyr
evil dealing with ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they fall fynd
ws ennemycs in ernefl, that fa ungently hes demeyned our conntrey, and at quhais
hands we look for nathing but all extremitye, giiF ever they may get the upper
hand. Let not this occation, fa happely offered, escape zow : giffze do, neglecR-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever gode luk comme fleaping upon
zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe to great, and fa flrang, that afterwards
quhen ze wald, ze fall not be able to put him down ; and then, to zour smart, as-
ter the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat
harme cometh off oversight, and trussing to zour enemyes promeffe. We offer zow
the occasion, quheyrby zour former loffcs may be repayred. Qhilk gif ze let over
flyde, suffering ws to be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the Frcnfchle,
that they fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, ic is their lull to regnc, that
they can ncyther be content with theyr fortune present, nor reft and be ftislicd
when they have gode luck, but will ill follow on, having in theyr awne braync
conceaved the iinage of fa great a conquest, quhat think ye efl be the endt ? Is ther
any of fa finall jugment, that he doth not soresec already, that thcyr hail force fall
then be bent against zo\v ?

IL fal not be a:nis, to conller in quhat cafe the Frcnfich be prcefeitly. Theyr cflate

is not always fa calme at hame as every man tlliinlictlh. And trcv'ly it \x cs liot thlyr
great rcdines for weyr made thetym to tak this i:ater on hand, at this tni., b[Llt l-
ther a vayne trult in their awne policy, thinking to have tiound na reflllance, thyI'
opinion lies deccavcd theym, and that makes them now aafed. 1I he cliates oll'
the empire (as I heare) has fiuted rellitution ofl '11' Inl)pcri.l towvins, Tz, I'oll,
and Verdin, quhilk may grow to fobte befynes; and all tiling is not a caltne withlln
theyr twne cointrey, the Ics lit

heyr e

oprclently for weyr, the malr olporltin lle clme
ye lthe tyme for zow. Gilt' the like occafionl wcr ollrcd to the 'rci'chl e againfl zow,

VoL, il. A1 im Wey,

wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour feuth, to
spare theym that hes already compalred your deflruftion, giff they wer able? Confi-
der with your self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against them out with zour
realme or within ? .Giffquhill ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fayle to fute zow in zour owne countrey, and use ws as a fote ltole to overloke zovw.
But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly to think they wald not
gift' they wer able, quhen before hand they flick not to giff zour armes, and:
ufurpe the flyle of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to camp within zowr
awne bounds or without, it is manifest. Giff twa armyes should camp in yowr coun-
try, but a moneth ; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit Ihould zowr loffe be grea-
tar, nor all the charge ze will nede to bestow on our support will draw to, befydes
the dillonour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticular refpecs weill

affected to the caus, move zow to fubtra& zour helping hand, by alleging things
not apparent, for that they be poflible. It is not, I grant, unpolible that we may
receave conditiones of peace; but I fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer
ws fik as will remove all miftrufl, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater
had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws
rebelles, and difflmes our jult querell with the name of conspiracy againlt our so-
verayne. It is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we
fludy to preserve, with the hazard off our lyves. We are not (God knaweth) comme
to this poynt for wantones, as men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zoke of governement, but ar drawne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of
itrangeares, feaking to defraude ws off lawful government. Giffwe flould susser
flrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all the frenthes of our realme, fortify
the fey-portes, and maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquelt, now
in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, hould we not be thought
oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill sub-
jefls to her majefle ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might she not
jufily hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent ministeres ? Giff firangeares
fliould be thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and
pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the people esteem our no-
blemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean na wyfe to fubtrak our obedi-
ence from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off her dew reverence, rents and re-
venues off hir crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of before,
a fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir ministeres borne men of the fam; and that
the ficcelion of the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not fa lyttill eteme the fiiendflip of Scotland, that zc

juged it not worthy to be embraced. It fall be na small commoditc for zow to be
delivered off the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimirye may more
trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfsas puifant, n t lyeng dry marche
with zow. Befydes that ze fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackyng
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our hand. Confider quhat superfluous
charges zc bellowe on the fortification and keping of Barwick; quhilk 7e mny re-
dace to a mean fowme, having ws to fiendes. The realme of Ireland being of na-
tour a gode and fcrtill countrey, by reason off the continewalld unquietnes ;and l ,
of policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great advantage ; and iss
it were peaceable may be very commodious For pacification quhayroff, it is not
onknowne to zow quhat service we ar abill to do. Refife not theyr commoditeys,

bclidL;t

j
6

besides mony ma quhen they ar offred. Qhilks albeit I study not to amplify and
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be
embraced, for that zour aunceflors, by all meanes, maift ernelfly futed our amity,
and yet it was theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift carryed me be-
yond the boundes off a lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow, after I have
geven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and they that ar learned, fould rede the
twa former orations of Demosthenes, called Olynthiac, and confidere quhat coun-
fall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quhilk
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word theroff myght be ap-
plyed to our purpos. There may ze learne of him quhat advise is to be followed,
when your nyghtbours hous is on fyre; Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill. From
.Sant Andrews, the 20th of January, 559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 196.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from the

camp before Leith, 29th of April, 1560.

WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the earl of An Original.
Huntly, who so defireth to be recommended to you, as one, who with all his Paper-Cfficc.

heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half the words that
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak far-
ther in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. 1 leave it to your honour to judge
of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself always measure my
thoughts, as he shall deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great per-
suasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this ac-
tion; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised
to do, with solemn protefltation, and many words; he trufteth to adjoin many to
this cause; and faith surely that no man flall lie where he taketh part. He hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith, that there
was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 207.)

Randolph to Cecil, Ioth Auguf 156Io. From Edinburgh.

IN CE the 29th of July, at *vhat time I wrote last to our holnour, I have ,

.

heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this present it may please you to l, the '"| cr

know, that the most part of the nobles are here arrived, :is your honour (hall leccive Oiii.'
their names in writing. The earl of Huntly cxcufcth himself by an infirmity in his
leg. His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen speaker of the
parliament, or harangue maker as these men term it. The irft day ot their fitting
in parliament will be on Thursday next. Hitherto, as many as have been prfccnt
of the lords have communed and devised of certain heads then to be lropotnitded,
as, who shall be sent into France, who into England. It is much caficr to ind themn
than the other. It feemcth almost to be resolved upon that for EnglaniI d the
Mailer of Maxwell, and laird of Lidington. For Flance, Pitarrow lnud the Jul-
tice Clerk. Also they have consulted whom they think mccteft to nme i the

M m 2 XXIV.

XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors muff be chosen. They intend, very
shortly, to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of those they
Ihall chufe; and also to require the king and queen's consent unto this parliament.
''hey have devised how to have the contract with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agreement between them and
their king and queen ratified. 'I here things yet have only been had in communi-
cation. For the confirmation of the contract with England I have no doubt; for
that I hear many men very well like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Su-
therland, the L. Giamis, who dined yeflerday with the lord ames. The I,. James
requeded me this present day to bring the contlract unto him. 1 intend altl, this
day, to speak unto the L Gray, in our' L. Gray's name, for that he prolmifed in
my hearing to fubfciibe, and then presently would have done it, if the contract could
have been had. For the more afliirance against all inconvenients, would, betides
that, that I trufll t shall be ratify'd in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotland
had put his hand and let his foal, s hiLh may always remain as a notable monument,
tho' the act of pa liament be hereafter difannulled. If it might, therefore, fland with
your advice, that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here present to
that effect, or that I might receive from your Honr. some earnefl charge to travel herein,
I dolbt not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known with what
fubflantial and effectious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed, I think
no great difficulty would be made. The Earl Marflal has oft been moved to subscribe,
he ufeth mo delays than men judged he would. His son told me yesterday, that he
would speak with me at Icifure, so did also Drumlmnrick; I know not to what pur-
pose: I have caused lord James to be the earnefler with the L. marshal, for his
auctority's fake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be

lwrought, that the amity between these two realms might be perpetual; and among
diverse men's opinion, one said that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have ever
been granted; the earl of Argyll advised him earnestly to flick unto that, that he
had promised for it, that it should pass his power and all the crafty knaves of his
counsel, (I am bold to use unto your H. his own words) to break so godly a pur-
pose. This talk liked well the aflifters, howsomever it pleased him to whom it
was spoken unto. The barons, who in time past have been of the parliament,
had yesterday a convention among themselves in the church, in very honest and quiet
fort they thought it good to require to be reflored unto their ancient liberty, to,
have voice in parliament. They presented that day a bill unto the lords to.that cf-
fct, a copy whereof shall be sent as oon it can be had. It was answered unto
gently, and taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of thelarticles, when
they are chosen, to resolve thercupon.- -lire Jol.ows a long paragraph concerning
the f.rtlfijations cf Dunbar, &c.--- This present morning; v.'z, the gth, I under-
ltood, that the lords intended to be at the parliament, which caused me romewhat
to flay my letter, to fee 'what I could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your
l-fonr. The lords, at ten of the clock, assembled tlicmfelvcs at the palace, where
the duke lieth; fiom thence they departed towards the Talbooth, as they were in
dignity. Each one being set in his feat, in such order as your H. liall receive
then in this Lcroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were laid in the queen's feat.
Silence being commanded, the L. of Lidington began his oration. He cxcufed his
inifificiency to occupy that place. He mftde a brief discourse of things pall, and'of

what

4
8

what neceflity men were forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy
and support it pleased God to fend them in the time of their necessity, how much
they were bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it. Hc took away the
perfuafion'that was in many men's minds that lay back, that mideemed other things
to be meant than was attempted. He advised all eflates to lay all particulars apart,
and to bend themselves wholly to the true service of God and of their country.
He willed them to remember in what fiate it had been of long time for lack of
government, and exercise ofjuflice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity
and hearty friendlip, and to live with one another as members all of one body-
lHe prayed God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, cfpecially
b'ctixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended. The
clerk of regifler immediately flood up, and asked them to what matter they would
proceed : It was thought neceflE y, that the articles of the peace should be confirmed
with the common conint, for that it was thought neccflary to fend them away with
ipeed into France, and to receive the ratification of them as soon as might be.
The articles being read, were immediately agreed unto A day was appointed to
have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and to put to their eals, to be ent
away by a herald, who hail also bring the ratification aain with him. The ba-
r.ons, of whom I have above written, required' an answer to their requefl, somewhat
was aid unto the contrary. The barons alledged for them custom and authority.
It was in the end resolved, that there thould be chosen fix to join with the lords of
the articles, and that if they, after good advisement, should find it right and necef-
fary for the commonwealth, it (hould be ratified at this parliament for a perpetual
law. The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the
articles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chute the temporal, and the temporal
the spiritual, and the burgesses their own. There were chosen as in this other pa-
per 1 have written. lhis being done, the lords departed and accompanied the duke,
all as far as the Bow, (which is the gate going out of the high fireet) and many down
into the palace where he lieth. '1 he town all in armour, the trumpets founding,
and other mufick such as they have. Thus much I report unto your honour of that
that I did both hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been used saving in times
long pat the lords have had parliament robes, which are now with them wholly out
of use.

THE names of as many carls and lords piritual and temporal as are assembled ar
this parliament.

l'he duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Iords. Lords Spiritual.
Arran. r-'kine. St. Andrew's.
A rgyll. Ru thv'cn. D)u nkell.
Athole. Linditfy. Athens.
Crawford. Somcrvill. The biflop of the Ilfcs.
Caflils. Cathcart. Abbots and I'riors, 1
Marfiall. I ime. !know not how many.
Morton. livinglton.
(;lIcncairn. 1 niermlllh.
Sut hcrland. l oyd.

C.aIth-

Earls.
' Cathnefs.

Rothes.
Monteith.

A P P E N D I

Lords.
Ogilvy.
Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.
Spiritual.

The Lords of the Articles

Temporal.

Athens. The Duke.
Isles. Argyll.
Lord James. Marflall.
Arbroath. Athole.
Newbottle. Morton.
Lindoris. Glencairn.
Cowpar. Ruthven.
Kinross. Erskine.
Kilwinning. Boyd.

Lindsay.
So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews,

Barons elected to be of the

Articles.

Maxwell.
Tillibardine.
Cunninghamhead.
Lochenvar.
Pitarrow.
Lundy.
Ten Provoits of the chief

towns, which also are of
the Articles.

the whole is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and chiefly the

affe&ions of these men, that are at this time chosen Lords of the articles. May it
satisfy your Hon'. for this time, to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubftantialler or more sufficient number of all forts of men chosen in
Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good to infue.
This present morning, viz. the loth, the L. of Lidington made me privy unto
your letter; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He himself is determined not to go into France. He alledgeth
many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that moveth him mos, which is the ex-
ample of the last, that went on a more grateful menage than he lhall carry, and
flood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth
what the whole world judgeth.

Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. 56o.

I nlofed in' I Y lords, unto your lordihips, humbly means and hows, we the barons and
Ran1ncololn .l ¥.M fieeholders of this realm, your brethren in Christ, That whereas the causes
letter toCcil. of true religion, and common well of this realm, are, in this present parliament,
15ih Augult, to be treated, ordered, and cflablifhed, to the glory of God, and maintenance of
x6' o. the commonwealth ; and we being the greatell number in proportion, where the said

causes concern, and has been, and yet are ready to bear the greatest part of
the charges thercuntil, as well in peace, as in war, both with our bodies, and
with our goods; and feeing there is no place where we may do better service
now than in general councils and parliaments, in giving our best advice, und rcafon,

vote
X.

vote and counfell for the furtherance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue, and
punishment of vice, as use and custom had been of old by ancient as of parlia-
ment observed in this realm; and whereby we underfand that we ought to be heard
to reason, and vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as well in counfells as
in parliaments; otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and statutes be
made concerning us and our eflate, we not being required and suffered to reason
and vote at the making thereof, that the fame hould not oblige us to fland thereto.
Therefore it will please your lordships to take consideration thereof, and of the
charge born, and to be born by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the com-
mon well of this realm, after our eflate, that ye will, in this present parliament, and
all counfells, where the common well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice,
counfell and vote, so that, without the fame, your lordships would susser nothing to
be passed and concluded in parliament or councils aforesaid; and that all ats of
parliament made, in times pafr, concerning us for our place and estate, and in our
favour, be at this present parliament, confirmed, approved, and ratified, and at of
parliament made thereupon. And your lordships answer humbly beseeches.

Of the fccefs of this petition, the following account is given by Randolph; Lett. to

Cecil, 19 Aug. 1560. The matters concluded and past by common consent on Sa-
turday last, in such solemn fort as the firll day that they assembled, are these. Firfl,
that the barons, according to an old a of parliament, made in the time of James I.
in the year of God 1427, hall have free voice in parliament, this at passed with--
out any contradiction.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the English resident, to the right wor-

fhipful Sir William Cecil, knt. principal secretary to the queen's ma-
jefty.
T Have received your honour's letters of the first of this month, written at Ofyes 9 Aug, 56.

in Effex, and also a letter unto the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come out Cott. Lib.

of France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed B. io. so. 32:
of her purpose in home coming. I assure your honour that will be a flout adven-
ture for a ick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may happen unto
her upon the eas, as also how heartily she may be received when flhe cometh to
land of a great number, who are utterly persuaded that he intendeth their utter
ruin, come when she will; the preparance is very finall whensoever that file arrive,
scarcely any man can be persuaded that fle hath any such thought in her head. I have
shown your honour's letter unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Ledington, they
with as your honour doth, that she might be flayed yet for a fpacc, and if it were
not for their obedience fake, some of them care not tho' they never aw her face.
They travel what they can to prevent the wicked dcvites of these mischievous pr-
poses of her ministers, but I fear that that will always be found that fllij hujus feclli,
they do what they can to Itand with the religion, and to maintain amity with their
neighbours; they have also need to look unto themselves, for their hazard is great,
and that they fee there is no remedy nor safety for themselves, but to repose
themselves upon the queen's majclly, our fovercign's favours and support. Friends

abroad

;abroad they have none, nor many in whom they may trult at home. There are in
mind hortly to try what they may be assured at of the queen's majesty, and what
they may assuredly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties. This the
queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth ; this (he feeketh by all means
to prevent; and hath caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly to write to charge him
that no such things-be attempted before her coming home; for that it is said, that
they too already arrived here out of England for the purpose, what femblant foin-
ever the noblemen do make, that they are grieved with their queen's refusal, that
cometh far from their hearts. They intend to expollulate with me hereupon. I
have my anfwcr ready enough for them. If he thrull all Englishmen out of this
country, I doubt not but there will be ome of her own that will bear us some kind-
nes. Of me the flall be quit, so oon as it plcafeth the queen's majesty my mif-
-trlfs no longer to use my feivice in this place. By such talk, as I have ot late had,
with the lord James, and lord of Lidilnton, I perceive that they are of mind that
immediately of the next convention, I hall repair towards you with their determi-
nations, and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice is earnestly
required, and olrtldy looked for. Whatfomever I defiie myself, I know my will
ought to be subjet unto the queen my fovecrcign's plealire, but to content myself,
would God I were ib happy as to felve her majesty in as mean a slate as ever poor
gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not that I do in my heart wax weary of
her majefiy's service, but becaue my time and years require some place of more re-
pose and quietness than I find in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when
other troubles in this country arise, or ought llall be required of me to the advance-
ment of her majefly's service, that either my will is not able to compass, or my
credit sufficient to work to that cffect, as perchance Ihall be looked for at my hands.
As your honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, so I trult that
I shall find that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it iall stand with
the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this place unto some far worthier than I
am myself, and in the mean season, have my course directed by your good advice
how I may by my contrivance do some such service, as may be agreeable to her ma-
jefty's will and pleasure.

THESE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of myself. For the

reft, where that is wiihed that the lords will tfoutly continue yet for one month, I
assure your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old and accuflomed man-
ner of doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and hould now
prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I IND not that they are purposed so to leave the matter. I doubt more her mo-

ney, than I do her fair words ; and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thouflnd crowns, and trcafue of her own here I know there is
no sure or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this
time utwritctn, that he thinkcth may be able to f{itisfye your desire, in knowledge
of the present ltate of things here. Whatfomevcr cometh of that, he findcth it
ever belt, that lhe come not; hut if lhe do come, to let her know,- at the sirs,
what he shall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if hle embrace
Christ, and defre to live in peace with her neighbours. By flch letters as you have
last received, your honour somewhat underflandeth of Mr. Knox himself, and also
of others, what is determined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus together with what comfort

fom-

fomever t will please you to give him by your letters, that the queen's miajefly doth
not utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he is so fore charged with
by his own queen, that her majesty will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it
will be a great comfort unto him, and will content many others; his daily prayer is
for the maintenance of unity with England, and that God will never susser men tO
be so ungrate, as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deflruftion of themi
that have saved their lives, and restored their country to liberty. I leave farther, at
this time, to trouble your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between these
two realms, that God may be glorified to them of this world.-At Edenbourgh the
9th of August, 1561.

No. VI. (Vol. . p. 224.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princefe, our right dear and well-

beloved filter and cousin the queen of Scotland.

IGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princefie, our right dear and right r6th of Aog,
well-beloved ifter and cousin, we greet you well. The lord of St. Colme i561.

brought to us your letters, dated the 8th of this present at Abbeville, whereby ye Paper-Oice
signify, that although by the answer brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might from a opy.
have had occasion to have entred into some doubt of our amity, yet after certain pur-
poses pased betwixt you and our ambassador, you would allure us of your good
meaning to live with us in amity, and for your purpole therein ye require us to give
credit to the said St. Cofme. We have thereunto thought good to answer as follow-
eth. The fame St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on your part, for your
excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself made to our ambassador, and we have
briefly answered to every the fame points, as he can hew you: and if he (hall not
so do, yet least in the mean season you might be induced to think that your reasons
has satisfied us, fomerally we assure you, that to our requetfs your answer cannot be
reputed for a satisfaction. For we require no benefit of you, but that you will per-
form your promise whereunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the re-
fufal whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither covet we any thing, but
that which is in your own power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words
and speech doth confers, that which your late hulband's our good brother's am-
bafladors and you concluded, that which your own nobility and people were made
privy unto, that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us, yea that, without
which, no perfet amity can continue betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed,
we doubt not but ye will perceive, allow and accomplish. Nevertheless, perceiving
by the report of the bringer, that you mean furthwith upon your coming home, to
follow herein the advise of your council in Scotland, we are content to suspend our
conceipt of all unkindness, and do aflure you that we be fully resolved, upon this being
performed, to unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood with you as qui-
etly, friendly, yea as ailuredly in the knot offriendship, as we be in the knot of nature
and blood. And herein we be so earnestly determined, that the world lhould fee if
the contrary (hould follow, (which God forbidI the very occasion to be in you and not
In us; as the story witnelfeth the like of the king your father, our uncle, with whom

VOL. II. Nn uit u

63

AP P ENDI X.

our father fought to have knitt a perpetual bond by inviting to come in this realm to
York, of which matter we know there remain with us, and we think with you,
sundry witnesses of our father's ernet good meaning, and of he error whereunto
divers evil councillors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that report
hath been made unto you, that we had ent our admiral to the eas with our navy to
empeache your pffage, both your servants do well understand how faire that is,
knowing for a truth that we have not any more than twoor three small barks upon
the eas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almofi compelled,
by the earnest complaint of the ambaflador of our good brother the king of Spain,
made of certain Scotrihmen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of letters o'
marque, of which matter also we earnestly require you, at your coming to your realme,
to have ome good consideration, and the rather for refpeet that ought to be betwixt
your realme and the countries of us, of' France, of Spain, and of the house of Bur-
gundy. And o, right excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend us
to you with mot earnef requet, not to neglec these our friendly and fiflerly offers
of fiiendfiip, which, before God, we mean and intend toaccomplish. Given under
our signet at Henyngham the 6th of August, in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 253.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

5th of May, O F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had nothing worth the writing
1 563. unto your honour.-Before his coming, we had so little to hint upon, that
Paper Office we did nothing but pats our time in feasts, banquetting, masking, and running at
from the Ori- the ring, and such like. He brought with him such a number of letters and such abun-
ginal. dance of news, that for the space of three days, we gave ourselves to nothing else but

to reading of writings, and hearing of tales many so truely reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus. Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor, moved a mar-
riage between his youngest on, the duke of Aulfruche, and this queen; wherein he
hath so far travailed, that it hath already come unto this point, that if he find it good,
the said duke will out of hand fend hither his embaffador, and farther proceed to
the consummation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, la Croch is sent unto her with this mefnage from the
cardinal, who hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again before the end of
May; and for this cause la Croch is ready for his departure, and his letters writing
both day and night. This queen being before advertized of his towardnefs, by many
means, hath fought far off, to know my lord'of Murray's mind herein, but would
never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is, or how he
is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but only this man's that last arrived, and as-
furedly until the L. of Lidington's return, he will do what he can to keep that
fccret, and because resolution in his absence cannot be taken, Ihe will, for this time,
return la Croch with request, to have longer time to devise; and after, with the
most fpced he can, he fully purpofeth to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardi-

nal,

nal, of her mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since his arrival
in France, divers letters have passed between her grace and him, whereof as much
as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some, as much
as was written in sypher, is kept unto themselves. Whether also the L. of I i-
dington hath had conferrence with the Spanilh ambafrador in England of this
matter, or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means, to get true know-
ledge thereof. Guefles or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loth to write
for verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the emperor hath
offered with his on, for this queen's dower, the county of Tyroll, which is said
to be worth 3o,o000 franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a let-
ter unto this queen, out of France not long since. This is all that presently I can
write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
shall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scottish man, that las came into

these parts, he brought also letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that
Newhaven is forre closed, but I am notfo ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis
' timidus fortius latrat.' From hence I do aflure them, what means fomever they
make, or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to receive but small com-
fort, for all their long allie. We fland daily in doubt what fiicndfhip we hall
need ourself, except we put better order unto our misruled papists, than yet we do,
or know how to bring to pass, that we may be void of their comber.

To morrow, the x5th of this inflant, the queen departeth of this town, towards

Edenborough. If my hap be good, you Ihall thoroughly hear some merry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next he shall be arreigned, and five
other priests, for their mafling at Easter lat. Thus molt humbly I take my
leave; at St, Andrews the 15th of May, 563,

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 261.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

\M AY it please your honour, the 7th of this instant, Rowlet, this queen's fe- t of ,ri,
MVJ. cretary, arrived here; he reporteth very honefily of his good usage, he 563 '
brought with him many letters unto the queen that came out of France, full of la- ia le ( fice
mentation and sorrow. She received from the queen mother two letters, the one fioom the i-
contained only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the state of France as ginal in his
then it was, in what fort things were accorded, and what farther was intended for own Hand.
the appearing of the discords there, not miftrulting but that if rcafon could not be
had at the queen of England's hands, but that the realm of France Ihould find her
ready and willing to support and defend the right thereof, as by fiiend (hip and old
alliance between the two realms fle is bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings, your honour can well confider,
and by her writings in this fort unto this queen, (which I assure your honour is true)

N n 2 you

you may assuredly know, that nothing hall be left undone of her part, that may
move debate or controverfie between this queen and our sovereign.

. IT was much mused at by the queen herself, how this new kindness came about,
that at this time the received two long letters written all with her own hand, faying,
all the time since her return he never received half so many lines, as were in one of
the letters, which I can myself teltify by the queen's own fayiug, and other good
afrurance, where hitherto I havenot been deceived. I can also farther assure your
honour, that this queen hath fayed that (he knoweth now, that the friendflip of the
queen's majelty my sovereign may fland her more in tead, than that of her good
mother in France, and as he is desirous of them both, so will he not lose the one V
for the other. . may also farther assure your honour, that whatfomever the occasion
is, this queen hath ome what in her heart that will burst out in time, which will ma-
nifel that some unkindness hath paired between them, that will not be easy forgotten.
In talk sometimes with myself, he faith that the queen mother might have used the
roatter otherwise than fie hath done, and doth much doubt what (hall be the success
of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing then that
presently they sand in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her
in that mind, (this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause her to
conceive better of the other. And yet I am aflured hle ihall receive as friendly let-
ters, and as many good words from this queen, as the other did write unto her.
Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Lydington of that
purpose, he did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if the do, I think it hard
if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I perchance by some means
here. It may, perchance,. be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, or understand what mind he beareth unto the queen's majesty our
sovereign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothewell is ent for to London.
She caused a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I answered, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it hould be
judged there. I know that he thinketh much that he is not sent into Scotland. It
is yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil infiru-
ment. If the lord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour herein, he
is in the wrong to those who are his friends here, but most of all to himself. There.
comes a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 269.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger ecretary

for the time, in the parliament holden by our sovereign the king's mo-
ther, queen of this realm for the time, the time of the restitution of
Umquile Matthew Earl of Lenox.
M Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has plcafed her ma-

jefty most graciously to utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have

sufficiently conceived the cause of this your present aembly; yet having her ma-
jelty's commandment to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye
fee deceased, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more at large.

NOTOUR
i

NOTOU. it is, how, in her Highness's minority, a process of forfaltour was

decreed againll my lord of Lennox, for certain offences alledged committed by him,
specified in the dome and cenfement of Parliament given thereupon; by reason
whereof he has this long time been exiled, and absent forth of his native country,
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared by divers his suites,
sundry ways brought unto her Majefly's knowledge, not only containing molt humble
and due fubmillion, but always bearing witness of his good devotion to her Majetly
his natural princess, and earnest affection he had to her Highness imof humble
service, if it hould please her Majetly of her clemency to make him able to enjoy
the benefit of a fubjeft; many refpecs might have moved her Highness favourably
to incline to his request, as the anciency of his house, and the firname he bears,
the honour he has to appertain to her majefly by affinity, by reason of my Lady
Margaret her highness's aunt, and divers other his good considerations, as also the
efleceuous request of her good filter the Queen's Majefly of England, whose earnell
commendation was not of least moment, besides that of her own natural, her ma-
jetly has a certain inclination to pity the decay of noble houses, and as we heard, by
her own report, has a great deal more pleasure to be the infirument of the uphold,
maintenance, and advancement of the antient blood, than to have matter miniftred
of the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, her majesty the
more tenderly looked upon his request, and her good filter the Queen of England's
favourable letter, written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration whereof
not only has fle granted unto him her letter of reflitution, by way of grace, but
also licensed him to pursue, by way of reduCtion, the remedies provided by the law
for such as think themselves grieved by any judgment, unorderly led, and to have
the process reversed; for examination whereof, it has pleated her majefly presently
to assemble you the three eflates of this her realme, by whose advice, deliberation,
and decision at her majesty's mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as
the merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and practice observed in such cafes,
will bear out. The fum of all your proceedings at this time, being by that we have
heard, thus as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter we have in hand
give me not occasion to fay a few more words, not far different from the fame sub-
jec, wherein I would extend the circumstances more largely. If I feared not to
offend her highness, whose pretence and modelt nature abhors long speaking and
adulation, and so will compel me to speak such things, as may seem to tend to any
good and perfec point; and lealt it lhould be compted to me, as that I were obli-
vious, if I flould omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may accept this,
and the like demonfirations of her gentIll nature; whose gracious behaviour towards
all, her subjects, in general, may ifrve for a good proof of that felicity, we may
look for under her happy government, so long as it hall please God to grant her
unto us; for a good harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices between
the prince and the subjects must be reciproque; as by her majefly's prudence we
enjoy this present peace with all foreign nations, and quietness among yourfclvcs, in
such fort, that I think justly it may be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age that prc-
fently lives, was in greater tranquility; so is it the duty of all us her loving ftubjctis
to acknowledge the fame as a most high benefit proceeding from the good govern-
ment of her majefly, declaring ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her
majelty fich due obedience, as a just prince may look for at the hands of fithfil
and obedient fubjets. I mean no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know

he r

her nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the contemplation of her modest
kind of regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good
proof have we all in general had of her majesty's benignity there three years, that
the has lived in the government over-you, and many of you have largely tafted of
her large liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her highness has had large
appearance of your dutiful obedience, o it becomes you to continue, as-we have
begun, in consideration of the many notable examples of her clemency above others
her good qualities, and to abhor and detest all false bruites and rumours, which are
the most pestilent evils that can be in any common well, and the owers and inven-
tors thereof. Then may we be well assured to have of her an most gracious princesse,
and he most faithful and loving subjeCts; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of the-politick bodies, where-
of I made mention before, as the glory thereof shall partly appertain to her majesty,
so hall no small praise and unspeakable commodity redound therethrough to you all
universally her fubjets.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 278.)
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in time to cone

follow, to the Queen's majetfy of England, and state of this realm,
upon the marriage of the Queen of Scocs to the Lord Darley.

IRST, the minds of such as be affected to the Queen of Scotts, either for her-

F self, or for the opinion of her pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have
charge of the forme of religion in this realm, or for the difcontentation they have of
the Queen's majelty, or her fucceflion, or of the fucceflion of any other betide the
Queen of Scotts, hall be, by this marriage, erected, comforted, and induced tq
devise and labour how to bring their desires to pass; and to make some estimate
what persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger may be weighed;
the fame may be compassed in those forts either within the realm or without.

THE first are such as are specially devoted to the Queen of Scotts, or to the Lord

Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as firfl all the house of Lorrain and Guise
for her part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be of their
blood, and have received displeasures by the Duke of ChateliLerault and the Hamil-
tons. The second are all manner of persons, both in this realm and other coun-
tries, that are devoted to the authority of Rome, and mifike of the religion now
received; and in these two forts are the substance of them comprehended, that shall
take comfort in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles these kind of men shall
intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their desires is, and always hall be, to

bring the Queen of Scotts to have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devisees may vary amongst themselves for the compafling hereof, accord-
ing to the accidents of the times, and according to the impediments which they hall
find by means of the queen's majesty's actions and governments, yet all their pur-
poses, drifts, devises, and practices, hall wholly and only tend to make the queen
of Scots queen of this realm and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; and in their
proceedings, there are two manners to be confidered, whereof the one is farworfe than

the

the other the one is intended by them, that either from malicious blindness in
religion, or for natural affedion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darley, do per-
fuade thetnfelves that the said queen of Scotts hath presently more right to the crown
than our sovereign lady the queen, of which fort be all their kindred on both fides,
and all such as are devoted to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or clfe-
where; the other is meant by them, which, with less malice, are persuaded that
the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majesty
and her ilfue, of which fort few are without the realm, but here within, and yetof
them, not so many as are of the contrary, and from these two forts hall the peril
devises and.pradtices proceed. From the firfi, which imagine the queen of Scots to
have perpetually right, are to be looked for there perils. First, is it to be doubted
the devil will inse&t rome of them to imagine the hurt of the life of our dear fove-
reign lady, by such means as the devil hall fugget to them, although it is to be
assuredly hoped, that almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graciously protect and
preserve her from such dangers. Secondly, there will be attempted, by persuasions,
by brutes, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good fubjets from
the queen's majesty, and to counciliate them to the queen of Scotts, and on this be-
half the frontiers and the north will be much solicited and laboured, Thirdly, there
will be attempted causes of some tumults and rebellions, fpccially in the north to-
wards Scotland, so as thereupon may follow some open enterprize set by violence.
Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's council and friends, a new league made
with France, or Spain, that hall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance to
their title. And it is also very likely, that they will set a foot as many practices as
they can, both upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occafioh the queen's majesty to
encreafe and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty or potent,
and for the attempting of all these things, many devises will be imagined, from time
to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen of Scotts, but

that /he ihould succeed in title to the queen's majefiy, is not much to be feared,
but that they will content themselves to fee not only the queen's majefly not to marry,
and so to impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts shall have issue, which
they will think to be more pleafible to all men, because thereby the crowns of Eng-
land and Scotland Ihall be united in one, and thereby the occasion of war (hall
cease; with which persuasion many people may be educed, and abused to incline
themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

THE remedies againf these perils..

A Duplicar.
A summary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and others thJune565.

of the privy council. Collcaed out of the sundry and several speeches Cott.Lib Cal.
of the said counsellors. B. o.so.290.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,
Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Lcicefter, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

uelion.s

Queflions propounded were there two.

. T' I R S T, what perils might ensue to the queen's majesty, or this realm, of the

J marriage betwixt the Queen of Scots, and the Lord Darnly.
2. What were'meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the First.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by some counellors into
only one.

1. First, that by this marriage, the queen of Scotts, (being not married) a great

number in this realm, not of the worst fubjecs, might be alienated in their minds
from their natural duties to her majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage
of Scotland, as a mean to establish the succession of both the crowns in the issue of
the fame marriage, and so favour all devises and practices, that hould tend to the
advancement of the queen of Scots.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of them, which furthered the

marriage of the lord Darnly, was laid upon the trust of such as were papifis, as the
only means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both
in this realm and Scotland, the papifis would most favour, maintain, and fortify
this marriage of the lord Darnley, and would for furtherance of faftion in religion,
devise all means and practices that could be within this realm, to diflurb the ellate
of the queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchieve
their purposes by force, rather than fail. By some other, these perils having indeed
many branches, were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, into two forts, and these
were in nature such as they could not be easily fevered the one from the other, but
were knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the one with the other.
The first of these fort of perils was, that by this marriage with the lord Darnley,
there was a plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen of Scotts, not
only to succeed the Queen's majesty, as in her best amity Ihe had possessed, but that
to occupy the queen's estate, as when he was in power, he did manifestly declare.

THE second was, that hereby the Romilh religion hould be ereaed, and increased

daily in this realm, and these two were thus knit together, that the furtherance and
maintenance of the title flood, in furthering of the religion of Rome within this realm;
and in like manner the furtherance the fame religion flood by the title, for other-
wife the title had no foundation.

Proves of the first.) And to prove that the intention to advance the title to diflurb

the queen's majesty, must needs ensue, was confidered that always the intention and
will of any person is most manifest, when their power is greatest, and contrary when
power is small, then the intention and will of every person is covered and less seen.
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatest, by her marriage with the dol-
phin of France, being afterwards French king, it manifestly appeared of what mind
she, and all her fiiends were, using then manifestly all the means that could be de-
vised to impeach and dispossess the queen's majefly, first by writing and publishing
herself in all countries queen of England; by granting charters, patents, and com-
missions with that stile, and with'the arms of England, both the French and Scotts,
which charters remain still undefaced; and to prosecute it with effect, it is known
what preparations of war were made, and ent into Scotland ; and what other forces
were assembled in foreign countries; yea, in what manner n hameful peace was

made

made by the French with king Philip, to employ all the forces of France, to purfne
all the matters by force, which by God's providence, and the queen's majesty con-
trary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune
and power being changed, the intention began to hide itself, and although by the
Scottish queen's commissarys an accord was made at Edenbrough, to reform all those
titles, and claims, and pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations, the
ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And so now, as soon as she hall
feel her power, (he will set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such errors
as were committed in the firfl, her friends and allies will amend the fame, and pro-
ceed substantially to her purpose. By ome it was thought plainly, that the peril was
greater of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a subjeCt of this realm, than
with the mightiest prince abroad; for by this, he being of this realm, and having
for the cause of religion, and other respects, made a party here, Ihould encreafe by
force with diminution of the power of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could
make by the faction of the papist, and other discontented persons here, should be
as it were deducted out of the power of this realm; and by the marriage of a ftran-
ger, he could not be aured of any part here; so as by this marriage he flould
have a portion of her own power to serve her turn, and a finall portion of adter-
saries at home in our own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble the like
abroad; whereof the examples are in our own ories many, that foreign powers
never prevailed in this realm, but with the help of ome at home. It was also re-
membered, that feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and mani-
feftly seen, that in every corner of the realm, the faction that most favoureth the
Scottish title, is grown flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this court, both in hall
and chamber, it could not be (but except good heed were speedily given to it) by
this marriage, and by the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame faction would
shortly encreafe, and grow so great and dangerous, as the redress thereof would be
almofl desperate. And to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in perusing
of the fubflance of the justices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly
a third was found fully alfured to be trufled in the matter of religion, upon which
only string the queen of Scots title doth hang, and ome doubt might be, that the
friends of the earl of Lennox, and his had more knowledge hereof than was thought,
and thereby made avant now in Scotland, and their party was so great in England
as the queen's majesty durst not attempt to contrary his marriage. And in this
fort, was the fum of the perils declared, being notwithstanding more largely and plain-
ly set out, and made so apparent by nmany sure arguments, as no one of the coun-
cil could deny them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Question.

THE queiflon of this consultation was what were meet to be done to avoid there

perills, or else to divert the force thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there
were a great number of particular devises propounded, and yet the more part of
them was reduced by some into three heads.

I. THE filft thought necclEary by all perobns, as the only thing of the mol mo-

ment and efficacy, to remedy all these perrils, and many others, and such as with-
out it, no other remedy could be found 'uflicient, and that was to obtain that the
qneen's majesty would marry, and make therein no long delay.

VDL. I. 0 o 2. TK

21

2. THE second was to advance, eftablif, and fortify ideed the profefion of re-

ligion, both in Scotland, and in England, and to deminit(h xveaken, aihd feeble the
contrary.

3. THE third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to disappoint and break

this intended marriage, or, at the least, thereby to procure the fame not to be
so hurtful to this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE first of these three hath no particular rights in it, bt an earnest and ut-

feigned desire and suite, with all humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and ad-
vice and council to the queen's majesty, that (he would differ no more time from
marriage, whereby the good fubjets of the realm might flay their hearts, to depend
upon her majeftly and the issue of her body, without which no surety can be devised
to ascertain any person of continuance of their families or pofteries, to enjoy that
which otherwise hould come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion) wherein both truth and policy were
joined together, had these particulars.

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realm have taken oc-

cafion to comfort and increase their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad,
with a rumour and expectation that the religion shall be lhortly changed in this
realm, by means that the bishops, by the queen's majesty's cominandment, have of
late dealt ftreightly with some persons of good religion, because they had forborn to
wear certain apparel, and such like things, being 'more of form and accidents, thah
of any substance, for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning to com-
fort the adversaries, 'but only to maintain 'an uniformity as well in things external,
as in the substance, nor yet hath any intention to rhake any change of the religion,
as it is established by laws. It was thought by all :men very necefary, for the sup-
~pressing of'the pride aid arroga'ncy of the :adverfhies, :ihdirecly hereby to notify, by
her special letters to the two arch-bisóhops, that her foriner 'ommandment was only
to retain an uniformity, and not to give any ocafion to'aniy person to misjudge of her
majesty, in the change of any part of religiodn but that he did determine firmly to
maintain the form of her religion, as it was established, and'to punish such as did
therein violate her laws. And in these points, foine also wished that it might please
her archbishops, that if they hould fee that the adversaries :ontinued in taking oc-
cafioin to fortify their fation, that in that cafe they Ihould use'a moderation there-
in, until the next parliament, at which 'tie, some good, uniform, and decent
order iight be devised, and eftablihed, for such .ce'renonies, so as both uniformity
and gravity might be retained amonglt the clergy.

THE second means was, that the quondam bishops, and others, which had re-

fnfed to acknowledge the queen's majesty's power over them, according to the law,
and were of late dispersed in the plague time to sundry places abroad, where it is
known they cease not to advance their faction, might be returned to the tower, or
some other prison, where they might not have such liberty to seduce and inveigle
the queen's majesty's fubjefts, as they daily do.

THE third means was, that where the bilhops do complain that they dare not

execute the ecclefiaflical laws, to the furtherence of religion, for fear of the premu-
nire wherewith thejudges and lawyers of the realm, being not belt affccted in re-
ligion, do threaten them, and in many cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that
upon such cafes opened, some convenient authority might be given them, firom the
queen's majesty, to continue during her pleasure.

2

THF

-TiH fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and unlawful books in

Englilh brought from beyond seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and es.
pecially in the north, seducing of great numbers of good fubje&ts, the like boldness
whereof was never suffered in any other princess's time, that some fireight order might
be given to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by the judges, what man-
ner of crime the fame is, to maintain such books, made directly against her majesty's
authority, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fiyers, and such lewd

persons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in England, especially in the North,
as curates of churches, and all such of them as are not found honefi and conformable,
may be banished out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the
realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings are on the other fide

the sea, and from thence maintain sedition in the realm; that livings may be better
bestowed, to the commodity of the realm, upon good subje&s.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no small authority in this

realm in governance of all property of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's
majelty, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby they Ihould for con-
science fake maintain the queen's majesty's authority.

The particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this marriage, or to
divert the perrils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do it, but force,

or fear of force, it is thought by some that these means following might occasion the
breach of the marriage.

1. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.
4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order with speed, to be ready at
an hour's warning,

5. TAT some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl of Salop, or
such other, be sent into Yorkfliire, to be lieutenant general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in readiness to serve, either at
Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

7. THAT presently lady Lennox be committed to some place, where lhe may be
kept fiom giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. THAT the earl of Lennox and his son may be sent for, and required to be sent

home by the queen of Scots, according to the treaty; and if they ihall not come,
then to denounce to the queen of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to
enter with hoflility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done
in deeds and lot in flews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the leafI that it
may be qualified from many perils; and whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be
executed with speed, whilt flic has a party in Scotland that favourcth not the mar-
riage, and before any league made by the queen of Scots with France or Spain.

Som E other allows well of all these proceedings, saving of proceeding to holtility,
but all do agree in the rell, and ao to these particularlties folowing.

o. THAT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his oin's refilfing, (hould be seizcd,
and bellowed in gift or cullody, as shall please her majefly, upon good fbjeCfs.

O o 1I. THAT

23

A P P E. N D

I X.

1x . THAT' ll manifest favourers of the earl, in the'North, r 'elewhere, be in.
quired for, and that they be, by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAr inquiry be made in the North, who have the stewardship f the queen's

majesty's lands there, and that no person, deferving'miltruft, be suffered to have
governance or rule of any of her fubje&ts or lands in the North, but only to retain
their fees, and more trusty person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. That all frequent passages into this realm, to and from Scotland, be restrain.

ed to all Scottilh men, saving fach as have safe condu&, or be especially recommend.
ed from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. THAT some intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as favour not the
marriage, and they comforted from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majesty's houfhold, chamber, and pensioners, be better

seen unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used by sundry againfi the slate of
the realm.

x6. THAT the younger son of the Earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles, be removed to
some place, where he may be forth coming.

17. THAT confidering the fation and title of the queen of Scotts, hath now,

of long time received great favour, and continued, by the queen's majesty's favour
herein to the queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Catharine, whom the
said queen of Scotts accompted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it may
please the queen's majesty, by some exterior aft, to hew some remifion of her dif-
pleasure to the lady, and to the earl of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may
find some change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein.

I 8. THAT whosoever ,hall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph Sadler may ac-
company him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed to a new governor.
20. FINALLY, that these advices being confidered by her majesty, it may

please her to choose which of them he liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds,
and not to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be afiured, that her adversaries will use all means to put their in-

tention in execution. Some by pracice, some by force, when time flall serve, and
no time can serve so well the queen's majefly to interrupt the perils, as now at the
first, before the queen of Scotts purposes be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 288.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edinburgh the 3ift of July

1565.

Cot. lib. Ca l. A Y it please your lordship, I have received your lordship's letter by my ser-

. O. fol. 218 l l vant, sufficient teflimony of your lordhip's favour towards me, whereof I
An Original. think my self always so assured, that what other mishap soever befall me, I have

enough to comfort my self with; though I have not at this time received neither ac-
cording to the need I and, nor the necelfity of the fervife that I am imployed in, I
will rather pass it, as I may with patience, than trouble your lordship to be further
futer for me, when there is so little hope that any good will be done for me. I doubt

not

A P -P E N D I X. 25

not but you lord1id ip hath heard by such information, as I have given from hence,
what the.prefent slate of this country is, how this queen is now become a married wife,
and her husband, the self fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires,
hitherto, they have found so much to their'contentment, that if the reft fucceed'and
prosper accordingly, they may think'themfelves much happier, than there is appear-
ance that they hali be, so many discontented minds, so much mifliking of the sub-
jects to have these matters thus ordered, and in this fort to be brought to pals; I never
heard of any marriage, so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk, was never
seen, at any time, when men (hotild most have hewed themselves to rejoice, if that
consideration of her own honour and well of her country had been had as appertained
in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the overthrow of religion, the breach of
amitie with the queen's majefly, and the destruction of as many of the obility as he
hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a quarrle unto. To fee all these inconve-
niencys approaching, there are a good number that may sooner lament with them-
selves, and complain to their neighbours, than be able to find remedie to help them,
some atempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do any good, what is
required otherways, or what means there is made your lordship knoweth ; what will
be answered, or what will be done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though your
intent be never so good unto us, yet do we so much fear your delay, that our
ruin fiall prevent your support when council is once taken. Nothing so needfull, as
speedy execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly depend, in her majesty's
hands it standeth to save our lives, or to susser us to perilh ; greater honour her ma-
jefly cannot have, than in that which lycth in her majelty's power to do for us; the fums
are not great, the numbers of men are not many that we desire; many will dayly be
found, though this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at this time, I
think her majesty hall loose but few; her friends here being once taken away, where
will her majefly find the like; I speak least of that which I think is most earnetfly in-
tended by this queen, and her husband, when by him it was lately said, that he cared
more for the papists in England, than he did for the proteltants in Scotland ; if there-
fore, his hops be so great in the papists of England, what may your lordship believe
that he thinketh of the proteflants there; for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honor
he hath to be of kine to the queen my miltrefs, if in preferring those that are the
queen's majelties worst fubjefts to those that are her best, he declareth what mind he
beareth to the queen's majetfies self, any man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his
duty evil forgotten; he would now eem to be indifferent to both the religions, he to
use her mass, and he to come sometimes to the preaching; they were married with
all the folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not the mass; his speech
and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to the world that he were of
some religion; his words to all men, against whom he conceiveth any displeasure
how unjust soever it be, so proud and fpitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of
the world, than he that, not long ince, we have seen and known the lord Darnley;
he looketh now for reverence of many, that have little will to give it him; and some
there are that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All honor that may be
atributed unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly and fully; all praises that may
be spoken of him, he lacketh not from herself; all dignities that (he can indue hini
with, which are already given and granted; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not
him; and what may I fay more, he hath given over to him her whole will, to be
ruled and guided as himself belt liketh; flhe can as much prevail with him, in any

thiing

thing that is againit his will, as your lordthip may with me to perfwade that I should
hang my self; this lait dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, he would
have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, or he had been himself of 21 years
of age, that things done in his name might have the better authority. He would,
in no cafe, have it deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt
is risen amonglt our men of law whether he being clad with a husband, and her
husband not twenty one years, any thing without parliament can be of strength, that
is done between them; upon Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in de-
bateing, And before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three
heralds, at found of the trumpet, he was proclaimed king. This was the night before
the marriage; this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were
in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of him again, where no man said so much
as amen, aving his father that cried out aloud God save his queen. The manner of
the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and fix, fle
was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell; he had upon her back the great
mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that,
which he wore the doulfull day of the buriall of her husband; Ihe was led into the
chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was she left untill her husband
came, who also was conveyed by the fame lords, the minister priesis, two, do there
receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and an initrument taken by a Notour
that no man said against them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not pro-
ceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich dia-
mond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together, and many prayers said over
them, he tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kifs, and leaveth her there, and went
to her chamber, whither within a space he followeth ; and being required, according
to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those forrowfull garments, and
give herself to a more pleasant life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for manner
fake than grief of heart, he fiffereth them that flood by, every man that could
approach to take out a pin, and so being commited to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that it was not lull that moved
them to marry, but only the necelity of her country, not, if God will long to leave
it destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given of all things to make the
worlt, would that it hould be believed, that they knew each other before that they
came there, would not your lordship hould so believe it, the likelihoods are so
great to the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an aft done, I would not be-
lieve it. After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and dancing: to their
dinner they were conveyed by the whole nobility; the trumpets found; a largess
cried; mony thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as were happy to
get any part; they dine both at one table, he upon the upper hand, there serve her
these earls Atholc Sewer, Morton Carver, Craufoord cupbearer; these serve him in
like offices, earls Eglington, Cassels, and Glencairn; after dinner they danced
awhile, and then retired themselves till the hour of supper; and as they dined so do
they sup, some dancing there was and so they go to bed; of all this I have written
to your lor-dhip I am not Oculatus teflis, to this, but of the verity your lordflip
flall not need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was ent for to have been at the
fupperl, but like a cnirinh or uncourtly carle . refused to be there; and yet that which
your ordllhip may think might move me much, to have had the fight of my nifitefs,
of whom these vighteen days by just account I got not a fight, I am my lord taken by

all
26

all that fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I do well allow, and like of
myself the better, for yet can I not find either honefi or good that liketh their do-
ings; I leave at this time further to trouble your lord(hip, craving pardon for my
long silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, walk now more abroad
by light than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of that which 1 con-
ceive, or receive in the night. As your lordship, I am sure, is partaken of such
letters as I write to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he (hall be to this, to save
me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I take my leave at Edin-
burgh, the last day of July, 56 5.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 29I.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir William Cecil knt.

her majely's principal secretary, and one of her highness's privy
council.
A F T E R my hearty commendations, this day at noon, captain Brickwell came 2 of Sept.

hither, who brought with him the queen's majefly's letters containing her full 65.

resolution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to give information of, sav- Paper-Office
ing that for the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing determined, from the Ori-
or at the least expressed in the fame letters, and for that purpose received I, this gilal.
morning, a letter subscribed by the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others,
craving to be holpen with 300 harquebufyers out of this garrison, for their better
defence. And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's
majesty our sovereign's good will, and care towards them; and do also underfand
that it were very requisite to have them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in
this manner decided, and that it now standeth upon their utter overthrow and un-
doing, ince the queen's part is at the leaf 5000, and they not much above ooo0;
besides, that the queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do yet
want the power that the earl of Arguyle hould bring to them, who is not yet
joined with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her majefly's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how, I flali answer them, or
otherwise deal in this matter, now at this their extreme necefflity. For, on the
one fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow, and the miserable sub-
version of religion there; and, on the qther fide, to adventure so great and weighty
a matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a small time) without good
warraunte, and thereby to bring, peradventure, upon our heads fore wilful warrs,
and in the mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the whole but 800)
without any grant of new supply for the fame; and by that means also, to leave the
marches here the more subjec to invasion, while in the mean season new helps are
preparing; to this know not I what to fay, or how to do. And so much more I
marvel thereof, as that having so many times written touching this matter, no rcfo-
lute determination cometh. And so between the writing, and looking for anfwcr,
the occasion cannot pass, but must needs proceed and have success. God turn it to
his glory; bu': surely all mens reason hath great cause to fear it. Such a pal it is
now come unto, as this little supply would do much good to advance God's honour,
to continue her majesty's great and careful memory of them, and to prefcrve a great

many

A P P E N D I X.

many noblemen and gentlemen. If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your
good will and affetion that way, I do nothing mistrust, and herein hall take such
good advice, as by any means I can. I received from these lords two papers inclosed,
the effect whereof Ihall appear unto you. For those matters that captain Brickwell
brought, I {hall answer you by my next, and herewith fend you two letters from Mr.
Randolph, both received this day. By him you fiall hear that the proteflants are
retired from Edenborough further off. So as I hope your resolution for their aid
fiall come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so presently
need them; and so with my hearty -thanks commit you to God. From Berwick,
this 2d of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 29 .)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

12Sept. 65. T PON the advertizements lately received from you, with such other things as
Paper-Office. came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole

matter well confideed, we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed that
we can, fend to you 30001. to be thus used. If you (hall certainly understand that
the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the imprefling to him of ooo 1.
might Itand him in stead for the help to defend himself, you hall presently let him
secretly to understand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much, and so
we will that you let him have, in the molt secret fort that you can, when the said
fum hall come to you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him ome part
there before hand.

The other 2000 1. you hall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if it be not that you

lhall fee necessary cause to imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen, and oo horsemen; or to the casting out of wages of such workmen,
as by sickness, or otherwise ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl of Murray and his afrociates,
that they might have, at the least, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you
also write, that tho' we would not command you to give them aid, yet if we would
but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempting such things,
as you with the help of others hould bring about, you doubt not but things would
do well; you hall understand for a truth, that we have no intention, for many re-
spects, to maintain any other princes fubjets, to take arms against their sovereign;
neither would we willingly do any thing to give occasion to make warrs betwixt us
and that prince, which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any power
to let them be aided with any men. But now, confidering we take it, that they are
pursued, notwithstanding their humble submission, and offer to be ordered and tried
by law and junlice, which being refused to them, they are retired to Domfrefe, a
place near our weft marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and adding
thereunto the good intention that presently the French king pretendeth, by fending
one of his to join with ome one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, and
to induce her to forbear this manner of violent and rigorous proceeding againlt her
filbje&s, for which purpose, the French ambassador here with us has lately writ-
ten to that queen, whereof afwcr is daily looked for, to the intent in the mean

time

time the aid lords hould not be opprefled and ruined, for lack of tome help to de-
fend them, we are content, and do authorize, if you hall fee it necessary for their
defence, to let them (as of your own adventure, and without notifying that you
have any diretion therein from us) to have the numbei of 300 soldiers, to be taken
either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you lhall fee cause.
And to cover the matter the better, you hall fend there numbers to Carlisle, as to
be laid there in garrison, to defend that march, now in this time that such powers
are on the other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you hall
fee cause to dire& of, the fame numbers or any of them may most covertly repair to
the said lords, when you hall exprefly advertize, that you fend them that aid only
for their defence, and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any
thing that may offend her person, wherein you hall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it hould otherwise appear, your dan-
ger Ihould be so great, as all the friends you have could not be able to save you to-
wards us. And so we alfure you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to
proceed with them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield
to give them aid of money or men : And yet we would not that either of these were
known to be our at, but rather to be covered with your own desire and at-
tempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 300.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 1565 6.
M sY humble duty confidered; what to write of the present state of the country An Oiginal.

I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it

maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
some good hope, that this queen would have hewed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin hould have returned unto them with comfort, upon some
conditions. Since that time, there are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Thorneton by ea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glaf-
gow. Since whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appearance
of any good intended them, except that they be able to perfwade the queen's ma-
jelly our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of England. I write of
this nothing less than I know, that he hath spoken. And by all means that he
thinketh the bell doth travaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately devised, in
which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpe&ed to be of the fame confederacy
to maintain papiffry throughout Chriftiandom; this band was ent out of France
by Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy thereof remaining with
her, and the principal to be returned very Ihortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon,
a fit miftifter for such a devilish devise; if the coppie hereof may be gotten, that
thall be Cent as I conveniently may. Monsieur Rambollet came to this toun upon
Monday, he spoke that night to the queen and her hu(band, but not long; the next
day he had long conferences with them both, but nothing came to the knowledge
of any whereof they intreated. I cannot speak with any that hath any hope that
there will be any good done for the lords by him, though it is said that he hath very
good will to do so to the utternofl of his power. He is lodged near to the court,

VOL. II. P and

and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the order is given, whereat
means made to many to e present that day at the mass. Upon Candlemass day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband, the earle of Lenox, and
earle Athol ; divers other lords have been called together and required to be at the
mass that day, some have promised, as Caflels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs.
Others have refused, as Fleming, Levingflon, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and
of them all Bothell is the flouteft, but worst thought of; it was moved in council
that mass hould have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather to tempt
men's minds, than intended indeed: She was of late minded again to fend Robert
Melvin to negotiate with such as she trufteth in amongst the queen's majefy's sub-
jests, of whole good willis this way I trufi that the bruit is greater than the truth,
but in these matters, her majefly is too wife not in time to be ware, and provide
for the worst; some in that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, whereof I am sure there is some things, tho'
perchance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers quarles, conten-
tions, and debates; no:hing so much fought as to maintain mischief and difolder.
David yet retaineth still his place, not without heart grief to many, that fee their
sovereign guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen Lath utterly refused to do any
good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that shall be the firfl voyage that he will
make after Ihe is delivered of her being with child ; the bruit is common that he is,
but hardly believed of many, and of this, I can assure you, that there have of late
appeared some tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 308.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph to
.the lords of the council of England from Barwick, 27th of March,
1566. An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B. o1. fol. 372.

MAay it please your Honours,

z7th March, TERING of so maynie matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varietie in the
7'.o.," L
r reports, we have myche ado to decerne the veritie: which maketh us the

flower and lcother to put any thing in wrytinge, to the entente we wold not that
your honours, and by you the queen's majeflie, our fovereigne, hould not be ad-
vertifed but of the verie trothe as we can polfible. To this end we thought good
to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Edinbourge at the tyme of the lafi attemp-
tate, who spoke there with diverse, and after that with the queen's self and her
hulband conforme to that, which we have learned by others, and know by this re-
porte, we fend the fame, confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
affyfers unto these that were executors of. the aCe.

THIS we fynde for certain, that the queen's howfband being entered into a veh-

ment suspicion of David, that by hym rome thynge was committed, which was
most agaynflte to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte, fyrlte com-
municated his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding his sorrowes so great fought
all the means he coulde to put some remedie to his griefs; and communicating the
fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's commandment, no other waye coulde be

I found

found then that David hould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he was so ear-
neff and daylye pressed the fame, that no refle could be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton and lord Lindfaye
lhould be made previe to th' intente that theie might have their fiiends at hande, yf
neade required; which caused them to alfemble so mayny, as thale thought fuffici-
entagainfl the tyme, that this determination of theirs hould be put in executione;
which was determined the ixth of this inflante 3 daies afore the parliament should
begyne, at which time the fayde lordes were assured, that the erles Argyle, Mor-
raye, Rothes and their complyces holde have been forfeited, yf the king could not
be persuaded through this means to be their friends : who for the defyre he hade
that this intent hould take effeft th'one waye, was content to yielde, without all
difficultie to t'other, with this condition, that thaie should give their conlents, that
he might have the crowne matrimonial. He was so impatient to fee these things he
saw, and were daylye brought to his eares, that he dayly prefed the aid lord Ru-
then, that there might be no longer delaye ; and to the intent that myght be mani-
felte unto the world, that he approved the ate, was content to be at the doing of
that himself.

UPON.Saturdaye at night neire unto viii of the clock the king conveyeth himself,

the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and two others, throwe his owne chamber by
the privy slayers up to the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet about
xil foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at the supper the queene, the lady Argile, and David with his
capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen,
who willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The queen
said, that it was her will. Her howlband anfwerede, that y was againfl her
honour. The lord Ruthen faide, that he hould lerne better his deutie, and offer-
ing to have taken him by the arm, David took the queen by the blychtes of her
gown and put himself behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved him:
But the king having looted his hand, and holding her in his arms, David was
thrust out of the cabinet throw the bed chamber into the chamber of prefens,
whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who intending that night to have referv-
ed hym, and the next day to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore hym
evill will, one thrufl him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hym a great
many others, so that he had in his bodie above wonds. It is told for cer-
tayne, that the kinges own dagger was left flicking in him. Wheather he fluck
him or not wecannot here for certayrt. He was not layne in the queen's prefens,
as was said, but going down the flayres out of the chamber of prefens.

THERE remayned along tyme with the queen her howband and the lord Ruthen.

She made, as we here, great intercession, that he hold have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her howlband that was thee ator of so foul a deed. It is said, that he did
answer, that David had more companic of her boddie then he for the space of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own contentment he gave his consent
that he hould be taken away. " It is not" (faythe he) the woman's part to seek
" the husband," and therefore in that the fault was his own. He said that when he
came, he either wold not or made herself tick. " Well," faythe ile, you have
" taken your lafl of me and your farewell." Then were pity, fayth the lord Ru-
ihen, he is your majefly's hulband and muff yield dutie to each other. " Why

may I not," l fythe (he, " leave him as well as your wife did her hulband ?"

p Other

Other have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that she was lawfully divorced
from her husband, and for no such cause as the king found himself greve. Be-
fydes this man was mean, baffe, enemie to the nobility, hame to her, and deftruc-
tion to hrfelf arid country. " Well, faith he, that hall be dear blude to some
" of you, yfhis be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen; for the more your
grace Ihowe yourself offended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weepeth. The lord

Ruthen being ill at ease and weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This I mull do
t with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in the best fort he could, that
The would pacify herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her. -

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacify which there went

down the lord Ruthen, who went firayt to the eries Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl
to quiet them, and to aflure them for the king that nothing was intend against
them. These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord of Mur-
ray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both
get out of a window and so depart. Atholl had leave of the king with Fly(h and
Glandores (who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
wold, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord of Lidington. Theie went
that night to uch places, where they thought themselves in most fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the lord Ruthen he

was contents that he shold lie with her that night. We know not how he * * him-
self, but came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so fleepie,
that he could not wake in due season.

THERE, were in this companie two that came in with the king; the one An-

drewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would have firoken her with a dag-
ger, and one Patrick Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who also her grace
fayth, offered a dag against her belly with the cock down. We have been ear-
neftly in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he affoureth us of the
contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin,
one or two others. They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen
drawd his: dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor seen in her
prefens, as we are by this lord assured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dunbar-Caftle, whither

retorted unto the lords Huntley and Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord
Ruthven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promises, bonds and fubfcrip-
tions. That he had protested before the council, that he was never consenting to
the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: " That of the great sub-
" fiance David had there is much spoken, some fay in gold to the value of m /.
"' His apparel was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose. His chamber
" well furnished, armour,. dagger, pyfloletts, harqucbufes, 22 iwords. Of all this
"' nothing fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the custody of all the
" queen's letters, which all were delivered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that
"he had hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be heard of. He had
" upon his back, when he was flayn a night gown of damalk furred, with a fatten

dublet a hose of ruffet velvet."

No. XVl

®,

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 35.)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16, r565-6.
-- T CANNOT tell what mifiking of late there hath been between her grace

and her husband, he prefreth earnestly for the matrimonial crown, which

{he is loth haffily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat in flore, until he know
how well he is worth to enjoy such a sovereignty: and therefore it is thought that
the parliament for a time hall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil.

HE juflice clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause than any desert, 4 April, 66.
and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worf, for neither hath the Paper-Office

queen good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was against her will, from the Ori-
nor the people that he hath denied so manifefl a matter, being proved to be done by gial.
his commandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pursuer of them that did
as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and Murray that was yeflerday
arreigned, were both accused by him. It is written to me, for certain, by one, that
upon Monday last fpok with the queen, that he is determined that the house of
Lennox thall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continueth ick, fore
troubled in mind; he ftaith in the abby, his son has been once with him, and he
once with the queen, since the came to the cafsle. The queen hath now seen all the
covenants and bands that passed between the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, before her and council, of his innocency of the death of David,
was false; and grievously offended that, by their means, he hould seek to come to
the crown matrimonial.

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 25 April, 1566.

-'
. H E R E is continually very much speech of the difeord between the queen

and her hulband, so far that, that is commonly said and believed of him-

self, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a divorce between them.
It is very certain that Malevafier had not spoken with him within there three days,
He is neither accompany'd nor looked .upon of any nobleman: attended upon by
certain of his own servants, and fix or seven of the guard; at liberty to do, and go
where and what he will, there have no hope yet among themselves of quietness.

- DAVID'S brother named Joseph, who came this way with Malevalfeur, un-
known to any man here, is become secretary in his brother's place.

No. XVII,

.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 3I9.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 1566.

rT HE queen and her husband agree after the old mannef, or rather worse. She
1 eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him,
nor loveth any such as love him. He is sofar out of her books, as at her going out
of the castle of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what ahe said of him.
One Hickman, an English merchant there, having a water spaniel which was very
good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the pleasure which he
saw the king have in such kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The queen thereupon
fell marvellously out with Melvil, and called him dissembler and flatterer, and said
lhe could not trust one, who would give any thing to such one as mhe loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Auguf 8.

T HE disagreement between the queen and her husband continueth, or rather

Tincreafeth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of Edin-
burgh, could not tell where to find the queen; sith which time mle is come to
Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then, nor
that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company. The
king her husband is gone to Dumfermling, and paffeth his time as well as he may;
having at his farewell, such countenance as would make a hulband heavy at the
heart.

Sir John Forfler to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

HE queen hath her husband in small eflimation, and the earl of Lennox
came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, i ith Dec.

H E earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambafladors, and all things

T for the christening are at his lordship's appointment, and the fame is scarce-

ly well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen is presently at Craig-
millar, but in little greater familiarity than he was all the while past.

Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

August 166 THAT the king and the queen agreed well together two days, after her coming
Paper Office. from-, and after my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, ome new
from the Ori- discord has happened. The queen hath declared to my lord of Murray that the
ginal. king bears him evil will, and has said to her, that he is determined to kill him,

find-

finding fault that (he doth bear him so much company: and in like manner, hath
willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king, which he did a few nights since in
the queen's pretence, and in the hearing of divers. The king conlelred, that reports
were made to him, that my lord bs Murray was not his friend, which made him
speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, that the king had spoken such
words unto her, and confessed before the whole house, that Ihe could not be content
that either he or any other hould be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of
Murray enquired the fame stoutly, and used his speech very modefily, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved ; he cannot bear that the queen hould ife fa-
miliarity either with man or woman, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray,
and Marre, who keep most company with her. My lord of Murray and Bothwell
have been at evil words for the L. of Ledington, before the queen, for he and fir
James Balfoure had new come from Ledington, with his answer upon such heads or
articles as Bothwell and he hould agree upon, which being reported to the said earl
in the queen's pretence, made answer, that ere he parted with such lands as was
delired, he hould part with his life. My lord of Murray laid floutly to him, that
twenty as honest men as he should lose their lives ere he reafte Ledington. The
queen spake nothing, but heard both; in these terms they parted, and since, that
I hear of, have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
carryetl. the prince thence to Stirling with her. This lafi Saturday was executed a
servant of the lord Ruthven's, who confelred that he was in the cabinet, but not of
council of the fact. The queen hath also opened to my lord of Murray, that
money was sent fiom the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for what
purpose it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. . p. )
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, 1569. A copy inter-

lined by Cecil. It contains an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bilhop of Ross.
-_ A FT E R this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland] how paticntly did I bear

-

with many vain delays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your own

commiflioners, whereby I received no small unkindnes, bcfides the manifold caue
of suspicion that I might not hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice rmy filbje& and near kinfinan, the lord Darnly,
under colour of private suits for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude the fame without my
afrent or liking. And how many unkind parts accompany'd that fa&t; by receiving ot
my fubjeEts that were bafc runnagates and offenders at home, and cnhanfing them
to places of credit against my will with many such like, I will leave, for that the
remembrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you. And yet all these did I
as it were suppress and overcome with my natural inclination of love towards you;
and did afterwards gladly, as you know,'chriffen your son, the child of my aid
kinsman, that had before so unloyally offended me, both in marriage of you, and in
other undutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How friendly also dealt 1 by mel-
fages to reconcile him, being your hulband, to you, when others liourillcdi ifeord

betwixt

betwixt you, who as it seemed had more power to work their purposes, being evil to
you both, than I had to do you good, in refpeft of the evil I had received. Well
I will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of following my council.
And then in your most extremity, when you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of
your life from your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remem-
brance of any former unkindness you had Ihewed me. Nay how void was I of
refpeft to the designs which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown, and
the security that might have ensued to my state by your death, when I finding your
calamity to be great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatned some as were irritated againfi
you, that I only may fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 348.)
Letter Q. Elizabeth to Q. of Scots. Thus marked on the back with

Cecil's hand.-Copia Literarum Regie Mojeftatis ad Reginam Scoto-
rum. VIII0. Aprilis.
taper Oflice. A D A M E, vous ayant trop molelft par M. de Crocq, je n'eufle eu si peu de

LVLM consideration de vous fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les rui-
nez, et les prieres des miserables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je entens que un edit a ete
divulgue de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult juflifier que ons este les
meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire le xlime de ce
mois. La quelle chose, comme c'eft plus honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas
fe pourra faire, ne y eltant cache quelque miftere ou finefie, ainfi le pere et amis du
mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priale de prolongue le
jour, pource qu'ilz cognoilrent que les iniques fe font combines par force de faire ce
que par droict ils ne pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour
de vous meme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vous
exhorter le leur conceder cette requefte, laquelle, si elle les feroit nie, vous tourneroit
grandement en foupcon, de plus que j'efpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volontiers
ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle fincerite & prudence en ce cas
qui vous touche de si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in-
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes, feriez dignement efbloye hors de
rancz de princesses, & non fans cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela
vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable, qu'une vie maculee;
vous voiez madame, que je vous traite comme ma fille, et vous promets, que si j en
euffe, ne luy fouhaiterois mieulx, que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dieu me
porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon coeur de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera
plus a honneur, et a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles recom-
mendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus de bien, qui vous pourra en ce
monde avenir. De Welt. ce 8 jour de Janvier* en hafle.

' A milake in the date correted with Cecil's hand Vllao. Aprilis.

No. XX. Vol. I. p. 362.)
A letter from England concerning the murder of king Henry Darnley.

AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to write a few E.ofMorton's

8H. words unto you. I have recd. some writs from you ; and some I have fccn Archieves.
lately ent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of the 6th. of May. I Bundle B. No.
have participat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure 25.
you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for there was not one
papist nor protestant which did not consent that juflice flould be done, be the queen
my fov'". aid and support, againfl such as had committed that abominable ill murder
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack & coldness did not rife fiom such as
were called to council, but from such as should give life and execution thereunto.
And further, I assure you, I never knew no matter of ellate proponed which had so
many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto you, no man
promoted the matter with greater affection, than the Spanifl ambafador. And fire
I am, that no man dare openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever
is guilty of this murder, handfasted with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I (hall not
need to tell you, which be our letts and Itayes from all good things here. You are
acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I mufl confess, that howsoever we omit
occasions of benefit, honour, and surety ; it behoveth your whole nobility, and namely
such as before, and after the murder, were deemed to allow of Bodwell, to profecut
with sword and jultice the punishment of those abominable as, though we lend you
but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both honourable and honet, be
well known to me, and sundry others here, to be jultifiable in all their actions and
'doings; yet thinlk not the contrary but your whole nation is blemifned and infamit by
these doings which lately passed among you. What we shall do I know not, neither
do I write unto you auredly, for we be subjet unto many mutations, and yet I think
we shall either aid you, or continue in the defence and iafeguard of your prince, so
as it appear to us that you mean his ffeguard indeed, anti not to run the fortune
of France, which will be your own destruction, if you be unadvised. I know not
one, no not one of any quality or estate in this country, which does allow of the
queen your sovereign, but would gladly the world were rid of her, so as the fame
were done without farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary junfice. This I fend the
23d of May.

No XXI. (Vol. I. p. 370.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil, I th of July,

1567, from Berwick.
-- IR, Your letter of the 6th of July, I received the ot'' at Berwick, I am sorry An Oliginal.

S to fee that the queen's majefly's difpQfition altereth not towards the lords, for I'aper Oilice.
*when all is done, it is they which mull Iland her more in Ilcad, than the queen

VOL. II. Qq her

her cousin, and will be better infiruments to work Come benefite and quietness to her
majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scotland which is void of good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil from Faftcaftle, I2th of

July, 1567.
Paper Office. I R, as yow might perceive by my letter of the 1th July, I lodged at Fail.

3 cattle that night, accompanyed with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and
James Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the state of the place,
which is fitter to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is
very strong. By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington I find the
lords his associates and he hath left nothing unthought of, which may be either to thir
danger, or work them fuerty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and likewite they confider the fame of England; but as farr
as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto them
through the queens majestys dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary faction amongelt themselves, for they aure themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though they do acknowledge great
benefit as well to them, as to the realm of England by her majesty's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms have received great fruit:
yet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they have observed such things in
her majestys doings, as have ended to the danger of such as he hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own designments, and little to the fuerty of any party; and upon
these considerations and discourses at length, methinketh I find a difpofitionin them,
that either they mind to make their bargain with France, or else to deal neither with
France nor yow, but to do what they shall 'think meet for their iate and fuerty, and
to- use there remedys as occation (hall move them; meaning neither to irritate France
nor England, untill such time as they have made their bargain assuredly with one of
yow; for they think it convenient to proceed with yow both for awhile pari paffu,
for that was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they take the matter very
unkindly, that no better anfweris made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her
majesty, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow 'to their fatisfacion, I have
answered as well asI can, and have alledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with
the queen, and their uncertainty hath occationed this that'is yet happened, and there-
fore her majesty hath ferit me to 'the end 'I may inform her throughly of the Itate of
the matters, and upon the declaration.of 'heir minds and intents to such purposes as
hall be by me proposed on their majeflys behalf unto them, they hall'be reasonably
and resolutely answered. At these things the lord of Ledington finiled and hook his
head, and said it were better for us yow wpnuld let us alone, than neither to do us nor
your selves good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if their be any truth in
Ledington, La Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a man of
likequality, and todeliver them of their queen for ever, who hall lead her life in France
in a abbay reclufed, the prince atthe iFrench devotion, the realm governed by a
council of their eletion of the Scottilh nation, the forts committed to the cuflody of
such ns (hall be chosen amongst themselves as yet l find no.great likelihood that I
ihall have nccefs to. the queen, it is objeced they may not so difpleafeithe French king,
illefs they were fuce.to.find theqpcendf England a/good. Fieand; and when they

,once

7

ronce by nty accers to the queen have offended the French, then they fay yov wil
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queens liberty, which was
the first head that I proposed, they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly to talk of them
the liberty going before; but aid they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for our selves. In the end they said, we hould refuse our own
commodity, before they concluded with any other, which I Ihould hear of at my
coming to Edint' by my next I hope to fend yow the band concluded by Hamiltons,
Argyll, Huntly, and that faction, not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edin',
as that which was sent into France; thus having no more leafurc but compell'd to
leap on horseback with the lords to go to Edial, I humbly take my leave of from
Faltcatlle the 12rl of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland. By the queen the 4th

July 1567.

RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think that the causes Paper Office.
will often charge upon variety of accidents, yet we think, for sundry refpets,

not amiss, that as yow shall deal with the lords having charge of the young prince
for the committing of him into our realm, so shall yow also do well, in treaty with
the queen, to offer her that where her realm appearcth to be subjed to sundry trou-
bles from time to time, and thereby (as it is manifelt) her son cannot be free, if fie
shall be contented that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this our realm,
being so near as {he knows it is we (hall not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein
for her child, as can be devised for any that might be our child born of our own
body, and Ihall be glad to Ihow to her therein the trew effe& of nature; and herein
lhe may be by yow remembred how much good may ensue to her son to be nourilsed
and acquainted with our country; and therefore, all things confidered, this occation
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by
us; and to this end, we mean that yow lhall so deal with her, both to flay her ia
deed from inclining to the French practise, which is to us notorious to convey her
and the prince into France, and also to avoid any just offence, that lhe might hereafter
.conceive, if Ihe should hear that we flould deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, 4th July 1567, from

Edinburgh.
IT may please your majesty tobe advertised, I did fignifie unto Mr. Secretary by my An )Orjiial.

letters of the I th and 2"'h of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the Paper Office.

causes of my flay, my lodging at FaRtcafle a place of the lord Humes, where 1 was
met by the said lord and by the lord Lidington, and what had passed in conference
betwixt us, whileft I was at the said Faflcaftle. Since which time, accompanyed
with the lords aforesaid, and with 400 horses by their appointment for my better
conduct, I came to Edi' the i2th of this present, The 13't being Sundiy appointed
for a folemne communion in this town, and also a folemne fast being published, I
could not have conference with the lords which be affimbled within this town as I

Qq 2 de'irec

desired, that is to fay the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of
Lidington, Sir James Balfour captain of the castle, Mr. James McGill and the pre-
sident of the session.

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the lord of Lidington that they would use no-

protra&te of time in mine audience, so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom
I met by chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit the day were deflined to
sacred exercises, such as were there of the council would consult upon any moyen
touching my access unto them and my conference with them, and said also that in
the afternoon either they would come to me, or I should hear from them. About 4
of the clock in the afternoon, the said 3'h day, the lord of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and others, that they re-
quired me to have patience though they had defferred my conference with them, which
was grounded principally upon the absence of the earles of Mar, and Glencairn, the
lords Semple, Crighton and others of the council, faying also that they did confider
the matters which I was on your behalf to treate with them of, were of great
importance, as they could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor give me
answer without the advice of the lords, and others their associates ; the lord of Liding-
ton also said unto me, that where he perceived, by his private conference with me ;n
my journy hitherwards, that I pressed greatly to have speedy access to the queen their
sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in that matter
there was great difficulty for many refpe&s, but specially because they had refused to
the French ambassador the like access, which being granted unto me, might greatly
offend the French, a matter which they desired and intended to eschew ; for they did
not find by your majestys dealings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to irritate
the Fiench king, and to loose his favour and good intelligence with him I answered
that as to their refusal, made unto the French ambassador, monsieur de Ville Roye
was dispatched forth of France before there accidents here happened, and his special
errand was to impeach the queens- marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so indeed
since my coming hither I learned his commission tended to that end, and to make of-
ser to the queen of another marriage) and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could have no
order forth of France concerning these matters since they happned; and therefore they
might very wel I hold them fufpeóted to have conference with the queen, least they might
treate of matters in this time without inflructions and so rather do harm then good;
but your majefly being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent me li-
ther to treat with them, for the well of the realm, for the conservation of their ho-
nors and credit, and for their fuerty; and I might boldly fay unto him, that your
majelty lad be tter dteferved than the French had. He said, for his own part, lie was much
bound unto your majefly, and had always found great favour and courtesy in Eng-
Land, but to be pklin with you, S fayed-he, there is not many of this affembly.thit
have found so great obligation at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the French
kings, for tlh carles of Morton and Glencairn be the only persons which took benefit
by the queens majcflys aid at Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the aIClion,
and we think, faidl he, the queens majcfly your fivereign, by the opinion of her ou\ I
council, and all the world, took as great bnclit by that charge as the reall of Scot.
land, or any particular person ; and not to talk with yow as an amluinldor, but with
S'r Nicholas Throgllorton,. my lord Morton, and such as were in pain for the t iath
of Davitc, found but cold lfvour at the queens mnjcftys hands, when they were la-
ill'di, bfrth of their own count ; but I would all our whole comlinny weie as well

w illiiiY

williig to accomplish the queen your sovereign intents and desires as I am, for mine-
own part, I am but one, and that of the meanefl fort, and they be many noblemen
and such as have great interest in the matter, mary yow flall be assured I will imploy
myself to imploy my credit, and all that I may do, to fatisfie the queen your miltrefs,
as much as lyeth in me, and for your own part you have a great many friends in this
assembly, with many other good words. But for conclusion I mut take this for an
answer to flay untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I thoght meet to ad-
vertize your majesty what hath passed, and how far forth I have proceeded ; your
expectation being great to hear from hence.

AND now to advertize your majefly of the ate of all things, as I have learned
since my coming hither, it may please your majesty to understand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the castle of Lochleven,guardcd

by the lord Linfay and Lochleven the owner of the houfc; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed in another commission, because he began to (how great favour to the queen
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewo-
men, and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. 'l The carle of Buchan,
the earle of Murray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her at his pleasure the
lords aforesaid, which have her in guard, doe keep her very straitly, and as fir as I
can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their order fiom there men, becauCf that the
queen will not by any means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the mur-
der, nor will not content by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her hus-
band, but avoweth conflantly that he will live and die with him ; and ifith that if it
were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, fiie
would leave her kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with him, and that
Ihe will never consent that he (hall fare worse, or have more harm than herself.

A\D as far as I can perceive, the principall cause of her detention is, for that there

lords do fee the queen being of so fervent affection towards the earle Bothell as lie is,
and being put at, as they should be compelled to be in continuall arms, and to have
occasion of many battles, he being with manifest evidence notoriously detected to be
the principal! murderer, and the lords meaning prosecution of justice againll him ac-
cording to his merits

TtIEi lords mean alto a divorce betwixt the queen and him, as a marriage not to

be fiuffcred for many refpets, which separation cannot take place if the queen be at
liberty, and have power in her hands.

'TH E Y do not also forget their own perill, conjoin'd with the danger of the prince,

but as far as I can perceave, they intend not either to touch the queen in fuerty or ill
honor, for they do speak of her with espec and reverence, and do affirm, as I do
learn, that the conditions aforesaid accomplilhed, they will both put her to liberty,
and reflore her to her elate.

THESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 I-Iarqubufilers which e in vcry

good order, for the entertainment of which companys, untill all matters be com-
pounded, they did sue unto your majcny, to aid them with filch fil of ra.ony, a
hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary by the lord of Lidingtons writtili, ainiiiiii
as I perceive to ten or twelve thoiufand crouns of the

TIIEY were latly advertized that the French King dolih mind to find hither inun-

ficur de la Chapcll dez Ursine, a knight of the French orderl, :dl alwv:ys well ailI -
tionatc to the house of Guyfe, and howbfvcer la Forclf, Villa.ry, an1I d

1 C(roq I11 ey
utCd lanina"ge in the queens favour and t t hcc lords dlililva;int:lr tLtUrI to yjur -il-l -

,eij j .

4.1

;jefty; la Crocq doth :crry with him such matter as Ihall be little to the 'ueens ad.
vantage; so as it is thought the French king, upon his coming to his presence, wilt
rather fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen ; for they have their party o wel
made, as the French will rather make their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I .fend your majesty the last bond agreed on, and signed by the Ha.
miltons, the earl of Argyll, Iuntly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELEss, since my coming to this town, the Hamiltons have sent unto

me a gentleman of their surname named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the
b shop of St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend your ma-
jefly and mine answer unto them, referring to the bearer the declaration of ome
*things, as these did by him unto me.

TH E earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another unto me with a letter and

.credit, I have used him as I did the others, the coppy of both which letters I fend
,your majesty also. The lord Harrys hath also sent unto me but not written, and
.have returned unto him in like fort.

AG ^ ArST the 20th day of this month there is a generall assembly of all the churches,

shires, and boroughs towns of this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
these lords to this town, where it is thought the whole state of this matter will be
handeled, and I fear me much to the queen's disadvantage and danger; unless the
lord of Lidington and some others which be best afeTed unto her do provide some re-
medy; for I perceave the great numrber, and in manner all, but chiefly the common
people, which have aflified in there doings, do greatly diflonour the queen, and
mind feriouny either her deprivation, or her defirualon ; I used the best means I can
(confidering the furie of the world here) to proroge this assembly, for that appeareth
to me to be the best remedy: I may not speak of dissolution of it, for that may not
be abiden, and I hould thereby bring my self into great hatred and perril. The chief-
,eft of the lords which be here present at this time dare not how so much lenity to the
queen as I think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people. The
women be molf furious and impudent agalnft the queen, and yet the men be mad
enough; so as a firanger over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice amongeft them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their adherents would put

their force into the fields againil the 24th of this month, but I do not find that in-
tent so true, as the common bruit gocth.

TH earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there Is trouble among his own
countrymen.

THE earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired here, and I do believe your

majesty may o ue him, and dirce him, as he hall be able to promote your pur-
porc with these men.

THE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.-- I do find amongst
the Hamiltons, Argyll and the company two trange and sundry humours.

HAMILTONS do make (how of the liberty of the queen, and prosecute that with

great earnclfnefs, because they would have there lords destroy her, rather than she
flould be recovered from them by violence, another time they fcem to desire her
liberty, and Bothwell's deflrucion, becaufo they would compas a marriage betwixt
,the queen and the lord of Arbroth.

TIR earle of.Argyll doth aflfe her liberty, and Bothwell's defiruction, because
he would marry the queen to .his brother.

AND yet neither of them, notwithstanding their open concurance, (as appeareth

by their bond) doth discover their minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox
is not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of the ministers will be here at the
great afremrbly, whos austerity against the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY some conferrence which I had with some of this councill, me thinketh that

they have intelligence that there is a disposition in the queen of Scotland, to leave
this realm, and to retire herself either into England, or into France, but mofl
willingly into England, for fich- and miflikings as she knoweth hath been, and
is meant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of persons de-
leagued, and authorized by her or to some one or more.

AND it please your majefly, I think it not amiss to put yow in remembrance

that in cafe the said queen come into England by your allowance, without the French
king's content, he hall loose her dowery in France, and have little or nothing from
hence to entertain her; and in cafe she do go into France with the king's content-
ment, he may be an instrument (if he can recover favour, as time will help to can.
cell her disgrace) either by matching with some hulband of good quality, or by some
other devise, to. work new unquietness to her own contry, and lb consequently to
your majesty's.

THEREFORE it may please your majefly to confider of this matter, and to let me

know your pleasure with convenient speed, how I hall answer the fame, if it be
propounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end
and composition. For I am sure, of late, he hath seemed very desirous to have
the matter brought to pass, that he might go into England, retaining her estate
and jurifdi&ion in herself, though fie do not exercise it; and likewile I understand
that ome of this council which be least affected to her safety do think there is no
other way to save her. Thus Almighty God preserve your majesty in health, honor,.
and all felicity; at Edinr the 1 4'h July 1567.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to queen Elisabeth the Sth of July 1567, from

Edinburgh.

TT may please your majesty, yow might perceave by my letters of the 6'h, how An Oripinal
I far I had proceded with these lords, and what was their anfwRer; since which Paper Office.
time I have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and
Sir James Balfour captain of this caltle, at whofc hands I cannot perceave that as yet
access to the queen to Lochleven will begranted me, taying themselves (lill by the
absence of the lords and others their arociates, which (they fay) they look for within
two days; and s'o that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that mine
.access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have thought good not to. defer this dif-
patch untill I have a resolute answer in that manner.

MAY it therefor pliefe your majefly, to underflhnd Robert Melvin retprned fiom

*the queen in Lochleven, to this town, .the 6'b of July, anJ brought letter fiom her
written of her own hand to these lords, which doth contain as I uinle(}.ind nacter as
followet - A request unto them to have conlide'ation of' her healIh, an if they will.
not put her to lib.rry, to change the plice ofreftr.int to lihe cale of Strling, to the
cdl clia might av te cmfort aud company of her iun, ;and if they will not change

hce

her from Lochleven, fle required to have some other gentlewomen about her, nam-
ing none.

To have her apothecary, to have some modest minister.- To have an imbroid-

erer to draw forth such work as he would be occupied about, and to have a varlet
of the ch.umber.-- Touching the government of the realm he maketh two offers,
which are but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but
refered to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and wholly to the earle
.of Murray; the other is to the lords whose names ensue, aflifled with such others,
as they lhall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the earls of
Morton, Murray, Marr, and Glencairn.

SHE hath written unto them that I might have access unto her.--She requireth

further, that if they will not-treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to fe her
as the king their sovereign's daughter, (whom many of them knew) and as their
prince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her husband,
.nor relinquihf him; which matter will do her most harm of all, and hardeneth these
lords to great severity againlt her.

SHE yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the murder.
I HAV E the means to let her know that your majesty hath sent me hither for her
relief.

I HAVE also perfwvaded her to conform herself to renounce Bothell for her husband,

and to be contented to susser a divorce to pats betwixt them; fle hath sent me word
that she will in no ways consent unto that, but rather die; grounding herself upon
this rcafon, taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing Bothell,
.she flhould acknowledge herself to be with child of a ballard, and to have forfcited
her honour, which fle will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save her
own life and her child, to choose the least hard condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this month, with whom I have had
.some conference, and with Mr. Craig also, the other miaifter of this town.

I HAVE perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I find them both very

austere, in this conference, what they (hall do hereafter I know not, they are fur-
nifled with many arguments, some forth of the cripture, some forth of hiflories,
some grounded (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some upon praftices used
in this realm, and some upon the conditions and oth made by their prince at her co-
ronation.

T-HE bishop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley hath sent hither to there

lords, that his nephew the earle and some others of that fide, may, at Linlithgow or
at Stirling, have some communication with some appointed on this file, assuring
them that there is a good disposition in the lords of the other party to concurre with
there, assuring further that they will not dissent for triffles or unnecessary things, and
(as I am given to understand) they can be pleased the queen's retfraint be continu'd,
.untill the murder be pursucd in all persons, whereby the separation of the queen and
Bothell is implyed, the preservation of the prince, the security for all men, and a
good order taken for the governance of the realm in tranquility.

CA PTAI N Clerk, which hath so long served in Denmark and served at Newhaven,

did the 6th of this month (accompanyed with one of his soldiers, or rather the fol-
dicr as the greater fame gocth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and such a one as had
great eflimation with these lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, honefly, and wil-
;Jingnefs in this action; whereupon Clerk hath retired himself; their quarrel was about

the
4.

the hip which took Blacketer, which hip was appointed by there lords to go to the
north of Scotland to impeach the pffaage of the earle Bothell, in cafe he went either
to the ies, or to any other place; by the death of this man this enterprize was
dafled.

THE bishop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth desire to speak with
the lord of Lidington.

THE abbot of Killwinning hath ent for Sir James Balfour, captain of the cafile,
to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majesty in my. last, the Hamiltons now find no matter to

difever there lords and them asunder, but would concurr in all things (yea in any
extremity against the queen) so as that they might be allured the prince of Scotland
were crouned king, and hould die without iue, that the earle of Lenox's son living
ihould not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors speak reverently, mildly, and charitably

of their queen, o as I cannot gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or vio-
lence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her life,
by rea on that the people assembled at this convention do mind vehemently the de-
flrution of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and amongst all estates, (saving of

the counselors) that their queen hath no more liberty nor privilcdge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither by God's laws, nor by the
laws of the realm.

THE earl Bothwell, and all his adherents and aociates, be put to the horn by

the ordinary jftice of this town, named the lords of the feflion; and command-
ment given to all Ihirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend him, and all other
his followers and receiptors- The earl of Bothell's porter, and one of his other
servitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confefled such sundry circum-
stances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said earl was one of the principal exe-
cutors of the murder, in his one person, accompanyed with sundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three of them, that is to fay,
two of the Ormifton's of Tivotdall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would
be glad that none of the murderers hould have any favour or receipt in England,
and hereof their desire is, that the officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell
doth still remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fleming, which have
been there, have utterly abandoned him, and do repair hitherwards.-The intelli-
gence doth grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held of; and notwith-
itanding there lords have Cent an hundred and fifty harqubulhers to Stirling, to keep
the town and passage from furprize; and so have they done in like manner to St.
Johnlton, which be the two paflages fiom the north, and weft to this town, I do un-
derfland the captain of Dunbar is much buried in fortifying that place, I do mervile
the carriages be not impeached otherwise than they be.

OF late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the said castle which

hath been furprized; and thereby matter is discovered which maketh little to the
queen's advantage.

THus, having none other matter worthy your majelty's knowledge, I beseech

God to prosper your majeRfy with long life, perfet health, and profpcous felicity.
At Edinburgh the 8th of July, 1567.

VoL. II. R r Lettcr

45

Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the earl of

Leicester, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of her majesty's moif
honourable privy Council.

24.th of July Y my former dispatches sent to her majesty, and Mr. Secretary, since the 12th
15(7. of July, your lordships might have perceived the state of this country, and to
Paper Office, what end these matters be like to come; so as not to trouble your lordship with
fiom the Ori- many words; this queen is like very hortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her
ginal. son to be crowned king, and she detained in prifun within this realm, and the fame

to be governed, in the young king's name, by a councel, confilfing of certain of
the nobility, and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be seen that the
power and ability to do any thing to the commodity of the queen's majefly, and the
realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the hands of these
lords, and others their associates, assembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's ma-
jefly will flill persist in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland, (unto
whom she ihall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that these lords and all
their accomplices will become as good French, as the French king can with, to all
intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlye,
and that faction, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is the tfate of things so
come to pass of this country, that France has Scotland now as much conjoined un-
to them, to all purposes, as ever it was ; and what an instrument, the young prince
will prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lordlhips wisdoms, and there-
fore confidering the weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, I trust your
lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her majesty,
to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her possession,
or, at the least, to be at her devotion. And amongst other things, that I can ima-
gine, for the first degree, nothing is more meet to bring this to effe&, than to al-
lure this company here assembled, to bear her majefly their favour. Some talk hath
pafled between the lord of Liddington and me, in certain conferences, about this.
matter. By him I find, that when her majefly hall have won these men to her
devotion, the principal point that will make them conformable to deliver their prince
into England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling him to the fuc-
cession of the crown of England, for fault of issue of the queen's majefy's body,
fume other things will also be required, as the charge of the said prince and his train,,
to be at the charge of England. I do well perceive that these men will never be
brought to deliver their prince into England, without the former condition, for the
fnccclion of iEngland; for (faith Liddington) that taking place, the prince hall be
as dear to the people of England as to the people of Scotland; and the one will be
as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise, he faith, all things confider-
ed, it will be reported that the Scottifhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety,
as those which commit the heep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion,
your lordflips may perceive here will be the scope of this matter. As unto the de-
liveriing of hihn upon holtages, he fayeth, let no man think, that the condition of

the
46

the fuccelllon not being accomplished, the nobility and the gentry will never conent
to leave themselves destitute of their sovereign, upon any hollages, neither upon any
promises, nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It were not good for your-
selves (faith he) that the matter were so handled; for then you should adventure all
your goods in one ship, which might have a dangerous effet, confidering the unwil-
lingnefs of the queen your sovereign to consent to eftablilhing any ucceffor to the
crown. And then, how unmete were it, that her majesty having in her poffeflion
already all such persons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in her custody. For so there might follow, without good capilula-
tions, a frange and dangerous issue, tho' the queen your millelis do think that such
imaginations could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us on
her behalf. What is come to pass since my last dispatch, and how far forth things
are proceeded, I refer your lordship to be informed by my letters sent unto her llma-
jelty, at this time. And so I pray almighty God, preserve your lordili;p in much
honour and felicity. At Edenburgh this 24th of July, 1567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord Stuard partner of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Thrognrorton.

By the queen.

T R U S T Y and right well beloved, we greet yn well, for as much as we do o (f : ,i.
T confider that you have now a long time remained in thofl parts, without ex- [-'
pedition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet feeing there hath
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that slate,
which good reason would have required, that you should continue there any longer,
our pleasure, therefore, is, that you hlall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
your servant Middlemore unto the lords and eflates of that realm, that are afriebled
together, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but seem very strange
unto us, that you having been sent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them,
in matters tending so much to their own quiet, and to the benefit of the whole
estate of their country, they have so far forgotten themselves, and fto lightly re-
garded us and our good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deterring
your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which is firangefl of all, in not
vouchsafing to make any answer unto u's. And altho' these dealings be liuch, in-
deed, as were not to be looked for at their hands, yet do we find their ufatge and
proceeding towards their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the rell, in so Irhange
a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole world besides, cannot but
think them to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of fuibjets, as must needs
remain to their perpetual tauche for ever. And therefore he flall fay, that we have
tho't good, without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our pre-
fence, requiring them to grant you lifcence and pafport so to do, which when yotl
Ihall have obtained, we will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as con-
venient fpccd as you may. Given, c.

lndorfed 6th Augufr, 1567.

1 mit'o t-
Rr 2

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight, one of

her majesty's privy council and principal secretary, give these.

S I R,
Izth Auguf, H A T I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Murray, and Mons.

56. de Linnerd, you hall undertand by my letter to her majesty, at this time.

Paper Ofice, The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water to their
from the Ori- wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart
in al. how the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether he be at liberty or in pri-

zon. The mark they hoot at, is, to renew their old league; and can be as well
contented to take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the fame by the
order of there lords, as otherwise. - Lyneroll came but yesterday, and me thinketh
he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will seek to displease these
lords, when they changed the coming of La Chappelle des Ourfins for this man,
because they doubted that de la Chappelle hould not be grateful to them, being a
papif. 'Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me think-
eth the earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bitterly againit the tragedy,
and the players therein, than he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an
inkling that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as much mislike, as any
thing, for our purpose. I can assure you the whole protefRants of France will live
and die in there mens quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongst you, that aid
should be sent to the adverse party, and that Martigues hould come hither with
some force; Mons. Baudelot hath alrured me of his honour, that instead of Mar-
tigues coming against them, he will come with as good a force to succour them:
And if that be sent under meaner condu&, Robert Stuart hall come with as many
to fortify them. But the conflable hath aflured there lords, that the king meaneth
no way to offend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle these lords
more against us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the
12th of August, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.
T R U S T Y and well-beloved we greet you well. We have, within there two

days, received three sundry letters of yours, of the 2oth, 22d, and 23d, of

this month, having not before those received any seven days before; and do find,
by these your letters, that you have very diligently and largely advertised us of all
the hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we nothing like, so we trult
in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive ome reformation. For we cannot
serceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the doubts moved by the
Hamiltons, who howsoever they may be carried for their private refpets, yet those
hipgs which they move, will be allowed by all rcafonable persons. For if they

may
48

may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered to hear the queen their £overeign
declare her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by fuih as keep her
in captivity, how Whould they believe the reports, or obey them, which do report it ?
and therefore our meaning is, you hall let the Hamiltons plainly underfand, that
we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
queen their sovereign for her relief) and in such things as hall appear reasonable for
us therein to do, for the queen our ifter, we will be ready to perform the fame.
And where it is so required, that upon your coming .hence, the lord Scroope hould
deal with the lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
well pleased therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof by
your letters, and to will him to Ihew himself favourable to them in their actions, that
may appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. And as we willed our secretary to write unto you, that upon your message done
to the earl of Murray, you might return, so our meaning is you hall. And if these
our letters lhall meet you on the way, yet we will have you advertise both the lord
Scrope, and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbilhop of St. Andrew's and the

abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my good commendations to your good lordlhips, this shall be to adver- 3 Aug. I 67

tize you, that the queen's majesty my overeign having sent me hither her Paper Office,

ambassador to the queen her filter your sovereign, to communicate unto her such from a copy
matter as he thought meet, confidering the good amity and intelligence betwixt which Sir Ni-
them, who being detained in captivity (as your lordships know) contrary to the duty cholas sent to
of all good subje&s, for the enlargement of whose person, and the restitution of her the queen.
to her dignity, her majelly gave me in charge to treat with these lords aflembled at
Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means as might be, for
the safeguard of the young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder, the
diflolutions of the marriage betwixt the queen and the earlof Bodwell, and lastly for
their own sureties. In the negotiation of which matters I have (as your lordships
well know) fpeat a long time to no purpose, not being able to prevail in any thing
with those lords, to the queen my sovereign's fatisfation. Of which firange pro-
ceedings towards her majesty, and undutiful behaviour towards their sovereign, I have
advertised the queen's majefiy; Ihe (not being minded to bear this indignity) hath
given me in charge to declare her further pleasure unto them, in such fort as they
may well perceive her majesty doth disallow of their proceedings, and thereupon hath
revoked me. And further hath given me in charge to commuicate the fame unto
your lord(hips, requiring you to let me know, before my departure hence, (which
shall be, God willing, as soon as I have received answer from you) what you and
your confederates will alluredly do, to let the queen your sovereign at liberty, and to
restore her to her former dignity by force, or otherwise ; eeingthefe lords have re-
fused all other mediation, to the end the queen's majefly my sovereign may concur
with your lordlhips in this honourable enterprize. AN

AND

AND in cafe, through the difperlion of your aflociates, your lordships can neither

communicate this matter amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinion. of so many of you as may confer
together, within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in this town
by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, being the 9th of this August; for I in-
tend (God willing) to depart towards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I
most humbly take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the 13th of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the 3th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

24Aug 1567. r OUR good lordlhip's letter of the 3th of Augufl I have received the igth
1'ailerl- flcc, X of the fame. For answer whereunto it may like your lordship to underfland,
from a copy that I will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already thoroughly inftruc-
which Sir Ni- ted of the queen's majesty my sovereign's pleasure, concerning the detention of the
cholas ent to
cholas ent to queen your sovereign, and concerning her relief.
CiY e To the first her majefly hath given in charge, to use all kinds of persuasion in her

name, to move these lords assembled at Edenburgh to defifi from this violent and un-
dutiful behaviour, which they use toward their sovereign. And in this part, besides
the fliew of many reasons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with them,
her majefly hath willed me to use some plain and severe speech unto them, tending
so far forth, as if they would not be better advised, and reform these their outrage-
ous proceedings exercised againlt their Sovereign, that then they might be assured
her majesty neither would nor could indure such an indignity to be done to the
queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

AND notwithstanding these my proceedings with them, they have made proof to

be little moved thereby, for as yet neither will they content to the enlargement,
neither susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to
treat any more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have advertised the
queen's majefly my sovereign, expecting daily her majefiy's further order; and as I
shall be advertised thereof, so will not fail to signify the fame to your good lordship;
and in the mean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordflip hath writ-
ten unto me. Thus with my due commendations to your good lordship, I commit
the fame to almighty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and service that I
can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 383.)
Account of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Parliament held December

15, 1567.

T HE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the name of the duke and him-
Paper Office. . seif their friends and adherents, (the duke himself, the earl of Caflilles, and

the abbot of Iilwinning being also present) to persuade the union of the whole realm

in

in one mind.. Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise that
part of this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning took meanes for punishment
of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing the queen's inordinat affection to that wicked
man, and that (he could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that n
fequellring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen. That their
honourable doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge
their native country fiom the slanderous reports that were spoken of it among other
nations, had well deserved that all their brethren hould join with them in so good
a cause. That he and they, in whose names he did speak, would willingly, and
without any compulsion, enter themselves in the fame yoke, and put their lives and
lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our cause. And if the queen herself
were in Scotland, accompanied with 20,000 men, they will be of the fame mind,
and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder noblemen of their party, Hunt-
ley, Arguile, and others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would conme
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnestly move them. And ifthey
will remain obflinate, and refuse to qualify the.felves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to correct them, that otherwise will not reform tiemfelves.
So plausible an oration, and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord regent, by the name of re-
gent, (there was no mention at all of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at
every word, when his speeches were directed to him, accompanying all his words
with low courteifes after his manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 402.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Aug. I563, fromn

Bolton;
-- UT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to favour the form, An Original.

B but also the chief article of the religion of the gospel, namely, juflitication Pper Office.

by faith only: and she heareth the faults of papefiry revealed, by preaching or other-
wife, with contented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and lhe doth not seen
to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 21 September, 568,

froml Bolton.
-- r T came to this queen's ears of late that Ihe was bruited to he lately turned

. to the religion of the gofpell, to the great disliking of the p;pills helc-

abouts, which thing fle herself confffred unto me, and yeflerday openly in the great
chamber, when the afnfmbly was full, and ome papitls present, hec took occasion
to fpcak of religion, and then openly fle profceced herself to be of the p;api rligion,
and took upon her to patronize the fame, more carnellly than (he had done a great
while afore, altho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that the cii'ct of her
fieech was only to nsew her zeal; and afterwards to me al(nc. wn Iirliked to
lie her become so confidently backward in religion, why, ihid nfe, would you h;ve

tIlC

AP P E N D I X.

me to loose France and Spain, and all my friends in other places, by eeming to
change my religion, and yet I am not assured the queen my good siser will be my
assured friend, to the fatisfafion of my hon6ur and cxpefation.

No.. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 404.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

Paper Oflice. T IGHT trulty and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well. Where we
From a copy LX hear fay, that certain reports are made in fandry parts of Scotland, that what-
corre&ed by soever hould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in any
secretary Ce- proof to convince or to acquit the aid queen concerning the horrible murder of her

late husband our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her kingdom and go-
vernment, we do so much mislike hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive
any credit: and therefore we have thought good to assure you, that the fame is un-
truly devised by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have been always certified
from our aid filter, both by her letters and meflages, that he is by no means guilty
or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true, so surely if (he hould be
found justly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it hould behoove us to confider otherwise of her cause
than to satisfy her desire in reflitution of her to the government of that kingdom.
And so we would have you and all others think, that should be disposed to conceive
honourably of us and our actions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of O&ober, 1568, from York.

A Oiial. -- M Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, to attend upon
Paper office IV him here Thursday last, I made my repair hither accordingly, mean-

Paper Of. ing to Itay here until Munday next; as touching the matters of the commiflion, that

his grace and the reft have from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto me of
all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed, and altho' the
matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any opinion of
mine own thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a reconcilia-
tion, to be had without the extremity of odious accusations; my lord of Ledington
also faith to me, that he could wish there matters to be ended in dulce maner, so
that it might be done with safety; of the relt you can conceive, by the advertisements
and writtings, sent up by our commiflioners.

A letter
2

A letter from the bihop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from Yolk,

Otober 1568.

PL E I S your majefly I conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night, Cott. Lib. Ca-
r who affurit me that he had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, lig. C. a, a
who determinate to him that it was the D. determinit purpose not to end your Copy.
cause at this time, but to hold the fame in fufpeace, and did that was in her power,
to make the E. puriue extremity, to the effet F. and his adherents might utter
all they could to your dilhonour, to the effe& to cause you come in disdain with
the hail subjects of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her disadvantage. And to this effe& is all her intention, and when they
have produced all they can againfl you, D. will not appoint the matter inflantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there till fle think time to hew
you favour, which is not likely to be haffily, because of your uncles in France, and
the fear he has of yourself to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your fubje&ts which
has offendit you.- This in effect that your majesty hearing the eflate of your as-
fairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majefly was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your subje&s in such fort as they might credit you
hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay of this controversy to be ended. And
therefore persuading her D. effetually not to trust any who had made such narration.
But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as most tender to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her counfell in all
your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to all others, as well uncles as others,
and assure her to keep that thing ye wald promise to your fubjets by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be removing
within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her G. pleated, until the time
her G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that
in the mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fubjeEts reftor-
ed and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things tending to this effet,
And affirms that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that
ye offer so far; and it may come that within two or three months flie may become
better-minded to your grace, for now he is not well minded, and will not liews
you any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

NV. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the following key is added in
another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of Engl:and.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioncrs.
F. The earl of Murray.

No. XXVII.

s r
VOL. II.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 418.)

Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec, 21, 568.
Paper Oflice. H E best way.for England, but not the.eafieft, that the .queen of Scots might-

. remain deprived. of her crown, and the state continue as it-is.
THE second way for England profitable, and not so hard. -. That the queen.

of Scotts might.be induced, by some perfwafions, to agree that her son might con.
tinue. king, because he is crowned, and herself to remain also queen; and that the
government of the realm might be committed to such persons as the queen of Eng-
land hould name, so as for the nomination of.them it might be ordered, that a.
convenient number. of persons of Scotland hould be firfl named to the queen of Eng-
land, indifferently for the queen-of. Scotts, and for her son, that is,to fay, the one
half by the queen of Scotts, and the other by the earle of Lennox and lady Len-
nox, parents to the child; and out of those, the queen's majesty of England to.
make choice for all theoffices of the realm, that are, by the laws of Scotland,. dif-
potable by the king or queen of the land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's majesty, the government remain:

in the hands of the.earle of Murray as it is, providing, hefhall not difpof¢ of any.
offices or perpetuals to continue any longer but to these offered of the-premifes.

THAT a parliament be summoned in Scotland by everal commandmens, both.
of the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

-THAT hoflages be delivered unto England on the young king's behalf,.to the

number of twelve persons of the earle of Murray's part, as the queen of Scotts shall
name; and likewise on thequeen's behalf to the like number as, the earl of Murray.
/hall narne; the fame .not to be any, that have by. inheritance or office cause to be in,
this parliament, to remain from the beginning of the summons of that parliament,
untill three months after the parliament; which hostages hall be pledges, that the
friends of either part hall keep the peace in all cafes, till by. this parliament it be
concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England lhall devise for. the go-
vernment of the realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor con-
trary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the,
parliament at Edinr. the Decem'. 567) llall be established to be kept and obeyed,,
under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

--THAT by the fame parliament also be fablifled all executions and judg--
ments given againtf any. person to the death of the late king.

--THAT by the fame parliament, a remission be made universally from the

queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and also from every one subject to another,
saving, that reflitution be made of lands and houses, and all other things heritable,.
that have been, by either fide, taken from them which were the owners thereof at
the committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

T'IAr by the fame parliament it be declared who flall.be successors to the crown.

mext after the Qof Scots and her iue; or clfe, tliat such right as the D. of Cha-
telherault had, at the marriage of the Q, of Scots with the lord Darnley, may be
conserved and not prejudized.

THA' the Qof Scots may have leave of the queen's majefly of England, twelve

months after the said parliament, and' that (he hall not depart out of England, with-
out special licence of the queen's majefly.

TnA'r the young king hall be nourilied and brought up in England, till he be

years of age.

IT
4

APPENDEIX.' 55

it 'to be conidered, that in this cause the composition between the queen and

her subje&s may be:made with certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world
for her honour, as though all the parts hould come of her, and yet for the surety
of contrarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's majesty are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 421.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. 568-9.

E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, be any writing, to renew Paper Office.
that which it hath pleased God to make grevious tous and forryfull to yow;

but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having occasion to command yow
in our service, and yow also whileft you are to serve us. We require yow to con-
.fider of this that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hitherto yow
have accuftumate in our fervife; at the time of our last letters written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we had understanding
out of Scotland of certain writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongfl
the which one is found to contain great and manifefft untruths touching us and others
also, as Ihall and may plainly appear unto yow by the coppy of the fame, which
likewise we fend yow, and because at the fame time we were adve-tifed, that it hould
be shortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not, we thought good first to
remove the queen, before we would disclose the fame, and then expeEt the issue there-
of; and now, this day by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained,
that since that time the fame matters contained in the writing, are publithed in di.
verse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet, for the discharge
of our honor, and to confound the falsehood contained in that writting, not only
to have the fame reproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the coppy
whereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient fort to charge that queen
therewith, so as he may be moved to declare the authors thereof, and persuaders of
her to write in such slanderous fort fich untruths of us; and in the mean season, we
have here flayed her commissioners, knowing no other whom we may more proba-
bly prefame to be parties hereunto, than they, untill the queen f(all name some
other, and acquit them; who being generally charged, without xprcfling to temu -
any particularity, do use all manner of speeches to difciharge thcnlleci's; wherco re
our pleasure is, that ye flall, after ye have well perused the coppy of this writting
tent to yow, speedily declare unto Mer, that we have good undrltandingir given ius
of diverse letters and writtings, sent by her into Scotland, signcd by her own hanl,
amongit which, one fiuch writting is sent with her commandment expressly s now it
is alrcady publiflhd, as we are much troubled in mind that a princcs as ahe is havinll
a cause in our hands so implicated with difficulties and calaimilys, nhould eitler con-
ccave in her own mind, or allow of them that fl(ould devise fiuch falls, untrue, an.l
improbable matters aigainl us, and our honor, aid specially to have the avetltre i,
have the fame being known fb untrue to be publi(hed ; anl you niall also lay, be-
caufc we will niot thiik so ill of her, as that it it iould proceed of Ier lIlf, Iht r:ther
(he hatli been counselld thereunto, or by abuse made to think l so part therco) to
be true, we require her, even as ile may look for any falvour at outr halnds, tllat
tlhe will difl)urden herself s much as truly The may herein, and name thein whi.li
have been the authors and perfwadesi thereof, and so the hnial make ail l.;at
amends to us as tlhe cafe may requiie; after you have thus far l-,rcctde , ;ni ha

S f 2 l1tbe

A P P E N D I X.

fame answer of. her, whether he thall deny the writing abfohutely, or name-any,
that have been the advisers thereof, you hall fay unto her that we have flayed her
commiflioners here, until we.may have some answer hereof, because we cannot but
impute to them some part of this evildealing, untill by her answer the authors may
be known; and as soon as you can have dire& answers from her, we pray you to
return us the fame; for as the cafe standeth, we cannot but be much disquieted with
it, having our honour so deeply touched contrary to any intention in us, and for
any thing we know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in the.
fame writting void of thought for the matters, to them therein imputed; you may
impart to the queen of Scots either the contents of the slanderous letter, or (hew
her the copy to ead it, and you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to.
join with you there as you /hall think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Wetherby the 28th January,

1568.

An Original --T WILL fuprefs my own griefss, and pass them over with silence, for the
in the Paper . present learning of your majely--and for this queen's answer to the coppie
Office. of her supposed letter sent into Scotland, I muff add this unto my brother's letter,

sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight late; in process of time, he did not deny but
that the first lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to a letter that she
had sent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her
son into your majefly's hands, and to avoid that the fame (hould not be done with-
out her consent, made her, he faith, to write in that behalf; he faith also that she
wrote that they hould cause a proclamation to be made to itir her people to defend
my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her said son, and impunge
his rebellious government, as he termed it, but he utterly denyeth to have written
any of the other slanderous parts of the said letter touching your majesty; he said
also, that he fufpefted that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the author
of some Scotch letters devised in her name, but he would not allow me to write
this for any part of her answer.

No. XX1X. (Vol. I. p. 428.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the lord of Lid-

dington.

2oth of July, '7 OU R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the xsth of the fame. For
<69o. 1 answer whereunto you (hall underhtand, that fiiends here to my lord regent
From the Oi- and you do with such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and circumflances
gia'l. there arise no dissention, or at the leafi, no more nor other than the difference of

countries doth necelfarily require. We here do think convenient that as few delays
be fed as may be, for the consummation of the matter in hand, which principally
to advance; your allowance, prosecution, and fpecdy promotion in Scotland, is moll
requifitc, for you are so wife, and well acquainted with the tlate of the world, and
with all our humours, .as you know that some do allow and disallow for reason, ome
for refpe& of multitude, some for refpe of persons, and o the cause is to go for-
ward as men do like to set it forward. You are not to seek that fomc will use cau-

tiQns,

tfonsi some neutrality, rome delays, and some will plainly impunge it. And'yet all'
and every of these forts will alter their doings, when they hall fee the regent and his
favourers accord with the belt and greatest part there, and agree with the wifaft
and firongeft party here. Tho' the matter has taken its beginning here, upon deep
and weighty considerations, for the weil of both the princes and their realms, as
well presently, as in time to come, yet it is thought most expedient, that the regent
and realm of Scotland, by you, (hould propose the matter to the queen our so-
vereign, if you like to use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a
scar, and no wound of the hurts palt. 1 would be glad that this my letter hould
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it seems your queen's restoration
and marriage to the duke of Norfolk hall be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedings, because you pray me to write
frankly, I fay and reason thus, me thinketh you use a propofterous order, to demand
the consent of fuch-perfons, in such matters, as their minds to a good end hath ra-
ther been felt or prepared, and therefore there muff needs follow either a universal
refusal, or a factious division amongst you, whereby a blouftering intelligence must
needs come to queen Elizabeth of the intended marriage from thence, which ought
to have been fecretely and advisedly propounded unto her highness; hereby you lee
then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majesty hall be made inexorable and so
bring the matter to such passe, as this which (hould have wrought surety, quietness,
and a flay to both queens and their realms, shall augment-your: calamity, and
throw us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy division amongfl
ourselves; for you may not conjecture that the matter is now in deliberation, but
expe&eth good occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly of
the managing of this matter, as to think we have not call the worlt, or to enter
therein-fo far without the assistance of the nobility, the ablest, the wisest, and the
mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth; fiom whom it hath been concealed
until you, as the fittest minifler, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the re-
gent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far mater Woddes defamations do carry
them of queen Elizabeth's affections, and master secretary's, to alift the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but do affu-
redly think, that her majesty will prefer her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and
the conservation of her people, before any device, which may proceed from vain
discourse, or imperfections of pafions, and inconsiderate affetions. And as for
Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fast afore, so he
coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and specially when the reliques be of no great
value or power. If I could as well afiure you of his magnanimity, and con-
fhincy, as of his present conformity, I would fay confidently, you may repose as
well of him in this matter, as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem-
broke, Leicester, Bedford, Shrewlbury, and the reft of the nobility; all which do
embrace and protefie the accomplishment of this cafe. I have, according to your
advice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame zeal and care of his
well-doing that I owe to him, whom I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath as-
fured unto him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion, wherewith he
beemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be, as I trufi, haften your coming hither,
for'it is very neccffary that you were here presently. Q( Elizabeth both doth write
to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may perceive Mr. Wood's discourses of her

majelty's

majelfy's-affeion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he conjeaureth
of him, the effet of which her majefly's letter you hall underfand, by my lord
Leicester's letter unto you at this dispatch. At the court, 2oth July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 430.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. probably Lord Burleigh.

I .6. -

7. E C A U S E I ee that great advantage is taken on small occasions, and that

Isar]. Lib. 7. B the mention of the marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother,
B. . fol 43. and the D. of Norfolk, hath this while past been very frequent in both the realms,

and then I myself to be spoken of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the last
come to her majelly's ears. I will, for fatisfacion of her highness, and the dif-
charge of my duty towards her majefly, manifest unto you my interest, and med-
ling in that matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is prejudicial to
her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king my sovereign, this his realm, and me.
What conferrences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were
with me within the realm of England, I am not able to declare; but I am no wife
forgetful of any thing that passed betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end her majesty may understand how I have been dealt with, in this
matter, I am compelled to touch some circumstances, before there was any men-
tion of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commissioners, I found
very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and others her highness's commillioners,
in the beginning of the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely,
and so further. During which time, I entered into general speech, flicking at our
just defence in the matters that were objected agains us, by the said queen's com-
missioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but summary cognition in the cause
of controversy, with a finall declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to Howard, what purpose they
had I cannot fay, but that night Lithington returning, and entring in conferrence
with me upon the state of our aion, I was advised by him to pass to the duke, and
require familiar conferrcnce, by the which I might have some feeling to what issue
our matters would tend. According to which advice, having gotten time and place
convenient in the gallery of the house where the duke was lodged, after renewing
of our firfl acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the assize of Leith,
and some speeches pafled betwixt us; he began to fay to me, how he in England
i,ad favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of many, it was
to be tho't there could be none more fit intruments, to travel for the continuance
of the amity betwixt the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the prc-
sent slate of both, and how I was entered in that ation tending so far to the queen's
dillonour, I was willed by him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inconveniencies her defimation in the matters
laid to her charge might breed to her polterity. Her elpec: was not little to the
crown of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my unfiiends had the
next respect, and that I flould esteem the issue of her body would be the more as-
fetionate to me and mine, than any other that could attain to that crown. And
so it should be ilecttll, that he affirmed her dimiffion made in Lochlevin, and we

to

torabftra't the letters of ier hand write, that he hould not be defamed in England.
My reply to thatwas, how the matter had pafred in parliament, and the letters seen
to: many, so that the abstracting of the fame could not then secure her to any pur-
pose, and yet hould we, in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us. Affirming it
would not be. fair for us that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of England
was not made privy to the matter as he ought to be, to be in refpet we were pur-
pofely come in England for that end, and for the - of the grants of our cause.

he dule's answer was, he would take in hand to handle matters well enough at
the court. After this, on the occasion of certain articles, that were required to be
resolved on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very ground of our
acfion, we came up to the court ; where tome new commissioners were adjoined to
the former, and the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parliament house
at Weltminfler, in presence of which commissioners of the said queen, and-
through the- rebuking of the queen of England's own commissioners, we uttered'
the whole of the action, and produced such evidences, letters, and probations, as
we had, which might move the queen's majesty to think well of our cause. Where-
upon expeEting her highness declaration, and feeing no great likelihood of the fame
to be flddenly given, but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean season, anding in hazard and
danger, we were put to the uttermost point of our wit, to imagine whereunto the
matters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone for juflification of our
causes, yet appeared no end, but continual motions made to come to ome accord with
thle queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no other answer to give them,
but that I ihould neither do againfl conscience nor honour in that matter. Notwith-
standing feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and that I
was informed that the duke began to mislike of me; and to speak of me, as that
T had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her - and murderer, Probably
I was advised to pass to him, and give him good words and to purge myself /diilc',er.
of the things objected to me, that I mhould not open the sudden entry of his evil
grace, nor have him to our enemy- confidering his greatness. It being there-
withal whispered, and shewed to me, that if I departed, he ltanding discontented and
not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble in my way, as my throat might
be cut before I came to Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough appear
to her marriage, I hould not put him in utter despair, that my good will could not
be had therein. So few days before my departing, I came to the park in Hampton-
court, where the duke and I met together, and there I declared unto him that it
was come to my ears, how some misreport hould be made of me to him, as that
I: hould speak irreverently and rashly of the said queen my fovercign's mother, fich
words as before exprefled, that he might - thereby my affection to be so plob:,hlv
alienate from her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her preferment, l^;,,:
howbeit he might perfoade himself of the contrary, for as ile once was the perion
in the world that loved best; having that holour to be so near unto her, and h:av-
ing received such advancement and honour by her, I was not so ungrate or o nl-
natural ever to wiit her body harm, or to speak of hler as was unlltly reported ot
me, (howfocver the trth were in the fel) and as to tle picrcfirvtion of her son,
now my fovercign, had moved me to enter into this cause, and that her own prc£-
ting was the occafioa of that was uttered to her - whenfivei God n(lould move I',,,;,y
her heart to repent of her bypalt behlavioulr ;ud li', and :asher her nown repent- ,/,!o ,.

n
11 ,

(6o

,anGe, that- helliould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful marriage that he
was entred in, and then after were joined with such a godly and honourable a per-
.fonage, as were affecioned to the true religion, and whom we might truss, I could
find in my heart to love her, and to hew her as great pleasure, favour, and good-
will, as ever I did in my life; and in cafe, he hould be that personage, there was
.none whom I could better like of, the queen -- in of England being made
.privy to the matter, and he allowing thereof, which being done, I lhould labour in
all things that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the
king my sovereign's eflate, and prayed him not to think otherwise of me, for my
affecion was rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God hould direct
her to know herself, than utterly alienated and abltra&ed from her; which he seem-
ed to accept in very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me that thing,
xvhereunto I will make none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and all
night, I was in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave myself in
that weighty matter, firlf, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempt-
ed without the queen's majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this realm
and I myself in particular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's
hands, and this whole ile such peace and quietness, since God possessed her majelly
.with her crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
protesting, none other were or hould be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not
find in my heart to utter any thing, that might endanger him; moved to the utter-
molf with these cogitations, and all desire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to
fend me some good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfaftion of my trou-
bled mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicefler, in his chamber at the
court, where he began to find strange with me, that in the matter I made so diffi-
cult to him, flanding so precisely on conferrence, and how when I had in my com-
munication with the duke, come so far-and there he made ome discourse with

Probably me, about that which was talk betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had-
,,tI/S//. tthe matter to my lord of Leicefier, and thinking me thereby discharged at the

duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in every point to my
lord of Leicelter, who dcfired me to (hew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I
refused to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that
he as one - by her majesty, and for many benefits received at her highness's
hands is obliged to with her well, should make declaration of the fame to her ma-
jelly, as I understand by some speech of her highness to me, he did. This my' de-
claration to the duke was the only cause, that t(aid the violence and trouble prepar-
ed for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways underfland. The fame declaration I
was obliged to renew since in writings of -- ent to my servant John Wood.
The fum whereof, I trust, he flewed the duke, and something also I wrote to him-
fclf, for it was tho't this hould redeem some time, that the duke should not suddenly
declare him our enemy, for his greatness was oft laid before me, and what friendfllip
he had of the chief of the nobility in England, so that it might appear to the queen's
majeftv of England-fo cold towards us, and doing nothing publickly that might seem
favourable for us, we had some cause to fufpct that her highness should not be contra-
rious to the marriage when it lhould be proposed to her. The (harp meflage ent by
her majelty with the lord Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the duke tending

3
3

far to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing one manner of conditions

from both, gave us to think that her highness had been foreseen in the duke's de-
sign, and that he might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was devised
in England, that the lord of Lethington should come as from me, and break the
matter to her highness, as her majefly in a letter declared that she looked for his
-coming, yet that devise proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the convention
could no wife accord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether
mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great inconveniencies, to the surety and quietness
of this whole ife ; for our proceedings have declared our mifliking and disallowance
of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleased, he was ready for the jour-
ney. And in like wife it was devised to give consent, that the- between the Probably
said queen and Bothwell, hould be suffered to proceed in this realm, as it was de. divrce.
fired by the said lord Boyd, by reason we could not understand what was the queen's
majesty's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf---- And whereas ye mean, that
her highness was not made privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me.
The first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord of Leicester, and by
him imparted to her majesty, so far as I could perceive by ome speech of her high-
ness's to me, before my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I have been
dealt withal for this marriage, and how just necessity moved me not to require diret-
ly, that which the duke appeared so - unto. And for my threatnings, to
alfent to the fame, I have expressed the manner; the persons, that laid the matter
before me were of my own company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her
majesty, that he let no speeches nor any other thing passed and objected to my pre-
judice, move her majesty to alter her favour- towards me, or any ways to doubt
of my assured conflancy towards her highness; for in any thing which may tend to
her honour and surety, I will, while I live, bellow myself, and all that will do for
me, notwithstanding my hazard or danger, as proof hall declare, when her ma-
jetty finds time to employ me.

APPENDIX
VOL. I.

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

APP E N D I X

To THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.)
William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicefier, March 2otl,

1570, from Ledington.
T H E great desolation threatned to this whole realm, be the divisions thereof An Origila

in dangerous fations, doth press me to frame my letters to your lordship,
in other fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other respect, but

only to maintain my private credit; therefore I am driven to furnish them with mat-
ter, which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by misconstruing my meaning,
some there may take occasion of offence, thinking that I rather utter my own pas-
sions, than go about to inform your lordship truly of the state; but I trust my plain
dealing hall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible,
I will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of this country; which firfl is divided
into two fa&ions, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign, the other
alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly deprived of her
state; the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gentlemen, and prin-
cipal burroughs of the realme, who shall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in
hand, the queen's majesty your sovereign's allowance and protection; the other hath
in it some most principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the in-
ferior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look assuredly that all kings do
allow their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What consequence this divifioa
will draw after it, I leaveit to your lordship's consideration; there is fallen out another
division,' accedentally, by my lord regent's death, which is like to change the slate of
the other two factions, to increase the one, and diminish the other, which is grounded
upon the regiment of the realm. Some number of noblemen aspire to the go-
vernment, pretending right thereto by reason of the queen's demiflion of the croun,
and her commitfion granted at that time for the regiment during the king's mino-
rity; another faction doth altogether repine against that division, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanelt fort amongst the earls, hall pre-
fume to challenge to themTelves a rule over the whole realne, the next of the blood,
the first in rank, the greatest alway both for the antientry of their houses, degree,
and forces, being negleckted ; this order they think prcpofterous, that the meaner
fort shall be placed in publick function to command, and the greater lhall continue
as private men to obey; besides that, they think if the commiflion had in the be-
ginning been valewable, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not be ex-
tended to the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed are ceascd, and so
the effec of the whole void ; the latter part of this division hath many pretences,
for betides the queen's faction, which is wholly on that fidc, a great number of thefc

T t 2 that
- -

that have heretofore prqfefled the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will not
yield to the goverment of the other, whose preferment for refpets they mislike,
when the queen's fation hall be increased, withia part of the king's, and these nor
of least substance, and yow may judge what is like to infue; an other incident is
like to move men to enter in further discourses, it is given out here in Scotland,
that the queen's majesty is setting forth some forces towards the border, which hall
enter this realm, to countenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and suppress the
contrary faftion, and bruts are spread, that the fame ihall be here out of hand;
these that think themselves of equal force with their contrary faction at home, or
rather an over-match to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of another
prince, rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take advise of necessity,,
and evill councillors, and seek also the maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby
her majesty (altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) muff be driven to ex-
ceflive charges, and it would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at
one time to set us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces
coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is arrived at
Dumbarton, a galzeon with a pneffenger sent exprefly from the king of France, to
that part of the nobility, that favours the queen, to learn the state of the country,
and what support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her afairs, or for their
own safety; afiuredly this message will be well received, and suffered accordingly,
this is the present fate of Scotland. Now if your lordship would also know my
opinion, how to choice the befl, as the cafe standeth; I will in that also fatisfie
your lordship, I am required from them to deal plainly, and your lordship hall judge
wither I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter my judge-
ment, and go not about to disguise my intents. I trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland, which ite hath gone about
to purchase, with bestowing great charges, and the loss of ome of her people;
this desire is honourable for her highneff,.profiable for both the countrys,'and of
none to be difalowed ; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the whole
realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove com-
modious for her to suit the friendhiip of a fation.of Scotland, for in so doing in
gaining the befl, she may lore the more, and the fame would bring all her ations
with us in suspicion, if he hould go about to nourilh factions amonglt us, which
meaning I am sure never entered into her majesty's heart; then if it be the friend-
flip of the whole the doth demand, let her not for pleasure of one part, go about
to overthrow the remnant, which will not be o faifable, as some may give her to
underfland ; but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
rfatc, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means to an uniformity, so
fhatli he give us all occasion to think well of her doings, that he tende h or wealth,
and provoks us univcrfailly to wilh unto her majesty a molt prosperous continuance;
by the contrary, if for the pleasure of a few, he will fend forces to suppress there
whom they mislike, and so consequently offbnd many; men be not so fint-hearted,
but they have courage to provide for their own fafty, and not only will embrace the
means partly offered, but will also procure further, at the hand of other princes.
This for miine own parr, I do ablorr, and protest I desire never to f;ie forces of
trangpcrs to set foot within this land, yet I know not what point ncccflity miay drive
men into, as if men in the middle of the sea were in a l(ip which fiddenly should
be set on fire,. the fear of burning would male them to leap into thie, fa, and oon after

the
64

the fear of the watter would drive them to cleive again tothe fired Ihip, so for avoid.
ing present evil, mew will many times be inforced to have recourse to another, no less
dangerous. Trust me forces will not bring forth any good fruit to her majesty's
behove, it must be ome way of treaty hall serve the turn, wherein by my former
letters your lordship doth know already what is my judgment; you fee how plainly
I do write, without consideration in what part my letters may be taken, yet my hope
is that such as will favourably interpret them, hall think that I mean as well to her
majesty, and that realme, as these that will utter other language I wilh the con-
tinuance of the amity betwixt the two contrys, without other refpeft. and will not
conceal from her majesty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the prejudice there-
of; if I (hall perceave her majesty taking frank dealings in evil part, I shall from
thenceforth forbear; in the mean season I will not cease to trowble vour lord/hip, as
I fall have occasion to write, and so I take my leave of your lordfsip.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks, July 2d, 570.

IG H T trufly and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this day we have Caderv.

AR received your letters of 28 the last month, with all other letters, ent from M. S. -Iiltory
Scotland, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto anfwrer is desired to be given be- V. 2. p. 189.
fore the tenth of this month; which is a very hort time, the weightiness of the mat-
ters, and the distance of the places confidered; nevertheless we have, as the flort-
ness could fuffr it, resolved to give this answer following, which we will, that yow,
by warrand hereof, Ihall cause to be given in our name to the earl of Lennox and
the reft of the noblemen conveend with him. Where it is by them, in their let-
ters, and writings alledg'd, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning the efta-
bllfhing of the regiment of the realm under their young king, great inconveniences
have happned, and therefore they have deferred now at their last convention to de-
termine of the famine, who fhiall have the place of governour, until the 21f this
month, before which time they require to have our advise, in what person or persons
the government of that realm hall be eftablilhed, we accept very thankfull the good
will and reputatiorrthey have of us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our
advise in a matter, that toucheth the tate of their king, their (elves, and realm so
near, wherein as we perceive, that by our former forbearing to intermeddle therein,
they have taken ome discomfort, as though that we would not have regard to their
Rate and fiuerty, so on the other part, they of their wildoms ought to think, that it
might be by the whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form of go-
vernment, or a governour by name,. for that howfoevcr we hould mean well if we
should do so, yet it could not- be without some jealousy in the heads of the estate no-
bility, and community of that realm, that the government thereof fmould be by me
specially named, and ordain'd; so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet millik-
ing most that they flould take any discomfort by our forbearing to (how our mind
therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed, confidering with oi iclves how
now that realm had been a good space of time ruled in the name of theil king, and
by reason of his bale age, governed heretofore by a very careftill and hIlmllou ble per-
son, the earle of. Murray, untill tlat by a mifchicvous person (an evil example) he

was
7

was murdered, whereby great disorder and confufiod of neceflity had, and will more
follow, if determination be not made of some otherfpeciall person, or persons, to
take the charge of governour, or superior ruler fpeciall, for administration of law
and justice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
fpeciall governour to be chosen; and therefore being very well assured, that their own
understanding of all others is best to confider the state of that realm, and to discern
the abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge, we
hall better fatisfie ourselves, whom they by their common consent hall firR choose,
and appoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named,
and that because they (hall perceave that we have care of the person of their king,
who by nearness of blood, and in refpeft of his so young years, ought to be very
tender and dear to us, e (hall not hide our opinion from them, but if they fllall all
accord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be governor
alone, or jointly with others, (whom we hear to be in the mean time by their common
consent appointed lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none can
be chosen in that whole realm, that hlall more desire the preservation of the king,
and be more meet to have the government for his safety, being next to him in blood
of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere; 'and yet, hereby, we do not mean to
prefcrive to them this choice, except they hall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well aured, that whatsoever reports of
devises, are, or (hall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our mind
to alter the (tate of the king or government of that realm, the fame are without
just cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertised them, that al-
though we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refute, what the
queen of Scots or her part hall fay and offer, not only for her own assurance, but
for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that hall be
offered, we mean not to break the order of law and jufice, by advancing her cause,
or prejudging her contrary, before we hall delliberately and assuredly fee, upon
the hearing of the whole, some place necessary, and just cause to do; and there-
fore finding that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realm,
and thereof invested by coronation and other folemnities used and requisite and ge-
nerally so received be the whole eflates, me mean not, by yielding to hear the com-
plaints or informations of the queen againfl her son, to do any at whereby to make
conclusion of goverments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to continue,
yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we may impelhe, as to our ho-
nor it doth belong, as by your late a&tions hath manifefily appeared, untill by some
justice, and clear cause, we (hall be diretly induced otherwise to declare our opi-
nion; and this we would have them to know to be our determination and course
that we mean to hold, whereon we trust they for their king may fee how plainly
and honourably they mean to proceed, and how little cause they have to doubt of us,
whatsoever to the contrary they have or (hall hear; and on the other part, we pray
them of their wisdoms to think how unhonourable, and contrary to all human or-
der it were for us, when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear
her cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in the fame, as well for matters be-
twixt ourselves and her, as betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm,
againfi which offers no reason could move us to refuse to give ear, that we hould
aforehand openly and direEtly, before the caures be heard and confidered, as it were,
give a judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them, whom he maketh to be

2 her

her contraries. Finally ye (hall admonish them, that they do not, by mifconceiv-
ihg our good meaning toward them, or by indirect aertions of their adversary
grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in such fort, that our
good meaning towards them hall not take such effe& towards them, as they shall de-
fire, or themselves have need of. All this our answer ye (hall cause be given them,
and let them know, that for the shortness of time, this being the end of the second
of this month, we neither could make any longer declaration of our mind, nor yet
write any several letters, as if time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
1570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

The bishop of Ross to secretary Lidington from Chattifworth.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Chattifworth, the Sj une, 157.
oth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like

as the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by which you will be resolved of ma-
ny points contained in yourfaid letter. I writ to you that I received your letter
and credit from Tho*. Cowy at London, and sent to Leicefler to know the queen
of England's mind whether if you hould come here or not. He sent me word, that
she will no ways have you come as one of the commissioners, because ihe is yet
offended with you; and therefore it appears good that ye come not hither, but re-
main where you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best advance the
queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and safety depends thereon, in refpet of
the great feid and ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the great
heirship taken of your father's landis; both were sure demonfirations of their malice.
Yet I am encouraged by your flout and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no dili-
gence hall be omitted to procure supports forth off all parts where it may be had.
We will not refute the aid neither of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and
to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well prepared. And feeing my lord
Seaton is desirous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very necessary that he so
do, for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the king of Spain to give
support, and I am sure that there he hall have aid both of Slanders and the pope,
for it abides only on the coming of some men of countenance, to procure and receive
the fame. He must needs tarry there, on the preparations thereof, during this treaty,
which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. The queen has already written
to the Duke D'Alva for this effe&, advertizing of his coming; there is certain
fums of money coming for support of the Englilhmen, as I wrote to you before,
from the pope. Whereupon I would he had a general commission to deal for them,
and receive such ums as hall be given. The means hall be sotnd to cause you' be
anfuerit of the fums you writ for, to be difponit upon the furnishing of the castle of
Edenburgh, so being some honest and true man were sent to Slanders to receive it,
as aid is, which I would you prepared and sent. Orders (hall be taken for the me-
tals as you writ of. We have proponit your avycc in entring to treat with the queen of
England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of aid. Your answers to the
Engliflmcn are tho't very good, but above all keep you well out of their hands, in
that cafe, eftote prudentes ficut serpentes. You may take experience with the hard
dealing with me, how ye would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of

danger,

67

-danger, being in medio nationes pravat; alway no fear, with God's grace, shall make
me (hrink from her majelty's service. Since the queen of England has refuted that
you come here, it appears to me quod nondum el fedata ialitia amorreorum, &c.
and therefore if Athol or Cathenes might by any means be procured to come, they
were the most fit for the purpose, Rothes were.alfo meet, if he and I .were not both
of one firname; so the treaty would get the less credit either in Scotland or here.
Therefore avys, and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come
with them, whoever comes, for so is the queen's pleasure; in my last packet, with
lames Fogo, to you, in the beginning of May, I ent a letter of the queen's own
hand writing to him, which I trufi ye received. I am sorry ye come not for the great
relief I hoped to have had by your pretence, for you could well have handled the
queen of England, after her humour, as you were wont to do. The reft I refer to
your good wisdom, praying God to fend you health. From Chattifworth the i5th
of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 26.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grange and Lethington

zoungare upon the 8th day of O&. 1571,

W 'l Hereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's pleasure, what hle will do
WV for appeaing of there controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves to
be at her commandment, touching the common tranquility of the whole ie, and
the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye hould leave off the
maintenance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king, whom ti'e will
maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, he will deal with the regent and the king's party, to receive
you into favour, upon reasonable conditions for security of life and livings.

ALso he fays that the queen of Scotts, for that he has pracifed with the pope

and other princes, and also with her own fubjets in England, great and dangerous
treasons against the state of her own country, and also to the deltruftion of her own
person, that (he hall never bear authority, nor have liberty *hile she lives.

IF ye refute there gentle offers, now offered unto you, (he will presently aid the

king's party, with men, ammunition, and all necessary things, to be had against
you.

WHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with speed, without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 34.)

Articles sent by Knox to the general Assembly, August 5th, 1572.

Calderw.M.S. F IRST, desiring a new a& to be made ratifying all things concerning the king
Hillory . V, and his obedience that were enacted of before without any change; and that the
:56. ministers who have contraveend the former as be corrected as accordeth.

THAT fute be made to the Regent's grace' and nobility maintaining the king's
taufe, that whatsoever proceedeth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk

be

be not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they specially of the minilters, that have
been robbed of their pofleffions within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or
otherwise dung and injured, may be reflored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other benefice be given to

any person, contrary to the tenor of the as made in the time of the firlt regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the said ats, or to any unqualified
person, may be revoked and made null be an aft of secret council, and that all bilop-
ricks so vacand may be presented, and qualified persons nominat thereunto, within
a year after the vaking thereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the com-
missioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January last, and in fpe-
cial to complain upon the giving of bilhoprick of Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no petitions of benefices, great or small, be given be simple donation of

any lord regent, without content of the possessor of the saids benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admission of the superintendent or commissioners of the province
where this benefice lyeth, or of the biflops lawfully elected according to the said or-
der taken at Leith; and desire an at of council to be made thereupon, until the
next parliament, wherein the famine may be specially inacted, with inhibition to the
lords of session to give any letters or decreets, upon such simple gifts of benefices or
pentions not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk presently as-
fembled declare all such gifts null so far as lyeth in their power.

THAT the first form ofprefentation to benefices, which were in the firfl and re

cond regent's time be not chang'd as now it is commonly; but that this clause be
contained in the presentation, that if the persons presented make not residence, or
be flandrous or found unworthy either in life or doctrine be the judgment of the kirk,
(to which alwife he hall be fubjecr) or meet to be transported to another room at
the fight of the kirk, the said presentation and all that shall fall thereupon hall be
null and of no force nor effec t and this to have place also in the nomination of the
bihops.

THAT an at be made in this assembly that all things done in prejudice of the

kirk's assumption of the third, either be papifis or others, by giving of fews, life-
rents, or taks, or any otherwise difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null
with a solemn protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an at be made decerning and ordaining all bishops, admitted to the order

of the kirk now received, to give account of their whole rents, and intromillions
therewith once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes as the kirk may
easily confider the fame to be most expedient and neceflar.

ANENT the jurifdiEtion of the kirk, that the fame be determined in this aembly,

because this article hath been long poftpond to make fute to the regent and council
for remedy against messengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the kirk, who procure againf
ministers and ministry, and for futting of julice of the kirk's actions in the feflTon.

No. VT.

1J u
VOL. II.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 39.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace concluded the

23d( Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, by these presents, that I Henry Killigrewe, Efq; am-
baffador for the queen's majesty of England, Forasmuch as, at the earnest mo-

tion and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord and
pacification of the publick troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland agreed
and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right honourable George
earl of Hnntly, lord Gordon and Baidzenoch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to
the duke's Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of Abirbrothocr,
'or the furcty of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, their kinfolks,
friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending on them; in treating of
the which said pacification, the murders of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the
earl of Levenax grandfather, late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm
and lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the frunis or moveable goods,
which the said persons have taken fra perfonis professing the king's obedience, or for
the damages done or committed by them, since the lsth day of Junij, 1 s67, and
before the penult day of July last by passed, by reason of the common cause or any
thing depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commifaiies matteris of such
wrecht and importance, as the king's present regent could not conveniently, of him-
self, remit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpea of the necellity of the present pa-
cification, and for the weil of the king, and common quietness of this realm and
lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of remiflion of the said murderers, and of
the discharge of the said frutis, moveable goods, and other damages, moved by the
persons desiring the said remifTions and discharge to the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habitation to the king of Scots.
And whatsoever her majesty hiall advise and councel touching the said remilion and
discharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the king and universal quietness of
the realm of Scotland, shall perform, obfervc, and fullfil the fame. And in likewise,
the said earl Huntly, and commendatour of the Abirbrothock, being urged to have
delivered pledges and hostages for observation of the conditions of the said accord
and pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majefly's name, by vir-
tue of my commission, to promise for them that they shall truly and faithfully ob-
serve and keep the said pacification, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their
parts, and that it would please her maiefty to interpoe herself, as furcty and cau-
tioncr for them to that effct', to the king's maiefty of Scotland their fovcreign and
his said regent, which I have done, and promise to do, by virtue of his majcfty's
comrniffion, as by the honourable and plain dealing of the said carl and lord, their
intention to peace well appears, the fame being most agreeable to the mind of the
queen's majesty my fovcreign, xvhich so long by her minifecrs hath. travelled for the
liid pacification, and in the end, at her motion and bolicittion, the fame is ac-
c(rded, knowing her majefltys godly dcfirc, that the fame may continue unviolatc,
ini.l that the noblemen and others now returning to the king's obedience hall have
fufficicnt surety for their lives, livings, honours and goods. Therefore in her ma-

jclly's
!

jefty's name, and by virtue of my commilfion, I promise to the aforesaid earl Huntly
and commendator of Abirbrothock, that by her majesty's good means, the said re-
mission and discharge shall be purchased and obtained to them, their kinfolks, friends,
servants, and partakers, now properly depending upon them, (the persons specified
in the first abllinance always excepted) as also that the said pacification shall be truly
observed to them, and that her majesty hall interpose herself as confervatrix thereof,
and endeavour herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in all points and
articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have to this present subscribed
with my hand, and fealed the fame with mine own eal the 13th day of FebrY, An-
no Domini 1572. And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof, and
the parliament which shall be appointed for their restitution, or at the furthest before
the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of Scotland's Dowry.

H E queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowry, besides other 1576.

T poffeflions, the dukedom of Turene, which was solemnly contracted and gi- Cott Lib. Cal.

ven to her by the king and eflates of parliament; which dukedom she possessed peace- 3. IV.
ably till 1576, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Monfr his bro-
ther, to augment whose appenage this dutchy was given, to which the queen of Scot-
land yielded upon account of princes, who were her near relations, provided the
equivalent which was promised her hould be faithfully performed. So that year,
after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, fle had granted her the
county of Vermaudaife with the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley and Vetry; tho' 'tis
known that county, and the other lands were not of equal value with Turene, but
was promised to have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confirmed in the courts of par-
liament, chamber of accompts, court of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others
necessary; upon which he entered into poffeflion of that county, &c. Afterwards,
by a valuation of the commissioners of the chamber of accompts, it was found, that
the revenue of that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene by 3000 livrcs,
But instead of making. up this deficiency according to juRice, fme of the pvi;,
council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the presidents of Bcllievre, Nicocholay, and St. Bo-
net, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of her aforesaid loflls, did fell and
alienate the lands of Senlis, and the dutchy of Eftaimpcs, to Madam de tilonlcn-
sier, from whom the king received money ; of which Sale the councellors aforetais l
obliged themselves to be guarantees, which hath hindred the aforcuid queen n
have juflice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfier hath been pt in pofll:lio
of these lands of Senlis, contrary to all the declaration, protestation, and allilni-
ces of the king of France to queen Mary's ambaafldors. So that thei queen of Scot-
lInd is dipofllced of her dowry, contrary to all equity, without any rcgald to uic
quality.

No, Vri.,
U u

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 44.)

A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoua..

3d rch, a'[T

v.ill please your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and has confidered the

1E. ls or- ti ae. 'I he parson of Camsey was here at me before the receit thereof, dire&-
riuan's Ar- ed fra my lord of Mar, and the mafier anent my last written, which was the an-
clicves, fwer of the writing that the matter sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
f:iild. . No. me to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given my answer before the re-

9-' ~ceit of your grace's letter, that I behuiffit to be besyd San& Androis, at ane friends

tryst, which I might not omit; I understand by my said' cousin, that the king's ma-
jelly is to write to divers of the nobility, to come there, anent your lord(hip's trial,
and that he had written before his departing to my lord Monthrois. I underfiand,
likewise, he will write to your grace to come there for the fame effec, which I
tho't good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your grace, for the
love of God almighty, to look upon the befl, and not to sleep in security, but to
turn you with unfeigned heart to God and to confider with yourself, that when the
king's majesty was very young, God made him the inltrument to divest his mother
from her authority, who was natural princess, for offending of his divine majesty,
and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as largely in you, except
that your grace condescended not to the deflru&ion of your wife. For as to har-
lotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offended God, and far more in
avaritioufnefs, which vycis God never left unplagued, except speedy repentance,
which I pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can never have the
love of God nor man. I pray your grace flatter not yourself, for if your grace be-
lieves that ye have the good will of them that are the king's good willers ye deceive
yourself; for surely I fee perfe&tly that your own particulars are not contented, lat
by the relt, and that molt principally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace,
beir with me that I am thus hamlie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but
fiom the very affeftion of my heart towards your grace, which has continued ince.
we were acquainted. And now I fee, because the matter itands in your grace's
handling with the king's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, I fee not how ye lhall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to.call to God, andi
look on the bell, and call from your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and
avaritioufnefs. I am riding this day to Sant Androis, and trust to return on Wed-
nefday at the farthest. If your grace will command me in any offices that are ho-
nest, tat I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise of your grace's mind.
;nd lhall do to my power and knowledge, and this with my heartlie, &c. &c.

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.

(rom the Ori- RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commendations, we received your letter
ginal, F.. of J of the 3d of March, and as we take your plainness therein in good part, as pro-
Moiton'sBd- cecding from a friend and kinsman, in whose good affecion toward us we never

NOe 3,u, d. doubted, so ye may not think.it Itrange that we purge ourself so far of your accufa-

tion,

tioa, as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended in. As touching our of-
fence to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for
ambition surely e think none can justly accuse us; for in our private estate we
could, and can live as well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, without fur-
ther aspiring. The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm, indeed,
mon lead us, or any other that (hall occupy that place, not simply to respect our-
self, but his majesty's rowme which we supply, and therein not transcending the
bounds of measure, as, we trult, it hall not be found we have done. it ought not
to be attributed tc any ambition in us. For as soon as ever his majesty hall think
himself ready and able for his own government, none shall more willingly agree and
advance the fame nor I, since I think never to set my face against him, whose ho-
nour, iafety and preservation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never believe to
find otherwise at his hand than favour, although all the unfriends I have in the earth
were about him, to persuade him to the contrary, As we write unto you, our friendly
dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit; as we trust
yourself confiders, but because the ambassadors of England, my lord of Angus, the
chancellor, treasurer, and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we
pray you heartily address yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye (hall find
the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized thereof, with your own advice, by
Alex' Hay, whom we have tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of Angus from
Sterling rides to Douglas. And so we commit you in the protection of God, At
Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, 1577.

FOR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in us so liberally to

deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers, nor never (hall any sovereign and na-
tive born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them
judges to their own reward; in many causes, I doubt not to find the afliftance of
my friends, but where my ations shall appear unhoneft, 1 will. not crave their as-
fiitance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 83.)
The coppy of the king of France his directions ent to Scotland with

Seineur de la Motte Fenelon. Translated out of the French.

R S T, on their majestys most chriftlan part, he hall make the most honour- Calderw.
able faluration and viCiting to the most serene king of Scotland, their good bro- M. S. Hilloryp
ther and little son, that in him is poflable. Vol . . 208..

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such like as they have written

to him with their hands, and to how exprelly the perfect friendship and singular
affcction, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the most serene king, to the effct
that his person may be in no danger, but that it may be most surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindred in the honefl liberty that he ought to have, and that
no greater, or Itraiter guards be about him than he had before.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the authority, that God hath given

to him of king and prince sovereign above his fubjeCs, to the effect he may as
freely ordain and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of his country, with his
ordinary council, as he was used to do of before.

TII.A T

73

THAT his nobility, barons and commonality of his contry may have their free

liberty to resort to his Irene majesty, without suspicion of greater guards or more
armed men about hisperfon then the use was,, that they be not affraid and hindered
to resort; and further that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely
speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the re-eftablilting of that that
may or hath been changed or altered.

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and other men of good

behaviour of the towns and commonality of the contry conveens, and are content
with the form of government presently with the said serene king,' to the end that if
their be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that he return
not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may underitand that there be any who have not used them so reverently

towards the said serene king their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this behalfof his majesty mot chriffian the said serene king
his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame, and exorting them
to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all refpets with the obedi-
ence and true fubjetion they ought him.

AND if the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceves the said serene king to be in any

manner conflrained of his person, authority, liberty, and disposition of his stairs,
than he used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty
of a prince does require, that he use all imoyen lawful and honest to place him in
the, famine, and that he imploy as much as the credit of his most christian majesty
may do toward the nobility, and fbje&ts of that contry, and as much as may his
name, with the name of his crown towards the Scottilh nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his estates, of his content, and

to all the nobility and principall personages of the contry, that his moRt Christian
majeflie will continue on his part in the most ancient alliance and confedracy,
which he hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobility
and contry, with his principall subje&s, to persevere in the famine, in all good un-
deritanding and fiiendfhip with him; the which, on his part, he shall do, observing
the famine molt inviolable.

FURTHER his most chrifian majesty understanding that the serene king his good

brother was contented with the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said fignieur
De la Motte had charged to pray his serene majefly that he might remaine betide
him to his contentment, believing that he should more willing intertain the points
of love and confederace, betwixt their majeltys and their contrys, because he was a
good fbject to them both; and if he might not remain, without ome alteration of
the tranquility of his estate, that he might retire him to his own house in the said
contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to return to France that he might surly----
and if it pleases his serene majety, to cause cease and flay the impeachments, that
are made of new upon the frontiers, to the cftrc that the natural Frenchmen may
enter as fircely into the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

ANn that: liere may be no purpose of difflmnation, nor no speech but honour-

able of the mofl Chriflian king, in that contry, but such like as is spoken mons ho-
nourably of the serene king of Scotland in France.

1 i had another head to propone, which he concealed till a little before his depar-

ture, to wit, that the qucen, the king's mother, was content to receive her sion in
allbcitioun of the lingdom.

No, IX.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 98.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis Walsingham, the 4th of August, 1584.

from Berwick.
SIR,

C CO RD I N G to my former letters, touching my meeting with the earl of Calderw.

sA Arran upon Wednesday last, there came hither to me from the earle, the jus- M. S. Hillo.
tice clerk, and fir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's ry, Vol. 3 P-
privie council, to treat with me about the order of our meeting, referring wholly to 374-
me to appoint the hour, and the number we fiould meet withal; so as we concluded
the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves
to be 13 of a fide ; and the reft of our troops to stand each of them a mile from the
town ; the one on the one fide, the other on the other fide, so as our troops were two
miles asunder; I was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen, where
had co shot on horfi, but they were very near 500 horse well appointed: Accord-
ing to which appointment, we met yelterday, and after ome congratulations, the
earle fell in the like proteflations of his good will and readiness to serve the queen's
majesty, before any prince in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto-
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnelf vows, as unlcfs he be worse
than a devil, her majefly may dispose of him at her -pleasure; this being ended, I
entered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him, and so near as I could,
left nothing unrehearsed, that I had to charge the king or him with any unkind deal-
ing toward her majesty, according to my inltru&ions, which without any delay he
answered presently, as ye shall perceive by the aid answers, sent herewith ; but I
replying unto him, he amplified them with many moe circumstances, but to this es-
feet. Then I dealt with him touching the point of her majely's fatisfacltion, for
the uttering such practices as has been lately fct on foot for the disquieting of her
majesty and her eflate, who thereof made sundry discourses, what marriages have
been offered to his majesty by fundrie princes, and by what means the earle has fought
to divert them, and for what causes; the one, for that be marriage with Spain. or
F'rance, he must also alter his religion, which as he is sure the king will never doe,
so will he never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as he has any credit wilh
him ; he denys not but the king has been dealt withal be practices to deal againlf her
majesty, which he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as they have left deal-
ing therein, but whatsoever the king or he knoweth therein there shall be nothing
hitden from her majefly, as her majllfty llall know very hortly; surely it seems by
his fpecehcs, that if the king would have yielded thereunto there had been no fin:ll
company of French in Scotland ere now to disquiet her majly.---- This Lbeing
ended, I dealt with him earnellly for the fRay of this parliament, which now p-
proacheth ; or at the lcalt that there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice
of these noblemen and others now in England, for the folfaulting of their livings
and goods, hereupon he made a long dilcoulrf to me, fill of the earl of Angus
dealing about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwithflanling of lundric
gracious offers the king had matde him, then of the road of Ruthvcn, how that pre-
fentlyafter they had the king's majesty in their hands, they imprifuned himielf, dealt
with the king for putting of the duke out of the realm, the king refused ft to do,
they told him plainly that if he would not he flhould have the earle of Arran's

!':a; l

head in a di(h; the king aflted what offence the earl had made ? and they answered
it mufl be so, and (hould be so; hereupon for the safeguard of Arran's life, the king
was content to fend away the duke, and yet Arran afterwards fundrie times in dan.
ger of his life; I alledged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and his
adts in council, that they had done nothing but for his fervife, and with his good
liking and contentment, who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not
do any thing but that which pleaed them, with such a number of other their dealings
with the king whileft he was in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad
if they were true; I said the king might have let the queen's majesty's ambassador have
cnown his mind secretly, and her majeffty would have relieved him; he answered,
that the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded
from Mr. Bow's practice, and thereby durst not impart so much to him, and yet the
king was content, and did give remilfion to as many, as would acknowledge their
faults, and ak reniflil, and such as would not, he thought fit to banish, to try
th-ir further loyalty, in which time they colfpired the king's second apprehension,
and the killing of the earle, and others, and reduced the mini(fers to their faction,
and yet not satisfied with these conspiracics and treasonable dealings, (as he terms
them) are entered into a third, bing in England under her majesty's protection, to
diflonour her majelly as far as in them yeth, or at least to cause the king conceive
tome u ikindnefs in her majesty, for harbouring of them; I wrote to yow what the
conspiracy was, the taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and some
others, the taking of the castle of Edinr. and bringing home the earles, to take the
charge o the king; all which (fays he) is by Drummond confessed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the constable of the caltle thereupon
fled; the earl brought Drummond with him as far as Langton, where he lay to
have confessed the conspiracy before me, but having at his lighting, received a blow
on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring him no further, I replied that I thought
verily they would not work any such pracices, in refpeft of the queen's majesty,
abiding within her realme, and if there by any such pracices, they have proceeded
from others, and they not privie unto them: and that if it be not apparently proved
against them, that it will be thought to be some practice to aggravate the fault, and
to make them the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it hould be pro-
ved so ffficiently, that they hould not be able with truth to deny it, for their
own hands is to be howed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if her ma-
jefty hould so press the king for them at this time, that would rather hinder this
matter of the amitty, nor further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides he aured me, that if he
would, he dare not this lad matter being fallen out as it is; and fuerly if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the restoring of the earl of Marr very
flortly, if her majesty would have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus,
1 perceive the king is persuaded that both he, and the reft of the Douglalfes, have
conceived so mortall an hatred against him and the earl of Arran, about the death
of the earl of Morton, as if they were at home, tomorrow next, they would not
leave to pralcice and conspire the death of them both, and therefore a hard matter,
to do any thing for him: finally, he concluded and required me to aure her majefly
from the king, that there hall nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone
that may fatisfie her majesty with reason, and that the king (hall never do any thing,
*or consent to have any thing done in her prejudice, so long as he had any credit

with

with him, or-authority'under him. Having this far proceeded, he defred to liow
me his commission, which is under the great feal, to himfelfonly, which is as large
as may be, and yet fundrie of the privie councel there with him, but not one in com-
million, nor present, nor near us all this time; having spent almost five hours in
there matters; he presented to me the master of Gray, who delivered to me a letter
from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the king means to fend to
her majesty, and therefore requires safe conduct for his pafige, which I pray yow
procure, and to fend it so soon as you may. I let him understand of the lord Seaton's
negociation with the French king. He swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave,
and that it was partly against his will, that he should be sent thither. But his com-
mission and inftrucion being of no great importance, he yielded the sooner ; and if
Seaton has gone beyond his inftrutions, which Arran drew himself, he will make
Seaton fimart for it. Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he protested
he never heard of any such; he fays' there was a little poor foul, with a black beard,
come thither a begging, who said he was an enemy to Definond, to whom he gave
a coun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into Ireland,
he fays there is no such matter; if there be, there may by ome few rafkels that he
knows not of; and touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is
but the slanderous devise of the king's enemys, and such as would have the world
believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who the world hall well fee will
continue as conflant therein, as what prince soever professed it most; and the earle
himself dos protest to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in his life,
and did aflure me if there was any in Scotland, they hould not do so much harm
in Scotland, as their ministers would do, if they preach such doEtrine as they did
in Scotland, and touching one Ballanden, 'of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from
Mr. Colvil, the earle avows con fantly that. he knows not, nor hath not heard of
any such man, but he would inquire at the juflice clerk, and would inform me what
he could learn of that; thus I have made yow as short a discourse as I can of so ma-
ny matters, so long discoursed upon, but these are the principal points of all our
talk, so near as I can remember it, and for this time I commit yow to the Almighty.
At Berwick, the 14th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majesty's pleasure.
Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed to the lord Hunfdane,

let down in another torm.

s to the strait and fevcre persecution of all such, as have been noted to have

tA been well affected to the queen's majesty, it cannot appear they were either
tor that cause punished, or hardly dealt with, since his majelly of late has been so
careful and diligent to choice oit good infiruments to deal betwixt her majesty and
him, as his majesty has done in elcting of your lordchip and me; beides that in
all their accufitions, their good will and aflecRion born to her majeftywas, at no
time, laid to their charge, but capital actions of treason many way tried now be the
whole three estates, and more than maniifeft to the world.

VOL. 11. ' X As

As for his majefly inhibiting, by publick proclamation, such as were banilhed, not

to repair in England the bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn they accomplihed, so far as in them
lay, moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majesty's
realm, left they (hould have attempted these things, which thortly they did attempt,
being farther off, and more distant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majesty's fugitives, and not delivering

them according to his promise, as your lordthip propones, his majesty would be most
glad that so it might fall out by your lordflip's traviles, that no fugitive of either
realme ihould be received of either, and when so hall be, it hall not fail on his
majesty's part, albeit in very deed this time bygone his majesty has been constrained
to receipt his majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall, finc0
her majesty hath receipt, in effe&t, the whole and greatelf rebells and traitors his
majelly in his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with his majesty's mother
nent their association, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of your lordlhip's
servant, to alrure her majefly and your lordship, in his majesty's name, that it is al-
together false, and an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to aflure your lordship, that it is also false

and untrue, that his majefly has, by any means direEt or indiret, fnt any melTage
to the pope, or received any from him; or that his majelty has dealt with Spain or
any foreigners, to harm her majefly or her realm, which his majesty could have no
honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope in God it hall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's minifers, sent unto his

maajefly, his majesty used none of them so; and if his majesty had, sufficient cause
was given by them, as some of their own writs do yet teflify; as I more particularly
thewed your lordhip at Foulden at our late meeting.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. ll.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,

t Lb 'Affeurant que vous avez eu communication d' ue lettre de Gray que vof,

Cott. Lib IL . tre homme Semer me livra bier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoilant
jol. 7. I quasi de mot a mot les.mefmes ralfons que le dit Gray m'cfcrivit en chifre eftant der-
An Original. nierement pres de vous defmontrant la fuffifance & bonneintention du personage je

vous prieray feulement fuivant ce quc si devant je vous ay tant infantement impor-
tune que vous me permettiez defclaircir librement & ouvertement ce point de 'also-
ciation d' entre moy & mon filz & me defiler les mains pour proceder avec lui comme
jejugeray eftre requis pour son bien & le mien. Et j'entreprendz quoy que l'on
vous die & puifle en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit brouillon qui persuade par au-
cuns de vos miniftres a entrepris cette separation entre moy et mon enfant, & pour
y commencer je vous fupplie m'o&royer queje puiffe parler a ce justice clerk qui
vous a ete nouvellement envoyd pour mander par luy a mon filz mon intention iLu
cela, cc que je me promis que ne me refuserez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demon-
trer en effeta la bonne intention que vous m'avcz afleure avoir a l'accord & entre-

tiea

7

lien de natural devoir entre la mere & l'enfant qui dit en bonnes termes efire em-
pefche pour vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez micux def.
mentir & faire paroitre vofire bon defir a notre union que me donnant les moyens d'y
proceder, & non m 'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos miniflres pre-
tendent a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiftres praftiques entre nous.
La lettre porte que l'aflociation n'elf pas pafTe,auffi ne luy al-jejamais dit,bienque mon
filz avoit accepte; & que nous en avions convenu ensemble, comme l'ate sign de
fa main, & ces lettres tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce memc
ternoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambaffadeurs & perfoune de credit, s'ex-
cufant de ne l'oser faire publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces pour
vous resister d'avant de fe declarer si ouvertement eflant journellement persuade au
contraire par vos minifires qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck le
faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe malheu-
reux que de s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne
puis penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la Chretiente le vou-
liliez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediction,
ains qne plutos introviendr.z pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop juste & evi-
dant devant Dieu & les hommes Helas & encores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays
donner avec droit ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife a vous, &
fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne en foye pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete
des uns ne prevale defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la plus
grande afflition qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous sup.
plie de me mander en cas qu'il per fife en cette m'efconnoifTance de son devoir, que de
luy ou de moy il vous plailt advouer pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecolle, & si vous
aves agreable de pourfuivre avec moy a part la trait6 commence entre nous de quoy
je vous requiers fans plus atendre de response de ce mal gouverne enfant vous en re.
querrant avec autant d' affTeion que je fens mon cccur oppress6 d'ennuy. Pour Dieu
fouvenez vous de la promelte que m'avez saltes de me prendre en votre proteftior
me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de
touts vos ennemys & diflmulez amys, comme je le desire de me consoler & de me
venger de ceulz qui pourchaffent un tel malheur entre la mere & l'enfant. Je cefferay
de vous troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque consolation de vous
& de Dieu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xu
Mars.

Vofre fidelement vouee fceur

& obcilrante coufine,

A la rcyne d'Angleterre M A R IE Q

maclame ma bonno focur,
& couline.

No. lI.
Xx 2.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 1 i.)

A Testament by Q - Mary.

Cott. Lib. N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the rev?. Mr. Crawford late regius
Verpaf.L. i. profefor of church hiltory in the university of EdinbUrgh. Part of this paper,
P. 4 i s according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's fccretary, the reft with the queens

own hand. What is marked " is in the queen's hand..
n Onfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eftat de vie hnimhaine, si incertain, que

, perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt afleurer, finno foubs la grande et'infinie

misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contaf tons les dangers et ac-
cidens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette cap.tivit6, mefmes a cause
des grandes et longues maladies, o-j'ay ete detenu jufqules a present; j'ay advise tan-
dis que j'ay la commodite, on raison en jugement, de pourvotr-aRes;ma la falut de
mon ame, enterrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon ben,' eflat, &:aaires,
par ce present mon teflament et ordonnance de mon dernier volont6, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife S'. Esprit. Premierement, me recong-

noiflant indigne pecherefle avec plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfacion
par toutes les adverfites que j'ay fotffert; dont je la lone fa bonte. Et m'appuyant
fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame
a la benoifte et individue Trinitcs et aux prieres de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et
de tous les anges faincs and faintes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et intercedibn,
eftre ayde a obtenir de eftre faite participante avec eulx de felicite eternell. Et
pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et entier, defpouillant des a present tout ref-
sentiment des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me pourroient
avoir ete fa&es durant ma vie, par mes fubjets rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en re-
triet la vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme afFetio', que
je luy requers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et celles que je puis avoir offenfc
de faiAs ou de parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphs ccntain dirsions con:er.ling
the place and dirc&mfJanee of her burial.]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur. et conservation de 'Eglife catholique,

apoftolique et Romaine, en la quelle je veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcolle
mon filz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon t cs
grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin entre mes rebelles, je le lainfe feul ct unique hhei-
tier de mon royaume d'Efcoffe, de droift que je pretende jultement en la couronne
d'Angleterre et pays que en dependent, et generallement de tons et chacun mes meu-
bles et immeubles qui refteront apres ma mort, et execution de ce prefcnt teltament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite herefie, Je cede, tranf-

porte, et faifte don " de touts et chacuns mes droi&ts, qut je pretende et puis pre-
" tendre a la couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres droi&ts, feigneuries, ou royaulmes en
' dependantz, au roy catholique, on aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis,
" confentement de fa faintete; tant pour le voyr aujourdhuy le feul feurs appui de la
' religion catholique, que pour reconiQifance de gratuites favcurs que moy, et les miens
recommandez par moy, ont avons receu , y en ma plus grande necenjltc; ct

' |(,, " r efgitard

" refguard aufll an droli que luy mefme peut preiendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,
' je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine, et si
" il ce pleut de celle de Guise, pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
'" cofte de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que mon feul enfant, lequel
" eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoil de
" 'accepter, ou faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.

" Je layffe mon filz a la protection du roy, de prince, et ducs de Lorrayne et

' de- Guise, et du Mayne. aux quelz je recommende et son eftat en Efcoffe, et mon
" droi& en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au " compt6 de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu par feu son pere,

et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier et fuccefleur, d' obeyr en celt en droit
a mon volonte.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe troveront par moys deues,

tien mis caule de doit eftre faits " a Lohliven" etre promptement payce et acquitt6s,
et tout tort et griefs repar6s per lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la conscience.
Oultre, &c. [Fll,w izoo or three paragraphs cncerning particular legacs, and then is
atded] Fait au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour de -- Mil cinq cens foi-
xant & dix sept.

After a blank page fol'ows in the queen's hand

"Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamilton lequel fe montrera
' le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus conflant en religion, an jugement de - Ducs

_"e Lorraine et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auray donnay la
4 c'airgede trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a condition de fe marrier ou
- ' aller e .ia dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Fic'ow near two pages of particular legacys.

".. *' Et.le remets ma tante de Lenox au droiEt quelle peut pretendre a la cont6 d'An-

i- gous avant 1'acort fait par mon commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et
" le omte de Morton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy,.
" fur la promeffe de fa fidele aflifiance, si luy et moy encourions dangier et be-

oing d'ayde, ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fccretement au les nos ennemis rebellcs,.
" qu' attemtprient cntre fa vie, et pour cell efFeCt pris les armes, et out porte les ban-

nieres dfploiees, contre nous, je revoque aufli toute autre don que j luy ay fait
"i de cont. de Morton ur promelles de fes bons services a advenir, et entends que

la dite Conte foit reunie a la couronne, si cell fe trouve y partenir, comm fes tra-
hifons tant en la mort de mon feu Mary, que en mon banilFement, et pourfuit

't de la micnne l'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de fe jamays fervire de luy pour
" de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes parents, la quelle je crains ne s'eflende jufques
" a luy, le connoiffant du tout affedionne aux ennemis de mon droite en cc roy-

aume, du quel il eft penconnaire.
" Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, ct luy commande dctcnir
pres de luy ct s'enfervit, et je luy layfie le bien du conte de Boduel on oncle, en
" rcfpet qu'il elt de mon fang, mon filleul, et ma ell laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

' Je declare que mon frere ballard Robert Abbe de S. Croix na'en que par cir-

" convention Orkcnay, et que le ne fut jamays mon inteation, comme ii apret par
*' la revocation que j'ay fayte depd'?.et et auffi faitc d'avant In. algc de xxv. ans,

ct Cc

' ctats je veulx donc que Orkenay folt rune a la couronne comne une de plus
" necellairec pour mon filz, et fans la mayfbn ne pourra etre blen tenue.

"( Les flles de Morra ne parvient accefli heriter, ains reviene la conte a la Con.

' ronne, si il luy pleft ly donner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome l'en
." fiennc liple."

No. XII. (Vol. 11. p. ilz.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scctts.

April_ P ILEASE your nmjeft, I received your letter of the date the th of Novr. and
ia .

Li 37 . inl like manner has seen some part of the contents of one other of the fame
33, 9 . f. z6. date, direted to Monfr de Movifir, ambassador for his majesty the most Chriflian

king, both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your high.
ness desires to know the true cause of my bani(hment, and offers unto me all favour
if I lhall be innocent of the heinous fasts committed in the person of your hutband
of good memory, so by the other the fid ambassador is willer to declare unto me,
if your husband's murder could be laid justly against me, that you could not follicit
in my cause, neither yet for any person that was participant of that execrable sac,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you (hould have any means to do it;
your majelty's offer, If I be innocent of that crime, is most favourable, and your
desire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable; and therefore that I Ihould
with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth answer thereunto is mol reasonable, to the
end that your princely dignity may be my help, If my innocence hall sufficiently
appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in any matter, except in the
knowledge of the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility againt your
said huband, and not revealing of it, which I am allured was sufficiently known to him.
self, and to all that had judgment never so little In that realm; which also I was con-
ihrained to understand, as he, that was specially employed betwixt the earl Morton,
and a good number of your nobility, that they might with all humility intercede at
your majcfly'a hand fbr his relief, in such matters as are more specially contained in
ihe declaration following, which I am constrained for my own juflification, by this
letter to call to your majesty's remembrance. Notwithfanding that I am asured to
my grief, the reading thereof will not finally ostend your princely mind. It may
pleCle your mjefty to remember, that in the year of God iS66, the said earl of
rMorton, with dlvers other nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majesty,
ondl baniflcd your realm for insolent murder committed In your majefly's own chamber,
which tley nlledged was done by command of your hulband, who noiwithflanding
ftlirmid thtli he was compelled by them to subscribe the warrant given for that effect,
howouveLr the truth of that matter remains nmongft them it appertains not to me nt
tlis time to be curious true it Is that I was one of that number, that heavily of-
ekndcd agninfi your majcfy, and pallbd in France the time of our hanihmient, at the
delre ol tho refl, to humbly pray your brother the Molt Chritflan king, to Inter-
ceed thatl our offences might be pardoned, and your majesty's clemency extended to.
wadiil us, albeit divers of no finall reputation, In that realm, was of the opinion,
that the si td lac t merited neither to be requisite for, nor yet pardoned. Always fiich

wan

A pp NID X
82

was the careful mind of his majesty towards the quietness of that realm, that the
dealing in that cause was committed to Monfr. de Movifir, who was directed at that
time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom Al-
mighty God of his goodness may long preserve in happy estate and perpetual felicity;
the careful travel of the said de Movifir was so effeCtual, and your majesty's mind so
inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I was permitted to repair in
Scotland, to deal with earls Murray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Leding-
ton, in the name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Reven, Linfay, and re-
manent complefis, that they might make offer in the names of the said earl, of any
matter that might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your clemency to. be
extended in their favours; at my coming to them, after I had opened the effect
of my melage, they declared that the marriage betwixt you and your hu/band had
been the occasion already of great evil in that realm, and if your huiband hould be
lfffered to follow the appetite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effects; for helping of such inconvenience
that might fall out by that kind of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join
themselves in league and band with some other noblemen, resolved to obey your ma-
jelly as their natural sovereign, and have nothing to do with your hulband's command
whatsoever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band and confederacy
with them, they could be content to humbly request and travel by all means with
your majesty for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed, they desired
to know the said earl's mind herein ; when I had answered, that he nor his friends,.
at my departure, could not know that any such like matter would be proponit, and.
therefore was not inftruted what to answer therein, they desired that I should re.
turn sufficiently inftru&ed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptifin of your son,
whom God might preserve; this meflage was faithfully delivered by me at New-
castle in England, where the said earl then remained, in pretence of his friends and
company, where they all condescended to have no farther dealing with your hus-
band, and to enter into the said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the request of the Molf Christian king and the queen's majesty of.
England by their ambaffldors present, your majesty's gracious pardon was granted
unto them all, under condition always that they should remain banished forth of the
realm, the space of two years, and farther during your majesty's pleasure, which li-
mitation was after mitigated at the humble request of your own nobility, so that im-
mediately after the said earl of Morton repaired into Scotland to Quhittingaime,
where the earl Bodvell and secretary Ledington come to him; what speech passed.
there amongst them, as God shall be my judge, I knew nothing at that time, but
at their departure I was requested by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl
Bodvell and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with such answer as they hould
obtain of your majesty, which being given to me by the said persons, as God fiall
be my judge, was no other than there words, " Schaw to the earl Morton that the
" queen will hear no speech of that matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafki
that the answer might be made more sensible, secretary Ledington said, that the earl
would sufficiently underhtand it, albeit few or none at that time undcrftand what
paged amongst them. It is known to all men, als veill be railling letters pal: be-
twixt the laid earl and Lidington when they become in divers factions, as also ane
buck sett forth by the ministers wherein they affirm that the earl of Morton hs
confessed to them, before his death, that the earl Bodvell come to Qihittingaie

t®

to prepon the calling away off he king your hfban-d;- to the which proposition the
sAid earl of Morton affirms that he could give no anfwcr unto such time he might
know your majesty's mind therein, which he never received. As to the abomi-
nable murder, it is known too by the depositions of many persons that were executed
to the death for the committing thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and:
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit band for that effe&; by
this upleafant declaration, the most part thereof known to yourself, and the re-
mainder may be understood by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined in torture,
and that are extant in the cuffody'of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency
--o far as may concern any fast does appear sufficiently to your majesty. And as for
my dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but as what would ac-
cafe the vessel that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy of such as
immoderately use the fame. As for the special cause of my banilhment, I think
.the fame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the
earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have confefed before
he died, and would not be induced;; for lots of reputation,. to perform any part
thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punishment
I should deserve, I remit me to your majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentleman mhould be of his fame, reputation, and honour, and how
far ever ilk man hould abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin, notwith-
standing all the injuries I was constrained to receive at his hand all the time of his
government, and for no other cause, but for shewing of particular friendship to par-
ticular friends in the time of the lafft cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now
to accuse him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff, be such
kind of dealing obtained that'name of Ingrate. Always for my own part I have
been banished my native country those three years and four months, living in anxiety
of mind, my boll guds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and difponit
upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my last troubles at
the desire of Mons. de Movifir, attended to know your majefly's pleaure, and to
await upon what service it Ihould please your majesty for to command. Upon the
8th of April inft. your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto me,
that her highness tho't it expedient that I (hould retire myself where I pleased, I dec
clared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform that desire, until such time
as I Ihould receive it from your majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to dire&t me, until such time as I should have received further information
fiom you. Upon this occasion, and partly by permiflion, I have taken the hardrefs
to write this present letter, .whereby your majesty may understand any part of my
troubles pall. nd strait pefent. As to my intention future, I will never deny that
I am fully resolvcd to spend the reft of my days in your majesty's service, and'the
king your son's, whcrefoever I (hall be directed by your majesty, and for the better
performing thereof, if so (hall be her majely's pleaflure, to recommend the tryal
of my innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding narration, to the
k'ilg your son, with requelt that I may be pardoned for such offences as concerned
your m;ajely's service, and var common to all men the time of his les nige and per.
(onit to all, except to me, I ould be the bearer thereof myself, and be directed
in whtfuocvcr service it hould please your majesty for to command. Most humble
1 bcfcech your majecty to confidcr hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, thar

I may
84

I may have means to serve your majesty according to the sincerity of my meaning,
and so expecting your majesty's answer, after the killing your hand with all humi-
lity, I take leave from London.

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 140.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Douglas his ambassador

in England, Oftober 1586.
R Eferve up yourself na langer in the earnet dealing for my mother, for ye have Ctt. Lib.

done it too long; and think not that any your travellis can do goode ifhir Cal. C. o.

lyse be takin, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that are the special inflru- An Original.
mentis thairof: And theirfore, gif ye looke for the contineuance of my favour towartis in the kin.,' .s
you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but reade my letter wrettin to Wil. hand.
liame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in this re-
queift let me reap the fruisis of youre great credit there, ather now or never. Fair-
well. Ocober 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in England, probably from fecre-

tary Maitland. Nov. 27, 586.
B Y your letters ent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no pleasant fubje&) his A copy in the

majesty conceives well of your earnestness and fidelity in your negociations, as collect. of fir

also of Mr. Archibald's activity and diligence, whom you so greatly praise and recom- A. Dick. Vol.
mend. I wifl the issue correspond to his majefly's opinion, your care and travell, A. fol. 219.
and his great diligence as you write. His majesty takes this rigorous proceeding
against his mother deeply in heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in ho-
nour and otherwise. His highnesses ations and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of
what moment he elteems it. There is an ambaffade hortly to be direced, wherein
will be employed an earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will depend the
continuance or dissolution of the amity and good intelligence between the princes
of this isle. In the mean fcafon, if farther extremity be used, and his majelty's suit
and request disdained, his highness will think himself dishonoured and contemned
far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye may perceive his majesty's disposition
by his letter to you, which you hall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal accord-
ing thereto. I need not to recommend to you care, concerning your master's ser-
vice both in weill and in honour. As you and your colleague shall behave yourself
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your affection to your mafler. I
am glad of that I hear of yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Ar-
chibald, whose friends here make great account of his profefled devotion to the
queen, besides the duty he owes to the king's majefy her son. Farther I am con-
strained to remit to next occasion, having scarce time to cribble there few lines
(which of themselves may bear witness of my haie.) Wishing you a prosperous if-
fuc of your negociation, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Novr, 27', 1586.

VOL. 'II.Y
VOL. I.

Y y

T'IHE people, and all elates here are so far moved by the rigorous proceedings

againit the queen, that his majefly, and all that have credit are importuned, and
may not go abroad for exclamations against them, and imprecations against the
queen of England.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 143.)

To the king's majefy, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

: Co 5S86 TLEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the date the 28th of September,
from the Uri- the 5th of OEtober, which was the fame day that I dire&ed Wi. Murray to-
ginal in the wards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates, your
c.lle&t. of majesty may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach
fir A. Dick. unto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in the said letter be-
Vol. B. fol. for the receipt thereof, which by these presents I must repeat for answering of the
3'4 faidis. As to the first, so far as may concern the interceeding for the queen your

majesty's mother her life, I have divers times and in every audience travelled with
this queen in that matter, specially to know what her full determination muff be in-
that point, and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this proceed-
ing against her by order of justice was no less against her mind, than against their will
that loved her best: As towards her life he could give no answer thereunto, untill
such time as the law hath declared whether (he was innocent or guilty. Herewithall
it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a number of the aflociants that
earnestly prefled her that the law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so
long as she was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never this realm be in
quiet, neither her life, neither this late in assurance, and in the end they used this
protestation that if she would not in this matter follow their advice, that they hould
remain without all blame whatsoever should fall out; whereupon he had granted
them liberty to proceed, left such as had made the request, might hereafter have
charged herself with inconvenience if any (hould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both papist and pro-

teftant has behaved them, as it hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon di-
vers respects, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was conceived against
them, the other upon zeal, and care that they will be known to have for preservation
of their sovereign's life and slate in this perrilous time, upon consideration whereof,
I have been constrained to enter into some dealing with both, wherewith I made
her majesty acquainted; the proteflants, and such as in other matters will be known
to bear no small favour unto your majesty's service, hath prayed that they may be
excused from any dealing in the contrary of that, which by their oath they have
avowed, and by their speech to their fereign requefled for, and that before my
coming in this country; if they hould nowotherwife do, it would produce no bet-
ter effeEt but to make them fubje& to the accusation of their fovercign, when it
(hould please her to do it,. of their inconflancy, in giving councell whereby they
might incur the danger of ill councell-. and be consequent worthy of punishment.
Such of the papists, as I did deal with, went immediately, and told her majesty
what I had spoken to them, who albeit he underflood the matter of before, sent
for me and declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to them, willing me

for

for the well of my mhifler's service to abstain from dealing with such, as were not
yet sufficiently moved to think of my mafier as he did. I craved leave of her ma-
jelty, that I might inform them of your majesty's late behaviour towards her, and
the state of this realm, whereunto with some difficulty he gave her consent. At
my late departure from court, which was upon the 5th of this instant, and the day
after that the lords of this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majefly to go
northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to promise to have further speech in
this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to give full answer according to
your majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I had proponit in name
of your majesty. As to the 2d part concerning the association, and desire that the
promise made to the malter of Gray concerning your majesty's title may be fulfilled;
it appears by the said letter, that the very point, whereupon the question that may
bring your majetfy's title in doubt hath not been rightly at the writing of the said
letter confidered, which I take to have proceeded for lack of reading of the at of
parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to the laid master,
and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise againit your laid title, except that an
opinion should be conceived by there lords of this parliament that are so vehement at
this time against the queen your majesty's mother, that your majelty is, or may be
proved hereafter aflenting to her proceedings, and some that love your majefly's ser-
vice were of that opinion that too earnest request might move a ground, whereupon
suspicions might grow in men so ill asseted in that matter, which I tho't might be
helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of your majefly's innocence at
this time, and by reason that good nature and public honesty would constrain you to
intercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with itself, without any fur-
ther, some suspicion that might move ill affected men to doubt. In my former let-
ters I humbly craved of your majesty that some learned men in the laws, might be
moved to advise with the words of the association, and the mitigation contained in
the a& of parliament, and withall to advise what suspicious etes your majelty's re-
quest might work in these cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might
be bell moved to receive reason; and upon all these considerations they might have
formed the words of a declarator of your majesty's innocence to be obtained in this
parliament, and failing thereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame effiet
that might best serve for your majesty's service, and for my better information. Al-
beit this was my simple opinion, I hall be contented to follow any direction it fllall
please your majesty to give; I have already opened the fubltance hereof to the queen
of this realm, who seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to
deal therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of mind. This
being the fum of my proceedings in this matter, beides the remainder, contained in
other letters of several dates, I am constrained to lay the whole open before your
majesty, and to humbly pray that full information may be sent unto me what fur-
ther to do herein, in this middle time, while I hall receive more ample direAion I
shall proceed and be doing according to such direcion as I have already received.
And so, most gracious overcign, wifling unto your majesty all happy success in your
affairs, I humbly take my leave from London, this 16th of Oe&r 1580. Your ma-
jefly's most humble subjea and obed' servant.

Yy 2

A ma-

A memorial for his majesty by the MaRter of Gray.

; an. i 56. l T will please your majelty, I have tho't meeter to set down all things as they oc.
An Original [ cur, and all advertisements as they came to my earsi then jointly in a lettre.
in h own I came to Vare the 24th of DecL. and sent to Wm. Keith, and Mr. Archibald
h nd- in the Douglas to advertize the queen of it, like as they did at their audience. She pro-
cofle. of fir mifed the queen your majesty's mother's life hould be spared till we were heard.
A folck. V°. The 27th, they came to Vare to me, the which day Sir Rob'. came to Vare, where

they shewed us how far they had already gone in their negociation, but for that the
discourse of it is set down in our general letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will
testify unto your majesty that Wm. Keith hath used himself right honefily and just-
ly till our coming, refpe&ting all circumstances, and chiefly his colleague his deal-
ing, which indeed is not better than your majesty knows already.

THE 29th day of Dec'. we came to London, where we were no ways friendly

received, nor after the honest fort it had pleased your majefly use her ambassadors,
never man sent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we underflood of Mr.
de Bellievre his leave taking, and for that the cultom permitted not we sent our ex-
cufes by Mr. George Young.

THE ift day of JanrY, Wm. Keith and his colleague according to the custom

sent to crave our audience. We received the answer contained in the general letter,
and could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done that day your majesty
has it in the general, yet we was not out of expectation at that time albeit we
received hard answers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where our conferrence was, as

is set down in the general. I remarked this, that he that day said plainly the de-
taining of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that he pretended a fucceflion to
this crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majesty as ye shall hear a
little after.

THE th day we speak with the French ambassador, whom we find very plain in

making to us a wife discourse of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we
thanked him in your majesty's name and opened such things as we had to treat with
this queen, save the las point, as more largely set down by our general.

IT is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's advised me, that Bellievre his

negotiation was not effetual, and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chafteauneuf his
servants taken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he was fending in France,
for that they charge him with a conspiracy of late against the queen here her life.
It is alledged his servant has conferred the matter, but whom 1 Ihall trult I know
not, but till I fee proof I hall account him an honest man, for indeed so he ap-
pears, and one (without doubt) who hath been very inflant in this matter. I hew
him that the queen and earl of Leicelter had desired to speak with me in private,
and craved his opinion ; he gave it freely that he tho't it meetelt, I hew him the
reason why I communicate that to him, for that I had been fufpeted by ome of
her majesty's friends in France to have done evil offices in her service, that he Ihould
be my witness that my carneft dealing in this hould be a sufficient teflimony that
all was lyes, and that this knave Naui who now had betrayed her, had in that done

2 evil
. S8

Q

evil offices; he desired me, feeing (he saw only with other folks eyes, that T hould
no ways impute it to her, for the like (he had done to himself by Naue his persuasion.
I answered he hould be my witness in that.

THE 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which we got the oth day; at

the firfl, he said a thing long looked for hould be welcome when it comes, I
would now fee your mafler's offers. I answered, no man makes offers but for some
cause ; we would, and like your majesty, first know the cause to be extant for which
we offer, and lilewife that it be extant till your majesty has heard us. I think it be
extant yet, but I vill not promise for an hour, but yon think to shift in that fort. I
answered we mind not to (hist, but to offer from our foverecign all things that with
reason may be; and in special, we offered as is set down in our general, all was re-
fused and tho't nothing. She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicefler, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very defpiteftlly repeated all
our offers in presence of them all. I opened the last part and said, Madam for what
respect is it that men deal against your person or estate for her cause ? She answered,
because they think (he hall succeed to me, and for that (he is a papill; appearingly
said I both the causes may be removed, he said she would be glad to understand it.
If Madam, said I, all that (he has of right of succession were in the king our ibve-
reign's person, were not all hope of papists removed ? She answered I hope so.
Then Madam I think the queen his mother shall willingly demit all her rights in
his perion. She answered he hath no right, for (he is declared unable. Then I
said, if he have no right, appearingly the hope ceases already, so that it is not to be
feared that any man attempt for her. The queen answered, but the papists allow
not our declaration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's person by her aignation.
The earl of Leicester answered, She is a prisoner, how can (he demit. I answered
the demifion is to her son, by the advice of all the friends she has in Europe, and
in cafe, as God forbid, that any attempt conttit the queen here away, who hall
party with her to prove the demission or aflignation to be ineffeCtual her son being
opposite party and having all the princes her friends for him, having bonded for the
efficacy of it with his majesty of before. The queen made as he could not compre-
hend my meaning, and fir Robt opened the matter again, he yet made as tho' he
understood not. So the earl of Leicester answered that our meaning was, that the
king hould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the queen answered, then I put
myself in a worse cafe than of before; by God's passion, that were to cut my own
throat, and for a dutchy, or an earldom to yourself, you or such as you would cause
some of your desperate knaves kill me. No, by God, he hall never be in that place.
I answered he craves nothing of your majefly but only of his mother. The earl of
Leicefler answered that were to make him party to the queen my miflrefs. I said,
he will be far more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She would flay no
longer, but said he would not have a worse in his mother's place. And said, tell
your king what good I have done for him in holding the crown on his head since
he was born, and that I mind to keep the league that now stands between us, and
if he break it (hall be a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us a
farewell; but we efcheuit. And I speak craving of her that her life may be spared
for 15 days; he refused. Sir Rob'. craved for only eight days, he said not for
an hour; and so geld her away. Your majesty fees we have delivered all we had
for offers, but all is for nothing, for (he and her councel has laid a determination
that they mind to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council than her-

self,

self, which I like the worse; for without doubt, fir, it -Ihall cut off all friendship
ye had here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembring themselves, that they have medled with your mother's blood, good faith
they cannot hope great good of yourself, a thing in truth [ am sorry for; further
your majefly may perceive by this last discourse of that I proponit, if they had
meaned well to your majesty, they had used it otherwise than they have done, for
reason has bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind omething to speak in
this matter, because we look Ihurly our letters fliall be troucit by the way.

FOR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their determination, altho'

the queen again and the earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me in particular;
I mind not to speak, nor (hall not; but assuredly (hall let all men fee that I in par-
ticular was no ways tyed to England, but for the refpec of your majesty's service.
So albeit, at this time, I could not effctuate that I desired, yet my upright deal-
ing in it lhall be manifefled to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave au-
dience, where we mind to use (harply our inftrutions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than
the French ambafmador has said for his rafter.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in your service, and not the

effEct, for had it been double by any I might have here had credit, but being I came
only for that cufe I will not my credit hall serve here to any further purpose. I
pray God preferce your majesty and fend you a true and incere friendship. From
London this 2th of Jan. 1586.

I underfand the queen is to fend one of her own to your majesty.
To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and secretary to his majesty,

from the malter of Gray.

I zth Jan. s IM Y lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to his majefly, whereby your
1591), an Ori- l L lordflsip hall underfiand how matters goes here. And before all things I pray
gmal in the your lordship move his majesty to refpeEt my diligence, and not the effe& in this
c.ib1t. or fir negotiation, for I swear if it had been for the crown of England to myself I could
A. i k Vol. do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the world hall fee
Ai °l. 79 that I loved England for his majefly's service only. I look hortly to find your lord-

flip friend as ye made promise, and by God I hall be to you if I can. W. Keith
and I desired, if matters had gone well, to have run a course that your lordship might
have here been in credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for you as for
rnyfelf; which is to care for no credit here, for in conscience they mean not honelt-
ly to the king our sovereign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is gone
or hortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind of scruple I pray you to advise
him the best is not this way. They fay here, that it has been said by one who
heard it from you, that ye desired not the king and England to agree, because it
would rack the noblemen, and gave an example of it by king James the fourt, I
answered in your name that I was assured you never had spoken it. Mr. Archibald is
the speaker of it, who I assure your lord(hip has been a poison in this matter, for they
lean very mickle to his opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the king will
be fain to deal this way, either by fair means or neceflity, so that when he deals this
courfI he is assured to be welcome; to set down all that is pail of the like purpofcs,

£ it

it would consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meeting. There is
a new conspiracy alledged against the queen to have been intended, for the French.
ambassador resident three of his men taken, but I think in the end it hall prove
nothing. Mr. Stafford, who is ambassador for this queen in France, is touched with
it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our negotiation, that
all this council would not move this queen to medle with the queen of Scotland's
blood, till this invention was found forth. I remit all other things to the inclosed.
We minded to have sent to his majesty a discourse, which we have set down of all
our proceedings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized that the bearer
is to be truffant by the way for our pacquets, so that we defer it till our own coming;
this 1 have put in a privy part beside the pacquer, We hall I think take leave on
Fryday the 13th day, where we mind exactly to follow the rigour of our inltruc-
tions, for it cannot stand with the king's honour that we fay less then the French
ambassador, which was, le roy mon mailtre ne peult moins fair que fe refentir. So
that about the 24th I think we hall, God willing, be at home, except that ome ltay
come which we look not for. The queen and the earl of Leicelter has desired to
speak with me. I refused save in presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter-
mination which particular credit cannot help, and I crave no credit but for that
cause. It will please your lordship retire the inclosed from his majesty and keep it.
So after my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I commit you to God.
From London the i2th of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majety, from fir Robert Melvill.
IT may please your majesty, since the direction of our former letters, we had au- zoth Jan.

dience, and her majesty appeared to take our overtures in good part in presence 1585. An,

of her council; albeit no offence would take place with them, having taken refolu- Original in
tion to proceed with extremity, not the less it pleased her majesty to desire us to flay his own hand.
for two days on taking our leave, until he had advised upon our proposition; ince offir A. eco: ..
which time, her majesty is become more hard by some letters (as we are informed) Vol. A. fol..
has come from Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majesty takes not 18.
this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in effect, and had of before removed
the like opinion out of her majesty's mind, which by sinister information was cre-
dited, their reports has hindred our commiflion, and abused this queen, fearing in
like manner we (hall be flayed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well enough known to all men
how heavily your majefiy takes these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they
have by thcfe occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to hinder our negotiation.
As also Allynour Stewart is to be direted in their party, by our knowledge, who
has awantyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform, and we willed him.
to desist from this dealing, faying it does harm, and he is not meet for that purpose,,
remitting to your majefly's good direction to take order herein as we hall be answer-
able to your majesty's not to omit any point we have in charge, as the truth is, the
mailer of Grhaye has behaved himself very rightly and difcrcetly in this charge, and:
evil tayne with be divers in their parties who were of before his friends. We have
been behalding to the menltrals who has born us befl company, but has not been
troubled with others. Wylzeme Kethc hath left nothing undone that lie had in.

charge.

charge. As for matter Archibald he has promised at all times to do his dewoyr,
wherein he hall find true report made to your majefly, craving pardon of your ma-
jefty that I have been so tedious, after I have kifled your majelty's hand I humbly
take my leave. Praying God to grant your majesty many good days and happy, in
whose protecion I commit your majesty at London, the 2oth of Jan. 1 586.

SIR,

A LB E IT Mailer George has not been in commiflion, he is not inferior in his

service to any of us, as well by his good advice and diligent care he takes for the
advancement of your service, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the king's majesty, from the mater of Gray and fir Robert Melvill.

2zif Jan. p LEASE it your majesty in the last audience we had, finee our last advertiement,
1586. An P by Wm. Murray, we find her majesty at the resuming our offers something miti-
Original in gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, before we got our leave, at
the collec. of our reasoning, certain of the council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir Christopher
fir A. Dick. Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart being present in the chamber, gave.
Vol. A. fol. little hare of any great contentment to have her from her former resolution,

I80. now caflin in perplexity what he should do, always we left her in that Itate, and

since have daily pressed conferrence with the whole ouncil, which to this hour we
have not yet obtained. This day we have sent down to crave our leave. The
greatest hinder which our negotiation has found hitherto is a persuasion they have
here that either your majelty deals superficially in this matter, or that with time ye
may be moved to digest it, which when with great difficulty we had expugnit, we
find a new that certain letters written to them of late from Scotland has found some
place of credit with them in our contrare. So.that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a special meflage, they have made choice of fir Alexander Stewart to
try your highness's meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty to like of their pro-
ceedings, wherefrom no terror we can fay out unto him is able to divert him, he
has given out that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts not to help
this matter at your highness's hand. If he come there that errand, we think your
majesty will not oversee the great disgrace that his attempts liall give us here, if he
be not tane order with before that be further heard, and if so be that any other
be dircted (as our intelligence gives us there hall) our humble suit is to your ma-
jefty, that it may please your highness to hear of us what we find here, and at what
point we leave this matter with her majesty, before that they find accidence, the
ca:uses whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your majelty for the
present to God's eternal protection. From London this 21ft of Jan. 1586.

No, XY.
92

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL
A P P E N D I X,

I had no opportunity of feeig several of the following papers, tll those feets of ti

hj/ory, to wbich they relate, were printed fs. Fr this reason no references are
made to them there ; bt I have supplied that dsea by marking the particular pas-
fages in the hiloty which they irve to illuirate.

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 358. Line o.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the earl of Bothwell and ldy

Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
.Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.

POUN the 29 of Apryle 15 17, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert Malt-
land dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson doetor in the laws, two of
the senators of the college of jullice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alex-

ander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edn ; compeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, pro-
curator for Jean Gourdoune countes of Bothwell, conflitute be her for purfewing of
ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her contra James erie Bothwel her husband
for adultry, committed be him with Befie Craufurde, the pursuers servant for the
time; and ficklyke, for the said erie, compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who efter he
had pursued and craved the pursuer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just
caus to purfew the said a&tion, and obtained it, denyd the libell, and the said Mr.
Harrie took the morne, the last day of Apryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The
quhilk day, having produced some witnesses, he took the next day, being the of
.May, to do farther diligence. Upon the quhilk of May, he produced some moe
witnesses, and renounced farther probatioune. After quhilk, he desired a term to be
afigned to pronounce sentence. To whom the said commilrars afligned Satterday
next, the 3 of May, to pronounce sentence therein, fecundum lligata et probata,
quilk accordingly was given that day in favour of the purfewar.

AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be the erl of Bothwell contra

his lady, for to have their marriage declared nul, as being contracted againfl the c-
nons, without a dispensation, and he and his lady being within degrees defendand, viz.
ferdis a kin, and that wyfe for expeding of this proces, there was a commiffioune
grantit to the archbishop of St. Androis to cognoce and determine it, and Rot. biflop
of Dunkeld, William bishop of Dunblane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glaf-

Voi. If. Z gow,

gow, and parson of Egelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and Mr. George Cooe
chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne Manderltonne chanon in Dunbar and pre-
bendar of Peltoune, or any ane of them. This commifione is datit 27 Aprile
1,567, was presented to two of the saids commissioners,. viz. Mr. Andr. Crawfurd
and Mr. John Manderitoune on Satterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne parson
of Auldhamltocks, procurator for the erie of Bothwell, who accepted the delega-
tioune, and gave out their citation by precept, dire.ed, Decano Chriflianitates de
Hadingtone, nec non vicano feu curato eccle. parochia de Crcichtoune, feu cuicunq;
alteri cappellano debite requifitis, ser. summoning at the said eries in/fance, both of
the lady personally if lhe could be had, or otherways at the parofche kerk of Creich-
toune the time of service, or at her dwelling place before witnesses, primo, fecundo,
tertio et peremptorie, unico tamen contextu protuplice edito. And likeways to be
witnefes in the said matter, Alex. bihop of Galloway, who did marry the said erie
and his lady, in Halereud-houfe kirk, in Feb. 565, fir John Bannatyne of Auch-
noule juflice clerk, Mr. Robert Creichtoun of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. Da-
vid Chalmers provost of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael- abbot
of Melrofs, and to compear before the said judges, or any one of them in St. Geils
kirk in Edr. on Monday the 5 of May, be thamfelves, or their procurators. Upon
the said 5 day, Mr. John Manderftoun, one of the juges delegat only being pre-
sent compeared the fame procurators for both the parties that were in the former

Two words in proces, Mr. Edmond Hay ( articulatlie ) and some of the wit-
the parentl.e- neffes summoned produced, and received for proving of the fame. The said procu-
sis illegible. rato\ renounced fardcr probatioune, and the judge assigned the morne, the 6th of

May, ad publicandum produfta, nempe depositiones ipforum tetfium. The quhilk
day, post publicatas depositiones prediEtas, Mr. Hen. Kinroffe, procurator for the
lady inflanter objecit objeciones juris generaliter, contra pro duse, infuper re-
nunciavit ulteriori defenfioni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hinc inde
caufa, judex predi&tus ftatuit craflinum diem pro termina, ad pronunciandam fuam
fententiam definituram, ex deductis coram eo, in prefenti caufa et proceffa. Con-
form hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said judge gave out, his fen-
tence in favour of the erie, declaring the marriage to. be, and to have been null from
the beginning, in respect of their contingence in blood, which hindered their law,
ful.marriage without a dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXXII. Vol. I. p. 401 ] Line 6.

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth,

MADAM,

Cott.Lib.Cal. A Lthough the neceflity of my cause (which maketh me to be importune to you.)
C. i. A copy, - do make you to judge that I am out of the way ; yet such as have not my
and pro ably palion, nor the respects whereof you arc persuaded, will think that I do as my cause
. trmr.fltioo. coth require. Madam, I have not accuscd you, neither in words, nor in thought,

to have used yourself evil towards me. And I believe, that you have no want of
good underlanding, to. keep you fiom perfwafion against your natural good incli-
nation. But in the mean time I can't chufe (having my senses) but perceive very
evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hither. I thought that I had si'-
ficicntly difcouried unto you the discommoditics, which this delay bringeth unto

1en.

'me. And especially that they think, in this next month of August, to hold a par-
liament against me and all my servants. And in the mean time, I am flayed here,
and yet will you, that I hould put myself forther into your country, (without fee-
ing you) and remove me further from mine; and there do me this dishonour, at the
requefi of my rebels, as to fend commissioners to hear them againfl me, as you wold
do to a mere subject, and not hear me by mouth. Now,, madam, I have promised
you to come to you, and having there made my moan and complaint of these re-
bels, and they coming thither, not as poffeflors, but- as filbjecs, to answer. I
would have besought you to hear my justification of that which they have fairly et
furth against me, and if I could not purge myself thereof, you might then difch;arg
your hands of my causes, and let me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if
I were culpable I would be better advis'd; but being not so, I can't accept this dif-
honour at their hands, that being in pofeffion they will come and accuse me before
your commiflioners, whereof I can't like: And feeing you think it to be againfl
your honour and confignage to do otherwise, I beseech you that you will not be
mine enemy, untill you may fee how I can discharge myself every way. And to
susser me to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain me; or at the eIat
to go into Scotland, with assurance that if there come any firangers thither, I will
bind myself for their return without any prejudice to you, or if.it pleis you not to
do thus, I protest that I will not impute it to fallhood, if I receive strangers in my
country, without making you any other discharge for it. Do with my body as you
will, the honour or blame flall be yours. For I had rather die here, and that my
faithful servants may be succoured (tho' you wou'd not so) by strangers, than to
,susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in time to come, particular
commodity. There be many things to move me to fear that I shall have to do, in
this country, with others, than with you. But forasmuch as nothing hath followed
upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may happ. I have as lees to
abide my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further, it pleated you to give li-
cence to my subjects to go and come. This hath been refused by my lord Scroop
and Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, bccaufe I would not depart
·hence to your charge, untill I had answer of this letter, tho' I fiewed them that you
required my answer, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

THE- one is to let you briefly uhderftand, I am come to you to make my moan

to you, the which being heard, I would declare unto you mine innocency, and then
require your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint to
God, that I am not heard in my just quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have
rcfpecct thereunto, as my cafe rcquircth and to you, madam, firlt of all, when you
shall have examined your conscience before him, and have him for witnces. -
And the other, which is to come further into your country, and not to come to
your pretence, I will cfteem that as no favour, ut will take: it for the contrary,
obeying it as a thing foicced In the mean time, I bfccclh you, to cltu1rn to m:
ny lord !Icrrics, for I can't be without him, having none of my counl id lc'c, adl
also to fuflir' me, if it please you, withoult firther delay, to delpart hence whli!lh.r-
soever it be out of this country. I am sure you will not deny me this Iilnupl rcqlll it
.for your honour's fake, feeing it doth not plcafe you to ulfe yourl ntulll g,",oducl.:
towards me orherwife, ad secing that of mine own accord, I am come hilher, let
· e depart again, with yours. And if God permit mv caufcs to fuccccd ell,

~Z z ~ 2~Ilial
Z .z 2

for my lord Fleeming, feeing that upon my credit you have suffered him to go home
to his house, I warrant you he hall pals no further, but hall return when it hall
Perhapsfor. please you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. Butfrom

Dumbarton I anfver not, when my L. Fleeming hall be in the Tower. For they
which are within it, will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't afure them of
yours; no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to
have more refpe& to my servants and to my estate, than to my life. Good filler be
of another mind, win the heart, and all hall be yours, aid at your commandment.
I thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen. you. Alas ! do not as the
er-pent, that ftoppeth his hearing, for I am no inchanter, but your filler, and natural
cousin. If Cefar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint of an advertiser,.
he had not so died; why hould princes ears be flopped feeing that they are paint-
ed so long ? Meaning that they flould hear all and be well advised, before they an-
ifer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and less of the chamelion, to turn.
you to my likeness, and tho' I (hould be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are sufficiently armed with conflnncy and with jultice, which I require of God, who.
give you grace to use it well with, long and happy life. From Carlile, the 5th of
July, 568.

t

g

No. XXXIII. (Vol'. I. p. 403, Line iz.)
A letter from my lord Herries to my brd- Scroop, and fir F. Knollis,-

September 3d,. 1568.

Cott. Lib t

o Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordfips, I am informit by James Borth-

Cal. C. anO- JVL wick, lately come from the queen's majesty your foverane, that it is fchawin
riginal in his to her highness, I fhuld have ridden. in Crawfurdmure, fen mylatf cuming into this
own hand. realm, upon the earl of Murray's dependants.. And that I fuld have caufit, or been

of counfall to Scottifmen to have ridden in. Ingland, to flay or fpulzie her majelly's
subje&s.

My lords, I thought it right needful: becaufe-your lordship's is, be your foverane,

commanded to attend upon the queen's majefly my miflrefs, so having-daily access
inthir matters, to declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your lordthip's will,
for God's cause, certificate the queen your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife had knowledge of ony

Scottifman's ryding in England, to do the fubjets thereof hurt in bodies or goods,
fene the siege of Leith; and'as I understand it hall be found true, that gif ony ic
open hurt be done, it is by the queen my sovereign's disobedients, and that I have
not ridden nor hurt no Scottifhman, nor commanded any.hurt to be done to them,,
fen my coming from the queen's majefly of England, it is.well kcnd, for that never.
ane will complain of me.

I HAVE done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the earl of Murray has done,

and will be loatheft to do them any harm than he will. Except the queen's ma.
jetly your sovereign, command fie false reports to be tryit, quereof this is altogid-
der an inventit leaflng her grace fall be trublit, and tyn..the hearts of true men.,

hew,.

A P E ND X.
96

r

here, quhom of sic report fall be made, that baith would serve hir, and may, bet-
ter than they unworthy liars.

MY lords, I understand the queen's majesty your sovereign is not contented of

this bruit, that there hould ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of
Chattlerault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the counfall of their cuming, nor
has no sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's ma-
jefly your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is true indeed, her grace
self is all the wyitt, and the counfall that will never let her take order with my maif-
trefs cause. For that our sovereign havand her majefly's promise, be writing, of'
luff, friendship, and assistance gif need had so requirit, enterit that realm, upon
the 6 day of May, fen that time the queen's majefly has commanded me diverse
times to declare he would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in
peaceable poffeflion of this realme, and when I required of her majesty, in my maif-
trefs name, that her highness wold either do for her, (as her special trust was he
wold) according to her former promises, or otherwise give her counfal wold not con-
sent, (as I how her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then that (he would permit her
to pass in France, or to some other prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk
was agains all reason) that (he would permit her to return in her awin countrie, in
sic fempil manner as he came out of it, and said to her majefly ane of thir, of her
honour, would not be refufit, fecand that (he was comed in her realm upon her
writings and promises of friendship. And ficklike, I said to her highness, gif my
maiflrefs had the like promire of her nobility and eltates, as he had of herself, I
Ihould have reprovit them highly, gif thay had not condefcendit to one of thir three,
and so I fay, and so I write, that in the warld it hall be maift reprehendable, gif
this promise taketh not other good effe&, nor yet it does. Notwithstanding, I get
gud answer of thir promises of friendship made to my sovereign, and to put her
grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary working by
Mr. Middlemore, dire&it from her highness to flay the army that cuift down our
houses. And alfua, in the preceding of this late pretendit parliament, promised
twenty days before the time to myfelfto have caused it been difchargit. And yet
contrary to this promise, have they made their pretendit manner of forfaulture of
3 men of guid reputation, bishops, abbotis, and barronis, obedient subjeCts to our
sovereign, only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause was taken upon hand be the

queen's majesty of that realm, an hundred thousand pounds Scots worth of her awin
true fubjets geir, under the color of their law, groundit upon their false, trea-
fonable, flowin, authority.

THe murders, the opprelflons, the burningst the ravishing of women, the de-

ftrution of policy, both ecclesiastical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my
former writings I said it was lamentable to ony christian man to hear of, except
God gif grace, the profeflion of the evangile of Jesus Chrifl profelfit be your prince,
counfall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamity that has fland betwixt.
the realms, many of my countrymen will doubt in this article, and their proceedings
puttis my self in fan& Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that realm, upon quhais promie and

honour my maiRtrefs came there, as I have said, will leave all the French writings,.
and French phrases of writings, quhilks amongis them is over meikle on baith the<..
,fides.unfit, and plainly, according to the auld true custom of Ingland and, Scotland,

quhcrcin.
3

*quherein be a word promift truth was observed, promise, in the name of the eter-
nal God, and upon the high honour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of
Ingland, quhereof she is defcendit, and presently wears the diadem, that (lie will
put my maiftrefs in her awin country, and cause her as queen thereof in her autho-
rity and trength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day with-
in two months, at the farthest, as we underfland this to be our weill, fua will
we, or the mail part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frcnchmen, and their
evil French phrases togidder. And therefore, and for the true perpetual friendship
of that realm, will condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty God,
keep ic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble and wife men can condescend
upon, for the weill of this haill island. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen your sovereign, quhilk I hew to your lordships felfis, both in religion, in
the punishment of the earl Bothwile, for the queen's last butband's slaughter, and
for a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

DOUBTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic time and friendful work-

ing, as may gif us occasion baith to forgett Middlemore, and this late pretendit par-
liament, we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our will to reft where
flie is, under the promise of friendship. As I have baith said, and will ever affirm,
made be your sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coming in that realme,
and seek the help and moyen of French, or Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable
and false pretendit authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MY lords, I desire your lordships confider, that it is he, that maif desires the

amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland to continue, and of a poor man belt cause has,
that writs this.

MY brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your lordships commun-

ing with him, it appearit to him, your mind was we shold susser the earl of Mur-
ray to work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the qucen's
majelty, and her highness wald fee it reformit. My lords, her majety will be over
meikle troublit to reform, the wranges we have fuftainit already. For I am sure,
gif reason and juflice may have place, our mailtrefs, and we her fubjees, have re-
ceived express wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds tferling, in the time
of this unhappy government, feeing the reformation of fa great causes, comes, now
a days, so flowlie, and the ungodly law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle praCtis'd,
I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordships would fua
mean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign
sic advertisement thereof, as your good wisdoms hall find in this cause meet. It
will be true and friendful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases, nor
boasting, and finding little other effect, that will cause us to hold away the French-
men. This is plainly written, and I desire your lordships plain anfwcr, for in
truth and plainness langefi continues gud friendllip, quhilk in this matter I pray
God may lang continue, and have your lordships in his keeping. Off Drumfreis,
tthe 3d day of September 568.

Your lord(hips at my power

to command leifully

H E R RI S.

Queen Mary to Q Elizabeth.
Mi/l AD AM E ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres, d'une mefme date: 27 Aug. 568.

l'une, ou vous faites mention de 1'excuse de Monfr. de Murra pour tenir son Cott. Lib.

pretendu parlement. qui me femble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que je Cal. i. an 0-
m'eflois perfuadce n'avoir par voflre promeffe, quant a n'ofer donner commission de riginal.
venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblefle alors, je vous refpons,.
qu'ils n'bnt que trois ou quatre d'avantage, qui eulfeut auffi bien dit leur opinion
hors de parlement, qui n'a este tenu tant pour cette effect, mais pour faire ce qu'ex-
preement nous avions requis efire empcfch6s, qui eft la forfalture de mes fubjets
pour m'avoir eftes fidelles, ce queje m'affurois, jufques a hier, avoir eu en promeffe
de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup e Maiflre Knoleis vous induire a ire
contre eulx, voire, a les enfayre refentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay mal p is, j'en
fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il me montrerent, et leur parole, je
lay fidivulguement affiuray que pour vengeance que j'en defirafe, si non mettre dif-
ference entre leur faux deportemens, et les miens sinceres. Dans voftre lettre auffi.
datee du lome d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots. I think your adverse party, upon
" my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament, at all; and if they do, it
" hall be only in form of an assembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm,
"and in what fort; for otherwise, if they fiall proceed in manner of a parliament,
"'-with any act of judgement against any person, 1 hall not, in any wife, allow
" thereof; and if they hall be so overseen, then you may think the fame to be
" of no other moment, than the former procedures: and by such their rash man-
" ner of proceeding, they shall most prejudice themselves; and be asured to find

me ready to condemn them, in their doings." Sur qnoy, j'ay contremande mes

ferviteurs, les faifant retirer, fouffiant felon voflre commandement d'etre fauffement
nommes traitres, par ceulx, qui le font de vray; et encore d'etre provoques par
efcarmons dies, et par prinfes de mes gens et lettres, et au contraire vous etes in-
formee que mes subjects ont evahis les voftres, Madame qui a fait cc rapport n'est pas
homme de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont eftes mes rebelles depuis Ic
commencement; enquires vous, s'ils n'eftoient a Donfris aveques eulx, j'avois offrii
refpondre de fa frontiere, ce qui me fut refuse, ce qui m'endevroit afles defcharger,
neanmoins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelite, et de leur falfite, s'il vous me fayte
donner le nom des coulpables, et me fortifier, je commanderay mes fubje&ts les pour-
fuivre, ou si vous voules que ce foit les voflres, les miens leur ayderont; je vous
prie m'en mander voftre volont6, au refte mes fubjets fidelles feront refponfables a
tout ce que leur sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les vofires, ni les rebelles, defpuis que
me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux Francois, j'efcrivis que 1'on m'en fit
nulle pourfulte, car j'efperois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois befoign,-je ne fceu
si le dic aura en mes lettres mais, je vous jure devant Dieu que je ne fay chose du
monde de leur venue, que ce que m'cn aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
du monde, et ne le puis croire pour ceft occasion, et si ils si font, c'e(t fans mon fcetr
ni confentement, Pourquoy je vous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je
fuis prest de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mencir Knoleis, ct vous affire que vofire
amit6, qu'il vous plef m'offrir, sera refcne avant routes les choses du monde, quant
France fervit la pour prefler leur retour a cefle condition, que prenics mes affaires en
mcin, en foeur, et bonne ami, comme ma France eft en vous; mais une chose feule
me rcnde confue, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre orcille, laquelle ne.pouvant avoir
bar parolle, toutcs mes actions vous font defguifcs, et falfcmcat raportecs, par quoi

IL'.

'il me'lf impossible de m'afTu'rer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait, pour
defirure voflre bonne volontd de' moy ; par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous
'faire entendre ma sincere et bonne affecion, laquelle je ne puis si bien defcrire, que
mes enemis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne foeur, gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir,
n'entres en jalousie pour faulx raports de celle qui me desire que votre bonne grace;
jc me remettray fur Melter Knolels a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte, et apres
vous avoir bais6e les mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en fante, longue et heu-
reuse vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere partir, qu'aveques vofire
bonne grace, quoyque les menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d' Aouft.

No. XV. [Vol. II. p. 68. line 9.]

Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3, 1580-I.

SIR,

C-tt. Lib. H AV E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter of the 25th of
Calig C. 6. the lalt directed unto his lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with

the king and his council, in your second audience, wherewith having made her
majesty acquainted, he seemed somewhat to mi/like, that you hould so long defer to
deal for the nla'genent of Empedocles. But I made answer in your behalf, that I
thought you were directed by the advice of the said Empedocles friendr, in the fol-
liciting of'that cause, who knew what time was fittelt for you to take to deal there-
in, with mol effe&t, and beftRfuccefs, with which answer, her majesty did in the
end reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

YOUR putting of us in hope that D'aubigny might easily be won at her majefly's

devotion, was at first interpreted to have been ironie spoke by you. But since it
feemeth you insist upon it, I could wish you were otherwise persuaded of the man,
or at left kept that opinion to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently proved, was only to advance
the queen's liberty, and reception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you may
use to good purpose there, hall partly give you some light; there is no man here can
be persuaded that he will change his purpose, for o small advantage, as he is likely
to find by it, and therefore you shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that
tfring, as I have already written to you. The prince of Orange fending, I fear
will not be in time that it may do any good; for besides that these people are in
themselves flow in their resolutions, their own affairs are, at present, so great, their
slate so confued, and the prince's authority so small, that he cannot so soon take or-
der in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or careless in the
matter, having, more than three weeks past, sent one about it, from whom never.
thelefs I do yet hear nothing. The letters, you desire ihould be written thither by
the French ministers, I have given order to Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I
doubt uot, will carefully perform it, so that, I hope, I hall have them to fend you by
the next. And so I commit you to God. At Whitehall the third of February 1580o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.
This letter is an original, and in fjme parts of it wrote in cyphers and explained by

another hand. By Empedocles is undejiood Moprton, by Villenarius the king of S&ots,
D'daubigney is marked thus o--._o,

. . .; 3 Feb. X5i80.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given, ad in time to be bet-

ter manifested, being now thought meet to be in convenient fort used,
and laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing the king, the no-
bility,: and that state.

IR S T, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubigny was prvy Cott. ib.
and acquainted with la Nave the king's mother's secretary, coming into Scot- Calig. C. 6.

land, and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and An Original,
esteem it-an evil president for princes, that fubjecs might have power to deprive
their lawful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded, by any mean,
to defeat him, either of the present government of that realm, or yet of the posses-
sion of the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame to him; and
that for the accomplilhment of that assurance, the king should have been advised and
drawn to have governed, for some hort time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny to rule
as governor of the prince, by commiflion from the queen his mother, untill the
king's enemies were suppressed; after which time, D'Aubigny hould have power
given to establish and resign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's voluntary
consent, whereby all such, as had before been in ation against the queen or her
authority, might be brought to: fland in the king's mercy. And for that the king
might live n more surety, D'Aubigny should be declared both second person in fuc-
ceflion of that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and that D'Aubigny,
before his departure out of France, received commifion from the King's mother to
the effects remcmbred, or near the fame. That in this behalf he had conference
with the bilhops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with fir James Baford, with which
persons, and with the duke of Guise, he had and hath frequent intelligence, and
by fir James Baford he was advised to confer with the lord John Hamilton before
his repair into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent one
John Hamilton to the said lord John to excuse him in this part, alledging, that he
did forbear to come to him, left thereby he hould marr or hinder greater effects to
be executed by him.in Scotland.

TH A before his coming into that realm, the nobility and country were well

quieted and united in good concord, with great love betwixt the king and nobility,
and amongst the noblefte, but he hath both drawn the king: againfi sundry of the
chiefeft of his nobility,. that have been most ready, and have expended their blood
and poffeflions to preserve religion, and defend the king's person, his government
and etate, and also hath given occasions of great suspicions and offence to be en-
gendered betwixt the king and his nobility, and especially with such as have been
in ation against the king's mother, and her authority, who by force and means of
the said commiflon and prafcice, hould have been brought into most dangerous.
condition; ad who also may find themfelvce in no small perril, whiles he possesses
the. king's ear, abufeth his presence, and holdeth such of the principal keys and:
ports of his realne, a; he p.ftinly enjoyeth.

lot

Tt AT
VOL. II.

A a a

THAT he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great benefits done to

him and- his realm, by the queen's majefly of England, but also to requite the fame
with sundry signs of great unthankfuilnefs, and wounding therewith the honour of
her majefly, and thereby hath adventured to (hake the happy amity long time conti-
nued betwixt those princes. .

AND whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters and good offers,

to have paed, and been done betwixt them: In which refplet, the king and council
having resolved to write to her majesty, for her: highness' better fatsfa&tion in. the
late negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had -given order to the
king's secretary to frame that letter: He minding to break the bond of amity in fun-
der, willed the secretary to be sure that nothing ih6uld be iferted in that letter,
whereby the king (hould crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to cut off all
loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the declaration of the'fid secretary may be
better learned, and thereupon further approved;

THAT under the hope and encouragement of-:DAublgnys prote&ion, Alexander

King presumed with that boldnefl to make' his lewd hrangdue. and by his means
lath hitherto escaped chastisement and correction, due for his offence.

THAT fir James'Baford, condemned- of:the laughter of the King's father, hath

been called into the realim by Lennox, without the privity of the knag.. And where-
as the said fir James found in a green velvet desk, late the earl of; Bothwell's and
saw, and had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that murder, and
can best declare and witness who were authors and executors of'the fame; he is
drawn by Lennox to suppress the truth, and to accuse such as he himself knoweth
to be innocent; and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may have due
trial, which, contrary to all justice, is by Lennox means denied.

This is the charge ag4nft D'A4bigny, mentoned in.thforegoing letter by afigngham..;
aut by. Bafrrd tFey mianir 7Yames Bal/for.

No. XVI. (Vol. IL. p. 102. Lie.: 18;).
The Scottilh queen's offers upon the effe& of her liberty propounded by

her secretary Naw, November 154.

Cott. Lib. Ca. FTHE queen my mistress being once well assured of your majesty's amity,
lig. C. 8. A J[ 1. WILL declare.openly that Ihe will (as it is sincerely her meaning) firait-
Qopy. ly to join unto your majtRy, and. to the fame to yield and bear the chief honour; and;

refpe, before all other, kings and princes in, Chriflendom.

2. SHE will fwenr, and protest solemnly, a sincere forgetfullnefs of all wrongs

which (he may pretend to have been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in
any fort or manner whatsoever, hew offence for the fame.

3. Ss will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own particular name, as

also for her heirs and.others descending of her for ever, your majesty forjult, true,
and Lawful queen of England.

4. AND.

3»
o02

4. AN D consequently, will renounce, as well for herself, as for her aid heirs, all

rights and pretences which lde fiay claim to the crown of England, during your
majefty's.life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all as and hews, by her heretofore made, of pretence to

this said crown to the prejudice of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms
and stile of qiueen 'of England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lord
and husband. -

6. Sa will renounce the pope's bull, fdr so much as may be expounded to turn

in her favour, and for her behoof, touching the deprivation of your majesty, and
Will declare that she wilt never help and serve herself with it.

7. SE will riot prosecute, during your niajefty's life, by open force or other-

ways; any publick declaratioii of her right in' the 'fidceflioii of this realm, so as fe-
cret assurance be. given unto her, or at the leaf publick promise, that no deciding
thereofifhall be made in the prejudice 6f her, or of the king her fun, duling your
majesty's life, nor fter your decease, untill such- time as they have been heard there-
upon, in publick, free, and general alfembly of the parliament. of the said realm.

8. SH.E will not practice, directly or indirectly, with any of your majefiy's sub-

jets, neither within nor out of your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or so-
reign, againt. your majesty' and your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for
civil and politick g6overniierit

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your subje&s declared rebels, and
convicted of treason. againff you,

o. SHE will enter. into the afrociaiion, which was hewed her at Wingield

for the frety of your' majefly's life, so as there be mended or right expricated
some clauses, which.1 will hew to your majesty, when I hall have the copy thete-
of, as I have before tiine required.

it. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any war or trouble

againfltthis fate, and will' renounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
made inher favour for' that refpe&.

12. FURTHERMORE; this realm being aftailed'by any civil or foreign war, he

will take part with your majesty, and will affill- you in your defence with all her
forces and means, depeidinig of lierfelf, and with all her friends of Christendom.

i.3. AND to that effe&, for the mutual defence and maintenance of your majelly,

and the two realmnsoftihis i', (he will enter with your majefly in a league defen-
five, as shall be more partiiularly a'dvised, and will perfrade as much as in hei,'
the king her Ton to do the like. The leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm,
and especially the antient league between. France and Scotland, in that which liall
not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offehfive, having good afflirance, or secret de-

claration and acknowledgment of her right in the succession of this crown, and
prorife, tlat happening any breach betwixt France and this realm, (which he,
prayeth God never to happeg) the just value, of her dowry hall be placed for her
in lands of the revenue of the crown.

15. FOR aflurance of lier promises and covenants, he dotli offer to abide her-

felfin this realm for a certain time, (better holla e can she not'give than her own
person) which, so as lhe be kept in the liberty here before propounded, is not in
cafe to cfcape fecrctly out of this country, in the sickly ltate lhe is in, and with
the good order which your m;i.ilty canl take thiein.

A i i' z C. A ND

toi

16 AND in cafe your majesty do. agree to her full and whole deliverance, to re.

tire herself at her will out of this realm, the said queen of Scots he' will give fuffi
cient hostage for such time as will be advised.

17. IF he abide in this realm, he will promise not to' depart out of it, with-

but your licence,. so as it be promised unto her that her tfate, in such liberty as (hall
be accorded unto her, hall not be in any fort altered, untill after tryall to have at-
tempted against your life, or other'trouble of your etate.

18. IF The go into Scotland, the will promise to alter nothing there in the religion

which is now used there, he being suffered to have free exercise of hers, for her.
and her houlhold, as it was at her return out of France; and further, to pull out
every root of new division between the fubjets, that none of the fubjets of Scot-
land shall be sifted for his conscience, nor constrained to- go to the service of the
contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences done against her in Scot-

land, and things (hall remain there as they are at this present, for that refpe&t,
saving that which hath been done againfl her honour, which she meaneth to have
revoked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation between the nobi-

lity of the country, and' to cause to be appointed about the king her son, and in his
council, such as shall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the coun-
try, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majefly; in favour of the Scots lords.

banished. and refuged hither, upon. their due fubmifion to their princes, and your
majesty's promise to assist the said queen and king of Scotland againfi then, if they
happen to fall into their former faults.

22. SHE will proceed' to the marriage of the king her fn, with the advice and
good council of your majefly.

23. As he will pass nothing without the king her son, so dbth he. desire that

he' intervene conjointly with her in this treaty; for the greater and perfeaer affur-
ince thereof; for otherwise any thing can hardly be established to be found and
continue.

24. THE said Scotch queen trufteth, that the French king her good brother, ac-

cording to the good affection which he hath always. hewed her, and hath been
afresh testified unto me by Monfr. de Mannifliere for this said treaty, will very will-
ingly intervene, and will affit her for the surety of her promises.

25. AD so will the princes of the house of Lrrain, following the will of the said
king, will bind themselves thereunto.

26. FOR other kings and' princes of Christendom, he will allay to obtain the

like of them, if for greater solemnity. and approbation. of the treaty it be found to
be nece(fary.

27. SHE doth desire a speedy answer, and fiina concltifon of the premises, to
the end to meet in time with allinconveniencies.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to strengthen the said treaty, as made by

her of a.pure and frank will, flie defireth that demonstration be made of fame. re-
tafement. of her captivity,

Obj ecions-

Objetions against the Scottilh queen, under secretary Walsinghame's

hand, November 1584.

H E queen of Scots is ambitious, and flandeth ill affe&ed to her majesty, and:
therefore it cannot be but that her liberty mhould bring peril unto her majesty.

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papifis, and other ill affected sub-
jests, and greatly advance the opinion had of her title as successor.

THAT as long as he (hall be continued in her majesty's pofrefion, he may.

serve as it were a gage of her majesty's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the
danger he may be thrown into, in cafe any thing hould be done in. her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in the offence of her majefly.
November l What course were fit to be taken with the queen of Scots, Cott. Libi

1584. either to be enlarged or not. Cal. 8.

HE course to be taken with the said queen may be considered of in three
degrees; either,

i. To continue her under custody in that tfate (he now is.
2. To refirain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. OR to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. TOUCHING the first, to continue her under custody under that state she now is;

it is to be confidered, that the princes that favour that queen, upon the complaint (he
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commiseration towards her, and pro-
mise to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpose, her ministers follicir
them daily.

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, he acquainteth them with her of-

sers made to her majesty, which appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable
for her majesty, so as the refusal and reje&cing giveth her friends and favourers cause
to think her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better ground and rea-
son, attempt somewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, finding her cafe desperate,

will continue her pra&ice under hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her
delivery, but to attain to the present polffelion of this crown upon her pretended
title, as (he hath hitherto done, as appeareth, and is most manifest by letters and'
plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland, which hath pro-
ceeded altogether by her direction, whereby a gap is. laid open for the malice of
all her majesty's enemics, so as it appeareth that this manner of keeping her, with
flich number of persons as (he now hath, and with liberty to write and receive let-
ters, (being duly confidered) is offensive to the princes, the said queen's friends; ra-
ther chargeable, than .profitable to her majesty; and fubje& to all such practices as
may peril her majesty's person or slate, without any provision for her najefty's
safety, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. ToucIIING the second, to restrain her in a more Fhraighter degree of the li-
berty (he hath hitherto enjoyed.

l~e

1.03

IT may, at firlt ight, .e thought'a remedy ery apt to flop the course of the

.dangerous pra&cices flftered heretofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy
might prove very profitable,. if the realm of Scotland food in that fort devoted to
her majelty, as few years pas it did; and if the king of that realm were not likely,
as well for the release of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pretended
title, to attempt formewhat agaaft this realm and her majesty, wherein he hould
neither lack foreign aitance, nor a party here withia this realm: But the king and
that realm itanding asseted& as they do, this reltraint, intead of remedying, is
likely to breed these incoqveniencies following:

FIRST, It will increase the otence both in him, and in the reft of the princes her
friends that mifliked of her retoraint.

SECONDLY, It will give them just caune to take fonme way of rdrefs.
LASrLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke some desperate ill disposed

person, all hope of her liberty removed, to attempt somewhat against her majelty's
own person, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which inconveniency being
duly conftdered, it will appear manifestly, that the refiraint, in a straighter degree,
is likely to prove a remedy fubje& to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the said queen at liberty, miniflreth
onme cause of doubt, touching the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is
to be performed, whether to be continued here within the realm, or to be reflored
into her own country.

BuT first, this proposition, before the particularities be weighed, is to be confi-
dered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well asseted fubjc&, that tendreth her majesty's surety,

and weigheth either the nature of the Scottish queen, being inclined to ambition
and revenge, or her former ations, what pratices he. hath set on foot most. dan-
gerous for her majesty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not made. ac-
quainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it less perilous than it
hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in some fort, be devised to prevent both
her ambition and malice; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mother, is now grown

to be in the son. He pretendeth the fame title he doth : Such as do assec her, both
at home and abroad, do affect him; (and. he is the more dangerous for that he is
unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune; and that he is a man, where-
by he may enter into aion in his own person) where he is relrained, he is at
liberty; his own realm is now altogether at his devoti6, and the party asseted to
tlis crown abated; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her liberty nor restraint
doth greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her majesty, unless by such promires as
may be made by way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from the king
her son be provided for.

BuT in this behalf it may be objcEted, that o long as the mother remains in
her majesty's hands, the king will attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objection it may be answered, first, That they hope that her majelty

being a prince of jultice, and inclined to mercy, will not punilh the mother for the
son's offence, unless fie (hall be found, by good proof, culpable. Secondarily,
That men will not be ovcr-hally, confidering in what predicament the king (land-
eth touching his expectation of this crown, to advise any thing that in time future
may be dangerous to the giver of such council as may reach to his mother's peril.

AND
*o6

AND lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being strong in the field through

both foreign affiltance, and a party here within the realm, will appear so weak a re-
medy, (which 'may rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed with
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard measure hould be offered unto
her) as they will suppose for the reason above specified, that no such extremity will
be used.

IT may also be objeted, that the setting of her at liberty will greatly encourage

the papists both at home and abroad; but herein, if the provision be duly confidered,
that may be made by parliament both here and there, they hall rather. find cause of
difcormfort any otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the mother ap-

pearing most manifefily to be seen in the son accompanied with more danger, with
due consideration had also of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing
of the dangers, that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt of; there will be
good- cause of hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit than peri!s.

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty (hall be performed; if it hall be

thought meet he hall be continued within the realm with some limitation, efpeci-
ally in that place where he now refideth, the country round about being so inseted'
in religion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much increase the cor-
ruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides he hould have commodity,
with much more ease, and speed, to entertain pra&ices within this realm, than by
being in her own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France, then hall her

majesty lose the gages of her safety, then hall fie be at hand to give advice in fur-
therance of such pra&ices, as have been laid for to stir trouble in this realm, wherein
the hath been a principal party.

FOR the firif, it is answered before, that the refpe& of ariy perils that may be-

fal unto her, will in no fort refirain her son. For the other, if it be confidered
what harm her advice will work unto herself, in refpeft of the violation of the
treaty, and the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to. be thought,
that (he will then be well advised, before he attempt any such matter, which now
{he may do without perill. Besides such princes, as have interposed their faith and
promise for her, cannot with honour assist her, wherein the French King will noe
be found very forward, who, in molt friendly fort, hath lately rejected all such re-
quests, propounded either by her, or her son's ministers, that might any way of-
fend her majesty. And so to conclude, fceing the cause of her grief hall be taken
away; the French king gratified, who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that,
by any Spanish pra&ice, (he hould be drawn to violate her faith; that the reft of
the princes hall have no just cause of offence, but rather to think honourably of her
majesty, confidering the Scottish queen's carriage towards her, which hath deterved'
no way any such favour; the noblemen of Scotland (hall be restored, who will be
a good flay of such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm, especially
having so good a ground of warrant as the parliament to t(and unto; the charges
and perrills which her praEtices might have bred to this realm hall be avoided; and
lalfly, the hope of the papilts hall be taken away, by such good provisions, as in
both the realms may be made, whereby the perils that might fall into her majelly's
own person, (a matter of all others to be weighed) hall be avoided, when by the
change that may grow by any such wicked and ungodly pratice, they hall fee
their cafe no way relieved in point of religion.

Rcasns

APPENDIX.
.1eafons to induce her majesty to proceed in the treaty under Secretary

Walsingham's hand.

Cot. Lib. r H A T such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to the raising of
;Calig. C. 8. T1 trouble within this realm) have grown from the Scots queen's ministers and

favourers, not without her allowance and eeking: Or,

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes to give ear to the
said plots, is principally grounded upon Come commiseration had of her refiraint.

THAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put in execution, hath proceed-

ed, for that the said princes have, for the most part, been entertained with home
and domeflick troubles.

TH T it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin to be quiet, that
somewhat will be attempted in her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted by some of her
fautors in an extraordinary fort, to the perrill of her majefly.

THAT for the preservation thereof, it hall be convenient for her majesty to pro-

ceed to the finiffing of the treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the said
queen.

No. XVII. [Vol. II. p. 128. 1. 4.]

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

SIR,

rigin. Cal. T Did forbear, according to your dire&Eion signified in your letters of the 4th of
.C. 9. this present, to proceed to the execution of the contents of Mr. Waades letters

unto you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary servants, and for the seasing
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (although
in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th of this instant, which I
doubt not are with you before this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the
5th, which came not unto my hands until the 8th in the evening, by reason as
did appear by indorfement, that they had been mistaken, and were sent back to
Windlor, after they were entered into the way towards me, I confidered, that
being accompanied only with my own servants, it might be thought that they would
be intreated to fay as I would command them, and therefore I thought good, for
my better discharge in there money matters, to crave the assistance of Mr. Richard
Bagott, who repairing unto me the next morning, we had access to this queen,
whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old manner with a defluxion, which
was fallen down into the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of
Jier hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her former pratires, doubt-
ing left fle would persist therein by corrupting underhand some bad members of
this slate, I was exprefly commanded to take her money into my hands, and to reft
answerable for it, when it {hall be required; advising her to deliver the said money
unto me with quietness. After many denials, many exclamations, and many bitter
words against you, (I fay nothing of her railing against myself) with flat affirmation
that her majefy might have her body, but her heart he hould never have, refusing

' to

to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my servants, and Cent for barrs to break
open the door, whereupon he yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waade's remembrance, five rolls of canvass,
containing five thousand French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one had,
in gold, one hundred and four pounds two (hillings, and the other had three pounds
in silver, which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that he had no more mo-
ney in this house, and that she was indebted to her servants for their wages. Mr. Curie can tell
Waades note maketh mention of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no you the truth
doubt, he was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and oaths of of this matter.
diverse persons as also by probable conje&ures; o as in truth we found only two rolls,
every of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curie's wife at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a
chain worth by estimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one bag nine
hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen
(hillings. All the foresaid parcells of money are bellowed in bags, and fealed by
Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I reserve
in my hands, for the use of this houlhold, and may be repayed at London, where
her majesty hall appoint out of the money, received lately by one of my ser-
vants, out of the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have dispersed this
money in all this time, or have hidden the fame in some secret corners, for doubt
whereof, I had caused all this queen's family, from the highest to the lowefd, to
be guarded in the several places where I found them, so as yff I had not found the
money, with quietness, I had been forced to have searched firt all their lodgings,
and then their own persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a singular blef-
sing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a contrary success might have moved
some hard conceits in her majefly.

ToucHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trult I have done so much,

as may suffice to satisfy her majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
solute course, until I heard again from you, partly because her majesty, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return such as shall be discharged to
their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to
deliver your opinion; partly, for that as yet, I have received no answer from you, of
your resolution, upon the view of the Scottish family ent unto you, what persons
you will appoint to be difmift; only this I have done, I have bellowed all such, as
are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame may
suffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink fiall be brought unto them
by my servants. It may please you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what
fort, and for what course, I mhall make their passports, as also, if they ilall fay that
they are unpaid of their wages, what I fiall do therein. Yt is said that they
have been accustomed to be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the whole year. This lady
Her majesty's charge will be somewhat diminished by the departure of this people, hath good
and my charge, by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the persons, all lave Itoreofmoncy
Baftian, are fiuch filly and simple fouls, as there was no great cause to fear their at pr efnt in
practices, and upon this ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all the French
this difmilfed train hould have followed their mistress, until the next remove, and Amb.tlfl;dor's
there to have been discharged upon the sudden, for doubt that the said remove might hands.
be delayed, yf mhe did fear, or expe&t any hard meafurec

log
Bbb

OTHERS
Vox. 11.

OTI'ERS hall excuse their foolish pity as they may; but for my part, I rennnce

my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing that 1 have laid, written, or done,
I have had any other refpe& than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and so I
thall molt earnestly pay you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not seasing of the
money by Mr. Manners, the other commifiloners and myself. I trust Mr. Waade
hath answered, in all humble duties, for the whole company, that no one of us did
so much as think that our commission. reaching only to the papers, we might be
bold, to touch the money, so as there was no speech of that all to my knowledge,
and as you know. I was no commillioner in this search, but had my hands full at
Tyxhall, discreet servants are not hastily to deal in great matters, without warrant,
and especially where the cause is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

YoUR advertisement of that happy remove hath been greatly comfortable unto

me. I will. not fay, in refpeA of myself, because my private interest hath no mea-
sure of comparison with her majesty's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God
grant a happy and speedy yffue to these good and godly counsels; and so I commit
you to his merciful protection. From Chartley the Loth of September 586.

No. XV. [Vol. II. . 49. line '7.1
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, &c. touching

their proceedings with regard, to the death of the Scottish queen, to
her majesty's council.
TT may please your hon't good lordships to be advertised, that, on Saturday the

4th of this present, I Robert Beale came to the house of ma the earl of Kent in

the county of- to whom your lordship's letter and melnage was delivered, and her
majesty's commission hewn ; whereupon I the earl forthwith sent precepts for the flay-
ing of such hues and cries as had troubled the country, requiring the officers to make
flay of all such persons, as should bring any such warrants without names, as be-
fore had been done, and to bring them to the next justice of peace, to the intent
that upon their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites might
be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the said' earl of Kent should:
on the Monday following, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and
readier to confer with my lord. of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Bealc
came to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the'commiffion, &c. unto us,
fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-
covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix.
miles of; it was thought good that we fir Drue Drury and Robertl Beale hould go
unto him, which we did on--- morning,; and together with. the delivery of her
majesty's commillon, and your lordhfip's letter, imparted unto him what both the
earl of Kent and' we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying his lordlhip hi-
ther the day following, to confer with me the. said earl, concerning the fame;, which
his lordship promised. And for the better colouring of the matter, I the said earl of
Shrewlbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice of peace of the county of Huntingdon next'
adjoining, to wom, I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had' under
your lordships hands, for the flaying of the hues and cries, requiring him to give
otice thereof to the town. of Peterborough, and especially unto thejullices of peace

of

of Huntingdonlhire, and to cause the pursuers and bringers of such warrants to be
flayed, and brought to the next jultice of peace; and to bring us word to Fother-
ingay castle on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he Ihould in the
mean time understand of the authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir
Amias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town, and other places ad-
joining. The fame night, the heriff of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your lordship's letter came to Arundel, and letters were sent to me
the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's intention and meeting here on
Tuesday by noon; and other letters were also feat with their lordships aftents
to fir Edward Montague, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to
be here on Wednesday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which time
it was thought meet that the execution hould be. So upon Tuesday, we the
earls came hither, where the sheriss met us; and upon conference between us it
was resolved, that the care for the fending for the surgeons, and other necessary
provision hould be committed unto him againlf the time. And we forthwith re.
paired unto her, and firfl in the presence of herself and her folks, to the intent that
they might fee and report hereafter that he was not otherwise proceeded with than
according to law, and the form of the tatute made in the 27th year of her majelly's
reign, it was thought convenient that her majefly's commifion hould be read unto
her, and afterwards he was by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself againfl the
next morning. She was also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable man-
ner of proceeding with her, and the necessity that was imposed upon her majesty to
proceed to execution, for that otherewife it was found that they could not both and
together ; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being here new conspiracys
were attempted, and so would be flill; wherefore since (fle had now a good while
since warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare herself
to die, we doubted not but that lhe was, before this, fettled, and therefore would
accept this mefage in good part. And to the effec that no hriftian duty might be
said to be omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of
her body and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that if it would please
her to confer with the bishop and dean of Peterborough, he might; which dean,
we had, for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that place. Here-
to she replied, crofling herself in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, faying that she was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her an-
ceftors had professed, from which she would not be removed. And albeit we ued
many persuasions to the contrary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
she demanded the admittance of her priert, we utterly denied that unto her. Here-
upon, he demanded to underfiand what answer we had touching her former petition
to her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and the bestowing of her body.
To the firit we had none other answer to make, but that we thought if they were
not sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waadc's custody, who was now in France,
and feeing her papers could nor any wife pleafurle her majesty, we doubted not but
that the fame would be delivered unto such as flte flould appoint. For, for our own
parts, we undoubtedly thought that her majelly would not make any profit of her
things, and therefore (in our opinions) fie might let down what ile would have
done, and the fame ihould be imparted unto her majeflt, of whom both lie and
others might xpet all courtesy. 'ouching her body, we knew not her majefly's
plenfure, and therefore could ncither fy that her petition hould be deny'd, or grant-.

13 b . ed.

ed. For the praCtice of Babington, (he utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
that her death was for her religion ; whereunto it was eftsoons by us replied, that for
many years he was not touched for religion, nor hould have been now, but that
this proceeding againfl her was for treason, in that he was culpable of that horrible
conspiracy for delroying her majefly's person ; which he again denied, adding fur-
ther, that albeit he for herself forgave them that were the procurers of her death,
yet he doubted not but that God would take vengeance thereof. And being charged
with the depositions of Naue and Curl to prove it againll her, he replied, that fhl.
accused none, but that hereafter when he (hall be dead, and they remain alive, it
{hall be seen how indifferently he had been dealt with, and what measure had been
used unto her; and aed whether it had been heard before this, that servants had,
been pratifed to accuse their miflrefs, and hereupon also required what was become
of them, and where they remained.

UPO, our departure from her, for that it seemed by the commillion, that the charge

of her was in the disposition of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S.
Drue Drurie to receive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and to
cause the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and that her folks hould be
put up, and take order that only four of them hould be at the.execution, remaining
aloof of and guarded with certain persons, so as they hould not come near unto
her, which were Melvil her steward, the physician, surgeon, and apothecary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were repaired unto the cafile, and

the heriff had prepared all things in the hall for the executions he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place where were present, we
which have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt.
his son and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother, fir Richard Knichtly,
knt. Mr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr,
Forefi, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and' others.

AT the ftairfold, he pawsed to speak to Melvil in our hearing, which was to this

effete, " Melvil, as thou haft been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue
to my son, and commend me unto him. I have not impugn'd his religion, nor the
religion of others, but with him well. And as [ forgive all that have offended me
in Scotland, so I would that he ihould also; and beseech God, that he would fend
him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Melvil's answer was, that he would so do,
and at that inflant, he would beseech God to assist him with his spirit. Then ihe
demanded to speak with her priefi, which was denied unto her, the rather for that
Ihe came with a superstitious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnest request, and faying that when other
gentlewomen were executed, he had read in chronicres that they had women al-
lowed unto them, it was permitted that he hould have. two named by herself, which
were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After the came to the scaffold, firIt, in. pretence of
them all, her majeflie's commiflion was openly read; and afterwards Mr. Dean of
Peterborough, according to a direction which he had received, the night before,
from us the earls, wou'd have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But at the first entry, he utterly
refused it, faying that he was a catholique, and that it were a flly to move her,,
being so resolutely minded, and that our prayers would little avail her. Whereupon,
to the intent it might appear that we, and the whole assembly, had a chriflian desire
to.have hec die well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr.. Dean, was. read' and pro-

nouncedi

nounced by us all. "That it would pleaSe Almighty God to fend her his holy fpi-
rit and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pardon all her'offences, and of his
mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlafling kingdom, and finally to bless
her majesty, and confound all her enemies;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair
up hortly, can hew your lord(hips a copy.

TH Is done, he pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this effec&, " To be-

feech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that (he trusted to receive her salvation in,
his blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom, besought God to for-
give her enemies, as (he forgave them; and to turn his wrath from this land, to,
bless the queen's majeftie, that he might serve him. Likewise to be merciful to her
son, to have companion of his church, and altho' he was not worthy to be heard,.
yet Ihe had a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints. to pray unto her
Saviour to receive her." After this (turning towards her servants) flie desired them.
to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made by
tlie executioners, ihe pardoned them; and said, (he was glad that the end of all her
sorrows was so near. Then she mifliked the whinning and weeping of her women,
faying, that they rather ought to thank God for her resolution, and killing them,,
willed them to depart from the scaffold, and farewell. And so resolutely kneel'd
down, and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon
the executioner proceeded. Her servants were incontinently removed, and order
taken that none ihould approach unto her corps, but that it hould be embalmed
by the surgeon appointed. And-further her crosse, apparell, and other things are-
retained here, and not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniencies that might
follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such as sent him hither.

TH Is hath been the manner of our dealings in this service, whereof we have

thought good to advertise your lordships, as particularly as we could, for the time,
and further have thought good to signify unto your lordlhips belides, that for the avoid-
ing of all finifler and' slanderous reports that may be raised to the contrary, we have
caused a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effet in writing, which we the
raids lords have subscribed, with the hands of such other there the knights and gen-
tlemen above named that were present at the action. And so beseeching Almighty
God long to bless her majefly with a most prosperous reign, and to confbund all his,
and her enemies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caltle, the th of Febru-
ary z586, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Appendix, is taken from a col-

leftion made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drumfoy, hifloriographcr to Q. Anne, now
in the library of the faculty of Advocates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has
omitted to mention the book in the Cott Lib. where it is to be found.

No XIX.
i A

1 . -- "
1 ' .. ----

X.

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. I54. line. 2.]
The bjetdions against Mr. Davison, in the cause of the late Scottifli

queen, must concern things done either, I. Before her trial at So-
theringay. 2. During that felfion. 3. After the fame.

Cot. Lib. . T E F O R E her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had any hand
Caj C( B. a at all in the cause of the aid queen, or done any thing whatsoever, con-

cerning the fame direftly, or indirectly.

2. DURING that session, he remained at court, where the only interest he had

therein, was as her majelly's secretary, to receive the letters from the commiflioners,
impart them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commissioners, it is well known to all
her council,

I. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatsoever, in parliament,

or council, concerning the cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jefty's warrant unto the commiflioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence, paled against her.
3. That he never penned either the proclamation publilhing the fame, the war-

rant after her death, nor any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the fame.
And,

THAT the only thing, which can be pecially and truly imputed to him, is"the

carrying up the said warrant unto her majesty to be signed. She fending a great
counsellor untq him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great feal
of England, by her own special dire&tion and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident.
1. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, was delivered by him

unto Mr. Davison, with her majesty's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when he
should be pleased to call for it.

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or fix weeks un-

presented, nor once offering to carry it up, till the sent a great counsellor unto him
for the fame, and was harply reproved therefore by a great peer, in her majesty's
own presence.

3. THAT having signed it, he gave him an express commandment to carry it to

the feal, and being fealed to fend it immediately away unto the commissioners, ac-
cording to the direction. Herself appointing the hall of Fotheringay for the place
of execution, miliking the court-yard, in divers refpets, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her hear any more hereof, till it
was done. She for her part, having (as the said) performed all that, in law or rca-
son, could be required of her. ,

4. Which directions notwithstanding, he kept the warrant seal'd all that night,

and the greatest part of the next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majefly withal, and finding her majefly jefolved to proceed
tirein, according to her former directions, and yet desirous to carry the matter so,

as
4

as (le might throw the burden from herself, he absolutely resolved to quit his hands
thereof

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's chamber, together with

Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his presence reflored the fame into the hands
of the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till himself and the refl of the council sent it away.

WHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest the said Davison had'
in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the commiflioners, that it was the ge-

neral at of her majesty's council (as is before mentioned) and not any private at
of his, may appear by

i. THEIR own confeflion. 2. Their own letters sent down therewith to the com-

missioners. 3. The testimonies of the lords and others to whom they were dire&ed.
As also 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of her majefly's
first commission for their calling to the ftar-chamber for the fame, and private ap-
pearance and submission afterward instead thereof, before the lord chancellor Broom--
ley. 6. The confefliori of Mr. Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. By
the sentence itself upon record. 8. Besides a common a of council, containing,
an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottish ambaflador then remaining here,
avowing and justifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some extraordinary furtherance there-
unto, the contrary may evidently appear by

I. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of association5 being earnestly
prefled' thereunto by her majesty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a commissioner, in the examination:
of Babington and his complices, and avoiding the fame by ajourney to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to ltay the commifioners from pronouncing of the sentence
at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they should return to her majelty's pretence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefented, without once of-
fering to carry it up, till her majcefy sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was seal'd unto the commissioners, as he

was specially commanded, flaying it all that night, and: the greatest part of the next
day in his hands.

6i And finally, his retforing thereof into the hands of the lord treasurer, of whom:
he had before received the fame.

WHicFl are clear and evident proofs, that the said Davison did nothing in this

aaufe whatsoever, contrary to the duty of the place he then held' in her majesty's
firvice.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the back is this title,
THE innocency. of Mr. Davison in. the caufo of the late Scottish queen.

LC ttir

116

No. XX. [Vol. IT. p. 238. line 29.]

Letter from e, Sir Robert Cecil, to His Majesty King James.

From the 0- fs S T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your affctionates have
rigina! Bibl. 1V been such, as hath inforced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your
Sac Jir. person, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the main-
Edin. A.t 34. tenance of the just regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations,
No. is ivefted in your royal person F.ll not then, most noble and renowned prince,

from him, whose providence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
inflru-ent of. his glory, and the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have
been revealed to your prejudice, which must proceed from some ambitious violent
spirited person near your majesty in council and favour; no man in particular will I
accuse, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom, for your service,
I have held correspondence; otherwise, I had, long since, been disabled from per.
formance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth; being only
known to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of Christendom
for his fidelity to your person and late, and to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal
servant, my first and faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom I
have found in all things that concern you, most secret and assured. It may, there-
fore, please your majesty, at the humble motion of 0, which jargon I desire to be
the indorfement of your commands unto me, that by some token of your favour,
be may underhand in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and service. My
palfionate affetion to' your person, (not as you are a king, but as you are a good
king, and have just title, after my sovereign, to be a great king) doth transport me
to presumption. Condemn not, molt noble prince, the motives of care and love
altho' mixed with defects in judgment.

r. I, therefore, first beseech your majesty, that for the good of those, whom

God, by divine Providence, hath destined to your charge, that you will be pleated
to have an extraordinary care of all pra&icers, or praaices, against your person; for
it is not to be doubted, but that in .both kingdoms, either out of ambition, facion,
or fear, there are many that desire to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the
sovereignty and state might be swayed by partiality of subalternate persons, rather
than by true rule of power and justice. Preserve your person, and fear not the
plaEtices of man upon the point of your right, which will be preserved and main-
tained against all assaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protection of your
person, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heayen, who bless and pre-
serve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the conservation and secret keep-

ing of your councells, which, as I have aid, are often betrayed and discovered,
either out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent fasion, or base conception, the
which your majefly is to regard with all circumfpetion, as a matter molt dan-
gerous to your person and itate, and the only means to ruin and dellroy all those,
that stand faithfully devoted to your majesty's service. Some particulars, and per-
sons of this nature, I make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of this
nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majesty may be further infgqrmed.

3. Th

3. Tft 3d point considerable is that your majesty, by all means pollible, secure

yourself of the good affe&tion of the French king and States, by the negotiation of
some faithful secret confident; the French naturally diflafling the union of the Bri-
tilh ifands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have many
allies and friends, but by reason of their remote ate, they do not so much importe
this affair, which must be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. WHEN God, by whose Providence, the period of all persons and times is de-

termined, hall call to his kingdom of glory her majefly, (although I do assuredly
hope that there will not be any question in competition, yet for that I hold it not
fitting to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature), I do humbly be-
feech your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and experienced confident servant of
yours, being of an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here resident,
whose negotiation, it were convenient your majefly hould fortifie, with such secret
trust and powers, as there may not need i 4 days respite, to post for authority, in a
cause, that cannot endure o hours respite, without varieties of danger. In the which.
it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend lealt good to your establishment, will
not in publick oppung your title, but out of their cunning ambition, will seek to
gain time, by alledging their pretence of common good to the slate, in propounding
of good conditions for difburthening the common weale, of divers hard laws, heavy
impositions, corruptions, oppressions, &c. which is a main point to lead the popu-
lar, who are much difgufled with many particulars of this nature. It were there-
fore convenient, that these motives, out of your majefly's providence, should be pre-
vented, by your free offer in these points following, viz.

I. THAT your majefly would be pleased to abolish purvaiors and purvaiance, be-

ing a matter infinitely offensive to the common people, and the whole kingdom, and
not profitable to the prince.

2. THAT your majesty would be pleased to dissolve the court of wards, being the

ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil,
education of their children, by which no revenue of the crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally repined against by

the subje&t, in regard of their uncertainty, being many times altered from their true
meaning by variety of interpretation.

4. THAT your majesty will be pleated to admit free outport of the native commo-

dities of this kingdom, now often restrained by ubalternate persons for private pro-
fit, being mofl prejudicial to the commerce.of all merchants, and a plain deflruction
to the true industry and manufacture of all kingdoms, and against the profit of the
crown.

THESE, being by your majefly's confidents in the point of time propounded, will

afluredly confirm unto your majeftie the hearts and affetions of the whole kingdom,
and absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of
pretext of common good, would seek to patronize themselves in popular opinion and
power, and thereby to derogate from your majeily's bounty and free favour, by
princely merit of your moderation, judgment, and juflice.

YoUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the subje&t, will no way impeach the

profits of the crown but advance them. The difproportionable gain of some chequer
officers, with the bale and mercenary profits of the idle unnecefiary clerks and atten-
dants, will only susser some detriment; but infinite will be the good unto the king-

VOL. II. C. c c doin,.

dom, which will confirm unto your majefly the universal love and affeaion of the
people, and eablilh your renown in the highelt esteem to all posterity.

THE Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you triumphant over all your ene-
mies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacquet, and will die before

he leave to be yours, shall be no less then of mine own life, and in like esteem will
I hold all your faithful confidents, notwithflanding I will hold my self reserved from
being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted affetions unto your maje-
sty, only this extraordinary worthy man, whose aociate I am in his misfortune,
doth know my heart, and we both will pray for you, and if we live you hall find
us together.

I BESEECH your majelty burn this letter, and the others; for altho' it be in an
unusual hand, yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

8.
A CRITICAL

3'

take or fallacy in our author's arguments. And so far are any either
of our hiitorians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling in question
the common account concerning the time of the Queen's setting out
to Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is not the leat
appearance of any difference among them with regard to this point;
But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which our author reits

the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's motions, are not
the originals subscribed by the Qeen, but copies only, or tranfla-
tions of copies of those originals. It is not necessary, nor would
it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unacquainted
with the forms of law in Scotland; but every Scotsman conversant
in business will underitand me, when I fay that the precept of con-
firmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a
precept, which was fealed with the Privy Seal, on a warrant from
the signet office, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh the 24th of January; and that the deed in favour of
James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with the Privy-feal,
proceeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with ome degree of reason, that
a proof founded on papers, which are so many removes diflant from
the originals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in the name both

of the King and Queen; by law, the King's subscription was no less
requisite to any paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original signatures be produced in order to ascertain the particular
day when each of them signed, or to prove that it was signed only
by one of them, the legal proof arising from there papers would be,
that both the King and Queen signed them at Edinburgh, on the
24th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued by the overeign,
in that age, seem to have been in a great measure arbitrary, and

affixed

affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of consequence, these
dates were seldom accurate, are often false, and can never be relied
upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found to be so per-
nicious, that an at of parliament, A. D. 1592, declared the affixing
a false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THERE fill remain, in the public records, a great number of

papers, which prove the necessity of this law, as well as the weak-
ness and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any particular
date to be false, yet furprizing instances of this kind hall be pro-.
duced. Nothing is more certain from history than that the King
was at Glasgow 24th January 1567; and yet the record of figna-
tures from 1565 to i582, Fol. 6th, contains the copy of a figna-
ture to Archibald Edmonlton said to have been subscribed by our
Sovereigns, i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January 24th
1567; so that if we were to truis implicitly the dates in the records
of that age, or to hold our author's argument to be good, it would
prove that not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh
on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Bishop of Ross, that on

the 25th of Odober 1566, Mary lay at the point of death; Keith,
App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in the publick records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day. Privy-feal,
Lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchterlony .

* N. B. In the former editions, another inflance of the fame nature with those whiclh

go before and follow was mentioned; but that, as has since been discovered, was
founded on a mistake of the person employed to search the records, and is therefore
omitted in this edition. The reasoning, however, in the Diliertation stands still in
full force, notyithitanding this omission.

BOT -

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

C R I T I C A L
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King HE N RY, and the Genuineness of

the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.
IT is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which

the murder of King Henry, or the letters from Mary to
Bothwell, have given rife; far less toappear as an adversary to

any particular author, who hath treated of them. To repeat,
and to expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to these points,
which have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from par-
tiality, from malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most of my readers. All
I propose, is to aflift others in forming some judgment concerning
the faas in dispute, by flating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame
attention and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examining other controverted points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two different fyflems

have been formed. The one supposes Bothwell both to have con-
trived and executed this crime. The other imputes it to the Earls
of Murray, Morton, and their party.

VOL. II.

THE
D dd

THE decision of many controverted fats in history, is a matter

rather of curiosity than of use. They stand detached; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the story
remains untouched. But the fad under dispute in this place is a
fundamental and essential one, and according to the opinion which
an Historian adopts with regard to it, he muff vary and dispose the
whole of his subsequent narration. An historical system may be
tried in two different ways, whether it be consistent with probabi-
lity, and whether it be supported by proper evidence.

THosE who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue in

the following manner; and though their reasonings have been men-
tioned already in different places of the narrative, it is necessary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they, was a sudden
and youthful passion. The beauty of his person was his chief
merit. His capricious temper oon raised in the Queen a disgust,.
which broke out on different occasions. His engaging in the con-
fpiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust into an indignation,
which fe was at no pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps,
in its own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted .that art
and condescension which alone could have repaired it.. It widened
every day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all remains of as-
fetion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal
both to the Queen, and to himself. He had served Mary at diffe-
rent times with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself into
her favour, by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her-
heart. In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it was ne-
ceffary to get rid of the King. Mary had rejected the proposal made
to her for obtaining a divorce. The King was equally hated by the
partizans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the.
kingdom; by Murray, one of the most powerful and popular persons
in his country; by Morton and his associates, whom he had deceived;
and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest by a recent favour.
Among the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. He
expecd, for all these reasons, that the murder of the King would
pals without any enquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own

i~~~~~~~~1 ~address

address and good fortune, he trusted for the accomplishment of the
reft of his withes. What Bothwell expeced really came to pass.
Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at an action
which rid her of a man whom the had such good reason to detest.
A few months after, the married the person who was both sus-
peeed and accused of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason in

this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless ambition.
Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's return into
Scotland, he insinuated himself into her favour, and engrossed the
whole power into his own hands. He set himself against every pro-
pofal of marriage which was made to her, left his own chance of
succeeding to the Crown hould be destroyed. He hated Darnly,
and was no less hated by him. In order to be revenged on him, he
entered into a sudden friendhip with Bothwell, his ancient and mor-
tal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate the crime, by giving
him hopes of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a de-
sign to throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of being ac-
ceffory to the murder, and under that pretext, to destroy Bothwell,
to depose and imprison her, and-to feize.the sceptre which he had
wrested out of her hands.

THE former of thee fyflems has an air of probability, is con-

fiftent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, some as-
fertions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and effects
appear, of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray, on the
Queen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and
by his prudent administration rendered her so popular, and so power-
ful, as enabled her with ease to quafl a formidable infurresion
raised by himself in the year 1565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without followers,
without influence over the nobles, whom the Queen, by her
neglet, had reduced to the lowest slate of contempt, and who,
after a long disgrace, had regained (according to the most favoura-
ble supposition) the precarious possession of her favour only a few
d(lys before his death? It is diflicult to conceive what Murray had to

D d d 2 fear

fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Qeen.had no-pre-
vious attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical
than a scheme to persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was still
alive, and who was not only fufpeded, but accused, of murdering
her former husband. But that such a scheme should really succeed.
is still more extraordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himself been accessory to the commission
of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bean
from a fellow criminal all the persecutions which he suffered, with-
out ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the whole
scene of iniquity ? An antient and.deadly feud had subsisted between!
Murray and Bothwell; the Queen with difficulty had brought them.
to ome terms of agreement. But is it probable that Murray would
chute an enemy, to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his
confident in the commission of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination of a wife
man, first to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that after-
wards he should find ome opportunity of depriving him of that
power ? The most adventrous politician never hazarded such a-dan-
gerous experiment. The most credulous folly never trusted such,
an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong there general reasonings may be, we mufl

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we now
proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, I..

From the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary historians..
2. From the confeflion of those persons who suffered for affilfing at:
the commifion of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumstances. Anders. v. 2. 65.. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own commissioners, who allow Bothwell
to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good,
v. 2. 21 . 4. From the express testimony of Lefley Bishop of Ross
to the fame effect with the former. Def. of Q Mary's Hon. And..
2. 76. Id. v. 3. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared that

Both-
4

Bothwell had follicited him, at different times, to concur in the con-
fpiracy formed against the life of the King; and that he was in-
formed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The letter
from Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix to vol. II.
No. 12. confirms Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herreis promises,
in his own name, and in the name of the nobles who adhered to
the Queen, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell as the
murderer of the King. Append. vol. I. No. 23.

THE most direct charge ever brought against Murray is in these

words of Bishop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addrefling himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herreis said to your face openly
c even at your own table, a few days after the murder was corn-
" mitted ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of the
" fame murder ? Did not he, nulla circuitione tifus, flatly and
" plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and. coming with one of
" your most assured and trusty servants the fame day whereon you
" departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This
"( night ere morning Lord Darnly Ihall lose his life?" Def. of Q.
Mary, Anders. v. 2. 75. But the assertion of a man so heated with
faction as Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence, is of
little weight. The servant to whom Murray is said to have spoken
these words, is not named; nor the manner in which this secret
conversation was brought to light mentioned. Lord Herreis was
one of the most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable
that in all his negotiation at the court of England, he never once
repeated this accusation of Murray. In answering the challenge
given him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of men-
tioning Murray's knowledge of the murder; but though he openly
accuses of that crime ome of those who adhered to him, he in-
duftrioufly avoids any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith,
Pref. XII. Mary herself, in a conversation with Sir Francis
Knolles, accused Morton and Maitland of being privy to the murder,
but does not mention Murray. And. 4. 55. When the Bishop of
Ross and Lord HIerreis themselves appeared before the English coun-
cil, January I , 1569, they declared themselves ready, in obedience

7 to.

to the Queen's command, to accuse Murray and his associates of being
accessory to the murder; but " they being also required, whether
" they or any of them, as of themselves, would accuse the said
<( Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty
"thereof;" they answered, " that they took God to witness that
" none of them did ever know any thing of the conspiracy of that

murder, or were in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither
( who were devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till it
was publickly discovered long thereafter by ome of the assassins
( who suffered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 308. These
words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herreis them-
selves, and seem to be a direct confutation of the bishop's assertion.
The bishop himself repeats the fame thing in still fironger terms.
And. 3. 31.

T HE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Proteflation touching

tie murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given an
account vol. I. 330. add " So after these premisses, the murder
"of the King following, we judge in our consciences, and hold
· for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Le-
" thington were authors, inventors, counsellors and causers of the

fame murder, in what manner, or by whatfomever persons the

"fame was executed." Anders. v. 4. 188. But, . This is no-
thing more than the private opinion or personal affirmation of these
two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they make has no con-
necdion with the premisses on which they found it. Because Mur-
ray proposed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her husband
with her own content, it does not follow that therefore he com-
mitted the murder without her knowledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll
were at that time the leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and
animated with all the rage of faction. 4. Both of them were Mur-
ray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment
which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll
was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
on no good terms; Knox, 328. and by whom he had no children.
Crawf. Peer. I9. She was Murray's lifter, and by his interest he

had

4.
6

had obftruded that design. Keith, 551. These circumstances would
go far towards invalidating a positive testimony; 'they more than coun-
terbalance an indeterminate uhfpicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain
whether Huntly and Argyll ever subscribed this protestation. A copy
of such a protestation as the Qteen thought would be of advantage
to her cause, was transmitted to them by her. Anders. v. 4.. 86.
The protestation itself published by Anderson is taken from an unfub-
fcribed copy with blanks for the date and place of subscribing. On
the back of this copy is pafled a paper, which Cecil has marked
"Antwer of the Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Hunt-
"ly and Argyll." Anders. 194, 95. But it can scarce be esteemed
a reply to the above-mentioned protestation. Murray's answer bears
date at London, January 19, I568. The Queen's letter, in which
she inclosed the copy of the protestation, bears date at Bowton, Jan.
5, 568. Now it is scarce to be supposed that the copy could be
sent into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and be seen and
answered by Murray within so short a time. Murray's reply seems
intended only to prevent the impreflion which the vague and uncer-
tain accusations of his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil
had got the original of the Queen's letter into his custody. Anders.
v. 4. 86. This naturally leads us to conjecture that the letter it-
self, together with the inclosed protestation, were intercepted before
they came to the hands of Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjecture alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. i. fol. 280, and is
an original subscribed by Mary, though not written with her own
hand, because he seldom chose to write in the English language.
The protestation is in the fame Volume, fol. 282, and is manifestly
written by the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter. This is
a clear proof that both were intercepted. So that much has been
founded on a paper not subscribed by the two Earls, and probably
never seen by them. Besides, this method which the Queen took of
fending a copy, to the two Earls, of what was proper for them to
declare with regard to a conference held in their own presence, ap-
pears somewhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and
not so liable to any misinterpretation, to have desired them to

write

7

write the most exact'accouint, which they could' recolle&, of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

THE Qeen's commifioners at the Conferences in England accused

Murray and his associates of having murdered the King. Good. 2.
281. But thefeaccufations are nothing more than loose and general
affirmations, without descending to such particular circumstances,
as either ascertain their truth, or discover their falsehood. The
fame accusation is repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton
Sept. 1568. Good. 2. 359. And the fame observation may be made
concerning it.

AL L the Qeen's advocates have endeavoured to account for Mur-

ray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was done on pur-
pose, that he might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's adminif-
tration, and thereby rendering ineffectual her general Revocation of
Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his associates of
the belt part of their estates. Lelley's D.ef. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a Scottish Monarch, will
fee that such a revocation could not 'be very formidable to the no,
bles. Every King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles
rendered it ineffectual. The best vindication of Murray and his
party from this accusation is that which they presented to the Queen
of England, and which hath never hitherto been publilhed.
Paper Office. Answers to the objelcions and alledgance of the ueen, alledging the

Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of Morton, Marr, Glen-
cairn, Hume, Ruthven, &c. to have been moved to armour, for that
they abhorred and might not abide her revocation of the alienation
made of her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it appears

God has bereft the alledgance of all wit and good remembrance
for thir reasons following.

- IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occasion to
grudge thereat, in refped the Queen made him privy to the fame,
and took resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his
Lordship know he would assuredly in the famine except all things
she had given to him, and ratefy them in the next parliament, as
she did indeed; and for that cause wifled my Lord to leave be-
hind him Mailer John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom
The declared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it
should be provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before
ever he demanded, as it came to pass without any let or impedi-
ment, for all was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the
Parliament, but any difficulty.

ITEM as to my Lord of Morton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of,

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ONL Y my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property quilk

alifa was gladly and liberallyconfirmed to him, in the said parliament
preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of milcontent of
that revocation, far less to have put their lives and heritage to o
open and rmanifeit ane danger as they did for ie ane frivole cause.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and liow any mif-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll in
fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to
the Queen herself, and did complain of the manifefi corruption of
ane at of Parliament past upon her Majesty's return, at la did
lett any revocation at that time; but the armor for revenge of the
King's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there was
no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind thercof.

Vo., H CC 0y

9

'A ,-
VOL. I.

e e

1HAVING thus eXamnined the evidence which has been produced

against the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we hall next proceed
to enquire whether the Q een herself was accessory to the murder
of her huiband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than strong

suspicions arose, among some of her fubjedts, that Mary had given
her content to the commission of that crime. And. . 56. We-
are informed, by her own ambassador in France, the Archbishop of
Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head, were no
less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many of her nobles loudly
accused her of that crime, and a great part of the nation, by support-
ing them, seem to have allowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOrIE crimes, however, are of such a nature that they scarce ad-

mit of a positive or direct proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom be
brought perfectly to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Principals, but only of being Accejfaries to a crime; not of having
committed it themselves, but only of giving content to the com-
mission of it by others; th9 proof becomes still more difficult: and
unless when ome accomplice betrays the secret, a proof by circum-
stances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attained. Even
in judicial trials, iuch evidence is Sometimes held to be sufficient for
condemning criminals. The degree of conviction which such evi-
dence carries along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises
from positive testimony; and a concurring series of circumstances
satisfies the understanding no less than the express declaration of
witnesses.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been produced against Mary.

We ihall first confider that which is founded upon circumstances
alone.

SOME of these suspicious circumstances preceded the King's death;

others were subsequent to it. With regard to the former, we may
observe that the Queen's violent love of Darnly was oon converted
into an aversion to him no less violent; and that his own ill conduct,

and

and excesses of every kind were such, that if they did not juttiiv,
at least they account for this sudden change of her disposition to-
wards him. The rife and progress of this domeltic rupture, I have
traced with great care in the history, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers published by other authors, I have added
thoie contained in App. N° XVI. and XVII. The Earls of
Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argyll,, and Huntly confidered the
scheme of procuring for the Queen a divorce from her husband,
as one of the molt flattering proposals they could make to her, and
employed it as the most powerful inducement to prevail on her to
content to a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 88. Du
Croc the French ambassador, who was an eye witness of what he
describes, not only represents her difuft at Darnly to be extreme,
but declares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do afuire Dece:n!!. iz.
you is not at all well; and do believe the principal part of her dif- '56,'
ease to consist in deep grief and sorrow; nor does it seem poflible
to make her forget the fame. Still he repeats there words, Icould
wijhl to be dead. You know very well that the injury flie has re-
ceived is exceeding great, and her Majesty will never forget it.-
To speak my mind freely to you, I do not expert, upon several ac-
counts, any good understanding between them [i. e. the King and
Queen] unless God effeAually put to his hand.---His bad de- Cecemb. 23.
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expected
from him for several reasons, which I might tell you was I present
with you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn, but I
will fay, that matters cannot subsist long as they are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad contequences." Keith, Prcf. vii..
Had Henry died a natural death, at this juncture, it mult have been
confidered as a very fortunate event to the Qeen, and as a tcalbn-
able deliverance from a husband who had become altogether odious
to her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weeks afterwards,
and as nothing had happened to render the Qucen's averlun to
him less violent, the opinion of tholi who conlider Mary as the
author of an event, which was manifefsly so agreeable to her,
will appear perhaps to tome of our readers to be lneither unnatural

J ee nor

nor over refined. If we add to this, what has been observed in the
history, that in proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of her
husband, Bothwell made progress in her favour; and that he be-
came the object not only of her confidence but of her attachment;
that opinion-acquires new strength. It is easy to observe many ad-
vantages which might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from
the King's death; but excepting them, no person, and no party in
the kingdom could derive the least benefit from that event. Both-
well, accordingly, murdered the King, and it was, in that age,
thought no violent imputation on Mary's character, to suppose that
the had consented to the deed.

THE teps which the Queen took after her huband's death add

1lrength to that supposition. I. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, asserts that " every body fulpeed
the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to others,
said plainly that it was He." p. 155. 2. Mary having issued a
proclamation, on the I2th of February, offering a reward to any
person, who ihould discover those who had murdered her husband;
And. i. 36. a paper in answer to this was affixed to the gates of
the Tolbooth, February 6, in which Bothwell was named as the
chief person guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was ac-
cufed of having given her consent to it. And. 2. 156. 3. Soon-
after, February 20, the Earl of Ledhox, the King's father, wrote
to Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prosecute the mur-
derers with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his own sus-
picions of Bothwell, and pointed out a method of proceeding against
him, and for discovering the other authors of the crime, no less
obvious than equitable. He advised her to seize, and to commit to
sure custody Bothwell himself, and those who were already named
as his accomplices; to call an Assembly of the nobles; to issue a
proclamation, inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on that
encouragement, no person appeared to accuse them, to hold them
as innocent, and to difinifs them without farther trial. And. I. 40.
4. Achbifhop Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March 9th, employs arguments of the utmost weight to
persuade her to prosecute the murderers with the greatest severity.

" I can
I2

'3

,( I can conclude nathing, (ays he) by quhat zour Majesty writes to
tne zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to take a
rigorous vengeance thereof, that rather than it be not actually taine,
it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I
ask zour Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I-can heir nathing,
to zour prejudife, but I man conftraindly writ the famin, that all may mu,,y
come to zour knawlege; for the better remede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth haw now rather than ever of be-
fore, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and constance that God has
grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this molt
heavie envie and difplefir of the committing therof, and conserve
that reputatioun in all godliness, ze have conquift of lang, quhich
can appear na wayis mair clearlie, than that zow do.fick justice that. /.
the haill world may declare zowr innocence, and give testimony hole
forever of thair. treason that has committed (but fear-of God or 'wit/zout
man) so cruel and ungodlie a murther, quhairof there is fa meikle muc,
ill spoken, that I am conflrainit to ask zow mercy, that neither
can I or will I make the rehearsal thereof, which is owr odious, too
But alas! Madame, all over Europe this day there is na purpose in
head fa frequent as of zour. Majeflie, and of the present state of
zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit sinisterly." Keith,
Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. N" XIX.
urged the fame thing in strong terms. 6. The circumstances of the
cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and remonflrances, called
for the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had been
murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her own preence. Her
subje&s were filled with the utmost horror at that crime. Both-
well, one -of her principal favourites, had been publickly accused as
the author of it. Reflections, extremely dishonourable to herself,
had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of justice, did
not prompt her to pursue the murderers with ardour, decency, at
least, and concern for vindicating her own characer, should have
induced her to avoid any appearance of remifnefs or want of,
zeal.

BUT inflead of this, Mary continued to discover, in all her ac-
tions, the utmost partiality towards Bothwell. i. On the i5th of

February

February, five days after the murder, she bestowed on him the re-
verfiion of the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the year
1565 he had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This grant
was of much importance, as it gave him not only the command
of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant over
the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of keep-
ing poffefflon of it . 2. Bothwell being extremely desirous to

* Copy from the original in the Charter-house of the city of Edinburgh of an 4jgna-
ti'on to the reverfin of the jiperiority of Leith by Queen ilary to the Earl of Bvthwell.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad qos

prafentes litera pervenerint falutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam reducentes mul-
tiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantumn quondam noftra chariffimae
matri Marie Regina: regni noftri pro tempore in noftra minoritate fa&tum et impen-
frm, verum etiam nobifinet ipfis, tam intra partes Gallise quam intra hoc nostrum
regnum, ad cxtenrionem nofiri honoris et audoritatis in punitione furum, malefac-
torum, et tranfgreforum infra idem, per nostrum confifum confanguineum et confilia-
rium Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominurn Halis, Creighton et Liddifdale, mag,
num admirallum regni nofiri, commilfionem et onerationem ad hunc effetum ha-
bentem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in
performatione et extentione nollri disi fervitii, fuam hereditatem, supra fummam
viginti millium mercarum hujus nofiri regni, alienavit ac lafit. Et nos cogitantes
quod, ex noftra principali honore et devoria, dictum nofirum confifum confanguineum
& confiliarium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine recompenfare et gratificare in-
cumbit qua: nos commode ibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus
affuturis temporibus ee poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum in omnibus caufis
feu eventibus: In recompenfationem quorum pramifforum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftris
rationabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dium Jaco-
bum comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos haeredes mafculos quofcunque noftros legitti-
mos, &c. affignatos in et ad literas reverfionis faaas, &c. per Symonem Prelton de
eodem militem, prapofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri
burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fucceforibus, &c. nobis, noftrifque heredibus,
fuccefforibus, et affignatis pro redemptione, &c. fuperioritatis totius ville de Lcith,
&c. impignorata per nos di&is prmpofito, &c. sub reverfione alienata continentis fum-
manl decem millium mercarum moneta prefcripte numerandam et calculandam in
parochiali ecclesia de Edinburgh, super premonitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris elt,
veluti in ditis reverfionis literis, &c. de data vo Oftob. IS65, &c. (The reft is
form, and contains a Clause of absolute warrandice.) IN cujus REI TESTIMONIUM
praefentibus magnum figillum noflrum apponi fccimus. Apud Edinburgh, dccimo
quinto die menfis Fcbruarii, anno Domini millcfimo quingentefimo fcxagefimo sexto,
.et regni nofiri vicefimo quinto.

The great feal entire.

obtain

obtain the command of the castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in
order to prevail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young prince to his custody. Mar
consented; and he instantly appointed Bothwell governor of the
cartle. And. I. Pref. 64. Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conduced
with the utmost remifilets. Buchanan exclaims loudly against this..
And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as is evi-
dent from a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when his master
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbifl. Being
examined on the Monday after the King's death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the Queenis
fervandis the keyis of her flalmir. Qhilk the Laird of Tillibar-
din hearing, aid, Hald thair, here is ane ground. Efter quhilk
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquifi-
tion.". And. 4. P. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to search
into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of so much im-
portance merited the most careful enquiry. 4. Notwithtanding
Lennox's repeated follicitations, notwithstanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the necessity of complying with them, in
order to encourage any accuser to appear against Bothwell, he not
only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove him
from her presence and councils; And. . 42, 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circumstances, discovered
an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing
Bothwell to a publick trial; but fie permitted him to fit as a mem-
ber in that meeting of the Privy Council, which directed his own
trial; and the trial itself was carried on with such unnecessary
precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumstances, as
render his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumstances have all been mentioned
at length, Vol. I. p. 344, &c. and therefore are not repeated in this
place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of
her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the ceptre
before her at the meeting of Parliament. Keith, 378. 7. In that

par -
3

Ir-5

rparliament, he granted him a ratification of all the vast poffeflions
and honours, which she had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services he had performed.
And. I. I 7. 8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her attach-
ment to Bothwell would at length induce her to marry him, warned
her of the infamy and danger which would attend that ation, he
not only disregarded this salutary admonition, but discovered what
had passed between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. 56. 9. Bothwell -seized Mary as she
returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this, without
her knowledge and conent, such an insult could not have failed to
have filled her with the most violent indignation. But according
to the account of an old M. S. "The friendly love was so
nighly contracted between this great princess, and her enormous
subjet, that there was no end thereof (for it was constantly esteem-
ed by all men that either of them loved other carnally) so that he
suffered patiently to be led where the lover lift, and all the way
neither made obstacle, impediment, clamour or resistance, as in
such accidents use to be, or that she might have done by her prince-
ly authority, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Huntly,
and ecretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil,
who was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that nothing was
done without the Queen's content. Melv. I58. IO. On the I2th
of May, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that fne
was then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended her
by seizing her person, he was so much satisfied with his dutiful
behaviour since that time, and so indebted to him for past services,
that she not only forgave that offence, but resolved to promote him
to higher honours. And. I. 187. i. Even after the confederate
nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's presence, and though
she tiw that he was confidercd as the murderer of her former hus-
band by so great a part of her fubjeets, her affection did not in the
lcaft abate, and she continued to express the moit unalterable at-
tachmcnt to him. " I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
.that the rigour with which the Qeen is kept, proceedeth by order

from
O N

from there men, because that the Queen will not, by any means,
be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murder; nor
will not consent by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Bothwell
for her husband, but avoweth conflantly that lhe will live and die
with him; and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquish
her crown and kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, she would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a simple damsel with him, and that
{he will never consent that he hlall fare worse, or have more harm
than herself. App. p. 42. See also p. 44. From this long enu-
meration of circumitances, we may, without violence, draw the
following conclusion. Had Mary really been acceflorv to the mur-
der of her husband; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her
content, or at her command; and had he intended to flifle the evi-
dence against him, and to prevent te discovery of his guilt, fle
could scarce have taken any otherRfteps than those he took, nor
could her condud have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary may be classed
under two heads.

I. THE depositions of some persons who were employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, and much trutfed by him, was twice examined,
and-the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of the other,
are still extant. It is pretended, that both there are notorious for-
geries. But they are remarkable for a iimplicity and naivete' which
it is almost impofible to imitate; they abound with a num-
ber of minute fads and particularities, which the most dextrous
forger could not have easily aflembled, and connectcd together
with any appearance of probability; and they are filled with cir-
cumifances, which can scarce be lhppofed to have entered the ima-
gination of any man, but one of Paris's profeflion and charader.
But, at the fame time, it muff be acknowledged that his depo-
fitions contain ome improbable circumflances. I-e seems to have
been a foolish talkative fellow ; the fear of death ; the violence of

VOL. II. F f f torture;

torture; and the desire of pleasing those in whose power he was,
tempted him, perhaps, to feign some circumstances, and to exagge-
rate others. To fay that some circumstances in an affidavit are im-
probable or false, is very different from faying that the whole is forg-
ed. I fufpet the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no appearance
of the latter. Be that as it will, ome of the most material fads in
Paris's affidavits reft upon his single testimony; and for that reason,
I have not in the history, nor fiall I in this place, lay any stress upon
them.

2. THE letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell. These

have been frequently published. The accident, by which the
Queen's enemies got them into their possession, is related Vol. I.
37I. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may be ascertained either by external or internal evi-
dence. Both these have been produced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters. .

Murray and the nobles who adhere to him affirm, upon their
word and honour, that the letters were written with the Queen's
own hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. 2.
64, 92. 2. The letters were publickly produced in the parliament
of Scotland, December 1567, Good. 2. 360; and were so far
confidered as genuine, that they are mentioned in the aft against
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66. 3.
They were shewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Suffex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's commissioners at York. In
the account which they give of this matter to their Mistress, they
seem to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion
of any forgery; they particularly observe, ( that the matter con-
tained in them is such, that it could hardly be invented and
devised by any other than herself; for that they discourse of
some things, which were unknown to any other than to herself'
and Bothwell and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, so the mat-
ter of them, and the manner how thee men came by them is such,
as it feemeth that God, in whose fight murder and bloodshed of the
innocent is abominable, would not permit the fame to be hid or

concealed.
0 N

concealed. Good. a. I42. They seem to have made such an
impression on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter to
Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has there words, " If the mat-
ter hall be thought as detestable and manifest to you, as for ought
we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2. 54. 4. Aftef
the conferences at York and Westminster were finished, Elizabeth
resolved to call together the Earls who were then at court, and to
lay before them the whole proceedings against the Scots Queen,
particularly that " the letters and writings exhibited by the Regent,
as the Queen of Scots letters and writings, should also be shew-
ed, and conference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their fight,
with the letters of the said Queen's being extant, and heretofore
written with her own hand, and ent to the Queen's Majesty;
whereby may be searched and examined what difference is betwixt
them." Good. 2. 252. They assembled, accordingly, at Hampton
Court, December 14 and 15, 1568; and " The originals of the
letters supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused; and being read, were
duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and
fashion of orthography, with sundry other letters long since here-
tofore written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the Queen's
Majesty.-- -In collation whereof no difference was found." Good.
2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologetical letter for her con-
duc to the Countess of Lennox, July I 0, 1570 *, he transmitted
it to her huband then in Scotland; and he returned to the Countess
the following answer: " Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer
the Queen the King's mother's letters ent to you, what can I fay

but

* Mary's letter has never been published, and ought to have a place here, where

evidence on all fides is fairly produced. " Madam, if the wrang and false reportis
of rebellis, enemeis weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trufled
of me by zoure advice, had not so far furred you aganis my innocency (and I
inult fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have not onelie as it were condempnit me
wrangfullie, bot so hated me, as some wordis and opcne deideis hes teltifeit to all the
warlde, a manyfeft miflyking in zow aganis zowr awn blude) I wold not have omit-
tit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow cxcufing me of thole untrew reportie.
made of me. Bot hoping with Godis grace and tyme to have my .innocency knawin
to zow, as I trust it is already to the mailt pairt of all indifferent perronis, I thocht
it belt not to trouble zow for a tyme till that such a matter is moved that tuichis

F f f us

but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ the best The can for hirfelf,
to feame to purge hir of that, quhairofmany befyde me are certainly
perfuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffionis of men gone ,to the
death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that
is hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
-quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary isfa weill knawin.
The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
and my cause, and of the jufi occafioun of our miflyking. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis interest, were hir trew
confeffioun and unfeyned repentance of that lamentable fact, odious
for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God is just,
and will not in the end be abused ; but as he has manifested the
trewth, so will he puneife the iniquity." Lennox's Orig. Regit.
of Letters. In their publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be
fufpeted of advancing what would be most subservient to their cause;
not what was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their own
inward convition. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox
had no occasion to dissemble; and it is plain, that he not only
thought the Queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her let-
ters to Bothwell.

II. WI TH regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of the

Queen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, . That whenever a

us bayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure littil sone, and my onelie child in this
cuntrey. To the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. 1 have born him, and God knawis
with quhat daunger to him and me boith; and of zow he is defcendit. So I meane
not to forzet my dewtie to zow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how
unkyndlie that ever ze have dealt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt, and refpcc
zow as my moyer in law. And gif ye ples to knaw firther of my mynde in that and'
all uther thingis betwixt us, my ambaflador the Bishop of Ross fall be ready to con-
ser with zow. And so after my hairtlie commendationis, remitting me to my faide
ambassador, and zour better cdnfideratioun, I commit zow to the proteftioun of Al-
myghty God, quhom I pray to preserve zow and my brother Charles, and caus zow to
knaw my pairt better nor ze do. From Chatifwolth this x of July 1570.

To my Ladie Lennox Your natural gude Nice

my moder in law and lovynge dochter.

paper
8

paper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to eftablih the point in view, his solicitude to cut off all
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncertainty, al-
ways prompt him to use expressions the most explicit and full to his
purpose. The passages foisted into ancient authors by Heretics in
different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romiih faints ; the
supposititious deeds in their own favour produced by monasteries;
the false characters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. I I. are so many
proofs of his assertion. No maxim seems to be more certain than
this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls
into the error of proving too little. The point which the Queen's
enemies had to establish, was " that as the Earl of Bothwell was
chief executor of the horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c.
so was he of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, persuader, and
commander of the said murder to be done." Good. 2. 207. But
of this there are only imperfect hints, obscure intimations, and
dark expressions in the letters, which however convincing evidence
they might furnish if found in real letters, bear no resemblance to
that glare and superfluity of evidence which forgeries commonly
contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof
of her guilt. Lefley, Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with passages
to this purpose; nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet still it might have been expected (fays her latest
defender) that ome one or other of the points or articles of the
accusation hould be made out clearly by the proof. But nothing
of that is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing in the
letters, that could plainly hew the writer to have been in the fore-
knowledge, counsel, or device of 'any murder, far less to have
persuaded or commanded it; and as little is there about maintaining
or justifying any murderers." Good. I. 76. How ill advised were
Mary's adversaries to contract so much guilt, and to pratife so many
artifices in order to forge letters, which are so ill contrived for efta-
blifhing the conclusion they had in view ? Had they been so base
as to have recourse to forgery, is it not natural to think that they
would have produced omething more explicit and decilive ? 2. As
it is. almost impossible to invent a long narration consisting of many

circum-
A·

'2I

circumstances, and to conned it in such a manner with real facts,
that no mark of fraud shall appear; for this reason kilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially of foreign and
superfluous ones, well knowing that the more these are multiplied,
the more are the chances of deteTion increased. Now Mary's
letters, especially the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circum-
stances, extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogether
foreign to the purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have been perfect folly to have inserted if they had been altogether
imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The truth and reality offe-
veral circumstances in the letters, and thee, too, of no very publick
nature, are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence. Let. I.
Good. 2. p. i. The Queen is said to have met one of Lennox's gen-
tlemen, and to have some conversation with him. Thomas Craw-
ford, who was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's commission-
ers, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this circumstance. He
likewise declared, that during the Qeen's stay at Glasgow, the King
repeated to him, every night, whatever had pafled, through the day,
between her Majesty and him, and that the account given of these
conversations in the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 2. 245. According to the
fame letter there was much discourse between the King and Qeen
concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. 2. 8, o1, 1r.
What this might be, was altogether unknown till a letter of Mary's
preserved in the $Spttifh College at Paris, and published, Keith,
Pref. vii. discovered it to be an affair osso much importance as me-
rited all the attention lie paid to it at that time. It appears by a
letter from the French ambassador, that Mary was fubjedt to a vio-
lent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circumstance is mentioned,
Letter . p. 30. in a manner so natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine production. 4. If we shall still think it probable to
suppose that so many real circumstances were artfully introduced into
the letters by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
their prodaction; it will scarce be possible to hold the fame opinion
concerning the following particular. Before the Queen began her
sift letter to Bothwell, the, as is usual among those who write long
letters concerning a. variety of fubjedCs, made notes or nemorandums

7 of

of the particulars he wished to remember; but as he fat up writ-
ing during a great part of the night, and after her attendants were
aleep, her paper failed her, and he continued her letter upon the
fame heet, on which {he had formerly made her memorandums.
This he herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: " It
is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you, yet now after
the kissing of your hands, I will end my letter. Excuse my evil
writing, and read it twice over. Excuse that thing that is fcriblit, for
I had na paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial. Good.
2. 28. These memorandumsiftill appear in the middle of the letter;
and what we have said seems naturally to account for the manner how
they might find their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be supposed
however that any forger would think of placing memorandums in the
middle of a letter, where, at first fight, they make so absurd and
so unnatural an appearance. But if any hall flill carry their refine-
ment so far, as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as to throw
in this circumstance, in order to preserve the appearance of genuine-
ness, they muff at least allow that the Queen's enemies, who em-
ployed thee forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and mean-
ing of these short notes and memorandums; but we find them
miltaking them so far as to imagine that they were the credit of the
bearer, i. e. points concerning which the Qeen had given him
verbal inftru&ions. Good. z. 52. This they cannot possibly be;
for the Queen herself writes with o much exa&nefs concerning the
different points in the memorandums, that there was no need of
giving any credit or inftruCions to the bearer concerning them.
The memorandums are indeed the contents of the letter. 5. Mary,
mentioning her conversations with the King about the affair of
Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, The morn [i. e. to-morrow] I will
fpeik to him upon that point;" and then adds, " As to the reft of
Willie Hiegait's, he confefit it; but it was the morne, [i. e. the
morning] after my cumming or he did it." Good. 2. 9. This ad-
dition, which could not have been made till after the conversation
happened, seems either to have been inserted by the Queen into,
the body of the letter, or, perhaps, she having written it on the
margin, it was taken thence into the text. If we suppose the
letter to be a real one, and written at different times, as it plainly

bears,.

bears, this circumstance appears to be very natural; but no reason
could have induced a forger to have ventured upon such an ana-
chronifm, for which there was no necessity. An addition, perfectly
similar to this, made to a genuine paper, may be found,- Good.
2. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for

her innocence have contended that these letters were forged by her
'enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to justify their own
rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the arguments, which
were produced, in her own age, in upport of this opinion; the
observations which we have already made, contain a full reply to
them. An author, who has inquired into the affairs of that period
with great'induftry, and who has acquired much knowledge of
them, has lately published (as he affirms) a demonstration of the
forgery of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds upon evi-
dence both internal and external. With regard to the former he
observes that the French copy of the Queen's letters is plainly a
translation of Buchanan's Latin copy ; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scottish copy; and by consequence, the assertion of
the Qen's enemies, that she wrote them originally in French, is
altogether groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries. He
accounts for this firange succession of translations, by supposing
that when the forgery was projected, no person could be found ca-
pable of writing originally in the French language, letters which
would pass for the Queen's; for that reason they were first com-
posed in Scottish ; but unluckily, the French interpreter, it would
teem, did not underhtand that language; and therefore Buchanan
translated them into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered
into French. Good. I. 79, 8.

IT is scarce necefTary to observe that no proof whatever is pro-

duced of any of there suppositions. The manners of the Scots,
in that age, when almost every man of rank Spent a part of his
youth in France, and the intercourse between the two nations was
great, render it altogether improbable that so many complicated

opera-
24

operations hould be necessary, in order to procure a few letters to
be written in the French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may observe that all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produced by
Murray and his party in the Scottish parliament, and at York and
Wertminter. But this he has not attempted; and if we attend to
the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious, must
have been unsuccessful. The letters were first published at the end
of Buchanan's DeteSion. The firit edition of this treatise was in
Latin, in which language three of the Queen's letters were subjoin-
ed to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 157 I. Soon after a Scot-
tifh translation of it was published, and at the end of it were printed
likewise in Scottish, the three letters which had formerly appeared
in Latin, and five other letters in Scottilh, which were not in the
Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of the Detection,
and of seven of the letters; this bears to have been printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem 1572. The name of the place, as
well as of the printer, is allowed by all parties to be a manifest im-
posture. Our author, from observing the day of the month, on
which the printing is said to have been finished, has asserted that
this edition was printed at London; but no stress can be laid upon
a date found in a book, where every other circumstance with regard
to the printing is allowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to
Lefley) was the best informed of all Mary's advocates in that age,
affirms that the French edition of the Detetion was publifhled in
France: " 11 [Buchanan] a depuis adjouft a cefte declamation un
petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la facon
de son proces, et la tout envoye aux freres a la Rochelle, lefquels
voyants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, 'ont traduit en Frangois, ct
iceluy fut imprimee a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par
Thomas Waltem, nom apoftl et fait a plaifir." Martyre de Maric.
Jebb. 2. 256. The author of the Innocence de Marie goes farther,
and names the French translator of the Detection. " Et iceluy prc-

VOL. II. G g g mierement

25

mierement compose (comme il femble) par George Buchanan Efcof-
soys, et depuis traduit en langue Francoise par un Hugonot, Poi-
tevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant gentilhomme, et un
de plus remarquez fediteux de France." Jebb. I. 425, 443. The
concurring testimony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence
in France afforded them sufficient means of information, must
outweigh a flight conjecture. This French translator does not pre-
tend to publish the original French letters as written by the Queen
herself; he exprefly declares that he translated them from the Latin.
Good. . I o 3. Had our author attended to all thee circumstances,
he might have saved himself the labour of so many criticisms to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is a translation
from the Latin. The French editor himself acknowledges it, and foi
far as I know no person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator was foignorant, as

to affirm that Mary had written thee letters, partly in French,
partly in Scottish. Good. I. 103. Had this translation been pub-
lifhed at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his diretion,
so gross an error would not have been admitted into it. This error,
however, was owing to an odd circumstance. In the Scottish tranf-
lation of the Detetion, two or three sentences of the original French
were prefixed to each letter, which breaking of with an &c. the
Scottish translation of the whole followed. This method of printing
translations was not uncommon in that age. The French editor
observing this, foolishly concluded that the letters had been written
partly in French, partly in Scottish.

IF we carefully confider thee few French sentences of each letter

which still remain, and apply to them that species of criticism, by
which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof will arise,
that there was a Frenchcopy not translated from the Latin, but which
was itself the original from which both the Latin and Scottish have
been translated. This minute criticism must necessarily be disagree-
able to many readers, but luckily a few sentences only are to be ex-
amined, which will render it extremely bfort.

IN
26

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, yfaijoit hon. It is plain that this expression veu ce que
peut un corps /ans creur is by no means a translation of cum plane
perinde esem atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a spirit
and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor Scottish
have retained. J7ufques a la dinde is not a translation of toto prandti
tempore; the Scottish translation quhile denner-time expresses the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently quhile signified
untill as well as during. e nay pas tenu grand propos is not justly
rendered neue contulfeim frmonemn cum quoquam; the phrase used in
the French copy, is one peculiar to that language, and gives a more
probable account of her behaviour, than the other. 7ugeant bien qu'il
n'vfai/oit bon, is not a translation of ut uijudicarent id non efe ex uit.
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. . ends with apprendre. It is
evident that both the Latin and Scottith translations have omitted
altogether these words, et toutefoisje ne puis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with preJenter. y'aye veile plus tard
la haut is plainly no translation of diutius illic morata fum ; the
sense of the French is better expressed by the Scottiflh I have wvalkit
later there-up. Again, Pour exczfer ,voJre afaire is very different
from ad excufandum nofira negotia. The five remaining letters never
appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their beingever tranf-
lated into that language. Four of them, however, are published in
French. This entirely overturns our author's hypothesis concern-
ing the necessity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Detetion the wholefonnet is printed

in French as well as in Scottish. It is not possible to believe that
this Scottish copy could be the original from which the French was
translated. The French consists of verses which have both mea-
sure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are far from being
.inelegant. The Scottish confifis of an equal number of lines, but
without measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever think of a
thing so absurd and impracticable, as to require one to translate a
certain given number of lines in prose, into an equal number of
verses, where both measure and rhyme were to be obefrved. The
Scottish, on the contrary, appears manifestly to be a translation of

G g g 2 the

the French; the phrases, the idioms, and many of the words are
French, and not Scottish. Besides, the Scottiih translator has in
several instances mistaken the sense of the French, and in many
more expresses the sense imperfedly. Had the sonnet been forged,
this could not have happened. The directors of the fraud would
have understood their own work. I hall satisfy myself with one
example, in which there is a proof of both my assertions. Stan-
za vii.- ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and Iyfe,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottish but a French phrase; the

two other lines do not express the sense of the French, and the last
is absolute nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French. It contains

much refined mysticism about devices, a folly of that age, of which
Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circumstances,
particularly from a letter concerning impresas by Drummond of
Hawthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged her letters, they were
certainly employed very idly when they produced this.

FROM there observations it seems to be evident that there was a

French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scottifi were
only translations. Nothing now remains of this copy but those
few sentences which are prefixed to the Scottish translation. The
French editor laid hold of these sentences, and tacked his own
translation to them, which, o far as it is his work, is a servile and
a very wretched translation of Buchanan's. Latin; whereas in those
introductory sentences, we have discovered frong marks of their
being originals, and certain proofs that they are not translated from
the Latin.

ITr
28

IT is apparent, too, from comparing t'le Latin and Scottish tranf-

lations with these sentences, that the Sottish translator has more
perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early translated into
Scottish, Good. 2. 76; it is probable that Buchanan made his
translation not from the French but from this Scottish copy. Were
it necessary, several critical proofs of this might be produced. One
that has been already mentioned eems decisive. Diliusr ilic to-
rata fuin bears not the least resemblance to j'aye wv.i/e' plus tard la
haut; but if, inflead of I wa/kit [i. e. watched] laiter there-up, we
suppose that Buchanan read I waitit, &c. this miitake, into which
he might so easily have fallen, accounts for the error in his tranf-
lation.

THESE criticifins, however minute, appear to be well founded,

But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the other
arguments with regard to the internal evidence remain in full
force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters, which

our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid
than that which we have already-examined. According to Mur-
ray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow January 2,.
1567; the arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the 27th;
the, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the 28th; flayed
in that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh before the
end of the month. But according to our author, the Queen did
not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th ; as he flayed a night
at Callendar, he could not reach Glasgow sooner than the even-
ing of Saturday the 25th, and he returned to Linlithgow on
Tuesday the 28th. By consequence, the first letter, which supposes
the Qeen to have been at least four days in Glasgow, as well as
the second letter, which bears date at Glasgow Saturday morning,
whereas fle did not arrive there till the evening, mufi be forgeries.
That the Quen did not set out from Edinburgh sooner than the
24th of January, is evident (as he contends) fronm the public re-
cords, which contain a Precept of con!firmation qs a I//t-rent by

Jaillles

29

James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers granted by the Queen on the
24th of January at Edinburgh; and likewise aletter-of the Queen's,
dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing James Inglis-taylor
to the Prince her son. That the King and Qeen had returned to
Linlithgow on the 28th, appears from a deed in which they appoint
Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace there, dated at Linlithgow
January 28. Good. i. 118.

THIS has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by Mary;
but how far it falls short of this, will appear from the following
considerations.

I. IT is evident from a declaration or confession made by the

Bishop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
opened in the beginning of Odober 1568, Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters which
her fubjeds accused her of having written to Bothwell. Brown's
trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31, 36. It is highly probable that
the Bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote the Defence
of Queen Mary's honour, in the year 1570. They were published
to all the world together with Buchanan's Deterion, A. D. 157 I.
Now if they had contained any error so gross, and so obvious, at
that time, to discovery, as the supposing the Queen to have passed
several days at Glasgow, while he was really at Edinburgh; had
they contained a letter dated atGlafgow Saturday morning, though
she did not arrive there till the evening, is it possible that She her-
self, who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advo-
cates who appeared for her in that age, hould not have published
and exposed this contradiction, and by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of such an imposture ? In difquiiitions which are
naturally abstruse and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest author
may discover many things, which have escaped the attention, or
baffled the sagacity of those who have formerly confidered the fame
rubjea. But when a matter of fad lay so obvious to view, this cir-
cumftance of its being unobserved by the Queen herself, or by any
of her adherents, is almost a demonstration that there is ome mif-

6 take
- r - - ir · -- - ~ v ^ - .

BOTHWELL seized the Qeen as he returned from Stirling,

April 24th, 1567, and (according to her own account) carried her
to Dunbar with all diligence. And. . 95. But our author, rely-
ing on the dates of ome papers which he found in the records,
supposes that Bothwell allowed her to flop at Edinburgh, and to
tranfadc business there. Nothing can be more improbable than
this supposition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed to
Wr-ight Privy eal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned by
our author, Vol. i. 124. among the instances of the false dates of
papers which were issued in the ordinary course of business in that
age. Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper to For-
bes, ibid. it is signed, April 4th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's history, it is, that

the remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her
thither, till he returned to Edinburgh along with him in the be-
ginning of May. Our author himself allows that she resided twelve
days there, Vol. . 367. Now though there are deeds in the records
which bear that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar during
that time, yet there are others which bear that they were signed
at Edinburgh e. g. there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy
feal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others aid to be signed at Dun-
bar on that day. Lib. 3. Chart. No. 524, 526. Ib. Lib. 32.
No. I54, I57. There are ome signed at Dunbar April 28th,
others at Edinburgh April 3oth, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492.
Others at Dunbar May Ift. Id. ibid. No. 158. These different
charters suppose the Queen to have made so many unknown, im-
probable, and inconsistent journeys, that they afford the clearest
demonstration that the dates in these records ought not to be de-
pended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the charter said

to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sun-
day, which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books offiderunt, then kept by the Lords
of session.

VOL. II.

33

FROM
It h h

FROM this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of

the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far from
amounting to demonflration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of these letters is

founded on the itile and composition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real producions. It
is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in most of
Mary's letters, and even from her solicitude to write them in a
fair hand, that he valued herself on those accomplishments, and
was desirous of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when she
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy ap-
pear. A remarkable instance of this may be found in a paper pub-
lifhed, Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in
the utmost hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of a tranfla-
tion, they are not destitute either of spirit or of energy. The man-
ner in which she expresses her love to Bothwell hath been pronoun-
ced indecent and even shocking. But Mary's temper led her to
warm expressions of her regard; those refinements of delicacy, which
now appear in all the commerce between the sexes, were, in that
age, but little known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Roytfon's papers there is a series of letters, from Mary
to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares her love to that nobleman in
language, which would now be reckoned extremely indelicate.

THE sonnets, and ome of Mary's letters to Bothwell were writ-

ten before the murder of her huffand; ome of them after that
event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior
to the death of her husband abound with the fondest expreflions of
her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that their familiarity had
been extremely criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
preflions, which her enemies employed to prove that ihe was no
stranger to the schemes which were forming against her husband's
life. Of this kind are the following passages, " Alace ! I nevir dif-
favit ony body; hot I remit me altogidder to zour will. Send me
advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhatfaever thing come therof,

3 I fall
34

1 fall obey zow. Advise too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out
ony mair secret inventioun by medecine, for he fuld tak medecine
and the bath at Cragmillar." Good. 2. 22., " See not hir quhais
fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa meikle praifit and eemit, as the trew
and faithfull travellis quhilk I fuftene for to merite hir place. For
obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that
may impefche me. God forgive me." &c. ibid. 27. " I have walkit
laiter thair-up, then I wald have done, gif it had not been to draw
Something out of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk
is the fairet commodity that can be offerit to excuse zour affairis."
Ibid 32. From the letters posterior to the death of her husband,
it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's seizing Mary by force,
and carrying her along with him, was contrived in concert with
herself, and with her approbation *.

HAV-

* THAT letters of Co much importance as thofeof Mary's to Bothwell flould have

been entirely loft appears to many altogether unaccountable. After being produced
in England before Elizabeth's commissioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good. 2. 235. He seems to have kept them in his poffeffio
during his life. After his death, they fell into the hands of Lennox his successor,
who restored them to the Earl of Morton. Good. 2.9 . Though it be not necefa-
rily connected with any of the queltions which gave occasion to this Dissertation,
it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of some of my readers to inform them, that as-
ter a very diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters
to Bothwell can be found in any of the publick libraries in Great Britain. The
only certain intelligence concerning them, since the time of their being delivered to
Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador from Queen Eliza-

beth to the King of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary of
State, from the original regiRler book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from r5th of Augull
1582, to 28th September 1583, in the poffelfion of Chriltopher Hunter, M. D. of
Durham.

1582, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein were the originals

of letters between the Scottish Queen and the Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered
to sundry hands, and thereby was at prcfent wanting, and unknown where it
relfed, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plufcardyne's means, that both the
coffer and also the writings are come, and now remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who,
I perceive, will be hardly iatreated to make delivery to her Majdlty, according to
her Majelty's defirc.

H h h11

'1 IS

HAVING thus stated the proof on both fides; having examined

at so great length the different fyftenms.with regard to the facts
in controversy; it may be expeted that I flould now pronounce

fen-

THIS time patl I have expended in searching where the coffer and writings were,

wherein without the help of the prior I hould have found great difficulty; now
will essay Gowrie, and of my success you hall be shortly advertised.

r2th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the caflet and letters mentioned in my last,

before these were come to the poffcefion of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found that
no mean might prevail to win the fame out of his hands without his own consent
and privity; in which behalf I had employed fitt instruments, that nevertheless
profited nothings therefore I attempted to essay himself, letting him know that the
said casket and letters hould have been brought to her Majesty by the offer and good
means of good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majelty before
they came into his hands and cultody, and knowing that he did bear the like assec-
tion, and was ready to pleasure her Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this that had
been thus far tendered to her Majefly, and which thereby hould be well accepted,
and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentment;
I moved him that they might be a present to he sent to her Majesty from him, and
that 1 might cause the fame be conveyed to her Majefly, adding hereunto such words
and arguments as might both tir up a hope of liberality, and also bell effect the
purpose ; at the first he was loth to agree that they were in his possession, but I let
him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that they were delivered to him by
Sanders Jardin, whereupon he pressed to know who did so inform me, enquiring whe-
ther the sons of the Earl of Morton had done it or no; I did not otherways in
plain terms deny or answer thereunto, but that he might think that he had told me,
as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleated that I shall give him to be the au-
thor thereof; after he had said [though] all these letters were in his keeping
(which he would neither grant nor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any per-
son without the consents and privities, as well of the King, that had interest therein,
a. also of the reft of the noblemen enterprisers of the ation against the King's mo-
ther, and that would have them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that
action. And albeit I replied, that their action in that part touching the afignation
of the crown to the King by his mother, had received such eflablifhment, confir-
mation, and firength, by acts of Parliament and other publick authority and iflhu-
ments, as neither hould that cafe be suffered to come in debate or quellion, nor
such scrolls and papers ought to be hewed for the strengthening thereof, so as there
might well be left and be rendered to the hands of her Majefly, to whom they
were dellined before they fell in his keeping ; yet he would not be removed or
satisfied, concluding, after much reasonings, that the Earl of Morton, nor any other
that had the charge and keeping thereof, durfl at any time make delivery; and
hecaufe it was the first time that I had moved him therein, and that he would glad-
ly both anfwcr her Majelty's good expectation in him, and also perform his duty
due to his fvereign and associates in the action aforesaid, therefore he would fcekc

out
36

sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclulions, which
can be drawn from the fasts which have been enumerated.

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-
couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her husband, and pre-

fuming

out the said caflet and letters, at his return to his house, which he thought should
be within a hort time; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and con-
fideration had of the cause, he would give further answer. This resolution I have
received as to the thing; and for the present I could not better, leaving him to give
her Majefly such testimony of his good will towards her, by his frank dealing here-
in, as flie may have cause to confirm her highnesses good opinion conceived al-
ready of him, and be thereby drawn to greater goodness towards him. I lhall Rill
labour him both by myself, and also by all other means, but I greatly distrust the
desired success herein.

24th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

FOR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the hands of the Earl of

Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnestly therein, letting him know the purpose of
the Scottish Queen, both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or defaced, and that the
means which fle will make in this behalf shall be so great and cffe&ual, as these writ-
ings cannot be safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that hath
the cuflody thereof, neither (hall he that is once known to have them be suffered
to hold them in his hands. Herewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fall
to that acfion, and the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now openly
known to have the poffefllon of there writings, and I have lettin him fee what surety
it shall bring to the said cause and all the parties therein, and to himself, that these
writings may be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping of her Majesty,
that will have them ready whenfiever any use (hall be for them, and by her l-igh-
neffes countenance defend them and the parties from such wrongful objections as
lhall be laid againfl them, offering at length to him, that if lie be not fully satis-
fled herein, or doubt that the reft of the associates lhall not like of the deliveryof
them to her Majefy in this good manner, and for the interest rehearsed, -that I lhall
readily, upon meeting and conference with them, procure their assent in this part; (a
matter more easy to offer than to perform) and, laflly, moving him that (for the
secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her Majesty's good opinion towards himfclf
may be firmly fettled and confirmed by his acceptable forwardness herein) he would,
without needlers scruple, franklly commit these writings to her Majesty's good cuflo-
dy for the good uses received. After long debate he resolved, and ;fid, that he
would unfeignedly (hew and do to her Majesty all the pleaftire that he might without
offence to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the allbciates in the ation, and
therefore he would firfi make search and view the said letters, and hercin take advice
what he might do, and how far he might satisfy and content her Majelty; promising
thereon to give more rcfolutc anfwcer; and he concluded flatly, that after he had

found
I

fuming on her attachment to himself, truck the blow without
having concerted with her the manner or circumstances of perpe-
trating that crime. That Mary, instead of testifying much indig-
nation at the deed, or discovering any resentment against Both-
well, who was accused of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, conducted his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it impossible to discover his guilt, and oon after,
in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, volun-
tarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every consideration
should have induced her to detest. By this verdict, Mary is not
pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her husband,
or even of having previously given her content to his death; but

found and seen the writings, that he might not make delivery of them without the
privity of the King. Albeit I stood long with him against his resolution in this point,
to acquaint the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands of her
Majesty, letting him fee that his doings there should admit great danger to the
cause; yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth to put over
the matter from himself to the King, upon fight whereof I shall travail effectually
to obtain the King's consent, that the letters may be committed to herMajefly's keep-
ing, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the present love and
affection that he beareth to her Highness, than to win any thing at the hands of the
associates in the action, whereof some principal of them now come and remain at
the devotion of the King's Mother; in this I hall fill call on Gowrie to search out
the coffer, according to his promise; and as I hall find him minded to do therein,
so hall I do my belf and whole endavour to effec the success to her Majefly's belt
contentment.

2d December 1582, from Edinbugh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the Earl of Gow-

rie for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I put him in mind
thereof; whereupon he told me, that the Duke of Lennox had fought earneitly to
have had those letters, and that the King did not know where they were, so as they
could not be delivered to her Majesty, without the King's privity and content,
and he pretended to be fill willing to pleasure her Majefly in the fame, so far as
he may with his duty to the King and to the reft of the associates in that ation;
but I greatly difiruft to efteft this to her Majefly's pleasure, wherein, nevertheless,
I hall do my uttermolt endeavours.

WHEITHER James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death, A. D. 1584, and

seizcd all his effeEts, took care to deflroy his mother's letters, for whose honour he
was at that time extremely zealous; whether they have perilhed by some unknown
accident; or whether they may not lill remain unobserved among the archieves of
some of our great families, it is ipoIible to detcrmine,

fie
38

flie is not acquitted of having discovered her approbation of the
deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and his adherents

laboured to etablifh, " That as James, fumtyme Erie of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy mur-
der, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry of gude me-
mory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis lauchfull
husband; fa was she of the foreknowledge, confall, devise, perfwa-
dar and commandar of the said murder to be done." Good. 2.
207.

WHICH of thee conclusions is most agreeable to the evidence,
that has been produced, I leave my readers to determine.

INDE X.

# INDEX.

I

N

D

E

X.
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Vol. and the Figures to the

Pages.
A DAMSON, archbilhop of St. an-

drews, is excommunicated by the fy-
· nod of Fife, I. 119. He excommau

nicated his opponents, ibid. is reflored by
the general assembly upon conditions, 120.
His mean fubmiflion to the general assem-
bly - 74
jlbany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his

nobles againit his brother K. James Il. I.
48. is made prisoner but escapes to France,
ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed IV. of
England, 49. procures afllftance to invade
Scotland on mean conditions, ibid. returns
to Scotland, and is reflored to favour, 50.
cabals again but is forced to fly to France,

..- - - ibid. 51.

Duke of, made Regent during the

minority of K. James V. 1. 31, 53. after
several unsuccessful struggles with the nobi-
lity, he is forced to retire to France, ib. 54.
/lencon, Duke of, Q_ Elizabeth long amuses

the court of France, by carrying on a treaty
of marriage with him - 11. I59
Alltn, cardinal, publilhed a book proving the

lawfulness- of killing excommunicated
Princes - - 11. 107
A/va, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q.

Mary, II. 23, 26, 37. is recalled from his
government of the Netherlands 43

Amba; dors, their office I. 7 ,74
And, ewJ St. the archbilhop of; remarkably

cured of a dangerous distemper, I. 16.
the motives of his opposition to the Q. Re-
gent, 136. his great influenceon the bench
of Bilhops and weight in Parliament, 140.
governed the church with great moderation,
141. persecutes the eformers, 4-2. per-
forms great service to the Congregation
ngainft the French, 19o. is imprilbled for
clebrating Maf, 2Sd. ruins (Q Mary's

VOL. 1I.

affairs by his imprudent condu&, 388. is
taken prisoner in Dunbarton caflle, and
hanged - II. 1

- . the castle of, demolilhed by the
* French - - 1. 99
- the prior of, promotes a treaty be-

tween the Q_ Regent and the Reformers,
]. 153. is provoked to leave the court,
155. is one of the chief promoters of the
rebrmation, 168. some account and a cha-
ra&-t of him, ibid. 169. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, 169. pre-
fumption of his innocence of the designs
charged on him, ibid. is sent by the con-
vention to invite the Queen to Scotland,
26. is received by her with confidence and
affecion, 217. restrains the turbulent spirit
of the people againit popery, 228. is sent
to refirain the licentious practices of the
borderers, 233. executes his commiflion
with vigour and prudence, 34. aconfpi-
racy againlt him discovered, 242. is crea-
ted Earl of Mar, 244. becomes obnoxious
to the Earl of Huntly, ibid. See Mar and
Murray.
,Yng#a, Earl of, was the only man who aferted

the independency of his country, I. 19, zo.
assumes the Regency during the minority
of K. James V. 31. 54. is unable to gain
his affctions, 54. is attainted and flies into
England - -

Obtains leave to return into Scotland,

11. 79. surrenders himself to K. James VI.
88. he with several others seize the castle
of Stirling to oppose Arran, 92. they are
forced to fly into England on the approach
of the King with an army, 92. 'he is at-
tainted and his eflate forfeited, 99. is con-
cerned in a plot in favour of Spain, 178.
is seized and conmnited prisoner to the callle
of Edinburgh, 179. licapes and flies to the
1 i i moun-
_ ___

mountains, ibid. 80, offers to ubmit to a
trial, 183. sentence is pronounced against
him, 184. he refuses to fiumit, 185

Anjou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between

him and Q Elizabeth II.

.dne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K.

.Janms VL . 170, 17,. her arrival in.
Scotland and coronation, 173. heads a
party that opposes the chancellor r81
. chAbihops, Bi/hops, Deans, and Chapters revi-

ved in Scotland during the:King's minority,
11. 33, $4. this gives great oeace tomany
of the clergy,. ibid. and at of afembly
against these offices, 74,. Bifihps made
subjea to p.relbyteries. and .assembles, i 9.
a great stroke given to their authority, 15.9
None of them present at:the Queen's coro-

nation 1--- - ' 73
.drgyl Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown

matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I.
140. uses his interest with the reformers to
make a treaty with the Qgeen Regent, 1 53.
leaves.her court in resentment of her, trea-
chery, 55. refuses to accede to a treaty
with Murray the Regent, 4z2. is soon as-
ter forced to submit, 423.. as as lieute-
nant to the Queen after the Regent's mpr-
der, IL 5. is prevailed, on to. join the
King's party,, 1 8. qarrels.with.Athole, 47.
confederates, with him, againfi Morton, the
Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid. they
remonstrate against him to the King, 50.
they raise forces. againaf him, 5.5. negoci-
ates.a treaty with him by the mediation: of
Q Elizabeth, 56. is promoted to the of-
isce of chancellor, 57., the King's autho-
rity delegated to him. and Lord. Sorbes
against the popilh Lords, 187. his forces
are defeated in an engagement with them

188

.ri/aocracy, predominantin. Scotland, I. zo2
drado Spanish, preparations for it, II. 16i.

it is defeated - - 166
.irran Earl, is appointed Regent during the

minority of Q_ Mary, I. 83. his charicter,
ibid. 84. conrents to the schemes of Epg-
land which difgulls the public, 86. be-
comes suspicious of the Earliof Lenox, 87.
is forced to renounce the friendfip. with
England and declare for France, 88. and.
to perficute the reformers, 89. publickly

abjures the doCtrine of the reformers, 90.
is contemned by one half and little trusted
'by the other Iart of the nation, gl. heads
the partizans: of France and defenders of
popery, ibid. attempts in vain to seize the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 97. is forced
PI tg!rakf a tck- wi: tle conffiiators, ;8.
his eldeR son is conditionally excluded all
right of succession, oo. his mean concession
to the court of France, 107. gets the title
of Chatelherault, ibid. is undermined by
the..Q;Dowager, .3,, rI4. proposals and
ar.gument.foihisirftigation,. :.15. he can-
sents to it, 16. rtr"s. by. t influence of
the archbithop of St. . Andews., 17. is at
la prevailed on and gets advantageous
terms,. ibid. See. ChaclberaIut..
Artan, elde& son. of the Duke of Chatelhe-

rault, joins in an aflociation with the refor-
mers,. L 16.6. narrowly, eofapes intended
ruin at the court of France, .167. is full of
resentment againg- the. French on that. ac-
count,,ibid.. 68. the Congregation follicit
Q Elizabeth, to.marr.y him, 209. his great
imprudence with: regard to Q. Mary, 23 5.
discovers a: confpjracy againit the Queen's
favourites, 242. loses his reason, .11. 57,
5 8.. isimprifoned by Morton 58
-- late capt..Stewart,, gets that title and
estate,. If. 69. is, appointed to conduct
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, ib.
tortures several of his servants cruelly,' ibid.
his infamous marriage with the countess of
March, 7.1, 72. his. variance with Lenox,
7 z.; is. frustrated in: an attempt to rescue the
King at Ruthven, 78. is.confuied prisoner
to. tie cafle of Stirling, ibid. 79. regains
his liberty and the Kihgs regard, 85, 86.
refumei his power and.arrogan.c, 86. gets
the Ruthyven conspirators declared guilty of
high treason, 88. is deteftedas.author of a
persecution. againf.the clergy, 94. is gain-
ed over to QL Elizabeth's. interetl, 97, 98.
gets several forfeited eRates, 99. his cor-
ruption.and insolence, o5.' is nmade chan-
cellor and. has. unlimited, power, ibid. his
venality is imitated by his wife, ibid. his
monstrous tyranny and oppreflon 1 o6, o/.
his power undermined by Wotton the Eng-
.lilh envoy, 115.. is confined in the cafle of
St. Andrews but. oon recovcrs favour, 1.6.

his

his interest finks much, 117. is lripped of
his honours and spoils, and reduced to his
original tation' - - 118
Arires Lords of, their origin and business, I.

69. by whom chosen, 70. the subsequent
variations and political use made of this in-
ftitution - - 71, 72

Jrundel Earl of, is appointed a commiflioner

to the conference at Weftminiter 1. 414
A/hby, ambalfador from 'Q Elizabeth to Scot-

land, II. 163. his great promires to King
James, ibid, his'proiiies are 'oon forgot,
166. he is ahamed and withdraws pri-
vately from Scotland - ibid.

.dffaJation, the frequency of it in Scotland,

how accounted for, 1. 311-313. several
instances of it in France, 313, 314. a fop
put to it there and in Scotland, 314. feve-
ral great men approved of it, 315. pre-
vailed greatly afterwards - 1I. 74
.jemnblv of the church of Scotland, the firlt

but feeble and irregular, I. z15. anoiher
affemibly, teir demands from the conven-
tion, 235. two other assembles in vain 'fl-
licit an augmentation of their revenues, 2 5 2.
they address Q. Mary in high itrains. of
complaints, 294. an aflembly proceeds at
Glasgow notwithianding the King's inter-
di&io, II. 74. two afemblies yield many
of the privileges of the church to the King,
204. declare it lawful for Ministers to fit in
Parliament, 207, zo8, fee Clergy.
Alrbiation, formed in defence of Q, Elizabeth

against Q. Mary - II. o
.dthle Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel

with the Earl of Argyl, II.'47. joins with
him in opposing Motton the Regent, ib. dies
soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 57.
suspicions of his being poisoned ibid.
Aubigne Lord de, second soh of the Earl of Lc-

nox, arrives in Scotland from France, II. 6o.
becomes soon a great favourite of K. James,
ibid. high titles and pods bellowed on him,
ibid. notes against him, appendix ol. See
Lenox.
Altifrian family, their origin and power, I. 74

B.
B iington, Anthony, some account of him,

I ir 122. the rife of his conspiracy againit
2Q Elizabeth, ibid. the names and scheme

of operations of his aociates, ibid.
they are betrayed, seized and executed,

..- - 124, 125
Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of tle

commissioners to the conference at Weft-
minlter - - I. 414

Baliol John, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, 1. 8. is preferred by Ed. . o. soon
forced by him to resign - ibid.
Ballard, a trafficking priest, follicits an inva-

sion of England from Spain, II. 2 2. joins
in a conspiracy to murder Q_ Elizabeth, 3.
is discovered and taken into custody, z4.
and executed 125
Barons, their jurifdidion very extensive, . 18.

the difference between the greater and lesser
whence, 66. three hundred of them remon-
ftrate againlt the conduct of the Q. Dowa-
ger, 130. the lefler admitted by their re.
presentatives into Parliament, II. 160. pc-
tition of the lefler Barons to Parliament,
app. o. See Aoles.
Bafilicon Doros, a book pub!ifhed by King

James VI. strengthens his interest in Eng-
land - - II. 209
ceatoun cardinal, made use of by K. James V.

to mortify the nobles, . 58. his preten-
sions to the Regency on the death of that
Prince, 82. forges a teltament of the late
King, ibid. his views how disappointed,
ibid. his charater, 83. opposes the Earl
of Arran Regent, 86. excites mofi of the
nation againit the English, 87. seizes the
young Queen and her mother, ibid. cajols
the Earl. of Lenox, ibid. obliges the Re-
gent to renounce England and declare for
France, 88. and to persecute the refor-
mers, 89. engrofes the, chief dircion of
affairs, 91. his double dealing with the
Earl of Lenox resented, ibid. is murdered,
95, 96. his death fatal to the Catholics,
97. a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid.
scandalous reports concerning him, 126
Bedford Earl of conies as Ambaflador from

Q. Elizabeth to witnes the baptism of
James VI. I. 332. his inflru&ions, ibid.
333, his letters to Sir W. Cecil, appen-
dix - 27, 30, 3.
Belhndon Sir Lewis, justice clerk, K. James's

refdent at London, II. 114. joins in pro-
moting Q. Elizabeth's interell in Scotland,

I i ibid.

ibid. is sent with her Envoy into that coun-
try - - ibid.
Black Mr. David, minier at St. Andrews,

his ridiculous and seditious expre'llons in the
pulpit, II. 9 5, 196. being supported by
the clergy, he declines the civil jurif-
di&ion, 196. is condemned by the privy
council, 197. is lentenced by the King to
reside beyond Spey - 198
Blackader captain, and three others executed

for the murder of Darnly 1. 370
Boethius Hector, his hiltory of Scotland, ome

account of - I. 4
Bolton Cafjle, Q: Mary confined a prisoner

there - - I. 401
Bonat, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney,

- - - I. 129ag
Borderers, an attempt to refirain their licen-

tious practices, I. 233, 234. Q; Mary vi-
fits them, 323. a scuffle there in which the
Englilh warden, &c. are made prisoners,

- - - II. 46
Berthwick Lord, aflits the Queen Regent in

defending Leith -- I. 183
Bothtweli Earl of, intercepts a fum of mo-

ney from England to the Congregation,
J. 8 . favours the Queen Regent, but re-
fides at his own house, 183. his resent-
ment against the prior of St. Andrews,
z45.' is by him when Earl of Murray and
Regent summoned to a public trial, 280.
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid.
a sentence of Outlawry against him pre-
vented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted
to return, 289. escapes with her after the
murder of Rizio, 310. some account of
his former behaviour, 317. commences a
favourite of the Queen, ibid. 38. he re-
conciles him to several Lords, with whom
he was at variance, ibid. he increases in
favour with her, 320. circuntances con-
curring in this, 321. he is wounded in at-
tempting to seize one of the borderers, 323.
the Qeen's extraordinary regard for him
on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton and his as-
fociates, 334, 335. proposes the reltora-
tion of the popilh ecclelialical jprifdicion,
336. his views in this, ibid. 337. is sus-

eaced the author of Darnly's murder, 343.
is charged with it by Lenox, 34;. but till
fAvoured by the Queen, ibid. appointed

governor of Edinburgh CaRle, ibid. his
trial is hurried on, 346. remarkable par-
tiality in'.his favour, 347. Lenox accuses
hinm'openly, 348. comes to his trial with
a great retinue, 34 8 349. is acquitted by
a jury, 349. the trial universally censured,
ibid. 350. challenges any that would ac-
cu'him, 350. everal ats of Parliament
passed in his favour, 3 . he procures an
ac in favour of the reformation, ibid. 35z.
prevails on several of the nobles to recom-
mend him as a husband to the Queen, 352,
353. 354. seizes the Queen on' a journey
from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar,
356. his view in this, 357. 'obtains a par-
don under the great teal, ibid. procures a
divorce from his wife, 358. carries the
Queen to the caitle of Edinburgh, ibid. is
created Duke of Orkney, 359. and mar-
ried to the Queen, ibid. is notallowed the
title of King, 360. he watches the Queen
very closely, ibid. endeavours to get the
Prince into his custody, ibid. 361. is a-
larmed with an association of the nobles
against the Queen and him, 36z. carries
the Queen to the catle of Borthwick, ibid.
raises forces againf the confederate Lords,
364. he marches against them, 365: pro-
poles a tingle combat, '366. this how pre-
vented, ibid. takes his las farewell of the
Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid. fends for
a calket of letters from Q_ Mary to him,
371. they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 380, 381.
refleions on his conduct, 381. copy of
his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon, appen-
dix - 93
- late Francis Stewart, created Earl of

Bothwell, II. 167. is imprisoned for con-
fulting witches, 7;. escapes and attempts
to break into the King's presence, ibid. re-
tires to the north, 176. he and his adhe-
rents are attainted, 178. fails in an at-
tempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken un-
der protecion of Q_ Elzabeth, who follicits
for him, 180. seizes the King's person,
181, 18z. forces him to difmifi the chan-
cellor and his other favourites, 182. and
to grant him a remiflion, ibid. his bold
andinfolent behaviour afterwards, ibid. 183.
is encouraged by the Englilh nmbafidor,
t85. makes another attempt to come at

the.
I N

the King, 86. is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the north of England, ibid. is aban-
doned by Q. Elizabeth, and forced to fly
into Spain and Italy, 190. remains in in-
digent obscurity, and is never after recon-
ciled to the King - ibid.
- Adam, bishop of Orkney, perf rms

the ceremony of marriage of Q Mary to
the Earl of Bothwell - I. 359

Bcthweilbhagh. See Hanilton.
Boulogne, wrested by the French out of the

hands of the English, I. o6. they content
to reitore it and its dependencies to the
French -- - 108
Boeve, Envoy from QElizabeth, accuses Le-

nox ofdifturbing the peace, II. 63. is re-
fused an audience, ibid. is ent to encou-
rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 79. to
enquire about K. James's correspondence
with the pope - - 210

Boyd Lord, his ambitious views in the time of

K. James III. frustrated - I. 30
- is prevailed on to join the King's party

againfit Q Mary, II. 18. joins the Ruth-
ven conspirators 77
Brienne Count de, comes an ambassador from

France to witness the baptism of K. Ja. VI.

1. 332
Bruce Robert, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. his grandson aflerts his right
and vindicates the honour of his country,
lo. he attempts to reduce the power of
the nobles 39
- a priel, employed by the King of Spain

to seduce the Scots nobles - II. 167
. Mr. Robert, a prelbyterian minifler, per-
forms the ceremony of the coronation of
K. James's Queen II. 173
- Edward, abbot of Kinlefs, acquits him-

self with address and reputation as ambafla-
dor at the court of England II. 208, 209
-- Mr. Robert, a minister, his resolution
in refuting to publish the King's account of
Gowries conspiracy, II. 229. is deprived
and banished on that account ibid.
Buchanan George, his history of Scotland,

some account of, I. 4. remarks on his dia-
logue de jure Regiis, 157. alone accuses
Q. Mary of a criminal correspondence with
Rizio, 3o;. approved of affaflination, 315.
kis partiality in overlooking an a of Par.

liament in- favour of the reformation, 3z.
attends the Regent into England when cal-
led on to accuse Q, Mary, 404. was one of
the preceptors of K James VI. II. 48.
commended for his great genius, 256, 257

Burleigh. See Cecil.
Burroughb, when first represented in Parlia-

ment --- I[. 179

C.
C /IfS John, a declaration of his in name

of Q Elizabeth to the Lords of Grainge

and Lethington, appendix 68
Caithne/s Earl of, his protest at the trial of Both-

well for the murder of Darnly I. 3 50
Calvin, the patron and restorer of prelbyte-

rian church government - 1. 2 3

Cambden, ome mistakes of his I. 333, 354
Canongate near Edinburgh, a Parliament held

there - II. 16
Cardan, some account of him, I. 116. his

remarkable cure of the bishop of St. An-
drews ibid.

Carey Sir George, sent ambassador from Q:

Elizabeth to encourage the conspirators at
Ruthven II. 79
- Robert, sent by Q Elizabeth to ooth

K. James after the death of his mother, II.
i54. is not permitted to enter Scotland,
ibid. was the first that brought K. James.
intelligence of the death of Q Elizabeth

r--- "~-- 246, 247

Caflet of letters from Q Mary to Bothwell

seized by the Earl of Morton, I. 37 . her
enemies avail themselves much of them

ibid.

Cajdls Earl of, joins the King's party, II. 8
CaJlelnau, the French ambassador, is emploed

to procure the consent of his court to her
marriage with Darnly, I. 273. he endea-
vours to make up the differences between
the Queen and him, 320. his intcrceflion
in behalf of Q Mary - 1. to
Catherine of Medicis, aflumes the government

after the death of Francis II. her son, 1. 21 .
her harfli treatment of Q_ Mary, ibid. her
views in behaving more fiiendly to her, 261.
bends her whole endeavours to dellroy the
Proteltants, II. 21. her artful condu&
with that view - ibid. 22

Cecil,,

Cecil, his great capacity as a miniter, I. 198.

z 9. is employed to negotiate a peace with
France, ibid. overreaches the French
ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, a 19.
is appointed a commiflioner to the confe-
rence at Westminster, 414. is ent by Q
Elizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, II.
9. has an interview with her which ex-
cites Q Elizabeth's jealousy, 43. is treat-
ed-harlhly by QElizabeth for consenting to
Q. Mary's death - 153
---- Sir Robert, on to the former, heads

the party againt Eflex, II. 232. his cha-
racter, 233. his great afliduity, ibid. en-
ters into a private correspondence with K.
James, 238. a letter from him to his Ma-
jelly, app. -116
Celebacy of the popili clergy, a chief engine of

their policy - I. 123, 148
Clarles V. Emperor, his great power, I. 74.

and unlimited ambition, 75. is checked by
Francis 1. ibid.

K. of France makes a league with Q.

Elizabeth - - I. 27
Chatlherault Duke of, that title conferred on

the Earl of Arran, Regent of Scotland, I.
107. his right of succession to the crown of
Scotland maintained, 136. nters a pro-
teftation to save his right, 138. joins the
reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 163, 164. joins in afbicia-
tion with them, 166. is looked on as the
head of the Congregation, 168. his pufil-
lanimity, 180. becomes obnoxious to Q.
Mary, 235. his jealousy of the prior of
St. Andrews, 242. deprived of his French
pension, 261. is alarmed at the Earl of
Lenox's return to Scotland, 268. an ac-
commodation brought about by the Queen's
influence, z69. adheres to Murray in op-
poting the Quecn's marriage, 29o. is per-
donedon his humble application, but forced
to reside in France, 293. his partizans
grumble at Murray's being advanced to the
Regency, 384. returns from France and
heads the Queen's adherents, 422. is
made her lieutenant-general, ibid. his re-
solution wavering, the Regent commits him
prisoner to the ca/ile of Edinburgh, 423.
is set at liberty by Kirkaldy and joins the
QCeeln's party, II. 4. is. proclaimed trai-

tor by Lenox the new Regent, 8. is recbn.
ciled to Morton the Regent, 39. articles
of a treaty between them, ibid. his death

45
Church .of Scotland, revolutions in it after the

union of the crowns, II. 254, z55. See as-
Jenably, clergy.
Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parlia-

ment - - II. 158

Clans the inflitution and nature of I. 23
Clergy popifh,theirgreat richesand power, 1.57,

1 z . were made use of by K.James V. to sup-
press the nobles, 57, 58. made a confider-
able body in Parliament, 1zz. their great
influence over the laity, ibid. they engrof-
fed learning, 123. and held many of the
chief employments, ibid. their power en-
creased by celibacy, ibid. they seized the
estates of the inteflate, 124. and tried all
matrimonial and testamentary caues, ibid.
become obnoxious to the laity, 1 5. their
great corruptor, whence, ibid. these of
Scotland particularly dissolute, 126. their
weak defence of their tenets, 127. try in
vain to impose false miracles, ibid. their
impolitic conduct to the reformers 143
- reformed, try in vain to recover the
revenues of the church, I. z r , 216, 218.
procure a debolition of all relics of po-
pery, ibid. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 236-240. they are no
gainers by it, 240. their flipends what in
those days, ibid. are offended at the mo-
deration of their leaders, 259. occasions
a tumult among the people, ibid. 260.
more complaints of their poverty, 269, 335.
are jealous of Q. Mary, ibid. the small al-
lowance appointed to support them all, 336.
their application for payment of their fti-
pends of little effe&, 383. frelh complaints
of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, 433, 434. are put off with
fair words and promises, 434. archbishops,
&c. introduced among them by Morton.
11. 33, 34. their grievances under his ad-
miniltration, 45. they approve of the Ruth-
ven conspirators, 80. by favouring them
they provoke the King, 89. severe laws
made against them, 92, 93. they of Edin-
burgh fly into England, 93. as do several
others that were mo!t eminent, 94. mnort

v igorous

Oigorots measures againt them, 99. they
obtain no redress on the restoration of the
exiled Lords,. 18. represent their griev-
ances to Parliament, 157. a maintenance
provided for them by Parliament, 159. they
prevail! to get Presbyterian government efta-
blifhed by law, r77. theirzeal against the
Pbpifh Lord', 183, 184, 192. their raft
proceedings, 92, 194. they ereft a fland-
ing Council of the Church, 194. vindicate
-one of their number who declined the civil
jurisdiction, z96, 197. their ianding Coun-
cil ordered to leave Edinburgh, ibid. this
occasions a violent tumult there, 198, 200.
they use their utmost assorts to spirit the
people, 201. are deserted and fly to Eng-
land, 202. their power greatly reduced,
ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of
their privileges, 203, 204. are reflored to
a feat in Parliament, zo6. this violently
opposed' by many of them, 207. but car-
ried in their general Assembly, 208. there
entitled to this privilege are. laid under
many regulations and reftric&ions, 213.
they are brought under great fubje&ion,
214. the revolutions among them since the
Union of the Crowns - 254, 255
Clintln Lord, appointed a commiflioner at the

conference at Weftminfier I. 414
Cockburr of Ormifon, receives a supply of

money from the Englilh to the congregation,
L. 181. is intercepted and robbed of it, ibid.

Cbin in Scotland, some account ofI. 177; I I. 44
Conmmiaries appointed to try causes in place of

the Spiritual.Court, I. 258. they are de-
prived of all authority - 336

Confeion of faith by the Reformers, consented

to by Parliament I. 205
Congregationi the Protestants distinguished by

that name, I. 149. their leaders enter into
an aflbciation, L53. are involved in diffi-
culties, 179. apply to Q. Elizabeth for as-
fifancc, 18o. money sent. them by her in-
tercepted, 18 i. make a rafl and desperate
attempt on Leith and are repulsed, ibid. 82.
are no less unfortunate in a second kirmifli,
t82. are quite dispirited and retreat to Stir-
ling, ibid. 183. ate joined by the body of
the nobles, 183. their army dwindles away,
184. are animated by Knox, ibid. they

apply again to Q Elizabeth, 185. their
parties harrafs the French, 190. are affiRed
by a fleet from England, ibid. conclude a.
treaty at Berwick with the D. of Norfolk,
19r. the design and fubitance of this treaty,
1,92. negociate a peace with France, 198.
articles of the treaty, 199. they reap many
advantages from it, 200, 201. See Refor-
mation,
Covenant, National, framed in defence of the

King and Government, IL. 164. the na-
ture and reasonableness of it, iLid. 165..
the progress of it since 165

Courtfy of Scotland, what - I. 136
Craig, a minister, boldly tellifies againift Q(

Mary's marriage with Bothwell I 359
Crawford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes

Dumbarton Castle, II. 13, 14. the diffi-
culties of that enterprize 14.
- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-
nilh facion, II. 163, 167. offers his ser-
vice to the K. of Spain, 167. joins in re-
bellion against the King, 169. is forced
·to submit to him, ibid. and imprisoned a
Ihort time 170
Crirhton, Regent during the minority of K.

James II. his barbarous policy I. 44, 45
- a jesuit, a plot againf Q Elizabeth

discovered by his means -- II. oo.

Criminals, a remarkable inflance of the diffi-

culty of bringing them to justice, I. 17

Croc du, the French Ambassador, refuses to

countenance Q: Mary's marriage with Both-
well, I. 359. attempts in vain a reconci-
liation between the Queen and the confe-
derate Lords, 365. mediates a truce be-
tween theKing's and Queen's party in Scot-
land -- 11. 28
Cro'wn matritninialof Scotland granted by Par-

lialnent to the Dauphin of France, 1. 138.
deputies appointed to carry it, but are pre-
vented -- -- 140
Cuinigham Robert, appears at the trial of

Bothwell in name of the Earl of Lenox,.
1. 39. demands a delay, which is refltfed,

ibid.
Curie, one of Q. Mary's fecrctaries, is seized

and carried prifoncr to Iondon, 11. 127,
128. is produced an evidence againlt her

.- ... - - 135

Dary
E X.

D.
D Arnly Henry, Lord, proposed as a hus-

band to Q. Mary, I. 256. his right of

succession confidered, ibid. 266. is per-
mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 271.
arrives there and quickly gains the Queen's
heart, 272. his charater, 274. disgusts
several of the nobles, particularly Murray,
ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David
Rizio, 75. is despised on that account,
276. grows intolerably insolent and haugh-
ty, 282. schemes to affaflinate Murray,
284. a plot to seize and fend him to Eng-
land prevented by the Queen, ibid. evi-
dences of this, 285, z86. his marriage
with the Queen celebrated, 287. is ho-
noured with the title of King of Scotland,
288. is implacable with refpe& to the ex-
iled nobles, z97. loses the Queen's assec-
tion by his untoward behaviour, 302. de-
mands the Crown matrimonial, ibid. 303.
becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with
the Queen, 303. his resolution to be aven-
ged of him encouraged by the nobles, 305.
articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 306. Heads the conspirators who
perpetrate the murder, 307. confines the
Queen after it is committed, 308. prohi-
bits the meeting of the Parliament, ibid.
makes his escape with the Queen, 309, 310.
her hatred to him increases, 315. is neg-
leted by her and treated with little respect
by the nobles, 319. resolves to leave Scot-
land, 321. his wayward and capricious
behaviour, 3z22. he writes the reasons of
his conduot to the Queen, ibid. his itrange
behaviour at the baptism of the Prince, 33 a.
a false reason alledged for this confuted,
333 retires to his father at Glasgow, 335.
falls sick there, 337. conjectures concern-
ing his dilsemper, ibid. is negleited by
the Queen, 338. she afterwards visits and
exprelfes affection for him, 339. he is pre-
vailed on by her to come to Edinburgh,
341. is lodged in a separate house, ibid.
he is murdered there, 242. his charater,
ibid. a proclamation issued for discovering
the murderers, 343. a remis enquiry made
into it, 344-350. Capt. Blackadder and
three others executed on that account, 384.
thl confellion of Morton the Regent at his

death concerning the murder, II. 70. pa-
per of objecions of the Court of England
against his marriage with Q. Mary, App.
a dissertation concerning his murder, at the
end of vol. II.
David I. K. of Scotland, his profulion to the

church - - I tt
- II. troubles during his minority, I. t8
Dawiin, sent into Scotland by Q Elizabeth,

as a spy on the French Ambassador, II. 83.
is sent to gain Arran's interest to Q_ Eliza-
beth, 98. this he oon accompliles, ibid.
brings the warrant for Q. Mary's death at
Q, klizabeth's desire, 144, 145. is char-
ged by her with disobeying her orders, 153.
is imprisoned, tried and fined, and loses all
favour, ibid. objecions against him in the
cause of the late Scottilh Queen, App. 1 14
Defe Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces

to aflift the French against the Englilh in
Scotland, I. 106. his success there, ibid.
Dfcipline, in the Church, the irt book of

composed, I. 215. why objeaed againt in
a convention of the States, ibid. another
attempt in favour of Church discipline fruf-
trated II. 73
Douglas, the power and property of that fa.

mily, I. 29. they aspire to independency,
44. Will. Earl of, murdered by K. James
11. 45. his son endeavours to resent it,
ibid. is forced to fly into England, 46
*--- William, Q Mary committed a pri-

soner to his castle of Lochleven 370
--- George, brother to the above, assists

the Queen in making her escape 385
-- Archibald, one of Darnly's murder-

ers, II. i a. undergoes a mock trial for
that crime and is acquitted, ibid. is sent
Ambafador to England, ibid. letter from
him to the Q.of Scots, app. to the King.
Drury, Sir Wm. enters Scotland with an army

to support the Queen's patty. II. 5. they
join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
he procures a truce between the King's and
Queen's parties, z8. comes with forces to
affill Morton in besieging the catle of Edin-
burgh, 40. which is forced to surrender, 41
- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q Mary's

keepers - - II. 103
Dudly Lord Robert, recommended by Q_

Elizabeth as a husband to Q. Mary, 1. 6z.
why a favourite of Q_ Elizabeth'", ibid. is
highly promoted by her, ibid. 63. his

situation

situation extremely delicate, 264. becomes
suspicious of Cecil - ibid.
Dumbarcn. Castle, furprized and taken in the

King's name by the Regent II. 13, 14
Diry, a minister of Edinburgh, banished from

his charge by King James, for his free invec-
tives against the courtiers, II. 75. after
being restored he is driven from it a second
time for approving the Raid of Ruthven, 89

E.

Dinburgh, is taken and burnt by the Eng.
lifh, 1. 93. a great fray there between

the French and Scots, lo. is seized by
the Reformers, I58. its inhabitants are
terribly alarmed by the French, 18z. a
treaty there with the French and English,
199. a.loan demanded of it by Q.Mary,
293. which is granted for the superiority
of Leith, 294. the treaty of infled on by
Q. Elizabeth, 333', 334. is possessed by
the Queen's party, II. 3. and fortified by
them, 16;' the City and' Caflle hold out
against the King's forces, 26. is reduced
to great straits by. famine, ibid. 27. is re-
lieved by a-truce, z8. the citizens take up
arms to promote the King's marriage; 171.
they rife again and insult the King- and his
minifRers on the murder of the Earl of Mur-
ray,. 176. aflift the King againfi Huntly,
186. a violent tumult there on account of
the Clergy, 198-zoo. theyarefeverely pu-
nilhed for it by the King, 201-203. their
minifiers return to their charges, 205. di-
vided into parilhes and number ofminifters
increased, ibid. they decline publishing
the account of Gowries conspiracy, 2'28.
all, except one who is banished, are per-
fuaded by the King'to do it - 229
EdwardI. of England, deflroyed the public

archives of Scotland, I. 4. is made um-
pire between Bruce and Baliol, 7. his art
to acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid.
,his wars with the Scots under Rob. Bruct,

10, 39
Eglition, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the

King's party - I. 18.
Elizabeth, her peaceable accellion to the Crown

of England, I. 140. upports the congre-
gation in Scotland; 18o. is sparing in her
flipplies, 18 . resolves to support them on
a ficond application, 185. her good con-

Vu1.. Ii.

dut in matters of importance, 86. m'o»
tives that determined her to affii them, ibid.
188. her deliberate and resolute conduct,
191. fends a firong fleet to their afifRance,
ibid. concludes a treaty with them, ibid.
192. her right to the Crown of Engtand
aferted by Francis and Mary in Fiance,
oo20. obtains advantageous terms for the
Scots, 20t.' is follicited by the Parliament
of Scotland to marry the Earl of Arran,
zc9. this he declines, 210. the feeds of her
discontent With QMary, 29, 220. her
jealousy of the fucceflion, ibid. 223. her
exceflive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beau-
ty, 223. her diflimulation to her, 224.
refuses her a safe condut, ibid. fends to
congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 230.
refuies a conceflion made by Q Mary, 23 1.
her jealousy of her right betrayed her into
mean ations, 232. Her resemblance to
Hen. VII. ibid. a personal interview with
QMary propored, 251. The artfully de-
clines it, 252. her views in regard to Q.
Mary's marriage, 255, 256. assumes a dif-
agreeable authority, 256. names one for a
husband to Q. Mary, 262. the different
qualifications of her ministers and favourites,
ibid. dissembles with Q. Mary about her
marriage, ibid. 65. and likewise with re-
gard to L. Darnly, 266. affronts QMary
by her insinuation concerning Lenox, 267.
is perplexed about the marriage of the Scot-
tih Queen, 271. permits Darnly to visit
the court of Scotland,. ibid. assets to de-
clare against Q. Mary's marriage to him,
277. her reasons for this conduct, 278.
her great diflimulation in that affair, z83.
her harsh and deceitful behaviour to Mur-
ray and his aflociates who had fled to her,
292. is firuck at hearing of the birth of
JamesVI. 319. consents to ftandgodmo-
ther to him, ibid. the Parliament address
her to fettle the fucceflion, 325. this greatly
*embaraffes her, ibid. 326. (he sooths and
gains her Parliament, 327. endeavours to
accommodate her differcnces with Mary,
333. writes to her to delay the trial of
DaTlly's murderers, 348. interposes in her
behalf when a prisoner, 372. her ambafr
fador is rcffied ccefs to Q. Mary, 373.
flic offers afliflance to the other nobles, ibid.
her deliberations concerning the disposal of
.Q Mary on her arrival' in England, 392,

~K k k 393.

.93. resolves to detain her there,. 394.
her motives to this conduit, ibid. 395.
fends her letters of condolance, and gives
orders to watch her conduct, 395. he
gladly accepts the office of umpire between
her and her fubjeas, 396, 397. receives a
very pressing letter from Q. Mary, 399.
her precautions againtl her, 400. appoints
commissioners to hear Q Mary and her ac-
cufers, 405. her important situation on
that occasion, ibid. her views in this as-
fair, 406, 407. receives the Regent's de-
mands, 410. removes the Conference to
Weftminfer, 411. her mean artifices to
get the evidence of QMary's guilt from
the Regent, 417. treats her with greater
rigour, 418. writes a harlh letter to Q.
Mary, ibid. the dismisses theRegent, with-
out approving or condemning him, 419. but
secretly supports his party, 420. makes
proposals to the regent in her favour, 423.
Norfolk's projea concealed from her, 425,
427. discovers and defeats a rebellion in
Q Mary's favour, 431, 432. resolves to
deliver her up to the regent, 434. her
great concern at his death, II. . conti-
nues to encourage fations in Scotland, 2.
her political conduc with regard to Lenox,
6, 7. is excommunicated and deprived of
her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 7. sup.
ports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lenox to be Regent, 7. proposes a
treaty of accommodation between Q Mary
and her fubjets, 8. procures a cefltion of
hostilities, 9. fends proposals to Q Mary,
ibid. her artifices in the condut of this
affair, o, X1. appoints commissioners to
fame a treaty, . finds a pretence to ren-
der their meeting fruitless, 12. a marriage
proposed between her and the D. of Anjou,
21. declares openly againllt the Queen's
paty, 25. concludes a treaty with France,
27. her motives for negociating a peace
between the two parties in Scotland, 36, 37.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q Mary,
43. negociates a treaty between Morton
and his adversaries, 56. her answer to K.
James's demand of a pofleflion of an estate
in England, 56, 57. a marriage between
her and the D. of Alencon proposed, 5.
interposes in behalf of Morton, 63. her
measures in order to save him, 66. coun-
tenances the conspirators at Ruthven, 7.9.

is alarmed at a conspiracy againt her, 95,
96. the designs of Queen Mary's adherents
against her, 97. endeavours to recover her
interest in Scotland and gains Arran to her
interelt, 98. amuses Q Mary with a fruit-
less negociation, oo. a new conspiracy
againit her, ibid. and association formed
for her defence, oi, oz2. her suspicions
of Q Mary, o02. her life endangered by
a conspiracy, 107. this how discovered
and prevented, ibid. occasions an extraor-
dinary flatute for her preservation, o18.
is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, t12. endeavours to
form a confederacy of the Protestant Princes,
ibid. and to proceed with rigour against
Q Mary, ibid. 114. advances her interest
in Scotland, and proposes a league withit,
114. fettles a pension upon K. James, 5.
concludes a treaty with Scotland, 120. ac-
count of Babington's conspiracy against her,
122- 25. herdiflimulationafter Q Mary's
convition, 137, 138. her answer to K.
James's interceflion for her, 141. her far-
ther dissimulation and anxiety, 143. signs
the warrant for her execution, 144. her
speech to Davison on that occasion, ibid.
affects to lament Q Mary's death, 152.
several marks of her artifice in that affair,
ibid. 153. The endeavours to sooth K.
James, 154. provocations given by herto
Spain, 162. prepares to meet its resent-
ment, ibid. 163. endeavours to secure
Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. James's
marriage, 170. follicits him to treat con-
fpirators against him with rigour, 180.
evades the decifon of K. James's right of
succession to the Crown of England, 208.
is difgutled at several of his proceedings,
21o. discovers his correspondence with the
Pope, ibid. frelh grounds of herfufpicion,
232. her conduct with regard to the Earl
of Effex, 233-237. her irrefolutioncon-
ccrning his deatlh 237. and great concern
after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from
K. James with regard, and increases his sub-
fidy, 238. her last illness, z41. conjec-
tures concerning the causes of her melan-
choly, 242, 243. her death, 244. and cha-
racer, ibid. 245. declared the K. of Scots
her successor, 246. some of her letters,
app. 13, 28, 35, 36, 39, 47, 48, 52 65.

Elpbhins
E X.

E 'lhiiion, secretary to K. James VI. deceives

him into a correlpondence with the Pope,
11. 211. is tried and found guilty of high
treason, 212. and pardoned on the Queen's
intercession * ibid.
England, the Eng'ifi seize and detain King

James I. of Scotland long a prisoner, . 29.
the nobles there humbled, 32. had early
two houses of Parliament, 68.' they in-
vade Scotland, 92. their depredations there,
94, 95. a peace between England, France
and Scotland, 95. invade Scotland again,
loi. gain a great vitory, o02, 103. it
proves of little advantage to them, 104.
they force the Scots into a closer union with
Prance, los. conclude a peace, 108. an
English fleet arrives in Scotland to affill the
congregation, 190. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 191. they enter Scotland and
besiege the French in Leith, 192. are fe-
veral times repulsed, 194. causes of their
bad success, ibid. 95. articles of a treaty
of peace, 99. they quit Scotland, 202.
reflections on the right of succession to their
Crown, 220-223. theParliamentfavours
Q. Mary's right of succession, 225. A league
between England and France, I. 27. be-
tween England and Scotland, 120. the
national covenant adopted in England, 16S

Entails with what view introduced I. 19
Epifsopal government in the Church, omie ac-

count of, . 213. An attempt to revive it,
II. 33, 34. it is abolilhed by the Assem-
bly, 74. Jurifdi&ion abolilhed, 174. See
Archli/hops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nifh faction, I . 163. his offers offervice to
theK. of Spain, 167. appears inrebellion,
169. is forcedto submit to the King, ibid.
imprisoned for a Ihort time,. 170. Joins in
another conspiracy, 179. is summoned by
the King to surrender, ibid. offers to sub-
mitto a trial, 183. Sentence pronounced
against him - 184
Et/kine of Dun, is employed by the Queen-

Regent to deceive the Protestants, So.
his resentment of this usage ibid.
- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Caflle,

ats a neutral part between the Qeen-Rc-
gent and the congregation, I. 183. receives
the Queen-Regent into the Cafile, 93. is
created Earl of Mar, 248. See Mar.

Alexander has the chief direcions of

the education of K. James VI. I. 49. ad-
mits some of the nobles to make complaints
to him againfl Morton the Regent, o. is
turned out of Stirling Catle by his Nephew
the Earl of Mar - 53
Ejnetva', the French Envoy, endeavours to

obstruct a treity between England and Scot-
land 11. 120
E/,x, Earl of, set up by the Englilh Papists

as a candidate for the Crown, 11. 189.
heads a party in England, 232 his cha-
rater, ibid. is greatly distinguished by the
Queen, 233. favours theK. ofScots, ibid.
obtains the offices of Lord Lieutenant and
Commander in Chief in Ireland, 234. is
unsuccessful in that expedition, ibid. re-
ceives a harlh letter from the Queen, ibid.
returns to England and is confined, ibid.
is tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to
spirit up King James, z35. his rash and
frantic conduc, 236. is again taken into
cullody, ibid. his death, 237. his son and
associates are reflored to their honours after
the accession of K. James - ibid.
Europe, the fate of, at the beginning of the

Sixteenth Century -. 71
Extommunication, a terribleengine of the Popish

clergy - - I. 124

F,
F.
F E L T O N, an Englihman, fixes the Pope's

excommunication of Q. Elizabeth, on
the gates of the bilhop of London's palace,

11. 7
Fetelot, M. de la Motte, ent by the French

King to interpose for I. James when con-
fined by the Ruthven conspirators, 1II. 82.
is forced to return without success ibid.
Feudalgovernment, its origin and ariftocratical

genius, I. 12, 13. causes which limited
the power of feudal Monarchs, 14. feudal
vaflals liable to few taxes, 15. A remark-
able infance of the feeblenels of feudal go-
vernment, 17. the most perfct idea of
the feudal system, how attained, 37. state
of it in England, 65-67. and in Scotland,

67, 68
Fife, a populous and powerful county much

devoted to the congregation, 189. is
destroyed and plundered by the French, ibid.
the fynod of, excommunicates the archbi-
flopofSt. Andrews for contumacy, II. 1x.

K k k z tleS

hey excommunicate the Popish Lords,

183
Fortes Lord, with the Earl of Argyl, is sent

against the Popilh Lords, II. 17. are de-
feated by them 88
Fordun, John de, his history of Scotland when

wrote -1. 4

Fcrfter Sir J hn, warden of the Englilh bor-
der, a fuffle between him and the Scots,

Ii. 115
Fothrilngay Catle, Q Mary's imprisonment,

trial and death there, - II. 128-149
France, the consequences of the fubvetfion of

the feudal government there, I. 72. a body
of French arrive in Scotland to support the
Catholics, 99. they reduce the castle of
St. Andrew's, ibid. another party of them
arrive there, 106. their tranfations there,
ibid. og9. conclude a peace with England,
io8. their politic conda&, to9. they
leave Scotland, ibid. their artifices in a
treaty of marriage between the Dauphin
and the Qof Scots, 135, 136. endeavours
to expel the French army out of Scotland,
163. Another party of them arrive there
and fortify Leith, 17o. They exasperate
the people by their insolence, ibid. they
are sent against the congregation, 189. they
deflroy and plunder Fife, and are much har-
raffed by parties of the congregation, 19o.
are greatly alarmed, by the arrival of the
English fleet, 90o. they return to Leith
greatly harrafed and exhausted, 191. ae
besieged there by the English and the con-
gregation, 194. they gain several advan-
tages, ibid. 195. their motives for con-
cluding a peace, 197. negotiations for that
purpose, lgS. articles ofthe treaty, 199,
zoo. they leave Scotland, zoz. the French
advise Q: Mary to moderate measures, 2 17.
their proposals by an ambassador rejected,
ibid. they agree to Q_ Mary's marriage
with Lord Darnly, 274. the licentiousness
of their morals - 34o

France, King of, a copy of his directions ent

to Scotland, app. -73

Fratlr I. gives a check to. the ambitious pro-

jects of Charles V. I, 7. his fidelity to
the Scots, 95. his death -- 99

--., 11. comes to the crown of France,
I. 6S. hischarader, ibid. 21o. is guid-

ed by the Duke of Guise and cardinal of
Lorrain, ibid. 166. he treats the Prote-
slants with great rigour, 197. his death,

210

G.

IF FOR D S, DoRor and Gilbert, their

G notion concerning the lawfulness of kill-
ing heretical excommunicated Princes, 11.
122. they join in a conspiracy to. kill Q_
Elizabeth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by
Walsingham betrays his aolbciates, 124. is
employed to carry on a foreign correfpon-
dence with Q._Mary 125
Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for

witchcraft I. 58
--- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's

order to Morton to surrender the Regency,
II. 5o. is killed in a rencounter of Stirling,

the tutor of, joins the conspirators of

Ruthven, I1. 77. his bold speech to King
James, 78. he with the other conspirators
seize the caltle of Stirling and erea their
standard, 91. he is attainted, and his estate
forfeited -99
Glasgow, bilhop of, a note of his concerning

the Queen of Scotland's dowry, app. 71
Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven confpi-

rators -- II. 77

Glenli.vat, the battle of - I. 188
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the reets of

Edinburgh between him and Lord Ogilvy,
1. 295. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, ibid. when ordered by the
Queen to furrenderhimfelf he takes up arms
against her, 245, 246, 247. is defeated
and together with his brother made prifo-
ner, 249. he is beheaded and his brother
pardoned -- ibid.
Gordon,. Lord, set at liberty - 289

Sir Adam, exerts himself for the

Queen's interelt in the north, II. 26. his
character and good condut as a soldier, 28
Gowrie,. Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize

the Kng at Ruthven, II. 77. is visited and
pardoned by the King after his escape, 85.
becomes fuspetted and is ordered for France,
g9. delays is voyage, and is taken into.
cullody, ibid. he is tried and executed,

92
a GCowri4,.

Gwrii, John and Alexander, sons of the above,

their charater and conspiracy, II. 214.
the surprising circumfiances of that remark-
able tranfadion, 215-218. several diffe-
rent conjecures concerning it, 219-228.
their dead bodies brought into Parliament
and condemned, 229. their eates and
.honours forfeited, and name aboihed for
ever, ibid. different accounts of this affair
published but not fatisfaclory, 230--232.
See Ruthvn.
Graham Sir David of Fintry, accused of a

conspiracy with the popish Lords in favour
of Spain, II. 79. is convicted and be-
headed - - ibid

Gray, master of, some account of him, II. 103.

he becomes a favourite of King James VI.
ibid. is gained to Q. Elizabeth's interest,
104. betrays Q Mary, ibid. persuades
K. James to write a harsh and undutiful let-
ter to her, o. joins with others in pro-
moting Q- Elizabeth's interest in Scotland,

114. his treachery when sent to intercede
for QMary, 143. his baseness discovered,
he is disgraced, 1So. his vain attempt
against secretary Maitland, ibid. afts in
Italy as a spy from the court of England,
210. a memorial of his for his Majesty,
app. 88, 92. to the secretary of fate 9g
Gui/e duke of, his violent counsels with regard

to the Scots, I. 166. is murdered at the
liege of Orleans -- 255
- his intrigues against Q. Elizabeth, 1I.

96, 9. is a principal promoter of the
holy league, IIZ, 161. drives the French
King out of his capital 16

H.

AD D ING TO UN,feiaedand fortified
by the Engliki, I. ios. is relieved by

the French - 106
Hamilton, the rife of that fnmily, I. 30. ar-

bitrary proceedings of Morton the Regent
againfi it, II. 57. See Chatlbtralt.
-- of Bothrelhaugh, taken prisoner at

the battle of Langfide, L 400. is tried
and condemned for rebellion, ibid. obtains
a pardon from Murray the Regent by the
interceflion of Knox, ibid. an account of
his murdering Murray, 435, 436. makes
his escape, 436. is received in triumph at
Hamilon _II.

Hamitton Mr. Patrick, the irft who fufered in

Scotland for the Protestant religion I. 141
Hartford Earl of, invades Scotland with an

English army, . 93. burns Edinburgh
and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and protetlor of England, lot. See
Soerier.
Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the ar-

gument by which he prevailed on Q. Mary
to plead at her trial - II. 131
Henry II. of France, fends forces to afiift the

Scots, I. 99. a marriage proposed between
his son the Dauphin and the young Queen of
Scots, tlo, o6. excites the Scots to in-
vade England, 131. his infamous impoi-
tion on Q Mary in.the treaty of marriage,
135. persuades his son and Q_ Mary to
assume the titles of King and Queen of En-
land, 145. his death 14

--- ll. degenerates greatly on his accef-

sion to the crown of France, II. 1i I. en-
ters into a private negociation with Q Eli-
zabeth, 1 13. interposes feebly in behalf of
Q Mary 138
--- VIII. of England, by his fyflem of

reformation becomes formidable both to
Papists and Proteflants, 1. 59. proposes
an interview with K. James V. ibid. is
disappointed by him and declares war
againit Scotland, 61. invades it but is
forced to retreat, ibid. 62. his impor.
tance as to the balance of power in Europe,
76. his influence in Scotland how ob-
tained, 78. his schemes with regard to it
on the death of James V. 84. were ill-
conduced by himself and odious to the
Scots, 85. attempts to gain the Regency
by great promises, 88. invades Scotland,
92. this being ill-conduded turns to no
account, 93. receives and rewards the
Earl of Lenox, ibid. encourages themur-
ders of cardinal Beatoun, 98. his death
and characer, ibid. 99. his inconfiflent
condu&, 145. excluded the Scots line by
his tefiament -334
Htrreis Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing

the Regent, I. 421. comes to a treaty
with him, 422. he and the duke are com-
mitted prisoners to the cable of Edinburgh,
423. intimates the King's order to Mor-
ton to refignthe Regency, II. o5. account

of

of his behaviour in Parliament, app. 50.
a letter from him to Lord Scroop and.Sir
F. Knollis -- 96
Hicksrd, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk,

betrays him by discovering his intrigues
with Q Mary - II. 23, 24
ig ilahnds and jles, an attempt to civilize them
by K. James VI. II. 239. regulations for
that purpose, 240. three towns endued
with the privileges of royal boroughs or-
dered to be built there - ibid.
Hodgfin, a prielt of Reims, maintained the

lawfulness of killing heretical excommuni-
cated Princes II. 12z
Home, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a fe-

cret embassy to the pope - II. 212

Howard. See Norfolk. .
Hunfdane Lord, governor of Berwick, his in-

terview with Arran - II. 98
Hunily Earl, tho' a catholic, joins the refor-

mers in opposing the French army, I. 163,
164. affiRs them only with fair promises,
183. his further concurrence with them,
195. some account of that family, 243.
his enmity againit the young Queen's mi-
nifters, ibid. his resentment inflamed by an
accident, 245. appears in open rebellion
againfi the Queen, 247. his plot against
her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks
out into open rebellion, 248. is trodden to
death in a battle, 249. his family prose-
cuted with the utmoR rigour, 250. several
anecdotes and conjetures concerning his
plot, ibid. 251. is attainted by Parliament,
258. the attainder repealed and the family
restored to eflate and honours 351
.- his attachment to Bothwell, 347,
353. refuses to submit to theRegent, 322.
is forced to do it, 423. as as lieutenant
to the Queen after the Regent's murder, II.
5. is proclaimed a traitor by Lenox the
new Regent, 8.' receives some money and
promises of afllfance from Spain, ibid.
agrees to a treaty with Morton the Regent,

39. is one of the heads of the Spanilh sac-
tion, 163. engages to the Prince of Parma
to serve the King of Spain, 167. is impri-
soned for a short time, 169. erets a itan-
dard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to ub.
wit to the King, ibid. is again imprisoned,
170. is soon let t liberty, ibid. receives

a commifion from the King, 176. his bar-
barous murder of the Earl of Murray, ibid.
is summoned to surrender to justice, 179.
flies to the mountains, 80. offers to fiib-
mit to a trial, 183. sentence pronounced
against him, 184. refuses to submit, 85.
makes another desperate attempt but is for-
ced to fly - - - 186

I.

JdAMES I. was detained long a prisoner
Jin England, I. 29. troubles in Scotland
during that time, .ibid. was much im-
proved by an Englilh education, 40. his
.policy on his return to Scotland, 41. his
character, 42. suppresses the power of the
nobles, ibid. they being exasperated con-
spire against and murder him 43, 44
--- I. troubles in Scotland during his
minority, I. 30. his attempts against the
nobles, 44, 45. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 45. procures several good laws
to be pafled, 46. reduces the power of the
nobles, ibid. 47. his death 47
- -- III. the ate of Scotland during his

minority, I. 30. his impolitic conduct,
47, 48. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 48, 49. is greatly in-
fulted by. his nobles, 5o. his despicable
minions, ibid. was the firfi that appointed
a anding guard to his person, 51. the
nobles are provoked to take arms againf
him, ibid. is killed in a battle against
them, ibid. 52. his characer ibid.
-----'IV. his charater, I. 52, 53. is

killed in a battle against the English at
Flowden 53
-- V.'his minority long and turbulent, I. 3 .

tranfaAions during that time, 53, 54. as-
fumes the government while very young,
54, 55. his character, 5. his scheme
for humbling the nobles, 56-59. is di-
verted from t by the clergy, 60, 6 . takes
arms for the defence of his kingdom, 61.
his nobles refuting to follow him, throws
him into a deep melancholy, 62, 63.
which is increased by a surprising defeat of
his forces, 63. his death, 64. reections
on his conduct, ibid. he refused an alli-
ance with Charles V. Emperor 77
. - ,Jomt

James VI. his birth, . 318. his baptism,

332. the care of him committed to the
Earl of Mar, 345. is by him preserved
from falling into the hands of Bothwell,
361. is crowned, 376. the nobles op-
prefled by Morton the Regent, turn their
eyes to him for redress, II. 48. his edu-
cation and dispositions, ibid. 49. he be-
comes suspicious of the Regent's power,
49. discovers early a great attachment to
favourites, 60. adopts two of different
dispositions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with
great solemnity, 62. is by his favourites
engaged in unpopular measures, 75, 76.
is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven,
77. and forced to receive complaints
againfl his favourites, ibid, 78. dissembles
with them and banishes Lenox, 79. is
brought to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 8 .
his concern at Lenox's death, and regard for
his memory, ibid. receives the French
ambafiador with great refpe, 83. makes
his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 84.
resolves to treat them with moderation, 8;.
visits Gowrie and grants him a pardon, ibid.
renews his fondnef for Arran, ibid. 86.
is by him persuaded to violent measures
againfi the conspirators, 86. his answer to
a haughty letter from Q Elizabeth on their
behalf, 87. is by her interposition rendered
more violent againfl them, 88. is pro-
voked by the clergy, 89. his iteps to
humble them, 92. his profusion to Arran,
99. fendsa new favourite to England against
the banilhed Lords, 103. devolves the
whole regal authority on Arran, lo5.
writes an undutiful letter to his mother,
ilo. is threatened to be disinherited by
her, Il. receives a pension from Q Eli-
zabeth, IlS. is reconciled to the exiled
Lords, 117. becomes popular by conclud-
ing a treaty with England, 120, 121. his
scandalous behaviour with regard to Arch'.
Douglas, ibid. his endeavours to save his
mother's life after her condemnation, 139,
140. is greatly incensed at her death, 154.
arguments used by the English minilters to
pacify him, ibid. 55. is forced to stifle
his resentment, 155. attempts to unite the
nobles, 157, 158. is courted both by
Spain and England, , 16 63. resolves

vigorously to adhere to the latter, 163.
takes several steps with that view, ibid.
164. his ill in the popiih controverty,
168. wrote a commentary on the Revela-
tions, ibid. his maxims with regard to po-
pery, ibid. 169. his exceflive lenity to
conspirators against him, 169. relblves to
marry the Princess of Denmark, 170. arts
used to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is
consummated in Norway, 171. affis fe-
veral months in Denmark, ibid. reflec-
tions on his conduct there, ibid. 172. his
arrival in Scotland with his Queen, 173.
indulges the Prelbyterians, 174. the ill
consequences of his lenity, ibid. 175. his
zeal against witchcraft, 175. is foilicited
by Q. Elizabeth to treat the conspirators
againlt him with rigour, i80. is fufpeted
of conniving with them, 18 . is furprized
and seized by Bothwell, ibid. and forced
to comply with his terms, 182. his lenity to
Bothwell abused, ibid. 183. is fufpeaed
of favouring the popish Lords, 183. is in
new danger from them, 186. delegates
his authority to Argyl and Sorbes against
them, 187. goes in person against them,
ibid. waftes their lands, and garrisons their
castles, ibid. his right of the fuccefion to
the crown of England opposed by the pa-
pifts, 189. his lenity to them incenses the
clergy and people, 93, 194. is much
provoked by the obflinacy of the clergy,
195. gives orders againit them, 197, 198.
is much insulted and in great danger at
Edinburgh, 198-zoo. leaves Edinburgh
and proceeds with severity againfi the citi.
zens, 200-203. acquires absolute domi-
nion in ecclefaflical affairs, 204, zo5.
flrengthens his in parliament by refloring
the feats of the ecclesiastics, zo6, 207. en-
deavours with success to gain a party in
England, 208. increases his reputation by
publilhing his Bafilicon Doron, 209. is
accused by Q Elizabeth of corresponding
with the Pope, 210. this he denies and
how accounted for, 21i. other reports
concerning this, 212. is at great pains to
gain the Roman catholics, ibid. his regu-
lations with regard to thechurch, 213. the
mylterious affair of Gowry's conspiracy,
214-233, his cautious behaviour in regard

to

to the Earl of Eflfx, 235. fends ambafla-
dors to save him, 236. they arrive too
late, 237. he restores his son and aflbciates
to their honours after his acceflion, ibid.
continues his intrigues in England, 238,
239. his interest greatly ftrengtlened there,
ibid. 239. endeavours to civilize the high-
lands and isles, 239, 240. is proclaimed
King in England after the death of Q. Eli-
zabeth, z45, 246. is proclaimed likewise
in Scotland, and prepares for his journey to
England, 247. enters London and takes
pofelion of the throne, 248. his charac-
ter how different from that of Q. Elizabeth,
ibid. a letter from him to Mr. Archi-
bald Douglas, app. - 85
invernes Caille, refuses to surrender t Q

Mary, 1. 247. it is forced, and the gover-
nor punilhed - ibid. 248
Ilaly the liberty of, how preserved I. 73

K.

E IT H Sir William, ent to intercede
for, Q Mary when under sentence, 11.

140. letter to him from secretary Mait-
land, app. - . 85
Kent Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence

against Q Mary executed: II. 145

Ker of Ferniherft, ravages England on the

murder of Murray the Regent, I. ., 2.
his design, 4. has a fcuiffewith the Eng-
lifh - --- 11
- Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is di-

covered. when ready to. fail to promote a
plot in Spain, II. 178. his fheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison t81
Killigrw Henry, his declaration on the peace,

157. app. - 70
Kings, feudal, the mort limited of all Princes,

1. 12. general causes of this, 14. their
revenues were but small, ibid. S1. had
no landing armies, 15. and jurifdiion
limited, 16. meant uled to extend the
royal authority, 33. their jurifdicion en-
larged, 35. the extraordinary influence of
the Scottilh Kings in Patliament, 65. the
reason of this - ibid. 69

Kijraldr of Grange, one of the murderers of

Beatoun, is recalled by the Q Dowager, I.
132. his attainder reversed in Parliament,
258. offers to fight Bothwell in ingle

combat, 366. his interview with Q_ Mary,
in name of the confederate Lords, ibid.
rescues Maitland from confinement, 431.
labours to support the King's authority and
retore harmony after the murder of the Re-
gent, II. 3. accedes to the Queen's party,
ibid. 4. provides for a siege by increasing
his garrison and fortifying Edinburgh, 5.
proclaims Lenox's authority unlawful and
usurped, i&. attempts in vain to prevent a
meeting of the Parliament, ibid. forms a
scheme for surprising the King's party, 19.
is at first successful but afterwards defeated,
20, comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regent, 31. a treaty with Morton,
breaks it off, 3.7, 38. fires upon Edin-
burgh from the caRtle, 38. is besieged
by the Regent afftRed by Englilh forces,
40. is forced by mutiny of the garrison
to capitulate, 4r. surrenders to Drury the
Englilth general, ibid. is by order of Q.
Elizabeth delivered up to the Regent, 42.
he and his brother are executed 43
Knolly, Sir Francis, ent by Q .Elizabeth with

letters of condolence to- Q Mary on her ar-
rival i England, . 39S. some of his let-
ters, app. - .5.

1 z52,56
Knox John, a famous reformer, his character,

. 1 I r. after being Come time abroad hieis
recalled by the perfecured Ploteitants, .
inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
against the papists, ibid: his notion con-
cerning the government of women whence,
156, 57. his residence fixed in Edin-
burgh, r6r. complains of the lukewarm-
ness of the reformers, 74. his opinion to
the convention of reformers that it. is lawful
to refit and deprive tyrannicalPrinces, 176.
animates and revives' the desponding Con-
gregation ,

184, 1. complains of the ne-

glAe of the reformers in providing maintai-
nance for their preachers, 207. recom-
mends the Geneva model of church go-
vernment, z13. propoes superintendents
*in the church, 214. compotes the firfl
book of dicipline, zt21. renounces fiiend-
ihip with the Earl of Murray for his mode-
ration, 239. is tried;for encouraginga mu.
tiny among thepeople and acquitted, 260.
popish judges concur in this decfion, ibid.
261. is publictlyaccufed by Maitland'of

preaching

preaching seditious doctrine concerning re-
fifance, 270. characters of the two difpu-
tants, ibid. approved of several inltances of
afilnation, 31S. agrees to some regula-
tions concerning the election of Bilhops,
1I. 34. hi; death and character, 35, 36.
his eulogium by Morton the Regent, 36.
articles lent by him to the general assembly,
app. - - 68

L.
L ANGSIDE, 'the battle of, I. 389.

Laareau cardinal, is sent as Nuncio

from the Pope with a present to Q Mary
of Scotland, . 328. is flopped at Paris,

329
League holy, a confederacy of roman catho-

lics o called, II. z. was universally
agreed to by them all over Europe ibid.
Learning, the revival of promotes the refor-

mation I. 119
LeiceJer Earl of, appointed a commilioner to

the conference at Wefiminfter I. 414
Ltith, burnt by the Englilh, I. 93. fortified by

the French, 170. besieged by the English,
x19. QMary lands therefrom France,z25.
the superiority of it granted by her to Edin-
burgh, 294. is seized and fortified by Mor-
ton and the Regent II. 16
Lenox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France

I. 87. is much courted by cardinal Beatoun,
ibid. his pretensions to the fuccefion how
founded, go. reents Beatoun's deceitful-
ness to him, 91. heads the reformers and
theadvocates for the Englilh alliance, ibid.
furprizes the Regent and cardinal, 92. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. continues
alone in the interest of England, 93. is
forced to fly to that court, where he is re-
warded, ibid. is married to a niece of K.
Henry's. by which he became father to a
race of Kings, ibid. 94. his claim to the
fuccefion, 265. is imprisoned for a secret
correspondence with Q.Mary, 266. is in-
vited ecretly by her to return to Scotland,
ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received
with great familiarity by her, 268. his for-
feiture is repealed, and he is refiored to his
ellate and honours by the Parliament, 269.
his lady sent prisoner to the Tower of Lon-
don, 279. and treated with rigour, 283. he
infilts on the prosecution of his son Darnly's

Vol.. 11.

murderers, 344. charges Bothwell with it,
345. the prosecution is hurried, 346. he
craves a delay which is refused, 347. he is
left alone in it, ibid. follicits Q Elizabeth's
interest to obtain a delay, 348. infilts on it
by proxy at the trial, but is over-ruled, 349.
being apprehensive of danger he flies to-
wards England, 350. his countess accufc,
Q. Mary of the murder to Q Elizabeth,
397. he appears at-the conference at Weft-
minster and accuses QMary of the murder
upon oath, 415. returns to Scotland pro-
te&ed by an English army, 1f. 6. is elected
Regent, 7, 8. his progress againit theQjeen's
party, 8. appoints commiflior,ers to frame
a treaty with those of the Queen, 1x. fur-
prizes Dumbarton castle, 13, 14. joins the
Earl of Morton at Leith, 6. holds a Par-
liament in the Canongate, ibid. another at
Stirling, 19. he is furprized and killed
there - ibid. zo

Lenox, late Aubigny, his character, II. 6.

joins with the King's other new favourite to
undermine Morton, ibid. renounces Pope-
ry, 6z. QElizabeth demands him to be
removed from the privy council, 63. is ac-
cufed by her ambassador, 67. Arran tries
in vain to supplant him, 72. is commanded
by K. James at the request of the nobles to
leave-the kingdom, 79. puts off his depar-
ture on various pretences, 80, 8 . returns
unwillingly to France where he oon dies,
81. his memory vindicated and much re-
garded by the King, ibid. died a Prote-
ftant -ibid.
- E. of, left as the King's lieutenant in the

north afterdifperfing thePopifh Lords,II. 88.
Lejlie, Norman, murders cardinal Beatoun, I.

96. he and his associates keep poffeflion of
the cafile of St. Andrew's, 97. makes a truce
with the Regent, 98. are encouraged by
Henry VIII. - ibid.
- bifop of Ross, is sent by the catho-

lics in Scotland to engage Q. Mary in their
interest, 1. 216. his propoals to her re-
jected, ibid. 217. his negotiations in Eng-
land in favour of Q. Mary, I. 22, 23. is
confined long in the Tower, and afterwards
is banilhed England - 5
Lindsay Lord, carries the proposal from the

confederates to Q Mary, that she hould re-
sign the government, 1. 375. joins the Ruth-
ven conspirators - I . 77

L 1 1 Lorllevin,

Lock.vi uRftle;; Q May committed a prisoner

there, I. 370. her escape from thence, 385
- Lord, letters to and from him, ap-

pendix - 72
logan of Reftalrig, an alleged accomplice in

Gowries conspiracy, II. zzo, z21. is tried,
and his estate forfeited long after his death,

222, 223

rLrds confederate, associate against Bothwell

and Q Mary, I. 362. raise forces against
them, 363. publish the motives of their
conduct, 364. prevail on the Queen to fur-
render to them, 367. assume the title of
Lords of the secret council and the royal
authority - 370
---- popilh, conspire againf K. James, 1I.

167. are treated by him with great lenity,
169. form a new conspiracy, 178. the King
proceeds against them, 179. more of his le-
nity to them, 183. fresh dangers from
them, 86. they receive money from Spain,
ibid. zeal of the clergy against them, 187.
are declared guilty of treason and. their
estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the King's ar-
my, 188. are diiperfed on the King's ap-
proach, ibid. go abroad and give fecu-
rity to keep the peace, 189. return to Scot-
land, and petition for leave to reside in their
own houses, 193. this granted by. a con-
vention of elfates, ibid. recant their errors
and are absolved from, excommunication,
205. relapse, and are again reconciled to
the church of Rome, ibid, are reRored to
their eRates and honours - 206

Lorrain cardinal, gets some of the bell bene.
sices in Scotland, - I. 140

Princes of, their ambitious views, I.

144. instigate the Dauphin and Q. Mary
to take the tites of King and Queen of
England, 145. resolve to invade Eng-
land, 146. and to check the reforma-
tion in Scotland, ibid. the cardinal's great
influence over the young King, 165, 66.
drives the Queen Regent of Scotland to vio-
lent measures, 171, 172. their violences oc-
cafion a conspiracy again.t them, 198. are
forced to withdraw their troops from Scot-
land, ibid. they insult the Scottih ambaf-
fador, 209. have great power over the
young King and Queen, al. are forced to
contrac their views on the dath, of the
King .- - si

Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the

reformation, 1. 119. the rapid progress of
his doctrine 120

M.
M JO R John, his hifory of Scotland,

ome account of - . 4
Maitland of Lethington, secretary to Mary

Queen Regent, leaves her service and joins
the Congregation, I. 183. his charater,
184. is sent by them ambafador to Q. Eli-
zabeth, 85. fends them afturances of her
protecion, 188. is sent by Q Mary tothe
court of England, z31. makes a conceflion
to Q Elizabeth, ibid. accompanies Q Mary
in a progress to the north, 246. he is em-
ployed by Q. Mary to desire a personal i-
terview with Q. Elizabeth, z5 . publickly
accuses Knox of preaching seditious doc-
trine concerningrefitance, 270. intimates
to Q. Elizabeth the intentionr of Q. Mary to
marry Darnly, 277. prudently conceals her
resentment from Q Elizabeth, 279. pro-
poses moderate meafures-with regard to Q.
Mary when imprisoned, 373. attends the
Regent when called on to accuse her in Eng-
land, 404.. he disapproves of this measure,
ibid. his intrigue with the Duke of Nor-
folk, 408, 409, 424. is imprisoned by the
Regent, 430. is relieved by Kirkaldy and.
secured in the cafile, ibid; 431. proposes
a coalition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, I . 2, 3. accedes to the
Queen's party, 4. is deprived of his office
of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 8. is
attainted in a Parliament of the King's par-
ty, 16. agrees with Mar, 31. his views
in refusing a reconciliation with Morton the
Regent, 37, 38. rejetsovertures of a treaty
with him, 37. is besieged by him in the
catle of Edinburgh, 38. is forced to capi-
tulate and surrender2 to the English general,
41. to avoid the. Regent's resentment he
dispatches himself, 43. several of his let-
ters, app. - I. 63, 85
--- * Sir John, is made secretary for Scot-

land II. 114, concurs with others in pro-
moting Q. Elizabeth's interests there, ibid.
attempts against him by capt. James Stew-
art, late Arran, 56. they prove abortive,
and he is advanced to be chancellor, 17.
ar attempt to remove him from that oflfce,

fruArated,

frustrated, 169. his death, 19o. a copy of
verses in honour of him wrote by the King,

ibid.
Mar Earl of, that title conferred on the prior

of St. Andrews, 1. 244. accompanies the
Queen in a progress to'the north, 246. he
and his aflbciates narrowly escape affaili-
nation, 247. he is created Earl of Murray,
248. See Murray.

- the title is conferred on L. Erskine, 248.
the person of the young Prince put into his
hands, 34S. his resolution in preserving
him from Bothwell, 361. is chosen Regent,

1. z1. labours to bring about a general
peace, 31. is thwarted by Morton and his
associates, ibid. 32. dies of melancholy,
ibid. his characer, ibid. his merit and in-
tegrity was acknowledged by both parties,

ibid.
- the young Earl, being imposed on by

Morton, turns out his uncle from the catle
of Stirling, 11. 53. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 77. he with the others seize
Sterling cale, and ere& their standard, 91.
is attainted and his estate forfeited, 99. is
pardoned and reltored to estate and ho-
nours - - 117, 1t8
March counters of, her infamous marriage

with the Earl of Arran II. 71, 72
Mary of Guise, Q. Dowager of Scotland, takes

a considerable hare in the government, I.
105. is much addited to the French inter-
eft, ibid. proje&s a marriage of her daugh-
ter to the Dauphin of France, ibid. o16.
becomes intrumental in promoting the re-
formation, 113. aspires to the office of
Regent, ibid. promotes difaffeion to the
prelent one and favours the reformers, 114.
visits the court of France, 1 5. returns to
Scotland to take possession of the Regency,
116. after some opposition he obtains it,
117. confers several offices of trust upon
trangers, z29. proposes to lay a tax upon
land, 130. is forced to drop it, 131. tries
in vain to excite a war with England, ibid.
the nobles vigorously oppose her measures,
132. treats the reformers with great re-
fpe&, 133. obtains a conceflion from the
Parliament in favour of the Dauphin, 138.
her artful management of the reformers,
ibid. 139. bellows the vacant benefices on
foreigners, 140. he alters her conduct to
the reformers, 143. remonstrates againt

the violent measures of the Princes of Lor-
rain, 147. is periuaded by them to perse-
cute the reformers, 148. her ralh answer
to their remonstrance, 149. summons their
preachers to appear before her, ibid. breaks
a promise {he had made them, 15o; marches
with an army againit them, 5 z. concludes
a treaty with them, 153. this he again
breaks, ibid. her severity at Perth, ibid.
her schemes discovered, 54. lhe goes to
attack them, 55. has again recourse to
negotiation, 156. the is flartled at their
demands and gets time to answer them, 157.
violates another treaty, 158. loses Perth
and forced to abandon Stirling and Edin-
burgh, she retires with precipitation to Dun-
bar, ibid. marches to attack the reformers
at Edinburgh, 161. gains time by her ar-
tifice, ibid. makes another treaty with
them, 162. her artifices to undermine the
prior of St. Andrews, 169. the absurdity
of her scheme, ibid. 70. gets a rein-
forcementof Frenchtroops who fortify Leith,
ibid. she disregards a remonstrance of the
reformers, 171. is influenced by French
counsellors and perfwaded to violent mea-
fures, ibid. 172. retires to Leith on the
approach of the reformers army, 173. her
prudent and artful conduft there, ibid. her
haughty and imperious anfier to a fresh re-
monstrance from them, 174. is by a con-
vention of them deprived of her office of
Regent, 176. the foundation of this fen-
tence, ibid. 178. foments differences among
them, 179. is deferred by her principal fe-
cretary, 183. fends French troops againlt
the reformers, 189. retires into the cattle
of Edinburgh on the approach of the Eng.
lilh, 193. her death and character, 96.
repented of her violent measures, 197. li-
tened to the inftruifons of a reformed
preacher - - ibid.
Mary Queen of England, her perlecuting reign,

1. 18. her death - 140
- Queen of Scots born, 1. 81. a propo

fal to marry her to Ed. VI. 84. the is de-
manded by Henry V11. 85. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposcd, oS.
a treaty for that purpose concluded, 107.
She is ent to be educated in France, ibid.
the fatal consequence of this, ibid. is in-
posed on by the artifices of the French in
the treaty of marriage, 135. her marriage
L 1 2 cele-

celebrated with great pomp, 136. they
take the title of King and Queen, of Eng-
land, 145. he makes concessions to the
Congregation, 199, zoo. declares Q. Eli-
zabeth's right to the crown of England,
ibid. he acquires an entire ascendant over
her huband, 210. he is overwhelmed
with great affliaion on his death and retires
to Rheims, 211 . The is invited by the con-
vention to return to Scotland, 216. an
emissary from the catholics in Scotland pro-
poles violent measures to her, ibid. he is
determined to moderation by the French
and the prior of St. Andrews, 217. is pre-
vailed on to prepare for her return to Scot-
land, 218. the origin of the discord be-
tween her and Q_ Elizabeth, 219, 220.
her pretensions to the crown of England,
220. is envied on account of her beauty,
223. demandsa safe condut from Q Eli-
zabeth which is refused, 224. leaves France
with great relutance, 22z. lands at Leith,
ibid. is much asseted by the change ofher
situation, 226. several disadvantages at-
tending her acceflion, ibid. 227. ome cir-
cumflances to her advantage, 227, 228.
her accomplishments of body and mind, ib.
the servants of her chapel insulted, ibid.
procures the free exercifeofherreligion, 229.
issues a proclamation in favour of the Pro-
teflants, ibid. 230. employs them only in
the adminiitration, 230 attempts to gain
Q. Elizabeth's favour, ibid. makes a con-
ceflion to her, 231. which is rejected, 232.
she makes her public entry into Edinburgh,
ibid. an insult offered to her religion on
that occasion, 233. discourages the at-
tempts of the papilis to gain her favour,
234. her aversions to the family of Hamil-
ton, 235. makes a progress into the north,
246. her miniflers narrowly escape afafli-
nation, 247. is refused access to the castle
of Inverness, ibid. when in the utmoR
consternation is relieved by the Monros and
other Clans, ibid. her forces defeat Hunt-
ley's rebellion, 249. he desires an inter-
view with Q. Elizabeth, 25i. negocia-
tions concerning her.marriage, 252. s1 fol-
licited by different Princes, 253, 254. her
deliberations concerning it, ibid. is forced
to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q,
Elizabeth, 256. topleafe her fubjetds de-
termines againf a foreign alliance, 257.

determines not to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, 258. further negociations for her
marriage, 261. discovers the views of
Catharine ofMedicis,ibid. 262. LordRo:
bert Dudley recommended to her as a hus-
band by Q. Elizabeth, 262. he is
highly offended at this, 263. diflembles
with Q Elizabeth, ibid. 265. entertains
thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly, 265.
she recalls Lenox, 266. is affronted at a
letter of Q_ Elizabeth, 267. her indiffe-
rence as to the reformed, and zeal for the
catholic religion, 269. is taken with Darnly
at first fight, 272. is greatly moved at Q.
Elizabeth's insulting craftiners, ibid. 273.
negotiates with the court of Rome for a di-
penfation to marry Darnly, 273. and the
consent of the court of France, 274. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to Q.
Elizabeth for consent to her marriage, 276,
277. which he affeas to refute, 27 7. in
resentment lhe proposes to fend an angry
message to Elizabeth, which Maitland pre-
vents, 279. jultifies her conduc to the
English ambassador, ibid. endeavours to get
Murray's consent, 281. courts the pope's
protetion, and receives a subsidy from him,
ibid. her great address in gaining the con-
sent of her fubjecs, 283. prevents a plot
againit Darnly, 284. summons her vassals
'to take arms againfl Murray, 286. and
him to appearbefore her, 287. her mar-
riage with Darnly celebrated, ibid. he
confers the title of King of Scots upon him,
288. this flep censured, ibid. her resent-
ment against the malecontents, ibid. The
marches against them, 289. rejecs the
interceflion of Q. Elizabeth in their behalf,
290. continues her march against the re-
bels, ibid. her conduc and courage on
that occasion, ibid. 291. drives them out
of Scotland, 291. her further resentment
againlt them, 293. has recourse to several
devices to raise money, ibid. 294. her
prosperity promotes her religion, 205. her
deliberations concerning the exiled Lords,
296. determines to treat them with lenity,
298. is diverted from this by her religion
and French influence, ibid. 300. this the
source of her after misfortunes, 300. her
intention to reflore popery, 301. is dif-
gusted with Darnly's insolent behaviour,
302. her familiariiy with Rizio offends the

King,

King, 303. vindicated from any criminal
correspondence with Rizio, 305-307. ues
her utmot endeavours to prevent his mur-
der, 308. he is confined by the confpi-
rators, ibid. he gains the King, and es-
capes from them, 309. is reconciled to
the exiled nobles, 310. her hatred to
Darnly increases, 315, 316. and favour
for Bothwell commences, 317. extinguilhes
some domestic feuds among the nobles,
3 18. is delivered of her son James VI. in
the Castle of Edinburgh, ibid. invites fe-
veral foreign princes to his baptism, 319.
continues to treat Darnly with neglet,
ibid. her attachment to Bothwell increases,
320o. prevents Darnly's intended flight,
322, 323. visits the borders, 323. an in-
Itance of her regard for Bothwell on that
occalion, ibid. how ihe rival'd Q Elizabeth,
324. her right of succession favoured by
the Englilh parliament, 325. ihe endea-
vours to avail herself of that opportunity,
326, 327. ihe takes an extraordinary ftep
in favour of popery, 328. receives a pre-
sent from the pope, but tfops his nuncio at
Paris, 329. endeavours to procure a bet-
ter subsistence for the reformed clergy, ibid.
330. her averion to the King excefive,
becomes melancholy, 330. he declines a
divorce from him, ibid. 331. goes to
Stirling to celebrate her son's baptism, 332.
is greatly offended at the king's behaviour
on that occasion, ibid. reltores the popilh
ecclesiastical jurifdition, 336. her neglet
of the King during his sickness, 338. the
breach between them becomes irreparable,
ibid. 339. he visits him at Glasgow,
339 the motives of her diflimulation
on that occasion, ibid. 340. prevails on
him to come to Edinburgh, 341. her sus-
picious behaviour to him there, ibid.
342. issues a proclamation for disco-
vering his murderers, 343. is supposed
to have been acceflory to it, ibid. is char-
ged with it abroad as well as at home, 344.
goes to, visit her son at Stirling, 356. is
met on her return by Bothwell, who seizes
and carries her to Dunbar, ibid. this up-
posed with her consent, 357. is conducted
to Edinburgh, 358. and married to Both-
well, 359. fends an apology to the courts
of France and England, ibid. her conduc
causes a general indignation against her
abroad, 361. is alarmed at a combination
of the nobles against her, 362. he pub-

lifhes a manifeflo to vindicate her condt,
363. is conducted to the cafile of Borth-
wick, ibid. marches with Bothwell's forces
against the confederate Lords, 365. an at-
tempt of an accommodation proves vain,
ibid. is forced to surrender to the confe-
derates, 3671 is insulted by the soldiers and
mob, ibid. is carried to Edinburgh, where
many abuses are offered her, ibid. 368. is
lent a prisoner to Lochlevin Castle, 370. Q
Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 372. the
Engli/h ambaffadoris refused access to her,
ibid. various proposals among the confe-
derates concerning her, 73. they oblige
her to resign the Government, 374, 375.
different reasonings on this measure, 376-
379. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 379, 380. her party
among the nobles become dispirited, 381.
her resignation of the Crown accepted by
the Parliament, and her imprisonment de-
clared lawful, 383. her letters to Bothwell
read, and he declared accessory to the
King's murder, ibid. escapes from Loch-
levin, 385. arrives at Hamilton, ibid. is
attended by many nobles and a numerous
army, 386. an aflociation signed in her
defence, ibid. her imprudence in hazard-
ing a battle, 388. her army defeated by
the confederates, 389. her precipitate flight
into Galloway, 390. ralhly determines to
retire to England, ibid. goes thither against
the advice of her attendants, 391. arrives
at Carlisle, 392. writes to Q. Elizabeth,
imploring her good offices, ibid. receives
letters of condolance from her, and demands
admittance into her presence, 395. this re-
fuied and why, ibid. 396. offers to submit
her cause to Q_ Elizabeth, 396. is much.
deceived in her expectation from this, 398..
and offended on discovering the artifices- of
Q. Elizabeth, 399. earneltly follicits tobe
admitted into her presence,. ibid. ilhe is.
carried to Bolton Catle, 401.. chagrin'd.
at finding herself a prisoner, ibid. agrees.
to an enquiry into her. condu& 402. her.
diflimulatlon with regard to religion, ibid.
commiflioners appointed to appear in her,
name, 405. her chief view in this affair,
406. consents to moving the conference to
Weftminfer,. 4 1. he as carried to Tuth-
bury in.Staffordlhirc, 412. is much offen-
ded at the regard Ihewn the Regent, and
recalls her content to the conference, 4&3.
the accusation against her produced by the

Regent,

O

'Regent, 414. is accafed likewise by the
Farl of Lenox, 415. her commifioners re-
sure to anfier, and demand a personal in-
terview, 416. they protest against future
proceedings, ibid. a suspicious circumstance
against her, ibid. 417. her commissioners
withdraw from the meeting, 417. her re-
solute answer to a harsh proposal of Q Eli-
zabeth, 4.8. avoids any farther progress
in the enquiry, 419. is enraged at the pro.
ceedings, and proposes defpelate measures,
420. .preads chimerical cojectures with
that view, ibid 4z2. proposes a divorce
from Bothwell, 424. is influenced by the
D. of Norfolks schemes, ibid. exchanges
many letters and love tokens with him, 425.
consents to proposals from the Englilh no-
bles, 427. their views in this tranfadtion,
426-428. a rebellion by her adherents
against Q_ Elizabeth, 431. is removed to
Coventry, 433. Q. Elizabeth thinks of
delivering her up to the Regent, 434. this
proje& how disappointed, ibid. 43;. ac-
ceflion of several to her party after the mur-
der of the Regent, II. 4. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ibid. her
authority proclaimed at Linlithgow, 5. her
parties defeated by the new Regent, 8, 9.
the answers proposals by Q Elizabeth, to.
attempts in vain to get foreign affiltance,
ibid. appoints commissioners to frame a
treaty for her liberation, . this proving
fruitless, he is more ftri&ly confined, 12.
the invalidity of her resignation declared in
a Parliament held by her adherents, 17. at
of Parliament in England to curb her and
her party, z2. /he looks for protefion
from the King of Spain, 22. is denied the
privilege of an ambassador at the Court' of
England, 25. is more close confined and
watched, ibid: proceedings against her in
England, 28. her interest neglected by the
French, 29. is hurt by the massacre at
Paris, 30, 3. her adherents divided into
two factions, 37. one of them joins with
Morton the Regent, 39. review of the
characters of her adherents and opponents,
41, 42. her forlorn situation, 42. is car-
ried to Buxton Wells, 43. loses several of
her fiiends by death, 45. fends a letter and
presents to her ton, 59. her meflenger why
difmiflid without feeing him, ibid. her un-
cafinefi at his confinement by the Ruthven
conspirators, 8z. complains to QEliza-
beth of her hard usage, ibid. and begs her

intereeflion for the King her on, ibid.
Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour,
95-97. a fruilefs negociation with Q.Eli-
zabeth, 1oo. is alarmed at an aflbciation in
defenceofQ. Elizabeth, to1. is committed
to more severe keepers, 103. betrayed
. by Lord Gray the Scots ambassador, lo4. a
itatute for the preservation of QElizabeth,
proves fatal to her, o8. is more rigor-
oufly treated, 109. her complaints to Q.
Elizabeth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
French ambassador's interest, removed to
Tuthbury, ilo. is undutifully treated by
the King her son, ibid. her pafionate
complaint to the French ambaflador on that
occasion, ibid. 1 l. threatens to difinhe-
rit him, I . several discoveries alledged
againt her, 125, 126. she is guarded with
unusual vigilance, 127. her.domefics, pa-
pers, &c. are fiized, ibid. 128. he is con-
veyed to Fotheringay Castle, 128. delibe-
rations concerning the method of proceeding
against her, ibid. 129. is suspicious ofpoi-
son or private murder, 129, 130. vindicates
herself to the D. of Guise, 130. the com-
miflioners for trying her arrive at Fotherin-
gay Castle, ibid. her spirited speech when
refusing to plead, ibid. 131. is at length
prevailed on, ibid. he proteRs against the
authority of the court, 132. the accusation
against her, ibid. her defence, ibid.-134.
her sentence, 135. irregularities in her trial,
136. the sentence is confirmed by Par-
liament, ibid. who demand the execution
of it, ibid. 137. France interposes feebly
in her behalf, 138, 139. the sentence a-
gains her published, 141. he is treated
with the utmost rigour, ibid. her last re-
quefi to Q Elizabeth, 142. refuses the
afliftance of a Proteflant Bishop or Dean,
ibid. artifices used to inflame the people
against her, 144. her behaviour at her
death, 146-149. sentiments of historians
concerning her, 149. her charaaer, 150,
151. her person described, 151. is bu-
ried, firit at Peterborough, and afterwards
in Wefminfler-Abbey, 15z. letters from
her, App. 78, 94, 99. her will, App. 80.
objetions againf her by Walsingham, App.
1o. what course to be taken with her,
ibid. a dissertation on the genuineness of
her letters to Bothwell. End of Vol. II.
Maxwdl/Lord, arrives from Spain and prepares

forces tojoin the Spaniards, II. 163. his fol-
lowers dispersed, he is taken prisoner, ibid.

Melvil

Mloil is ent by the French King to oberve

the motions of the Queen-Regent and her
adversaries, I. 65. sent to make up a dif-
ference between Elizabeth and Mary, 268.
brings about an appearance of friendlsip
between them, ibid. is sent to inform Q.
Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 319.
puts a letter into the Queen's hand againit
her marriage with Bothwell, 355. is forced
to fly from court, 356. advises K. James
to moderate measures upon his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators - II. 8
----, Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his cha-

raCer, II. 46. zealously opposes Epifco-
pacy, ibid. declines the civil jurifdi&ion
in ecclesiastical matters, 90. is forced to
fly into England to avoid persecution, ibid.
- Sir Robert, sent by K. James to inter-

ceed with Q Elizabeth for Q. Mary when
under sentence, II. 142. excutes his com-
miflion with fidelity and zeal, 143. a me-
morial of his to the King, App. 91.
---- Master of the houflold to Q. Mary,

takes his last farewel of her, II. 147. her
parting. speech to him - 148
Mildmay, Sir Wm. sent by Q Elizabeth with

proposals to Q Mary - II. 9
Moo/luc, Bilhop of Valence, employed by the

French to conclude a peace with England
and Scotland, I. 198. terms agreed to by
him - -- 199-202
Montgomery appointed Archbishop of Glagow,

II. 74. is refused and excommunicated by
the general Assembly for his immoral life,

ibid.
Montmorency, Conflable of France, endeavours

to prevent the Dauphin's marriage with Q.
Mary, 1. 133, 134. his prudent advice to
Henry II. 165. makes a slender appear-
ance in favour of Q Mary 11. 29
Moaron, Earl of, his. irresolute condu& as to

the Reformation, I. 8 3. accompanies Q_
Mary in a progress to the North, 246. in.
tfigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, 305.
takes the direction of that enterprize, 307.
is admitted into the Queen's presence, who
pronifes him a pardon, 309. is forced to
fly into England, 310. obtains his pardon
on Bothwell'sinterceffion, 334, 335. seizes
a calket withletters from Q. Mary to Both-
well, 371. he is, by Q Elizabeth's inttr-
position, in favour with theKing'siparty as-
ter the murder of the Regent, 11. 3. ap.
pointed one of the commiflioners to treat
with the Queen's party, x. his demands
frustrate the meeting, 1z. is entirely in-
fluenced by the Court ofEngland, 18. com-
mands the King's, forces at Leith, 26. has
several .limsibesawiththe QyeeCa' forces,

2

ibid. closely besieges Edinburgh, and cornm
mits great cruelties, ibid. a suspension pro-
cured by the English and French ambalfa-
dors, 27. a coalition of parties prevented
by him, 31, 32. he is chosen Regent, ibid.
his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of
Northumberland, 33. obtains the tempo-
ralities of the ArchbifhoprickofSt. Andrew's,
ibid. labours to procure a peace between.
the two parties, 36. attempts in vain to
gain Maitland and Kirkaldy, 37, 38. makes
a treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, 39.
gets pofeflion of the Castle of Edinburgh,
41. his severity to Kirkaldy and his bro-
ther, 43. his administration becomes odi-
ous, 44. his various methods of gratifying
his avarice, ibid. 45. connives at the dif-
putes of the cergy, 47. he irritates the
nobles, ibid. Argyll and Athol refuse to'
answer his fuinmons, ibid. makes a vain
attempt against Lord Claud Hamilton, 48.
discovers the designs of the nobles against
him, and proposes to resign his office, 5o.
his resignation accepted by the King gives
universal joy, 51. obtains an approbation
of his conduc and a pardon in ample form,
5z. continues to watch the motions of his
adversaries, ibid. is forced to surrender the
Cafle of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes his au-
thority, 53. gains the Cafle of Stirling
and a feat in the Privy Council, 54. pro-
cures a meeting of the Parliament at Stir-
ling, ibid 55. his security ratified in it,
55. forces are railed for and against him,
ibid. he is reconciled to his adversaries by
the intercession of Q Elizabeth, 56. is
suspected of foul play at an entertainment
in his own house, 57. his illegal proceed-
ings againfi the family of Hamilton, ibid.
58. the King's new favourites undermine
him, 61. he endeavours to prevent them,.
62. Q. Elizabeth interposes in his favour,.
63. is charged with being acceflary to the
late King's death, 64. he is confined in.
different prisons, 65. discourages an at-
tempt to refctle him, ibid. all his friends.
are turned out of office, 68. lie is tried
and condemned, 69. his resolute calm be-
haviour and confelion before and at his,
death, 70, 71. his body is treated with ig-
nominy, 7 .
M3urray, Earl of,, late prior of St. Andrew's,

goes with a handful of men against Huntly,.
1I 248. by his great flill and courage he
gains a complete victory, 249. is grant
is confirmed by Parliament, 257. cabals
ngainft him by Lenox and Darnly, 274.
his aversion to Darnly and other court fa.
voutite o,,. calls Bothwell to tand a.

trl,

trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
ly's marriage with the Queen, z81. he
and his associates are made the dupes of Q.
Elizabeth's policy, 283. concerts to seize
Darnly and carry him to England, 284.
this prevented by the Queen, ibid. avoids
alaffilnation intended him by Darnly, ibid.
evidences of there plots, z85, z86. the
Queen's vassals are called to arms against
him, 286. he is summoned to appear be-
fore, her, 287. is again summoned and
outlawed on his non-appearance, 288. is
forced to fly with his aflbciates into Argyl-
lhire, 289. they are interceded for by Q.
Elizabeth, z9o. are pursued by the Queen,
and obliged to fly into England, 29 . they
meet with unexpeced ill treatment from Q.
Elizabeth, ibid. 292. courts Rizio to in-
tercede with the Queen for him, 297.
many of his old friends follicit for him,
ibid. the Queen's favour how intercept-
ed, 298, 99. a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 301. this how prevented,
302. he and his associates arrive at Edin-
burh, 309. are gracioully received by
the King and Queen, ibid. are alarmed at
the Queen's escape, but soon reconciled to
her, 30o. he is appointed Regent during
the minority of King James V. 379. his
harsh behaviour in a visit to the Queen,
ibid. the success of his wife admimflra-
tion, 381. procures many of the Queen's
party to join him, ibid. gets the places of
Itrength into his hands, 38z. his office of
Regent confirmed by Parliament, 383. his
severe and haughty behaviour difgufls fe-
veral, 384. his adherents in great confer-
nation at the Queen's escape from Lochle-
ven, 386. his prudent conduct on that
occasion, 387. Defeats the Queen's army
at Langfide, 389. he improves this vic-
tory, 400oo. his lenity to the prisoners, ibid.
he calls a parliament, 402. is called upon
by Q_ Elizabeth to vindicate his conduct,
403. he arrives at York, 405. his views
in this affair, 406. complaints of the
Queen's commillioners againll him, 407.
he behaves with great reserve on this oc-
cafion, ibid. 408. this part of his conduct
accounted for, 408, 409. intrigues with
the Duke of Norfolk, ibid. his demands
from the Englilh commiflioners, 409, 410o.
answers the complaints of the Queen's com-
miflioners without touching on the murder,
410, 41 . agrees to have the conference
moved to WeRminfRer, 41 . i, affecionately
received by Q;Elizabeth, which offends Q.
Mary, 4 3. is prevailed on by Elizabeth
to accuse Mary of the murder, 414. pro-
duces is evidences, 417. is dilmifed by

Q Elizabeth without approving or con-
demning his condut, 419. his party is
secretly supported by her, 420. returns to
Scotland and by his vigorous conduct breaks
the Queen's party, 4zl. he receives pro-
pofals both from Q Elizabeth and Q Mary,
423. he disappoints Norfolk, 429. an ac-
count of his murder, 435, 436. his cha-
ra&er, 436, 437. his death much lamented
by Q. Elizabeth and the King's party, II. .
much anarchy the consequence of it, 2. part
of a letter of his, App. 58. his heir mur-
dered by the Earl of Huntly, II. 176

N.
N Aud, secretary to Q Mary, is sent by her

with a letter, and presents to her son,

II. 5S. why difimifed without feeing him,
ibid. is Lent with offers of humble refigna-
tion to Q. Elizabeth, 1oz. is seized and
sent prisoner to London, 127, 128. is pro-
duced an evidence against her 135
Nevil discovers and prevents Parry's design to

murder Q. Elizabeth, II. 107, o8
Nobles, their extensive power, I. 18, 19. be-

come turbulent and tbrmidable, 20. their
power greater in Scotland than in any other
kingdom, 21. the causes of this, 22-27.
their power of long duration, 32. it be-
comes intolerable to the Princes, ibid. they
are humbled in France and England, ibid.
but continue rigorous in Scotland, 33. dif-
cords among them encouraged, ibid. their
jurifdi&ion circumscribed, 35. are greatly
mortified by K. James V. 56-59. are dif-
appointed in a scheme to hew their resent-
ment, 61. refute to attend the King into
England, 62. they seize the revenues of
the church, 206. refuse to part with them
to the reformed clergy, 207, 215, 216.
dissensions among them, 241. a conven-
tion of them approve the Queen's marriage
to Darnly, 282. several of them recom-
mend Bothwell as a hulband to her, 353.
a frange combination of them on this occa-
sion, 354. a body of them aflbciate againt her
and Bothwell, 362. their different views in this
ibid. a party of them favours the Queen
371. they are much dispirited by the good
condut of Murray, 381, 382. they are
much provoked by Morton the Regent, II.
47. think of redress from the King, 48.
infuse suspicion of the Regent's power into
him, 49. a meeting of them called by
him, 5o. a party of them conspire against
the King's favourites, 77. they seize his
person and drive them off, 78. their ne-
glec of, and ingratitude to the clergy, s118.
the King attempts to reconcile their feuds
and unite them, 157. Se Lord:.-

NtorfeA,

Norfolk, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner

to hear the cause between Queen Mary and
her accusers, I. 405. forms a scheme of
mounting the throne of Scotland, 408. in-
trigues with the Regent and Maitland with
that view, ibid. 409. . he represents the de-
mands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 410.
his farther negociations with xrepe& to Q:
Mary, 424, 425. endeavours to conceal
his designs from Q Elizabeth, 425. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent,
4z5, 426. gets the consent of many of
the English nobles, 426. his project ap-
proved at foreign courts, 428. is disco-
veredand defeated by Q. Elizabeth, 429.
flies to Norfolk, 430. he surrenders on a
second summons, and is ent prisoner to the
Tower, ibid. is fdt at liberty, and con-
tinues his intrigues with Q.Mary, II. zz. is
betrayed by his fecreiary,. z3. is seized
with his dependants, and accused by them,
24. is executed, ibid.
NrbSthuinierlud,' Earl of, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q_ Mary, I. 43 . his scheme
defeated, 432. he is seized by the Regent,
433. is delivered up to the governor of
Berwick, and put to death at York, II. 33.
- 'otinghan, Countess of, some account of the

tranfaEion corcerning the Earl of Essex's
ringII. z42.

0.'.

CT7A RViANS, their inflitution and ex-
tensive powers, II. 191'. they under-

mine the King's milnifters, ibid.. become
: odious;, nd'a combiatiaon i formed against

thelti ibid, 192.' beingk split itbo facions,

. hnd enviedi by the ourtiers, they resign

their commission,. o,

Ogilvie, Lord, has a scale with Sir John
. Gordon in the streets of Edinburgh, I. 245.
Olipbat, Master of, joins' the Ruthven con-

fpirators, 1.II. 77.
Oango, Princ of, fends an agent into Scot-

larid' It. 67 hist . infttclions, ibid. is
adtffntlted, i. ;
D'Oses, comniander bf.tble Fiench trops in

Scotland, *endeavoltrs t promote a war
: wihlEtnglatdlt 13 iz. 'liis'defign frfitiated,

ibid; :h'ie.umbr itroop 'tindot hjs co0m-

Vol.. II.

mand, 154. instigates the Queen Regent
to violent measures against the Reformers,
155. is sent by QMary to demand a safe
conduct from Q Elizabeth, during her
voyage to Scotland, 224.

P.

AIS LE Er, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland,
L 87. creates a suspicion of the Earl of

Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent. ibid.
88. is made Archbithop of St. Andrews,
99.
Paris, the maflacre of, II. 29, 30. rejoicings

of the popish party on account of it, 30.
the consternation and horror of the Pro-
tentants, ibid.
Parliament, the nature of their original con-

ftitution, I. 65-67. particularly that of
Scotland, 67-81i 202. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 202. a dif-
ficulty started and answered, 203, 204.
their proceedings with regard to religion,
204. condemn the Popifil and approve the
Reformed Dotrines, 205. several other
regulations of the fame tendency, zo6.
their validity called in question, 207. ex-
ceed their powers, 208. their proceedings
laid before the King and Queen, ibid. a
parliament in favour of Bothwell, 351.
pals an a in favour of the Reformation,
ibid..352. confirm tie proceedings of the
confederates, 383. parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's parties, II. 6,
17. another of the Queen's adherents, 8.
attaint upwards of zoo of their opponents,
ibid. a parliament at Stirling by the King's
party, 19. furprized by the Queen's ad-
herents, ibid. another at Stirling, 54, 55.
one at Edinburgh, 61. and on the King's
being of age, 58. several new laws made
there, ibid. 161. the lefler Barons admitted
into parliament, 6o.
Parry, Doctor, undertakes to murder Q Eli-

zabeth, II. 107. is encouraged by and
gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. ic8. is exe-
cuted, ibid,
JP,;fon, sa Jesuit, publilhes a book in favour

of the Ifanta of Spain's right of fuccellion
to tho Crown of England, I. 89.

M ml iin Pas-

PnafqiinadeJ and Pi&ures, accusing Bothwell of

parnly's murder, I. 343, 351. a law
made againfi them, 35 .
Patten, William, his account of the Scottilh

antient military discipline, I. 103.
Paulet, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q.

Mary's keepers, II. 103. his rigid severity
to her, 1og. discovers her foreign cor-
respondence, 12z. his rude treatment of
her, 141. refuses to be concerned in pri-
vately affaflinating her, 45. a letter from
him, App. o8.
Pel/evi, Bilhop of Amiens, is appointed to

support the popilh interest in Scotland, I.
172. drives the Queen Regent to violent
measures against the Protestants, ibid.
Perth, an infurresion of the Reformers there

againf the Papists, 151. its inhabitants
are severely treated by the Queen Regent,
153. a French garrison placed there, ibid.
154. is besieged and taken by the Pro-
teltants, 158. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy, II. 318.
Philip II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen

of England, 1. 118. reinforces his army
with her troops, 131. his great power, II.
112. joins in the holy league. ibid. re-
solves to invade and conquer England, 162.
his preparations for it dilatory, 166. his
design frufirated, ibid. meditates an inva-
sion of England through Scotland, 167.
intrigues with some Scottih Lords with that
view, ibid. remits money to them, 186.

Pinkey, the battle of, I. . oz2.
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q_ Elizabeth,

deprives her of her kingdom, and absolves
her fubjeas, 11. 7.
Polly, one of Babington's conspirators against

Q Elizabeth, II. 123. discovers the plot,
124.
Poltrot, a frantic zealot, afliflnates the Duke

of Guile at the liege of Orleans, I. z5;.
Pent, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one of the

Lords of Seflion, protests against laws op-
preffive to the Church, II. 93.
Popery, where moR flourilhing, I. 2zo. what

kind prevailed in Scotland, ibid, 121. was
partly grafted on Heathenism, 159. is
much hurt by the Congregation, 205.
their doctrines. condemned by parliament,
ibid. the jurifdiftion of their courts abo-

2

lilhed, zc6. their'worihip prohibited, ibid.
attempt in vain to gain Queen Mary's fa-
vour, 234. the great influence of Popery,
.299, 300. -
Power, the ballance of, the great consequence

of preserving it, I1. 73.
Pretiyterian church government established in

Scotland, L 212. is confirmed by King
James VI. 177.
Protefiants, in France, violently persecuted,

1. 167. are moderate on Q Mary's arrival
from France, 229. are employed by her
in the administration, 230. a scheme for
fupprefling them all over Europe, 299. a
league formed for that purpose, II. l 2.
See Reformation.

R.
1 AMSE r, a favourite of K. James III.

narrowly escapes the fate of his afro-

ciates, I. 5o. is appointed Captain of the
King's guard, and created Earl of Both-
well, 51. See Bothwell.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French

to negociate a peace with England and
Scotland, I. 198. terms agreed on by
him, 200, 201.
Randolph, Lent to.encourage the Congregation,

I. 18o. (See App. I.) congratulates Q.
Mary's arrival in Scotland, 230. urges the
ratification of the. treaty of Edinburgh,
231. is imposed on by Q. Mary in the
affair of her marriage with Darnly, 276;
Cent into Scotland on the murder of Mur-
ray, II. 2. interposes for Morton, 66, 67,
flies from Scotland in the night, 68. is Cent
again there, and concludes a treaty with
England, 123. several of his letters, App.
7, 14, 15, 24. 29, 30, 33

Ratcl e. See Sujx.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, , i o.

account of its sirs preachers, 1 i . is much
influenced by England, i a . two remark-
able instruments of promoting it, 1133
it makes great progrtes, 8. causes con-
tributing to promote it, t9. its advan-
tages over popery, 128. is favoured by
the Q Regent, 133. an inflance of re-
gard for it in Scotland, 13. the whole
party not chargeable with Cadinal Bea.

toun's.

toun's murder, 141. A pries burnt for em-
bracing it, 142. the reformers violently per-
fecuted by the Archbihop of St. Andrew's,
ibid. are proteted by the Q Regent, ibid.
apply in vain to the Popilh clergy, 143. a
persecution againlt them pulhed on by the
French interest, 148. the preachers fum-
moned before the Regent, 149. they are
deceived and declared out-laws by her, 150.
a riotous infurretion of them at Perth a-
gainft the Papifs, i i. prepare to defend
themselves against the Queen, liz. con-
clude a treaty with her which Ihe presently
breaks, 153. they take arms again against
the Queen, 1x5. infiR on redressing civil as
well as religious grievances, 1 16. the in-
fluence of the reformation on liberty, ibid.
they besiege and take Perth, 158. they seize
Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
great violence on churches and monasteries,
159. their condut how accounted for,
ibid. an inance of their moderation, 160.
fix their residence at Edinburgh, 161. the
Queen prepares to attack them, ibid.
make another treaty with her, 16z. are
forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but al-
lowed the exercise of their religion, ibid.
demand the expulsion of the French army,
163. are aware of their danger from
France, 66. their party firengthened,
ibid. remonstrate against the French for-
tifying Leith, 171. take arms in their
own defence, 172, 173. remonstrate again
to the Regent, 174. are highly incensed
at her imperious answer, ibid. 175. by
advice of a convention deprive the Queen
Dowager of the office of Regent, 176.
the foundations of this condu&, ibid. 177.
the growth of it encouraged by Parliament,
383. See Congregation.

Regaltis, the ample jurifdi&ion of I. 8
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belong-

ing - - 1. 18
Retvenge, encouraged both by custom and law

I 34
Revenues of the church, proceedings of Parlia-

ment concerning them - . o206
Ridolphi, an agent for the Pope at London ne-

gociates for Q. Mary, 11. 22. his argu-
ments with the D, of Norfolk 23, 24

Rizio David, ome account of him and his

rife, . 275, 276. Darnly's connection
with him, 276. his good offices courted
by Murray, 297. his great interest and
familiarity with the Qeen, 303. incurs
the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, ibid. several
concurring causes of this, ibid. 304. a
combination formed to murder him, 305.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace, 307,

308
Romam invade Britain, I. 2. give the ear-

lief accounts of the Scots - ibid.
Roif, Bilhop of, zealously promotes Queen

Mary's interest at London, II. 23, 24.
is confined to the Tower and threatened
with capital punilhment, 25. is set at li-
berty and banilhed the kingdom, ibid.
some letters of his, App. 53, 67
Rubay, a foreigner, made keeper of the great

feal of Scotland - I. t9
Ruthven Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed

to him by Darnly, 1. 305. heads the con-
fpirators againf him, 308. his part in that
tranfaRion, ibid. is admitted into the
Queen's presence who promises him a par-
don, 309. did not repent of it at his death,

315

created E. of Gowrie, he and his

associates seize the King, and remonstrate
against his favourites, 1I. 77, 78. drive
them from him, ibid. their conduct ap-
proved in an assembly of the fRates, 80.
the King escapes from them, 84. by Ar-
ran's influence violent measures are deter-
mined against them, 86. Q Elizabeth in-
tercedes in their behalf, ibid. 87. are de-
clared guilty of high treason, 88. take re-
fuge in foreign countries, ibid. are harlh-
ly treated by Q. Elizabeth, 104. a recon-
ciliation with her brought about, i 15, i 6.
return to Scotland, and are reconciled to
the King, 1 7. their moderation on being
restored to their efates and honours, u18.
their negle& of their friends the Clergy

ibid.

that name abolished by Parliament,

II. zz9. See Gowrie.
Ruthbtn raid, what, -II. 78

Mmm S.
E X;

S.

,S D L E R, Sir Ralph, appointed a comn-
mriffioner to hear the caufb between 'Q
Mary and her accufcrs - I. 405
Sandilands of Calder, Lord St. John,'fent to

lay the proceedings of the congregational
Parliament before the King and Queen in
France, I. zo8. is coldly received and dif-
miffed without a ratification by them, 209
Savage, a Spanilh officer, his desperate refo-

lution to kill QElizabeth - II. 2zz
Scotland, its ancient hiltory fabulous, I. s.

the origin of the Scots, 2. their history
why remarkably obscure, 3. some account
of the writers of it, 4. is divided into
four periods, 5. a review of the third
era, 6. ome account of the controversy
concerning its independency, ibid.-lo.
this the cause of great animofities and much
bloodihed, i . the state of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 12. It begins to
have an influence on the fate of distant
nations 76, 77. influence as to the ba-
lance of power, 77. state of Scotland
at the birth of Q. Mary, 81. is invad-
ed by the Epglifh, and several places
burnt and plundered, 93. much alienated
from the Englilh, ibid. 94. a peace con-
cluded between England, France and Scot-
.Land, 9;. computation of damages done
by the English in Scotland, 94, 95. a new
breach with England, oo. is invaded by
a great Englilh army, iol. the Scots are
defeated with great slaughter, 102, 103.
their manner of fighting at that time, 163,.
}o4. a marriage agreed of their young
Queen and the Dauphin of France, 167.
they soon repent this ftep, 109. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aversion to
the French, to. this inflamed by another
incident 129. they decline a war with Eng-
land, 131. fend representatives to witness
Q Mary's marriage, 134. their care as'to
the marriage articles, ibid. 135. they re-
fuse consent to the demands of the French,
1136. four of their deputies fufpedted to be
poiloned, 137. which much increases the
aversion, 138. grant the crown matrimo.

- stia-t6 the' Daauphin, ibid. they apply' to

tbe ngliih for anifitaneagaiiit ithe Freiich,
1 8o. .185 an Englifhi eet arrives for that
purpose, ' 96. ' conelude a 'peace with
England arid receive an Engifh army, 91,
192: all parties agree in relenting the
French, 195, a treaty between England,
France and Scotland, 198, 199. both

* Englifi and French armies leaveScotland,

22z: they 'ejoiee tnnch at the death of
the'young King of France, 212. fend to
invite· the Queen 't Scotland, .2 6. rejec
proposals of an ambassador from France,
217. fRate of Scotland on Q. Mary's re-
turn from France, 226. the great zeal: of
the nation against Popery, 229. the Scots
brought into contempt by Q. Mary's con-
dut, 361. in a miserable condition after
the murderof Murray'the regent, 11. 17.
slate of facions at that time in it, ibid. 18. a
league concluded between Scotland and Eng-
land, 12o. a view of-the revolutions of
Scotland firce the acceflion of James VI.
249-260. of the policy of the Rate,
249-254. and of the church, 254, 255.
of the genius and tafle'as to learning 256.

' ' 2o.
Scott of Buccleugh, enters ind ravages Eng-

land after the murder oF'Murray the Re-
gent, II. , 2. the design of this,- 4
Scroop, Lord, Cent to condole with, and watch

Q. Mary on her arrival in England I. 395
Seffn Lords and-court of, by w\hom first ap-

pointed, 1.. 36. the President and one half
of their number of the Clegy ' 123

Stion Lord, afffift the'Q een regent in defend-
* ingLeiti ' - I. 183
Sbrew/Aury Earl of, the charge of Q Mary's

perfin committed to him, '1. 412. why
removed from that office, II. ioz. is ap-
pointed to fee the sentence againit her exe-
cuted, 145. 'letter from him and the Earl
of Kent concerfipg .her 'death, Appendix

.. .' * ' ~~~~110

ictair, Biflop of Rqfs, a zealous Papist,
concurs as President of the Seflion in ac-
quitting Knox of a charge of treason, I.

260
S.mer/it, Duke of, enters Scotland with a pow-

erful armyi I. io1. is reduced to a very

iL critical.

critical. situa.tion, ibid. . defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, oz. this vicory
why of little advantage, 104. cabals
against him at the court of England, force
him to return, ibid. is ruined by his ene-
mies - -- 1o8

Spain, great warlike preparations there, II.
* 162. See Armado. the Infanta of, set up
as candidate for the crown of England, 189

Span/y ambassador is ordered to leave Eng-
'land, for intriguing in favour of Q.Mary,

1. 25
Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's con-

fpiracy, II. 220-22i. is executed, 222
Ste-wart, James prior of St. Andrews, is ap-

pointed to carry the crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin of France, 1. 140. See
·St. ,ndrew.

.. Efme, Lord. Aubigne, his arrival in
Scotland, II. 60. See Aubigny.
- - Capt. James, his characer, I. 61.

becomes a favourite of King James, ibid.
accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 64. is created Earl of Arran. See
Arran.

- Col. William, commander of the

King's guard, contributes to his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators, II. 84. seizes
the Earl of Gowrie - 91
- Francis, created Earl of Bothwell,
II. 167. joins in a treasonable correfpon-
dence with the Popilh lords, 168. See
Bothtvell.
-, all of that name combine in opposing

the Chancellor - II. 181
Stirling seized by the Reformers, . 158. a

parliament theie by the King's party, II.
19. is furprized byl the Quen's adherent's
and a great fray ensues ibid. zo
Strozzi Leon, commands a body of French

sent into Scotland, I 99. reduces and de-
molilhes the catle of St. Andrews, ibid.
Sec France.
Succr.lion, a remarkable flatute concerning it,

1. 100
Superintendeats proposed in the Church of Scot-

land, I. 214. their business ibid.
Siex Earl of, one of the commifioners to

hear the cause between Q Mary and her
accusers, I. 405. allfmbles a powerful

army on the borders, II. 3. . he and Scroop)
enter, and ravage Scotland 5

T.

AX upon land, first proposed in Scot-
land I. 130
Throgmorton Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador ex-

traordinary from Q Elizabeth, to oppose
Q Mary's marriage with Darnly, I. 279.
his interceflion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 297, 298. his enmity to Cecil,
ibid. is sent to negociate Q Mar.y's libe-
ration, 372. is refused access to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his,.
Appendix, 37, 39, 43, 46, 48, 49'
---- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy

againit Q. Elizabeth, I. 95. at first lhe
denies, but afterwards confesses it, ibid. 96.
refletions on his confession, ibid. 97. is
executed -97
Tichbourne defignsto affafinate Q Elizabeth,

I1. 123.
Treason, persons guilty of it, tried after their

death by the law of Scotland II. 221,

U.

V IL MOT, a foreigner, made comptroller
V of Scotland - 1. 129t
Union of Scotland and England, the advan-

tages of -- I. 253, 25+

W.

W ALLACE Sir William, bravely afl'ted:
Ve the liberty of his country I. o
laglnham, secretary to Q_ Elizabeth, sent

alnbaffador to K. James V1. 11. 87. returns
without success, ibid. makes a favourable
report to her concerning James, 88. inter-
poses in favour of Q. Mary, 102. disco-
vers Babington's conspiracy, 124. why a
determined and inveterate enemy to Q:
Mary, 127. a letter from him, Appen.

100
War'wick Earl of, fucceds Somerset in the go-

vernment of England I. 108.
WlflninJier, the conferences concerning Q.

Mary there - 1. 411

Wflmorland,.

Wijmorriani Earl oi attempts a rebellion in

favour of Q: Mary, I. 431. his schemes
difc6vered and defeated, 432, 433. he
escapes to the Netherlands ibid.
Wbithorn, the prior of, imprifoaed for cele-

brating Mass - I. 258

IPillox, a miniser, declares for resistance and

,deprivation of tyrannical rulers, I. 176. is
called to attend the Q_ Dowager on her
death.bed - 197
WYifart George, his illegal execution, reveng-

ed I. 46
Iitchcraft, vigoroully prosecuted in Scotland,

IL 175
Woeton, dean of Canterbury, employed to

negociate a peace with France I. 198

Sir Edward, lent by Queen Elizabeth
into Scotland, II, 1 4. his character, ibid.

loon gets into high favour with K. James
ibid. procures a league between the two
kingdoms, ibid, 1 15. undermines Arran's
power, 1 5. forms a plot on King James,
and forced to withdraw without taking
leave - - 116, 117

Y.

0 R K, the conferences there concerning
Queen Mary I. 405

Z.

OUCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q.
Elizabeth, to remonstrate against King

James's lenity to the Popish lords, II. 185.
his treachery on that occason ibid.
F 1 N I 4,

E ---X.
