THE
T 11 E

H I S T O R Y
HISTORY

F
A ME RI C A.

VO L. III.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, HISTORIO-

aGAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND, and

MEMBER of the ROYAL ACADEMY or

HISTORY at MADRID.

VO L. III.
THE FOURTH EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN ; T. CADELL, in the Strand;

and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXXIII.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T O R Y

0 F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VI.
F ROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- a o O K

vered the great Southern Ocean, and received _
the first obscure hints concerning the opulent 'sm 3.r

-ch*clmes for

countries with which it might open a communica- diftovecinI
tion, the wishes and schemes of every enterprising
person in the colonies of Darien and Panama werc
turned towards the wealth of thole unknown re-
gions. In an age when the spirit of adventure was
so ardent and vigorous, that large fortunes were
wafted, and the most alarming dangers braved, in'~
pursuit of discoveries merely possible, the faintest
ray of hope was followed with eager expecation,
and the slightest information was sufficient to in-
fpird such perfclt confidence, as condu&ed men to
the most arduous undertakings '.

· See NOTE I.
VoL. III. B ACCORD-

B 0 ° 0K ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted

Vi.

a-_-I out in order to explore and take poffeflon of the
unf;. ' countries to the cast of Panama, but under the
ful foom condut of leaders whose talents and resources

were unequal to the attempt b. As the excursions
of those adventurers did not extend beyond the
limits of the province to which the Spaniards have
given the name of Tierra Firme, a mountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and
extremely unhealthy, they returned with dismal
accounts concerning the distresses to which they
had been exposed, and the unpromising aspe6t of
the places which they had visited. Damped by
these tidings, the rage for discovery in that direc-
tion abated; and it became the general opinion,
that Balboa had founded visionary hopes, on the
tale of an ignorant Indian, ill understood, or cal-
culated to deceive.

vodertaken BUT there were three persons fettled in Panama,
by Pizarro
Alnagro, on whom the circumstances which deterred others
and Luqe. made so little impression, that, at the very mo-

ment when all confidered Balboa's expetations of
discovering 'a rich country, by steering towards
the eaf, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt
the execution of his scheme. The names of those
extraordinary men were Francisco Pizarro, Diego
de Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was
the natural son of a gentleman of an honourable

b Calncha Coronica, p. Io0.

lfamily
V,1

family by a very low woman, and, according to B 0°o K
the cruel fate which often attends the offspring of y
unlawful love, had been so totally negle&ed in his '*51
youth by the author of his birth, that he seems to
have destined him never to rife beyond the condi-
tion of his mother. In consequence of this unge-
nerous idea, he set him, when bordering on man-
hood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring mind of
young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation,
he abruptly abandoned his charge, enlisted as a
soldier, and, after serving some years in Italy, em-
barked for America, which, by opening such a
boundless range to a&ive talents, allured every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his am-
bitious thoughts. There Pizarro early distinguish-
ed himself. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the constitution of his body was robust, he
was foremost in every danger, patient under the
greatest hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was soon confidered as a man formed to com-
mand. Every operation committed to his conduct
proved successful, as, by a happy but rare con-
juncion, he united perseverance with ardour, and
was as cautious in executing, as he was bold in
forming his plans. By engaging early in active
life, without any resource but his own talents and
industry, and by depending on himself alone in his
firuggles to emerge from obscurity, he acquired
such a thorough knowledge of affairs, and of
men, that he was fitted to afume a luperior part

B a in

B I KI in conduaing the former, and in governing the

Vi.
v- latter .

1514.

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent

as Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other a
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any of the
soldierly qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable
activity, or insurmountable constancy in enduring
the hardships inseparable from military service in
the New World. But in Almagro there virtues
were accompanied with the openness, generosity,
and candour, natural to men whose profeflion is
arms in Pizarrol they were united with the ad-
dress, the craft, and the difiimulation of a politi-
cian, with the art of concealing his own pur-
poses, and with sagacity to penetrate into those of
other men.

HERNANDO DB LUQ.tE Was an ecclesiastic, who

acted both as priest and schoolmaster at Panama,
and, by means which the contemporary writers
have not described, had amafted riches that in-
spired him with thoughts of rising to greater
eminence.

Terms of SUCH were the men deflined to overturn one of
*teir ,lro¢i-
·*ioI. the most extenlive empires on the face of the

earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was

1 I1crrcra, dec. I & z, passim. dec. iv. lib. vi, c. 107.
Comara Hlilt c. c. 1 . Zarate, lib. iv. c. 9.

authorised

authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama. I o o i.
Each engaged to employ his whole fortune in the --.
adventure. Pizarro, the leat wealthy of the 's't
three, as he could not throw so large a fum as his
associates into the common flock, engaged to take
the department of greatest fatigue and danger, and
to command in person the armament which was to
go first upon discovery. Almagro offered to con-
dut the supplies of provisions and reinforcements
of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in need.
Luque was to remain at Panama to negociate with
the governor, and superintend whatever was carry-
ing on for the general inLcrcti. As the spirit of
enthusiasm uniformly accompanied that of ad-
venture in the New World, and by that itrange
union both acquired an increase of force, this con-
federacy, formed by ambition and avarice, was
confirmed by the most solemn at of religion.
Luque celebrated mass, divided a consecrated host
into three, and reserving one part to himself, gave
the other two to his associates, of which they par-
took; and thus, in name of the Prince of Peace,
ratified a contract of which plunder and bloodfied
were the objecs ',

THE attempt was begun with a force more suit- Their flt

ed to the humble condition of the three associates, attfmpt.
than to the greatness of the enterprise in which they
were engaged. Pizarro set fail from Panama with Nov. 14.

* Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 13. Zarate, lib. i. c. I.

B 3 a single

B O°v K a single vetfel; of small burden, and a hundred

Avl- and twelve men. But in that age, so little were
5z4'. the Spaniards acquainted with the peculiarities of

climate in America, that the time which Pizarro
chose for his departure was the most improper in
the whole year; the periodical winds, which were
then let in, being diretly adverse to the course
)52s. which he purposed to fleer '. After beating about

for seventy days, with much danger and incessant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east
was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at fe-
veral places on the coast of Tierra Firme, but
found every where -the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had described; the low
grounds converted into swamps by the overflowing
of rivers; the higher, covered with impervious
woods; few inhabitants, and those fierce and ho-
flile. Famine, fatigue, frequent rencounters with
the natives, and above all, the distempers of a
moist, sultry climate, combined in wafting his

Attended slender band of followers. The undaunted refo-
with little
faicrs. lution of their leader continued, however, for some

time, to sustain their spirits, although no sign had
yet appeared of discovering those golden regions to
which he had promised to condu& them. At
length, he was obliged to abandon that inhofpi-
fable coast, and retire to Chuchamar opposite to

s lIercera, dec. 4. lib. ii, c. 8. Xerez, p. 179.

tlhp

the pearl islands, where he hoped to receive a sup- B o o
ply of provisions and troops from Panama. .

BUT Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, flood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his as-
fociate. Not finding him there, he landed his fol-
diers, who, in searching for their companions, un-
derwent the fame diftrefles, and were exposed to the
fame dangers, which had driven them out of the
country. Repulsed at length by the Indians in a
sharp conflit, in which their leader loft one of his
eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise were
compelled to reimbark. Chance led them to the
place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found some
consolation in recounting to each other their ad-
ventures, and comparing their sufferings. As Al- June ar.
magro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan,
in the Province of Popayan, where both the coun-
try and inhabitants appeared with a more pro-
mifing afpe&, that dawn of better fortune was sus-
ficient to determine such sanguine projectors not to
abandon their scheme, notwithstanding all that
they had suffered in prosecuting it'.

ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of re- ,sT .

cruiting their (hattered troops. But what he and Thy ,;
Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen such an n,^"
unfavourable idea of the service, that it was with

r Herrcra, det, 3, lib. viii. c. it, tz. Sec N OTE II.

B 4 difficulty

* o K difficulty he could levy fourscore men s. Feeble
XI-..: as this reinforcement was, they did not hesitate

i5s6. about resuming their operations. After a long

series of disasters and disappointments, not inferior
to those which they had already experienced, part
of the armament reached the Bay of St. Matthew,
on the coast of Quito, and landing at Tacamez, to
the south of the river of Emeraulds, they beheld
a country more champaign and fertile than any
they had yet discovered in the Southern Ocean, the
natives clad in garments of woollen or cotton stuff,
and adorned with several trinkets of gold and
silver.

BUT, notwithstanding those favourable appear-

ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report from
Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of those
who lifiened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst
not venture to invade a country so populous with a
h.andful of men enfeebled by fatigue and diseases.
They retired to the imall island of Gallo, where
Pizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
afticiate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement, as might enable them to take
poffeflion of the opulent territories, whose existence
seemed to be no longer doubtful h.

Z Zarae, lib. i. c. 5.
Xerez, a81. Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 13.

BuT

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising, B o00 K

or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly -
conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings piz^ore
and losses to their friends at Panama, Almagro met cllverr of
with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de los Panamn.
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the govern-
ment of that settlement. After weighing the mat-
ter with that cold ceconomical prudence which ap-
pears the first of all virtues to persons whose limit-
ed faculties are incapable of conceiving or execut-
ing great designs, he concluded an expedition, at-
tended with such certain waste of men, to be so
detrimental to an infant and feeble colony, that he
not only prohibited the raising of new levies, but
dispatched a veflel to bring home Pizarro and his
companions from the island of Gallo. Almagro
and Luque, though deeply affeced with those
measures, which they could not prevent, and durst
not oppose, found means of communicating their
sentiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
not to relinquilh an enterprise that was the founda-
tion of all their hopes, and the only means of re-
establishing their reputation and fortune, which
were both on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent
with inflexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed
no incentive to perlift in the scheme. He per- Per.fi I*
emptorily refused to obey the governor of Pana-
ma's orders, and employed all his address and elo-
quence in persuading his men not to abandon himi
But the incredible calamities to which they had
been cxpofed were still so recent in their memories,

4 and

0 °o K and the thoughts of revisiting their families and
VI.
. , friends after a long absence, rushed with such joy
I51<' into their minds, that when Pizarro drew a line

upon the sand with his sword, permitting such as
wished to return home to pass over it, only thirteen
of all the daring veterans in his service had refo-
lution to remain with their commander'.

'THIS fmnall, but determined band, whole names
the Spanili historians record with deserved praise,
as the persons to whose persevering fortitude their
country is indebted for the most valuable of all its
American possessions, fixed their residence in the
ifand of Gorgona. This, as it was farther re-
moved from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited,
they confidered as a more secure retreat, where,
unmolested, they might wait for supplies from Pa-
nama, which they trusted that the activity of their
aflbciates would be able to procure. Almagro and
Luque were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and
their incefrant importunity was seconded by the
general voice of the colony, which exclaimed
loudly against the infamy of exposing brave men,
engaged in the public service, and chargeable with
no error but what flowed from an excess of zeal
and courage, to perish like the molt odious cri.
minals in a desert island. Overcome by those en-
treaties and expostulations, the governor at last
consented to fend a frall velfel to their relief. But

A Herrera, dec, 3. lib. x, c. 2, 3. Zaratp, lib. i. c. g.
Xcrez, 181, Gomara Hill. c. lo9.

that

that he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to any B °l ° l
new enterprise, he would not permit one landman -*--
to embark on board of it. 5s*.

BY this time, Pizarro and his companions had Hrdh

remained five months in an island, infamous for
the most unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
rica k. During all this period, their eyes were
turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from
their countrymen; but worn out at length with
fruitless expectations, and dispirited with suffering
hardships of which they saw no end, they, in de-
fpair, came to a resolution of committing them-
selves to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
in that detestable abode. But, on the arrival of
the vessel from Panama, they were transported with
such joy, that all their sufferings were forgotten,
Their hopes revived, and, with a rapid transition,
not unnatural among men accustomed by their
mode of life to sudden viciflitudes of fortune, high
confidence succeeding to extreme dejection, Pizarro
easily induced not only his own followers, but the
crew of the vellel from Panama, to resume his for-
mer scheme with frelh ardour. Instead of return-
ing to Panama, they flood towards the south-east,
and more fortunate in this than in any of their past
efforts, they, on the twentieth day after their de-
parture from Gorgona, discovered the coast of
Peru. After touching at several villages on the i;'ro,'r"

k Ss NOTE HI.

cQart

OV 0 K coast no wife inviting, they landed at Tumbez, !
v.c .-» place of some note, about three degrees south of

fs'5 the line, difinguihed for its fately temple, and a

palace of the Incas or sovereigns of the country '.
There the Spaniards feasted their eyes with the first
view of the opulence and civilization of the Peru-
vian empire. They beheld a country fully peopled,
;nd cultivated with an appearance of regular in-
jdultry, the natives decently clothed, and pofieffed
of ingenuity so far furpafling the other inhabitants
of the New World, as to have the use of tame do-
reftic animals. But what chiefly attracted their
notice, was such a Ihow of gold and silver, not
only in the ornaments of their persons and temples,
but in several veflels and utensils for common use,
formed of the fame precious metals, as left no
.room to doubt that there abounded with profusion
in the country. Pizarro and his companions seem-
ed now to have attained to the completion of their
most sanguine hopes, and fancied that all their
withes and dreams of rich domains, and inex.
hauflible treasures, would soon be realized.
Retlrn to BUT with the slender force then under his com.

a m and, Pizarro could only view the rich country of
which he hoped hereafter to obtain poffeflion. He
ranged, however, for some time along the coast,
maintaining every where a peaceable intercourfl
with the natives, no less afonilhed at their new

Calancha, p. 103.

visitants,

rifitants, than the Spaniards were with the uniform B o0 K
appearance of opulence and cultivation which they ---
beheld. Having explored the country as far as '
was requisite to ascertain the importance of the dif-
covery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants omen
of their Llamas or tame cattle, to which the Spa-
niards gave the name of sheep, some vessels of gold
and silver, as well as some rpecimens of their other
works of ingenuity, and two young men, whom
he proposed to inftru& in the Castilian language,
that they might serve as interpreters in the expedi-
tion which he meditated. With these he arrived
at Panama, towards the close of the third year from
the time of his departure thence m. No adventurer
of the age suffered hardlhips or encountered dan-
gers which equal those to which he was exposed
during this long period. The patience with which
he endured the one, and the fortitude with which
he surmounted the other, exceed whatever is re-
corded in the history of the New World, where so
many romantic displays of those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave iSS.

of the incredible opulence of the country which he schema
had discovered, nor his bitter complaints on ac- ciatf'*,
count of that unseasonable recal of his forces, which
had put it out of his power to attempt making any

' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3-6. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 7, 8.

Vega, a. lib. i. c. 10-14. Zarate, lib. i. c. a. Bcnzo Hilt.
Nori Orbis, lib. iii. c. i.

settlement

a °0 K settlement there, could move the governor of Pa;

V1.
X-__' nama to swerve from his former purpose. He still

Sa*. contended, that the colony was not in a condition

to invade such a mighty empire, and refused to
authorise an expedition which he forePaw would be
so alluring that it might ruin the province in which
he presided, by an effort beyond its strength. His
coldness, however, did not in any degree abate the
ardour of the three associates; but they perceived
that they could not carry their scheme into execu-
tion without the countenance of superior authority,
and must solicit their sovereign to grant that per-
mifllon which they could not extort from his dele-
gate. With this view, after adjusting among
themselves that Pizarro lhould claim the itationof
governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-governor,
and Luque the dignity of bishop in the country
which they purposed to conquer, they sent Pizarro
as their agent to Spain, though their fortunes were
now so much exhausted by the repeated efforts
which they had made, that they found Come diffi-
culty in borrowing the small fum requisite towards
equipping him for the voyage .

p;,rro rent PIZARRo loft no time in repairing to court, and
to Spain to
narocite. new as the scene might be to him, he appeared be-

fore the emperor with the unembarrafled dignity of
a man conscious of what his services merited; and
he conduted his negociations with an insinuating

D Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iii, c. 1. Vega a, lib. I. 14.

dexterity

dexterity of address, which could not have been B o 0 K
expected either from his education or former ha- . -
bits of life. His feeling description of his own sus- *5''
ferings, and his pompous account of the country
which he had discovered, confirmed by the fpeci-
mens of its produaions which he exhibited, made
such an impression both on Charles and his mini-
fters, that they not only approved of the intended
expedition, but seemed to be interested in the fuc-
cess of its leader. Presuming on those dispositions
in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention to the
interest of his associates. As the pretensions of Neglea;his
Luque did not interfere with his own, he obtained aciate,
for him the ecclesiastical dignity to which he afpir-
ed. For Almagro, he claimed only the command
of the fortress which fliould be ereEted at Tumbez.
To himself he secured whatever his boundless am-
bition could desire. He was appointed governor, Ju1y ts.
captain-general, and adelantado of all the country thc,'upim,

commarid

which he had discovered, and hoped to conquer, h,"as,
with supreme authority, civil as well as military;
and a full right to all the privileges and emolu-
ments usually granted to adventurers in the New
World. His jurifdition was declared to extend
two hundred leagues Ilong the coast to the south
of the river St. Jago, to be independent of the
governor of Panama; and he had power to nomi-
nate all the officers who were to serve under him.
In return for those concessions, which cofi the court
of Spain nothing, as the enjoyment of them de-
pended upon the success of Pizarro's own efforrs,

, i he

B 0° K he engaged to raise two hundred and fifty men,

V¥.
*----' and to provide the Ihips, 'arms,; and warlike flores

5ss9' requisite towards fubjectng, to tlie crown ofCaftile,

the country of which the government was allotted
him.

Sflende INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was which
wal able o Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds and cre-

dit were so low that he could hardly complete half
the number; and after obtaining his patents from
the crown, he was obliged to iteal privately out of
the port of Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny
of the osicers who had it in charge to examine,
whether he had fulfilled the stipulations in his con-
traet °. Before his departure, however, he received
some supply of money from Cortes, who having
returned to'Spain about this time, was willing to
contribute his aid towards enabling an ancient 'cm-
panion, with whose talents and courage he was well
acquainted, to begin a career of glory similar to
that which he himself had fnilhedP.

HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

across the isthmus to Panama, accompanied by his
three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of
whom the first was born in lawful wedlock, the two
latter, like himself, were of illegitimate birth, and
by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's brother.

Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9.
P Ibid. lib. vii. c. o1.

They

They were all in: the prime of life, and offuch abi- B 0o0 K
lities and courage, as fitted them to take a diftin- '- .
guifhed part in his subsequent tranfa&ions. s19.

ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Alma- ,5;o.

gro so much exasperated at the manner in which he ,ilto,.
had conducted his negociation, that he not only ,h AI.
refused to at any longer in concert with a man, by
whose perfidy he had been excluded from the power
and honours to which he had a just claim, but la-
boured to form a new association, in order to
thwart or to rival his former confederate in his dif-
coveries. Pizarro, however, had more wisdom and
address than to susser a rupture so fatal to all his
schemes, to become irreparable. By offering vo-
luntarily to relinquish the office ofadelantado, and
promising to concur in soliciting that title, with an
independent government, for Almagro, he gra-
dually mitigated the rage of an open-hearted fol-
dier, which had been violent, but was not im-
placable. Luque, highly satisfied with having
been successful in all his own pretensions, cordially
seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A reconciliation
was effeted; and the confederacy renewed on its
original terms, that the enterprise should be carried
on at the common expence of the associates, and
the profits accruing from it should be equally di-
vided among them q.

q Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. i. c. 3.
Vega, 2. lib. i. c. 14.

VOL. III. C EvEN

B °0 K Evrw after their re-union, and the otmnof efots

VI.

i- , of their interct, three small vefRfl, with a hun-
ThJrI dred and eighty foMdien, thirty-fix of whom were
nI.ncn. horfcmen, composed the armament which they

were able to fit out. But the aftonithifng progress
of the Spaniards in America had irtfpired them
,53. with such ideas of their own superiority, that Pi-

zarro did not heficate to fail with this contemptible
force to invade a great empire. Almagro was left
at Panama, as formerly, to follow him with what
reinforcement of men he should be able to muster.
As the season for embarking was properly chosen,
and the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Pizarro completed
the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried above a
hundred leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place
of his detfination, and obliged to land his troops
Lnds in in the bay of St. Matthew. Without losing a mo-

ment, he began to advance towards the south,
taking care, however, not to depart far from the
fea-lbore, both that he might easily effet a junc-
tion with the supplies which he expeced from Pa-
nama, and secure a retreat in cafe of any disaster,
by keeping as near as possible to his ships. But
as the country in several parts on the coal of Perti
is barren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the
Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near their
mouth, where the body of water is greatest; and
as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking the na-

tives

tiyes when he fhpu.ld have lp4iudd to gain their 'R ,0 K
Confidence, had forced them t9 abandon their ha- .-
bitations; famine, fatigue, and tift:fes of various sl'
kinds, br.Cught upon him and his followers cala-
mities hardly interior to those which they had en-
dored in their former expedition. What they now
experienced correlponded lo ill with the alluring
description of t!e country given by Pizarro, that
many began to reproach him, and every soldier
must have become cold to the fevice, if, even in
this unfertile regioni of Peru, they had not met
with some appearances of wealth and cultivation,
which seemed to jultify the report of their leader.
At length they reached the province of Coaque April 14,
and, having surprised the principal fettlenent of
the natives, they seized there vcefels }pd ornaments
of gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thou,.
sand pesos, with other bobty of such value, as dif-
pelled all their doubts, and inspired the most de-
fponding with sanguine hopes r.

PJZARRO himf-lf was so much delighted with ,i', ,,.

this rich spoil, which he confidered as the first- ,i.,ing
fruits of a land abounding with treasure, that he mre,.
inflaptly dilpatched one of his flips to Panama
with a large remi.taince to Almagro; and another
to Nicaragua with a confiderabe fum to some per-
fins of influence in that province, in hopes of
alluring adventurers, by tlui early display of the

' licrrer;, dec. 4. li. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. i. >.er.s lqz.

C 2 wealth

a1 v 0 wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, it
* ,-- continued his march along the coast, and disdain-

3t-' ing to employ any means of reducing the natives

but force, he attacked them with such violence in
their Scattered habitations, as compelled them
either to retire into the interior country, or to flb-
mit to his yoke. This sudden appearance of in-
vaders, whole aspet and manners were so strange.
and whose power seemed to be so irresistible, ope
the fame dreadful imprefflon as in other parts of
- America. Pizarro hardly met with refitance until
he attacked the ifand of Puna in the bay of Guay-
quil, As that was better peopled than the. country
through which .e. had passed, and its inhabitants
fiercer and lefs;.civilized than those of the conti-
nent, they defended themselves with such obstinate
valour, that Pizarro spent fix months in reducing
them to fuhje&ion. From Puna he proceeded to
Tumbez~. where the distempers which raged
among is men compelled him to remain for
three months ''

WHILE he Was thus employed, he began to reap

advantage from his attention, to spread the fame

ecafct df'his first fu:cefs at Coaque. Two different de-
fame. and

ontinues.to tachments arrived from Nicaragua, Which, though
dvanC". neither exceeded'thirty men, -he connfderd as a re-

inforcement of great conrequedce' to his feeble
band, especially as the one wa's under the corn-

P. Sancho ap.'! amuf. iii. p. 371, F. Herrera, dec. 4.

lib. vii. c. 18, lib. ix. c. I. Zaratc, lib. ii. c. a, 3. Xeres,
p, 18z, &c.

· Ir~ mand

mand of Sebastian Benalcazar, and the other of Ba o K
Hernando Soto, officers not inferior in merit and *-..
reputation to any who had served in America. ''3"
From Tumbez he proceeded to the river. Piura, May «6.
and in an advantageous station near the mouth of
it, he eftablilhed the first Spanif colony in Peru
to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at
that juncture. Without some knowledge of there,
he could not have conducted his operations with
propriety; and without a suitable attention to
them, it is impoflible to account for the progrcfs
which the Spaniards had already made, or to un-
fold the causes of their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Ptru, state of ith

the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, e^".
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
..along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from east
to weft, was much less considerable; being uni-
formly bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes,
.tretrhing from its one extremity to the other.
Peru, like the reft of the New World, was origi-
ginally pofeffed by small independent tribes, dif-
fgring from each other in manners, and in their
forms of rude policy. All, however, were fQ
lictle civilized, that, if the traditions concerning

C 3 heir

.B 0,0 K their mode of life, preserved among their descend-
i-.-..; ants, deserve credit, they mu{l be clffed arinon.

s31' the most unimproved savages bs America. Stran-

gers to every species oF cultivation or regular in.
duifry, without any fixed relidcnce, and unac-
quainted with those sentiments and obligations
which form the first bonds of social uniorr, they
are said to have roamed about naked in the forcfts,
with which the country was then covered, more
like wild beasts than like men. Afrer they had
struggled for feve-al ags with the hardships and
calamities which are inevicable in this barbarous
slate, and when no circumstance seemed to indi-
cate the approach of any uncommon effort towards
improvement, we are told that there appeared on
the bank of rhe la'ke Titiaca, a man and w6m'an of
mnjeftic form, and clothed in decent garnents.
They declared rhemfelves to be children of the
Sun, sent by their beneficent parent, who beheld
with pity the rnifiries, of the human race, to in-
itruc and to reclaim them. At their peri-uafion,
enforced by reverence for the divinity in whose
name they were supposed to speak, fcveral of the
dispersed savages united together, and receiving
their commands as heavenly injuntions, followed
them to Cuzco, where they fcttled, and began to
lay the foundations of a city.

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for such

were the names of those extraordinary pcrfonagesy
hbiaing thus collc6Ied some wandering tribes/

formed

formed that fodal union, which, by multiplying B o° K
the dfires, and uniting the efforts of the human
species, excites industry, and leads to improve- '53"
ment. Manco Capac inftruted the meri in agri-
culture, and other useful arts. Mama Ocollo
taught the women to spin and to weave. By the
labour of the one sex, subsistence became less pre-
caious; .by that of the other, life was rendered
more comfortable. After securing the objects of
sirs neceflity in an infant fare, by providing food,
raiment, and habitations, for the rude people of
whom he took charge, Manco Capac turned his
attention towards introducing such laws and policy
as might,perpetuate their happiness. By his infli-
tutions, which shall be more particularly explained
hereafter, the various relations in private life were
eflablifhed, and the duties resulting from them
prescribed with such propriety, as gradually foi med
a barbarous people to decency of manners. In
public adminifIration, the funcions of persons in
authority were so precilely defined, and .the fubor-
dination of those under their jurildiction main-
tained witlifuch a Ready hand, that the focity in
which he presided, soon allumed the aspet of a
regular and well-governed fRate.

Tlmus, according to the Indian tradition, was

founded .the eniplire of the Incas or Lords of Peru.
At first, its extent was fiall. The territory of
Manco Capac did nor reach above eight leag,] "
from Cuzco. But within its narrow prcciri,; 2':

04 . (.aL4'iJ

B °0 K exercised absolute and uncontrolled authority. His

V1.
v- successors, as their dominions expanded, armgated

a similar jurifdi&ion over their fubjeds: the def-
potifm of Aria was not more complete. The
Incas were not only obeyed as monarchs, but re-
vered as divinities. Their blood was held to be
sacred, and, by prohibiting intermarriages with
the people, was never contaminated by mixing
with that of any other race. The family, thus
separated from the reft of the nation, was diftin-
guifhed by peculiarities in dress and ornaments,
which it was unlawful for others to assume. The
monarch himself appeared with ensigns of royalty
reserved for him alone;' and received from his
subje&s marks of obsequious homage and refpet,
which approached almost to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs seems to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their subjects. It was not the rage of conquest, if
we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions
but the desire of diffusing the blellings of civiliza-
tion, and the knowledge of the arts which they
posTersed, among the barbarous people whom they
reduced. During a fucceflion of twelve monarchs,
it is said that not one deviated from this bene-
ficent characer'.

iieca de Leon, Chron. c. 44. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. x.
c. q. dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

WHEN1

WHEN the Spaniads first visited the coast of B 0°° o

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and ^ --
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch 's5
from the founder of the state, was feated on. the
throne. Heis represented as a prince diftinguilhed
not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the race,
but eminent for his martial talents. By his vito-
rious. arms the kingdom of Quito was fubje&Ced, a
conqueft;of such extent and importance as almost
doubled the power of the Peruvian empire. He
was fond of residing in the capital of that valuable
province, which he had added to his dominions;
and, notwithstanding the ancient and tundamental
law of the monarchy against polluting the royal
blood by any foreign alliance, he married the
daughter of the vanquished monarch of Quito.
She bore him a son named Atahualpa, whom, on
his death at Quito, which seems to have happened
about the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-nine, he appointed his fuccefior in that
kingdom, leaving the reft of his dominions to
Huafcar, his eldest on, by a mother of the royal
race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory
of a monarch who had reigned with more reputa-
tion and splendour than any of his predecessors,
the destination of Huana Capac concerning the
fucceflion, appeared so repugnant to a maxim coe-
val with the empire, and founded on authority
deemed sacred, that it was no sooner known at
Cuzco than it excited general disgust. Encouraged

by

* o K by those -fentimnts of his fobjps, Htfacar re-
eoi- a quired his brother to reouace the government *f

3 to' Quto and to acknowledge Jimn as his lawful

fupetor. Bet ik fad beet the firl care ofA.Auma pa
to gaia a large body eof.fvops which had acr~-
ptied 4i is father-o Q(ito. Tbqfe were the flower
of the Peruvian w ir-los, to whole: vaour Hoana
Capac had been indebted for all his 'vit&oies.
Relying on their ftippert, Athualpa first elded
hrs bdrther's demand, -dhd hthc '- mtarcbd taaint
im in hoRftle aray :

THOrS the ambltion of tWo yott*n,.*t, t'e itle

of the one founim d-on aniieat ~ft, *nd t'hat f
the other -aerted by the' veteran troops, inol4sed
Pere'in civil atr, a calanity. to *hich, under a
fccefcfion of viroous -priiees,, it 'hid hritbhio
been a ftrarnger. In such a cont4f. the iffse was
'tob-ioxs. Th 'force of arms triumphed over ihe
authority of laws. Atahiolpa rermained vid&otoms,
and made a crueii rfe Of his viiory. Conscious of
the defe&t in his own tidle to the crown, he at-
tempted to exterminate 'the royal -race, by putting
to death all the children of che Sun defoendcd
from Manco Capac, whom he could seize either
by force or ftratagen. JFrom a political motive,
the life of his urfortunate rival Htialcar, who had
been taken prisoner in the ;btr)e which decided
the fate of the empire, was prolonged for some
time, that, by issuing orders in his name, the

ufurpcr

usurper might more easily cftablilh his own au- B O o K
thoriey ', a
-

WiHEN Pitarro landed in the bay of St. Mat- Favourable

thew, this civil war raged between the two bro- gc. orPi-
hters in its greareft fury. Had he made any hoflile "so"'
atteii-pt in 'his sorier visit to Peru in the year one
thottahd five hundred and twenty-feven, he must
then have encountcieed the force of a powerful
stare, united under a monarch, poileffde of capa-
city as well as courage, and unembarrafTed with
any care that could divert him from opposing his
progress. But at this time, the two competitors,
though they received early accounts of the arrival
and violent proceedings of the Spaniards, were so
intent upon the operations of a war, which they
deemed moie inrtrefling, that they paid no atten-
tion to the motions of an enemy, too inconfider-
able in number to excite any great alarm, and to
whose career, it would. be easy, as they imagined,
to give a check when niore at leifirte.

B 'this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof rr av,;i,

Pizarro could have no forelight, and of which, i;, 'd ad.
from his defective mode of intr cou'rse with the '""l5.
people of the country, he rrrm.ined long ignorant,
he was permitted to carry on his operations un-
niolefted, and advanced to the ccntre of a great
empire before one effort of its power was exerted

" arate, l.b. i. c. 15. \ega., i. lih. ix. c. 12 and 3 z- 40.
Hcircra, dec. 5. lib. i. c. z. lib. iii. c, 17.

to

B o o K to fop his career. During their progress, the Spa.

_ niards had acquired rome imperfet knowledge of
'53s* this truggle between the two contending fations.

The first complete information, with refpe& to it,
they received from messengers whom Huafcar sent
to Pizarro, in order to solicit his aid against Ata-
hualpa, whom he represented as a rebel and an
usurper ". Pizarro perceived at once the import-
ance of this intelligence, and foresaw so clearly all
the advantages which might be derived from this
divided state of the kingdom, which he had in-
vaded, that, without waiting for the reinforcement
which he expeced from Panama, he determined
to push forward, while intestine discord put it out
of the power of the Peruvians to attack him with
their whole force, and while, by taking part, as
circumstances ihould incline him, with one of the
competitors, he might be enabled with greater
cafe to crush both. Enterprising as the Spaniards
of that age were in all their operations against Ame
ricans, and distinguished as Pizarro was among his
countrymen for daring courage, we can hardly
fuppofc, that after having proceeded hitherto
slowly, and with much caution, he would have
changed at once his system of operation, and have
ventured upon a mcafure so hazardous, without
tome new motive or profpe& to justify it.

t..,r rh', As he was obliged to divide his troops, in
sMtU* order to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sufficient

u Zarate, lib. ii. c. 3.

to

to defend a station of equal importance as a place B o0 K
of retreat in cafe of any disaster, and as a port for --
receiving any supplies which should come from 's3'
Panama, he began his march with a very slender
and ill-accoutred train of followers. They con-
sifted of fixty-two horsemen ', and a hundred and
two foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were armed
with cross-bows, and three with muskets. He di-
reaed his course towards Caxamalca, a small town
at the distance of twelve days march from St.
Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped with
a considerable body of troops. Before he had pro-
ceeded far, an officer dispatched by the Inca met
him with a valuable present from that prince,
accompanied with a proffer of his alliance, and
assurances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca.
Pizarro, according to the usual artifice of his coun-
trymen in America, pretended to come as the am-
bafflador of a very powerful monarch, and declared
that he was now advancing with an intention to
offer Atahualpa his aid against those enemies who
disputed his title to the throne Y.

As the objet of the Spaniards in entering their Idcss ohe

country was altogether incomprehensible to the P'.",'
Peruvians, they bad formed various conjeures their de-
concerning it, without being able to decide whe-
ther they should confider their new guelts as beings
of a superior nature, who had visited them from

x See NOTE IV.
·r -lerrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 3. Xcrez, p. i?9.

some

B Ov K ibte beCnficent motive or as formidable avgers
__*^ Qof their crimes, and enrmiel to their rep9Qf and
IS" liberty. The continual profelions of the Spa-

nisrd,. that they came to enlighten them with the
rdiowledge of truth, and tead them in the way of
happiness, favoured the former opinion i the out-
rages which the committed, their rapocioufnels
and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the lat-
ter. While in this fate of uncertainty, Pizarro's
declaration of his pacific intentions f0 far renmoved
all the Inca's fears, that he determined to give him
a friendly reception. In consequence of this refo-
lution, the Spaniards were allowed to march in
tranquillity across the sandy desert between St.
Michael and Motupi, where the rnof feeble es-
fprt of an enemy, added to the unavoidable dif-
treifes which they suffered in paling through that
comfortless region, must have proved fatal to
them z. From Motupe they advanced towards
the mountains which encompassed the low country
of Peru, and palled through a defile so narrow and
inaccessible, that a few mep might have defended
it against a numerous army. But here likewise,
from the fame inconsiderate credulity of the Inca,
the Spaniards met with no opposition, and took
quiet poffeflion of a fort ereced for the security of
that important Itation. As they now approached near
to Caxamaica, Atahualpa renewte his professions
of firici)dslipi and as an evidence of their lince'

Sec NOTE V.

riry,

ity, font them prcfietc of greaer value than the Ba o K
foraoer.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffiQon Atrive at

of a large court, on one fide of which was a houi:
which the Spanish historians call a palace of the
Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun, the
whole surrounded with a strong rampart or wall of
earth. When he had potted his troops in this ad-
vantageous station, he dilpatched Hernando Soto,
and his brother Ferdinand, to the camp of Ata-
hualpa, which was about a league distant from the
town. He intruded them to confirm the declara-
tion which he had formerly made of his pacific dif-
position, and to desire an interview with the Inca,
that he might explain more fully the intention of
the Spaniards in visiting his country. They were
treated with all the refpctful hospitality usual
among the Peruvians in the reception of their most
cordial friends, and Atahualpa promised to visit the
Spanish commander next day in his quarters. The
decent deportment of the Peruvian monarch, the
order of his court, and the reverence with which his
fubjets approached his person and obeyed his com-
mands, astonished those Spaniards, who had never
met in America with any thing more dignified than
the petty cazique of a barbarous tribe. But their
eyes, were sill more powerfully attracted by the valt
profusion of wealth which they observed in the In-
ca's camp. The rich ornaments worn by him and
his attendants, the vclcli of gold and silver in

which

B o o' It which the repast offered to them was served up, the

VI.
. s multitude of utensils of every kind formed of those
151.' precious metals, opened profpe&s far exceeding

any idea of opulence that a European of the fix-
teenth century could form.

. t.

^ei Ors N their return to Caxamalca, while their minds

scheme of
Pitrro. were yet warm with admiration and desire of the

wealth which they had beheld, they gave such a
description of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.
From his own' observation of American manners
during his long service in the New World, as well
as from the advantages which Cortes had derived
from seizing Montezuma, he knew of what confe-
quence it was to have the Inca in his power. For
this purpose, he formed a plan as daring as it was
perfidious. Notwithstanding the character he had
assumed of an ambassador from a powerful mo-
narch, who courted an alliance with the Inca, and
in violation of the repeated offers which he had
made to him of his own friendlhip and alfiftance,
he determined to avail himself of the unfufpicious
simplicity with which Atahualpa relied on his pro-
feflions, and to seize the person of the Inca during
the interview to which he had invited him. He
prepared for the execution of his scheme with the
fame deliberate arrangement, and with as little
compun&tion, as if it had refleted no disgrace
on himfelfor his country. He divided his cavalry
into three fiall squadrons, under the command of

his

his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and Benalcazar; his B OO K
infantry were formed in one body, except twenty ---.
of molt tried courage, whom he kept near his own '53'
person to support him in the dangerous service
which he referyed for himself; the artillery, con-
sifting of two field-pieces' and the crofs-bowmen,
were placed opposite to the avenue by which Ata-
hualpa was to approach. All were commanded
to,kecp within the square, and not to move until
the signal for a&ion was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was Nov. ,6.

Visited by

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to the inca.
appear with the greatef splendour and magnifi-
cence in his first interview with the itrangers, the
preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march.
Even then, left the order of the procession should
be deranged, he moved so slowly, that the Spa-
niards became impatient and apprehensive that
some suspicion of their intention might be the
cause of this delay. In order to remove this, Pi-
zarro dispatched one of his officers with fresh afTur-
ances of his friendly disposition. At length the
Inca approached. First of all appeared four hun-
dred men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to
clear the way before him. He himself, fitting on
a throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colours, and almost covered with plates of gold

a Xerez, p. 194.
VOL. 111. D png

B o 0o K and silver enriched with"precious stones, was' car-

VI.
t -' _ tried on the (houlders of his principal attendant's.

'5'* rBehind him came some chi'ef officers' f his court,

carried in the fame manner. Several bands of
fingers and'dancers accompanied this cavalcade;
and the whole plain was covered wi:h troops,
amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

Strange ha- As the Inca drew neair the Spanish quarters, fa-
ranguc tIf
lather Va- ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,

advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre-
viary in the other, and in a long discourse explain-
ed to him the dotrine of the creation, the fall of
Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and refur-
retion of Jesus Christ, the appointment of St.
Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranfmif-
sion of his apostolic power by fucceffon to the
popes, the donation made to the king of Castile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Chriltian faith, to ac-
knowledge the fupren.e jurifdition of the pope,
and to fubiiit to the king of Castile as his lawful
lIvcreign promising, if he complied instantly
with this requilition, that the Castilian monarch
would protcct his dominions, and permit him to
continue in the cxercife of his royal authority; but
if he thould impiously refule to obey this fum-
mons, he denounced war against him in his ma-
fler's name, and threatened him with the most
4l&-adfuil -cfCets of his vengeance.

bus-

THIS strange harangue, unfolding deep myf- B oo K

teries, and alluding to unknown facts, of whi. h
no power of eloquence could have conveyed at RepYtthbc
once a.diltid; idea to an American, was so lamely ""'
translated by an un&kilful interprerer, little ac-
quainted with the idiom.of the Spanili tongue, and
incapable of exprefling himfklf with propriety in
the language of the Inca, tht .its general tenor
was altogether incomprehenfibe. to Atahualpa.
Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him .with aftonilhment and indignation. lHis re-
ply, however, was. temperate. H-e began with
oblerving, that he was lord of the dominions over
which he reigned by hereditary fucceflion.; and
added, that he cowld not conceive IhQW a fQreign
prielt fiould pretend to dispose of territ(ries which
did riot bl.ong to him; that if such a prepofterou5
grant 1ai4 been made, he, who was the rightful
pofieffor, refused to confirm it; that 1h had no in-
clination to renounce the religious inflitutions elLa-
blilbed by his apceftQrs; nor would he forifke the
service of the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he
and his people revered, in order to worlhip the
God.of the Spaniards, who was subjet to death
that with refpec to other matters contained in his
discourse, as he had never heard of them before,
and did not now underflaid their meaning, he de-
fired to know where tile priest had learn'd things
so extraordinary. " In this book," answercd Val-
verdc, reaching out to him his breviary. The
Inca opened it eagerly, and turning over the leaves,

D) 2 lifted

B 0 0 K lifted it to his ear: " This," fays he, "c is silent;

VI.
i_- -it tells me nothing;" and threw it with disdain to

' the ground. The enraged monk, running towards

his countrymen, cried out, " To arms, Christians,
to arms; the word of God is insulted; avenge this
profanation on those impious dogs h."

p.;rro at. PIZARRO, who, during this long conference,
euv;ian,, had with difficulty restrained his soldiers, eager to

seize the rich spoils of which they had now so near
a view, immediately gave the signal of assault. At
once the martial music struck up, the cannon and
muskets began to fire, the horle tallied out fiercely
to the charge, the infantry rushed on sword in
hand. The Peruvians, astonished at the sudden-
ness of an attack which they did not expect, and
dismayed with the deftruaive effe&s of the fire-
arms, and the irresistible impression of the cavalry,
fled with universal consternation on every fide,
without attempting either to annoy the enemy, or
to defend themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his
chosen band, advanced directly towards the Inca;
and though his nobles crowded around him with
officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while
they vied one with another in sacrificing their own
lives, that they might cover the sacred person of
their Sovereign, the Spaniards soon penetrated to

land W;es the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the
the inc. arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him

b See NOTE VI.

as

is a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the mo- B o, K
narch increased the precipitate flight of his follow-
ers. The Spaniards pursued them towards every ,s '
quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting bar.
barity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives,
who never once offered to refitt. The carnage did
not cease until the close of day. Above four thou-
sand Peruvians were killed. Not a single Spaniard
fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro himlclf,
whose hand was lightly hurt by one of his own
soldiers, while struggling eagerly to lay hold on
the Incac.

T'HE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru, and they were so tranfporc-
ed with the value of the acquisition, as well as the
greatness of their success, that they pased the night
in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent
adventurers on such an extraordinary change of
fortune.

AT first the captive monarch could hardly be. Dejetio)nef

lieve a calamity which he so little cxpecaed to be
real. But he soon felt all the rmilcry of his fate,
and the dejecion into which he funk was in pro-
portion to the height of grandeur from which he
bad fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the ad-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the pof-
fefiion of such a prifoncr, laboured to conrole him

c Ste NOTI' VII.

D 3 with

B 0 0 CK with prdfeffions of kindness and respect, that cor-

v--c-' responded ill with his actions. By reiding among
531' the Spaniards, the Ihca quickly discovered their

ruling paflion, which, indeed, they were no-wise
solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that,

4Hi froo mnade an attempt to recover his liberty. He offer-
a tartlorn.

ed as a ransom what aftonilhed the Spaniards, even
after all they now knew concerning the opulence
of his kingdom. The apartment in which he was
confined was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen
in breadth; he undrrtook to fill it with vessels of
gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed
eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a line was
drawn upon the walls of the chamber, to mark the
flipulated height to which the treasure was to rife.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having obtained

some profpec of liberty, took measures instantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by fending
messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other places,
where gold had been amafied in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of their gods, or the
houles of the Inca, to bring what was necelrary for
completing his lanfom direflly to Caxa!nalca.
Though Atahualpa was now in the custody of his
enemies, yet lb much were the Peruvians accuf-
tumed to reliec' every mandate issued by their so.
vcreign, that his orders were executed with the
,;reaccs alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recover-
ing his liberty by this me.ins, the IfubL.jcs of the
Inc. were afitaid of tndangering his lite by forming

any

any other scheme for his relief; and though the B o, K
force of the empire was fill entire, no prepara- -
tions were made, and no army affcmbled to avenge 15S31
their own wrongs or those of their monarch'. The
Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and un-
molctted. Small detachments of their number The Si-
marched into remote provinces of the empire, and, d il.c.lt
inttead of meeting with any opposition, were every provin"s.
where received with marks of the molt fubnmifive
refpct '.

INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and de- A'maproar-

firous as Pizarro might be to obtain fime know- ecnorc-
ledge of the interior state of the country, he could ....."
not have ventured upon any liiiinution of his main
body, if he had not about this time received an December.
account of Alnagro's having landed at St. Michael
with such a reinforcement as would almost double
the number of his followers f. The arrival of this
long-expe.ted succour was not more agreeable to
the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca. He saw
the power of his enemies increase; and as he knew
neither rhe source whence they derived their sup-
plies, nor the mens by which they were conveyed
to Peru, he could not fortsee to what a height the
inundation that poured in upon his dominions
might rife. WhIl disquieted with such apprehen- 5s3.
douns, he I arncd that some Spaniards, in their way to ,"icah.

d XC:.7, 2rc. c S c NOTE VIII.
f Xcrez, 204. Hcriora, dec. 5. lib. iii, c. I, 2.

D 4 q

B ° K to Cuzco, had visited his brother Huatfar in the

Vi.
, -. place where he kept him confined, and that the
1533. captive prince had repreisnted to them the justice

of his own caule, and as an inducement to espouse
it, had promised them a quantity of treasure vastly
exceeding what Atahualpa had engaged to pay for
his ranfbm. If the Spaniards should liften to this
proposal, Atahualpa peceived his own destruction
to be inevitable; and fufpefting that their infa-
tiable t;lirt for gold would tempt them to lend a
favourable ear to it, he determined to sacrifice his
brother's life, that he might save his own; and
his orders for this purpose were executed, like all
his other commands, with scrupulous puntu-
ality .

The Sp.ni- MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa-
ards make a
divfion of malca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded

with treasure. A great part of the stipulated
quantity was now amafled, and Atahualpa aflured
the Spaniards, that the only thing which prevented
the whole from being brought in, was the remote-
nels of the provinces where it was depoited. But
I`uch vast piles of gold, presented continually to the
view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed their ava-
rice, that it was impossible any longer to restrain
their impatience to obtain poffellion of this rich
booty. Orders were given for melting down the

g Z.rate, lib. ii. c. 6, Gomara Hit. c. .

15. Herrera,
dec, S. lib. iii . c .

whole,

whole, except rome pieces of curious fabric, re- B O 0 K
served as a present for the emperor. After setting '----,
apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred
thousand pesos as a donative to the soldiers which
arrived with Almagro, there remained one million
five hundred and twenty-eight thousand five hun-
dred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. The fe- July;.
ftival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was
the day chosen for the partition of this vast fum,
and the manner of conduAing it strongly marks
that gtrange alliance of fanaticism with avarice,
which I have more than once had occasion to point
out as a firiking feature in the character of the
conquerors of the New World. Though affein-
bled to divide the spoils of an innocent people,
procured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty, the
transaction began with a solemn invocation of the
name of God , as if they could have expected the
guidance of Heaven in distributing those wages ot
iniquity. In this division above eight thousand
pesos, at that time not inferior in effective value to
as many pounds Sterling in the present century,
fell to the fiare of each horfcman, and half that
fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro hinfelf, and
his officers received dividends in proportion to the
dignity of their rank.

THER a is no example in history of such a sudden T! e cfreS
acquifiion of wealth by military service, nor was

Hlerrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c, 3.

ever

B ov K ever a fum so great divided among so frnall a num-
'---' -ber of soldiers. Many of them having received a

recompence for their services far beyond their most
sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire from
fatigue and danger, in order to spend the relnain-
der of their days in their native country, in ease and
opulence, that they demanded their discharge with
clamorous importunity. Pizarro, sensible that from
such men he could expect neither enterprile in ac-
tion nor fortitude in suffering, and persuaded that
wherever they went, the display of their riches
would allure adventurers, less opulent but more
hardy, to his standard, granted their suit without
relucance, and permitted above sixty of them to
accompany his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent
to Spain with an account of his success, and the
present deflined for the emperor'.

The t-ra THE Spaniards having divided among them the
denmands
his iibety treasure amassed for the Inca's ransom, he insisted

'n"V'' with them to fulfil their promiCe of letting him at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. During his long service in the New
World,. he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of
his fellow soldiers, which led them to confider its
inhabitants as an inferior race, netther worthy of
the name, nor intitled to the rights, of men. In
his comrpaCt with Atahualpa, he had no other ob-
jec than to amunfe his captive with such a prolpeca

s IIcrr zra, dcc. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Ve\ g , p. 2. lib. i. c. .

of

of recovering his liberty, as might induce him to B o0 K
lend all the aid of his authority towards collecting ' --
the wealth of his kingdom. Having now accom-
plifhed this, he no longer regarded his plighted
faith and at the very time when the credulous
prince hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had
secretly resolved to bereave him of life. Many
circumstances seem to have concurred in prompting
him to this action, the most criminal and atrocious
that slains the Spanish name, amid(t all the deeds
of violence committed in carrying on the conquelt
of the New World.

THOUGH Pizarro had feize4.the Inca, in imita- He "ndthe

Spaniamr e

tion of Certes's conduc towards the Mexican mo- rnturily
narch, he did not poffels talents for carrying on
the fame artful plan of policy. lcftitute of the
temper and address requisite for gaining the confi-
dence of his prifuner, he never reaped all the ad-
vantages which might have been derived from be-
ing Inafterof his pcrlon and authority. Atahualpa
was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and dif-
cernment than Montezuma, and fecms to have pe-
netrated more thoroughly into the charadler and
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual lulpicion and
diitruft accordingly took place between them. The
ftrit attention with which it was neceffTry to guard
a captive of fiuch importance, greatly i.crealcd the
fatigue of military duty. The utility ol keeping
him appeared inconliderable ; and Pizarrro felt him

as

B o o K as an incumbrance, from which he Alhied to be

VI.
.' _ delivered i.

' 33.

Al..pro ALMACRO and his followers had made a demand
Idehiro- of an equal Ihare in the Inca's ransom; and though
fndhie . Pizarro had bellowed upon the private men the

large gratuity which I have mentioned, and en-
deavoured to sooth their leader by presents of great
value, they still continued difratisfied. They were
apprch-nfive, that as long as Acahualpa remained
a Frifoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever
treasure fhoulij be acquired, to make up what was
wantiii oi the quantity fiipulated for his ransom,
and under that pretext exclude them from any part
of it. They insisted eagerly on putting the Inca
to death, that all the adventurers in Peru might
thereafter be on an equal footing '.

Met~il PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with ac-
whir!h in-
duced Pi. counts of forces .ffembling in the remote provinces
n.fcnt° of the empire, and fufpcAed Atahualpa of having

issued orders for that purpose. These fears and
suspicions were artfully increased by Philippillo,
one of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off
from Tumbcz in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-feven, and whom he employed as
an interpreter. The fun&ion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with the

k Hcrrera, dcc. q. lib. iii. c. 4.

Zarte, lib. ii. c. 7. Vega, p. z. lib. i. c. 7. Hcrrera,
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.

t captive

captive monarch, he prefurncd, notwithstanding B oO K
the meanness of his birth, to raise his affections to
a Caa, or descendent of the Sun, one of Atahual- '533
pa's wives and feing no profpec of gratifying
that passion duringthe life of the monarch, he en-
deavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards with such
accounts. of the Inca's secret designs and prepara-
tions, as might awaken their jcaloufy, and incite
them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo la-
borred to ruin him by private machinations, that
unhappy prince inadvertently contributed to haflen
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-
tached himfelfwith peculiar aff&tion to Ferdinand
.Pizarro and 1-ernando Soto; who, as they were
persons of birth and education superior to the rough
adventurers with whom they served, were accui-
tomed to behave with more decency and attention
to jhe captive monarch. Soothed with this telpeft
from. persons of such high rank, he delighted in
their society. But in the presence of the governor
he was uneasy, and overawed. This dread oon
came to be mingled with contempt. Among all
the European arts, what he admired most was that
of reading and writing; and he long deliberated
with himfilf, whether he should regard it as a na-
tural or acquired talent. In order to determine
this, he desired one of the soldiers, who guarded
him, to write the name of God on the nail of his

thumb.

B 0

°v° Khtimb. 'This he shewed fticcefflVel to fever.
t-.--j Spaniardi, aftring its rmeaning "afrid to his araze

'53' mnentr they all, without heftaiof, -returne -th

fame answer. At length 'Pirzart entered; -and o0
prelenting it t' him, he bliuftid, and with' foim
. confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno.
rance. From' tat moment, Atahualpa confidered
hinmas a meani person, leds initruicedthan his own
foldicrs; and he had not adclr'fs enough to conceal
the fcntiinents with, which this discovery inspircd
him. To be the obje& of a {arbarian's fcosi, not
only mortified the pride of l'izarro, but excited
such refentmien 'in his'breaft, as added force to all
·the other co'n:siderations which prompted hin to
put the Inca-tt'death'".
;,i t,;,a. BUT in order'to give some colour of juflice to

this violent ation, and that he himself migh't be
exempted fromr tanding singly refponible for the
commission of it, Pizarro resolved t'o try the Inca
with all the formalities obfe'rwd in the criminal
courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro,
with two afifRants,' were appointed jidges, with
full power to acquit or to 'condemn; an attorney-
general was named to carry on the prolccution in
the king's name; counsellors were chosen to al-
sift the priloner in his defence; and clerks were
ordained to record the proceedings of court. Be-
fore this Itrange tribunal, a charge was exhibited

H, Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. ia. lib. i. . 3c.

itill

fiill more amazing. It confifed of various ar- B °0 KI

Vt.

ticles; 'that Atahualpa, though a bastard, had dif- ^
possessld the rightful owner of the throne, and 533'
ufufped the regal power; that he had put his bro-
ther and lawful sovereign to death; that he was
an idolater, and had not only permitted, buc
commanded the offering of human Sacrifices; that
he had a great number of concubines; that since
his imprisonment he had waited and embezzled the
royal treasures, which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his lubje&s to
take arms against the Spaniards. On thele heads
of accusation, ione Dt which -are so ludicrous,
others so absurd, that thet el'rontery of Pizarro, in
making them the foundation of a serious proce-
dure, is not less surprising than his injulfice, did
the court go on to try the ibvereign of a great.-em-
pire, over whom it had no jurilfiction. With re,
fped,,to each of the articles, wvineefcs were exa-
mined; but as they dliver.ed-their evidence in
their native tongue, Philippillo had it in his power
to give their words whatever turn best suited lhi
malevolent intentions. To judges predeterlined
in their opinion, this evidence appeared iufficient.
They pronounced Atahualpa guilty, and con- HF;ion,
demned him to be burnt alive. Friar Valverde dc"led.
proftituted the authority of his sacred fundion to
confirm this lenience, and by his ignature war-
ranted it to be just. Altonilhcd at his fate, Ata-
hualpa endeavoured to avert it by tear', by pro-
miscs, and by entreaties, that he might be sent to

Sp Ain,

B O°Q K Spain, where a monarch would be the. arhiilo
*. his lot. But pity never touched the unfceling heart

'533' of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led inaRttly

to executicon and, what added to the,, bitternpefs
of his iaft moments, the fame monk who hbad-jcft
ratified his doom, offered to console, and attemnpt
to convert him. The most powerful argument
Valverde employed to prevail with him to embrace
the Christian faith, was a promile of mitigation in
his pjanilhment. The dread of a cruel death ex-
torted from the trembling victim a desire of receiv-
ing baprifm. The ceremony was performed; and
and execut. Atahualpa, initead of being burnt, was strangled

at the ftakc'.

SeveraiSpa. HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanilh nation,
niards Fro-
Ieat againa even among the profligate adventurers which it

sent forth to conquer and desolate the New World,
there were persons who retained some tincture of
the Castilian generosity and honour. Though, be-
fore the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had
set out for Spain, and Soto was sent on a separate
command at a ditance from Caxamalca, this odious
tranfaAion was not carried on without censure
and opposition. Several officers, and among those
some of the greatecf reputation and most refpestable
families in the service, not only remonfirated, but
protested against this measure of their general, as

" karate, lib. ii. c. 7. Xcrcs, p. 233. Vega. . 1.

lib. i. c. 36, 37. Gomtra Ilill. c. . 7 IIcrrcra, dec. 5.
lib. iii. c. 4.

difgraccful

di'sgraceful to their country, as repugnant to every B ro K
maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith, and - -
ant tfurpation of jurifdidion over an independent '533'
nrtnarch, to which they had no title. But their
endeavours were vain. Numbers, and the opinion
oVTuch as held every thing to be lawful which they
deemed advantageous, prevailed. History, how-
ever, records even the unsuccessful exertions of
virtue with applause; and the Spanish writers, in
relating events where the valour of their nation is
more conspicuous than its humanity, have not
failed to preserve the names of those who made
this laudable effort to save their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated such a crime°.

ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro inverted D;folution

of govern-
one of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping metii and

order in Pc.

that a young man without experience might prove ,u.
a .pore palfive instrument in his hands, than an
ambitious monarch, who had been accustomed to
independent command. The people of Cuzco,
and the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco
Capac, a brother of Huafcar, as Inca . But
neither possessed the authority which belonged to a
sovereign of Peru. The violent convulsions into
which the empire had been thrown, firfR by the
civil war between the two brothers, and then by
the invasion of the Spaniards, had not only de-

Vega, p. ii. lib. i. c. 37. Xerer, i. 235. Herrcra,
dec. 7. lib. iii. c. 5.

P Vega, p. ai. lib. ii. c. 7.

VOL. III. E ranged

B OVI K ranged the order of the Peruvian government, but
-y-r almost dissolved its frame. When they beheld

their monarch a captive in the power of strangers,
and at last suffering an ignominious death, the
people in several provinces, as if they had been
fct free from every restraint of law anli Decency,
broke out into the most licentious excesses q. So
many dercendents of the Sun, after being treated
with the utmost indignity, had been cut off by
Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the state
diminished with their number, but the accustomed
reverence for that sacred race sensibly decreased.
In consequence of this slate of things, ambitious
men in different parts of the empire alpired to in-
dependent authority, and usurped jurifdicion to
which they had no title. The general who com-
manded for Atahualpa in Quito, seized the brother
and children of his mailer, put them to a cruel
death, and disclaiming any connection with either
Inca, endeavoured to eflablifh a fcparate kingdom
for himself.

Pirro ad- THE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit
'ances to
Cuzco. of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour of go-

vernment relaxing anmong the Peruvians. They
confidered those dilbrders as symptoms of a fate
hastening towards its diflblution. Pizarro no longer
heficated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had
received such considerable reinforcements, that he

'1 Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. lib. iii. c. 5.
Zarate, lib. ii. c. u. Vcga, p. 1i. lib.ii. c. 3,4.

could

could venture, with little danger, to penetrate so B 0o K
far into the interior part of the country. The ' --
account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca ,533'
operated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his
brother Ferdinand, with the officers and foldicrs
to whom he had given their discharge after the
partition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their
aftonilhed countrymen, than fame spread the ac-
count with such exaggeration through all the
Spanilh settlements on the South Sea, that the
governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua,
could hardly restrain the people under their jurif-
cdition, from abandoning their pofleflions, and
crowding to that inexhauilible source of wealth
which seemed to be opened in Peru '. In spite of
every check and regularion, such numbers retorted
thither, that Pizarro began his march at the head
of five hundred men, after leaving a considerable
garrison in St. Michael, under the command of
Benalcazar. The Peruvians had afrembled tobme
large bodies of troops to oppole his progrels.
Several fierce encounters happened. But tlhy
terminated like all the actions in Americn ; a few
Spaniards were killed or woundcld; the natives
were put to flight with incredible flauinlter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Ci:zco, and rook
quiet poffciion of that capital. I he riches found

" Gorinr;l I ilt c. 25. Vcga, p. ii. I,1.. ii. C. I. Ilcr-
rcra, dc<. 5 li. iii, c. .t

E 2 there,

B o°V K there, even after all that the natives had carried off

v - and concealed, either from a fuperfittious venera-
l533. tion for the ornaments of their temples, or out of

hatred to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in
value what had been received as Atahualpa's ran-
fom. But as the Spaniards were now accuflomed
to the wealth of the country, and it came to be
parcelled out among a greater number of adven-
turers, this dividend did not excite the fame fur-
prise either from novelty, or the largeness of the
fum that fell to the (hare of each individual'.

DURING the march to Cuzco, that son of Ata-

hualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died; and
as the Spaniards substituted no person in his place,
the title of Manco Capac seems to have been uni-
verfally recognized u.

Qi(to c'n- WHILE his fellow-foldiers were thus employed,
q ueredl by
a.ii,,caz,, Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able and

enterprising officer, was ashamed of remaining in-
aaive, and impatient to have his name diftin-
guifhed among the discoverers and conquerors of
the New World. The seasonable arrival of a frefl
body of recruits from Panama and Nicaragua, put
it in his power to gratify this pafion. Leaving a
sufficient force to protect the infant settlement en-
tutled to his care, he placed himself at the head
of the re[l, and fct out to attempt the reducion of

* Sec NOTE IX. Ilcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. v. c. i.

Q~tlct'il

Quito, where, according to the report of the B °O K
natives, Atahualpa had left the greatest part of his -
treasure. Notwithitanding the vast distance of '533
that city from St. Michael, the difficulty of march-
ing through a mountainous country covered with
woods, and the frequent and fierce attacks of the
best troops in Peru, commanded by a skilful
leader, the valour, good conduct, and perseverance
of Benalcazar surmounted every obRfacle, and he
entered Quito with his victorious troops. But
they met with a cruel mortification there. The
natives now acquainted, to their sorrow, with the
predominant passion of their invaders, and know-
ing how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpet of which had prompted them
to undertake this arduous expedition, and had
supported them under all the dangers and hard-
ships wherewith they had to struggle in carrying
it on .

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader AlvaradoS'

who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame e"ieit'o"l.
of its riches attracted a more powerful enemy.
Pedro de Alvarado, who had distinguished him-
self so eminently in the conquest of Mexico, hav-
ing obtained the government of Guatimala as a
recompence for his valour, soon became disgusted
with a life of uniform tranquillity, and longed to

x 7arate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega. p. 1I. lib i. ci .

. . lererr,
dcc. 5. lib. iv. c. II, 12. lib. v. c. z, 3. lib. vi. c. 3.

E3 be

B o0 K be again engaged in the bustle of military service.

_- The glory and wealth acquired by the conquerors
1533. of Peru heightened this palion, and gave it a de-

termined direcaion. Believing, or pretending to
believe, that the kingdom of Quito did nor lie
within the limits of the province allotted to Pi-
zarro, he resolved to invade it. The high reputa-
tion of the commander allured volunteers from
every quarter. He embarked with five hundred
men, of whom above two hundred were of such
diltincion as to serve on horseback. He landed at
Puerto Viejo, and without fufficicnt knowledge of
the country, or proper guides to conduct him,
attempted to march directly to Quito, by follow-
ing the course of the river Guayquil, and crossing
the ridge of the Andes towards its head. But in
this route, one of the molt impracticable in all
America, his troops endured such fatigue in forcing
their way through forests and marshes 'on the
low grounds, and suffered so much from excessive
cold when they began to ascend the mountains,
that before they reached the plain of Quiito, a fifth
part of the men and half of their horfcs died, and
the reft were so much dispirited and worn out, as
to be almost unfit for service Y. 'Ihere they met
with a body, not of Indians but of Spaniards,
drawn up in hostile array against them. Pizarro
having received an account of Alvarado's arma-
mnent, had detached Almagro with some troops to

i See NOTE X.

oppofc

oppose this formidable invader of his jurisdiction; B O O K
and these were joined by Benalcazar and his vi&o- - .-
rious party. Alvarado, though surprised at the 533'
fight of enemies whom he did not expeft, advanced
boldly to the charge. But, by the interpofriion of
some moderate men in each parry, an amicable
accommodation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their conquests to em-
brue their hands in the blood of their countrymen,
was postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged to
return to his government, upon Almagro's paying
him a hundred thousand pesos to defray the expence
of his armament. Most of his followers remained
in the country; and an expedition, which threat.
ened Pizarro and his colony with ruin, contributed
to augment its strength .

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in HnsU34U

Spain. The immense quantities of gold and silver PofarT,"ednd
which he imported', filled the kingdom with no Ah&'aro
less astonishment than they had excited in Panama
and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was received
by the emperor with the attention due to the
bearer of a present so rich, as to exceed any idea
which the Spaniards had formed concerning the
value of their acquisitions in America, even alter
they had been ten years matters of Mexico. In

z Zarate, lib. ii. c. o1-13. Vega, p. II. lib. ii. c, I, z.

9. &c. Gomara Hill. c. i26, &c. Remefal Hlii. GuatimAl,
lib. iii. c. 6. lerrera, dec. S, !ib. vi. c. 1, 2. 7, S.

a Scc NOTE XI.

E 4 recompence

B °vo K recompence of his brother's services, his authority
a--_-.. was confirmed with new powers and privileges,

J534 and the addition of seventy leagues, extending

along the coast, to the southward of the territory
granted in his former patent. Almagro received
the honours which he had so long desired. The
title of Adelantado, or governor, was conferred
upon him, with jurifdi&ion over two hundred
leagues of country, stretching beyond the southern
limits of the province allotted to Pizarro; Ferdi-
nand himfeilf did not go unrewarded. He was ad-
mitted into the military order of St. Jago, a
diftintion always acceptable to a Spanish gentle.
man, and soon set out on his return to Peru,
accompanied by many persons of higher rank than
had yet served in that country b.

if dl'"n.s SOME account of his negociations reached Peru
ltio'nbe before he arrived there him]self. Al.nagro no
t'cen P >1
zarro and sooner learned that he had obtained the royal grant
Alniagro.

of an independent government, than, pretending
that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas,
lay within its boundaries, he attempted to render
himself master of that important flation. Juan
and Gonzalez Pizarro, prepared to oppole him.
Each of the contending parties was supported by
powerful adherents, and the dilpute was on the
point of being terminated by the sword, when
Francis Pizarro arrived in the capital. The recon-

b Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega, p. 1 . lib. ii. c. 19i
lHcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

ciliation

ciliation between him and Almagro had never been B o ° l
cordial The treachery of Pizarro in engrofning , _i
to himfeif all the honours and emoluments, which 1534'
ought to have been divided with his aflociate, was
always present in both their thoughts. The former,
conscious of his own perfidy, did not expert for-
givenefs; the latter, feeling that he had been de-
ceived, was impatient to be avenged; and though
avarice and ambition had induced them not only
to dissemble their sentiments, but even to ad in
concert while in pursuit of wealth and power, no
sooner did they obtain poffefion of these, than the
fame paflions which had formed this temporary
union, gave rife tojealouly and discord. To each
of them was attached a small band of intererled
dependents, who, with the malicious art peculiar
to such men, heightened their suspicions, and mag-
nified every appearance of offence. But with all
those feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus
afiduoufly cherished, each was so thoroughly ac-
quainted with the abilities and courage of his rival,
that they equally dreaded the consequences of an
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firmness
which he manifested in his expoflulations with
Almagro and his partizans, averted that evil for
the present. A new reconciliation took place; the
chief article of which was, that Almagro should
attempt the conquest of Chili and if he did not
find in that province an eftablifhmcnt adequate to
his merit and expectations, Pizarro, by way of in-

demnification,

B o0 K demnification, should yield up to him a part oi
L-.-- Peru. This new agreement, though confirmec

1534.
Jun1eI. with the fame sacred folemnities as their first con-

tra&, was observed with as little fidelity c.

RepIairons SOON after he concluded this important tranf-
oit Pizarro.

action, Pizarro marched back to the countries on
the sea-coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval of
tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either
Spanifli or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which distinguishes his cha-
racer, to introduce a form of regular government
into the extensive provinces fubje& to his autho-
rity. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any diflLuifition concerning the principles
of civil policy, and little accuflomed by his former
habits of life to attend to its arrangements, his
natural sagacity supplied the want both of science
and experience. He distributed the country into
various districts; he appointed proper magistrates
to preside in each; and eltablifhed regulations con-
cerning the administration ofjuftice, the colleEtion
of the royal revenue, the working of the mines,
and the treatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
but well calculated to promote the public profpe-
rity. But though, for the present, he adapted his
plan to the infant late of his colony, his aspiring
mind looked forward to its future grandeur. He

c Zarate, lib.ii. c. 13. Vega, p. I,. lib. ii. c. 19. Bcnzo.
lib, iii. c. 6. I-Irrcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 8.

confi dcred

confidered himself as laying the foundation of a B o o K
great empire, and deliberated long, and with much _
solicitude, in what place he should fix the feat of Foun534.
government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the of Lim".
Incas, was situated in a corner of the empire, above
four hundred miles from the sea, and much farther
from Quito, a province of whose value he had
formed an high idea. No other settlement of the
Peruvians was so considerable as to merit the name
of a town, or to allure the Spaniards to fix their
residence in it. But, in marching through the
country, Pizarro had been struck with the beauty
and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one of the
most extensive and best cultivated in Peru. There,
on the banks of a small river, of the fame namne
with the vale which it waters and enriches, at the
distance of fix miles from Callao, the most com-
modious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded
a city which he destined to be the capital of his
government. l-e gave it the name of Ciudad de 'sis.
los Reyes, either from the circumstance of having
laid the first stone, at that season when the church
celebrates the feltival of the Three Kings, or, as
is more probable, in honour of Juana and Charles,
the sovereigns of Caftilc. Thli name it (lill retains
among the Spaniards, in all legal and formal
deeds but it is better known to foreigners by that
of Lima, a corruption of the anci-nt alppllation of
the valley in which it is fituatcii. Linder his in-
fpection, the buildings advanced with luch rapi-
dity, that it blon assumcd the form of a city, which,

by

3 0 0 K by a magnificent palace that he ereted for himself

Vi.
A_ and by the stately houses built by several of hi!
s535 officers, gave, even in its infancy, bome indication

of its fublequent grandeur d.

Almgro;in- IN consequence of what had been agreed with
vades Chili.

Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards Chili;
and as he pofiffed in an eminent degree the virtues
noft admired by soldiers, boundless liberality and
fearles courage, his standard was followed by fi.e
hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of
Europeans that had hitherto been assembled in
Peru. From impatience to finish the expedition,
or from that contempt of hardship and danger
acquired by all the Spaniards who had served
long in America, Almagro, instead of advancing
along the level country on the coaff, chore to
march across the mountains by a route that was
Ihorter indeed, but almost impracicable. In this
attempt his troops were exposcd to every calamity
which men can susser, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigour of the climate in those elevated
regions of the torrid zone, where the degree of
cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the
survivors, when they descended into the fertile
plains of Chili, had new difficulties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different from
the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,

' H-rrera, r'ec. 5. lib. vi. c. 12. lib. vii. c. i . Calnnclih
Coronica, li. i. c. 37. Barnucvo, Liina fimdiJL!,, ii. 294.

andl

and in their bodily constitution, as well as vigour B o o K

VL1

of spirit, nearly resembling the warlike tribes in
North America. Though filled with wonder at 's3J'
the firR appearance of the Spaniards, and still
more astonished at the operations of their cavalry
and the effets of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon
recovered so far from their furprize, as not only to
defend themselves with obstinacy, but to attack
their new enemies with more determined fierceness
than any American nation had hitherto discovered.
The Spaniards, however, continued to penetrate
into the country, and colleced some considerable
quantities of gold; but were so far from thinking
of making any settlement amidst such formidable
neighbours, that, in spite of all the experience and
valour of their leader, the final issue of the expedi-
tion still remained extremely dubious, when they
were recalled from it by an unexpe&ed revolution
in Peru '. The causes of this important event I
shall endeavour to trace to their source.

So many adventurers had flocked to Peru An infur.

rebion of

from every Spanish colony in America, and all the' Pru.
with such high expetations of accumulating inde- 'via".
pendent fortunes at once, that, to men possessed
with notions so extravagant, any mention of ac-
quiring wealth gradually, and by schemes of pa-
tient industry, would have been not only a dif-

0 Zarate, lib. iii. c. i. Gomara Hil. c. 131. Vega, p. a.

lib. ii. c. o2. Ovalle Hilt. de Chile, lib. iv. c. IS, &c.
lerrcra, dec. 5. lib.vi, . 9. lib. x. c. i, &c.

4 appoint-

B °V KC appointment, but an insult. In order to find
*. .. occupation for men who could not with safety

'53s' be allowed to remain inactive, Pizarro encouraged

some of the most diftinguilhed officers who had
lately joined him, to invade different provinces of
the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed for this
purpose; and about the time that Almagro set out
for Chili, they marched into remote diftrifts of
Its ie, the country. No sooner did Manco Capac, the

Inca, observe the inconsiderate security of the Spa-
niards in thus dispersing their troops, and that only
a handful of soldiers remained in Cuzco, under
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than he thought that
the happy period was at length come for vindicat-
ing his own rights, avenging the wrongs of his
country, and extirpating its oppressors. Though
itridly watched by the Spaniards, who allowed
him to reside in the palace of his ancestors at
Cuzco, he found means of communicating his
scheme to the persons who were to be entrustei
with the execution of it. A mong people ac-
customed to revere their sovereign as a divinity,
every hint of his will carries the authority of a
command; and they themeilves were now con-
vinced, by the daily increalc in the number of
their invaders, that the fond hopes which they
had long entertained of their voluntary departure
were altogether vain. All perceived that a vi-
gorous cflort of the whole nation w.as requtlile to
expel them, and the preparations fur it were car-

ried

ried on with the secrecy and silence peculiar to B RK
Americans.

*535.

AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca andprogrcs.

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per- 1536.
million from him to attend a great festival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capi-
tal. Under pretext of that lolemnity, the great
men of the empire were assembled. As soon as
the Inca joined them, the flandard of war was
erected; and in a short time all the fighting men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely
on the settlements allotted them, were massacred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelefly
through a country which seemed to be tamely sub-
minive to their dominion, were cut off to a man.
An army amounting (if we may believe the Spa-
nish writers) to two hundred thousand men, at-
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothers endea-
voured to defend with only one hundred and
seventy Spaniards. Another formidable body in-
veiled Lima, and kept the governor closely shut
up. There was no longer any communication be.
tween the two cities; the numerous forces of the
Peruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every neffenrger; and as the parties in Cuzco and
Lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worlt concerning

I tili

B O K the other, and imagined that they themselves were

Vi.
· cv-- the only persons who had survived the general ex.

X536' tindion of the Spanifl name in Peru d.
S;ege of IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded

in person, that the Peruvians made their chief
effort. During nine months they carried on the
liege with inceflant ardour, and in various forms;
and though they displayed not the fame undaunted
ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they conduced
some of their operations in a manner which disco-
vered greater sagacity, and a genius more fufcep-
tible of improvement in the military art. They
not only observed the advantages which the Spa.
niards derived from their discipline and their wea-
pons, but they endeavoured to imitate the former,
and turn the latter against them. They armed a
considerable body of their braves warriors with
the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which they
had taken from the Spanish soldiers whom they
had cut off in different parts of the country. These
they endeavoured to marlhal in that regular com-
pa& order, to which experience had taught them
that the Spaniards were indebted for their irre-
fiftible force in action. Some appeared in the field
with Spanish muskets, and had acquired Ikill and
resolution enough to use them. A few of the
boldest, among whom was the Inca himfclf, were

d Vega, p. I . lib. ii. c. 28. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Cieca

de Leon, c. 8z. Gomara Hid. c. 135. Herrcr, dec. 5.
lib. viii. c. 5.

mounted

mounted on the horses which they had taken, and B °0 Kr

VI.

advanced briskly to the charge like Spani(h cava- v_
liers, with their lances in the reft. It was more by 153'
their numbers, however, than by those imrperfet
eflays to imitate European arts and employ Euro-
pean arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the Spa-
niards'. In spite of the valour, heightened by
despair, with which the three brothers defended
Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered poffefrion of one
half of his capital; and before the Spaniards could
drive him out of it, they loft Juan Pizar-o, the
best beloved of all the brothers, together with
some other persons of note. Worn out with the
fatigue of incessant duty, distressed with want of
provisions, and despairing of being able any longer
to reifl an enemy whose numbers daily increased,
the soldiers became impatient to abandon Cuzco,
in hopes either of joining their countrymen, if any
of them yet survived, or of forcing their way to
the sea, and finding some means of escaping from
a country which had been so fatal to the Spanish
name'. While they were brooding over those de-
fponding thoughts, which their officers laboured
in vain to dispel, Almagro appeared suddenly in
the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts transmitted to Alinagro concern- Arrival of

ing the general infurreaion of the Peruvians, wereAl

e See NOTE XII.
f Herrcra, dcc. 5. lib. .i;i. c. 4.

VOL. II. F such

B °o K such as would have induced him, without hefita-

Ve.

- --- tion, to relinquish the conquest of Chili, and
.i',,.'.tivs halten to the aid of his countrymen. But in this
d¢I t. n- resolution he was confirmed by a motive less gene-

rous, but more intererting. By the fame meflen-
ger who brought him intelligence of the Inca's
revolt, he received the royal patent creating him
governor of Chili, and'defining the limits of his
jurifdicion. Upon confidering the tenor of ir, he
deemed it manifest beyond contradicion, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his govern-
ment, and he was equally solicitous to prevent the
Peruvians from recovering pofefTion of their capi-
tal, and to wrest it out of the hands of the Pizarros.
From impatience to accomplish both, he ventured
to return by a new route; and in marching through
the sandy plains on the coast, he suffered, from
heat and drought, calamities of a new species,
hardly inferior to thole in which he had been in-
volved by cold and famine on the summits of the
Andes.

s-7. H1is arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment.
li, upcla-

i. The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes upon

himn with equal solicitude. The former, as he
did not fludy to conceal his pretenfio.s, were at a
loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or to
take precautions againlt him as an enemy. The
latter, knowing the points in contefl between hlin
and his countrymen, flattered them llves that they
had more to hope than to dread from his opera-

tio'ls.

tions. Almagro himself, unacquainted with the B 0,1 K
detail of the events which had happened in his ---.
abfencce, and lolicitous to learn the precise poflt'irc 537.
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and with great circunimlpdeion. Various negocia-
tions with both parties were tit on iotor. The
Inca conducted them on his part with much
addrels. At fiTrt he endce'voured to !-ain the
fi-iendfhip of Almagro; and after many truitltfs
overtures, delpairing of any cordial union with a
Spaniard, he attacked him by furprile wich a nu-
merous body of cholen troops. Buc the .panifl
discipline and valour maintained their wonted
superiority. The Peruvians were repullfd with
such slaughter, that a great part of their arimy dif-
perfed, and Almagro p-oceeded to the gates of
Cuzco withjut interruption.

THE Pizarros, as they had no longer to nmake 'rc , prf.

head againfi the Peruvians, diec'cd all their cuiz"'
artention towards their new enemy, and took mca-
fures to obflrud: his entry into the capital. lPru-
dence, however, rcltrained both partcis for onme
time from turning their arms agaiinll one another,
while surroundcd by coinmon enemies, who would
rejoice in the nmuu.tl llauglhtr. Difcrent (licees
of accommodation were piopolk-d. Ei.ach cndea-
voured to deceive the olhcr, or t') corrupt his
io;lowers. 'I lie gelerous, op0c), aflijble rtcnipc of
AlImagro gained many ;alhertents of rhc J'izarros,
who weCr dilgti cd wiih their a3rlh LioniinreI ru.

1' 2 IniallnerS.

B o°v K manners. ELncouraged by this defection, he ad-
C--__ vanced towards the city by night, surprised the

517' centinels, or was admitted by them, and inverting

the house where the two brothers resided, compel.
led them, after an obstinate defence, to Surrender
at difEretion. Almagro's claim ofjurifdicion over
Cuzco was univcrfally acknowledged, and a form
of administration eftablilhed in his name .

c:»;I wa., Two or three perlons only were killed in this
and firll sue-
cCISoiAI- first aa of civil holtility ; but it was soon followed
znlagro,

by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro having
dilpcrlcd the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received rome considerable reinforcements from
Iifpaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred
men, under the command of Alon'o de Alvarado,
to march to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his bro-
thers, if they and their garrison were not already
cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which, at
that period of the Spanifhl power in America, nmuf
be deemed a confidcrab!e force, advanced near to
the capital before they knew that they had any
enemy more formidable than Indians to encounter.
It was with astonishment that they beheld their
countrymen pofred on the banks of the river Aban-
cay to oppole their progress. Almagro, however,
wifled rather to gain than to conquer them, and
by bribes and promises endeavoured to seduce their

gE ar;itc, lib. iii. c. 4. VeZa., p. i. li. ii. c. 29. 31.
C ,jinara lilt. c. 13i. Ilcrrcrn, !cc. 6. lib. ii. c. I- 5.

leader.

leader. The fidelity of Alvarado remained un- B o K
shaken; but his talents for war were not equal to a
his virtue. Almagro amused him witi various 537.
movements, of which he did not comprehend the
meaning, while a large detachment of chosen July i2.
soldiers pahcd the river by night, fell upon his
camp by surprise, broke his troops before they had
time to form, and took him prisoner, together
with his principal officers h.

BY the sudden rout of this body, the contest hbu"t.' rt

im;rove }h.s

between the two rivals must have been decided, advant.e..
if Almagro had known as well how to improve as
how to gain a victory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
officer of great abilities, who having served under
the constable Bourbon, when tie led the Imperial
army to Rome, had been accustomed to bold and
decisive measures, adviled him inllantly to issue
orders for putting to death Ferdinand and Gon.
zalo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons
whom he could not hope to gain, and to march
diretly with his victorious troops to Lima, be-
fore the governor had time to prepare for his de-
fence. But Almagro, though he discerned at once
the utility of the countel, and had courage to have
carried it into execution, suffered himself to be in-
fluenced by sentiments unlike thole of a soldier <.f
fortune grown old in service, and by scruples

h Z arate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gom. [lift. c. 138. Vega, p. 11.
lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Hcrrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 9.

F 3 which

B o0 K which suited not the chief of a party who had

L-_-- drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings of huma-
'5 7' nicy reitrained him from ihedding the blood of his

opponents; apd the dread of bcing deemed a
rebel, deterred him from entering a province
which the king had allotted to another. Though
he knew that arms must terminate the dispute be-
tween him and Pizarro, and resolvcd not to flun
that mode of decision, yet, with a timid deli(acy
prcpofierous at such a junture, he was lo olicitous
that his rival should be confidered as the aggressor,
that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait
his approach

PIZARRO was till tinacquainted with all the in-
i'iartoo

tereeting events which had happened near Cuzco.
Accounts of Almagro's return, of the loss of the
capital, of the death of one brother, of the impri-
Ibnment of the other two, and of the defeat of
Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a
tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a spirit
which had coatinued firm and ere under the
rudefl shocks of adversity. But the necctiiy of
attenling to his own tf.ifty, as well as the desire
of revenge, prefervced himn from finking under it.
]-1c took mealfurs for both with his wonted saga-

7 rrfli ci:/. As he had the command of the ita-coaft,
oJ)du~t.

and expected confillcrable supplies both of men
and military florcs, it was no leIs his intcreft to

Hlerrcri, dec. 6. liL. ii. c. o, gI.

gaiq

gain time, and to avoid aaion, than it was that of B o O K
Almagro to precipitate operatic-ns, and bring the i
contest to a speedy issue. He had recourse to arts '5;7'
which he had formerly pratifrd with luccels, and
Almagro was again weak enough to fufTer himl-lf
to be a-mused with a profpea of terminating their
differences by some amicable accommodation. By
varying his overtures, and Ihifting his ground as
often as it suited his purpose, sometimes 1steming
to yield every thing which his rival could defrre,
and then retracting all that he iiad granted, Pizarro
dextcroufly prctracted the negociation to such a
length, that though every day was precious to
Almagro, fcveral months elapsed without coming
to any final agreement. While the attention of
Almagro, and of the officers with whom he con-
fulted, was occupied in detelcing and eluiinlg the
fraudulent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo
Pizarro and Alvarado found meians to corrupt the
soldiers to whofc cuitody th:y wvre committed,
and not only made their t.bape them:clves, but
persuaded sixty of the men who formerly guarded
them to accompany their flight . Fortune having
thus delivered one cf his brothers, the governor
scrupled not at one act of p' rfiiy n-rcrc to pi'ocure
the release of the other. IIc propollci, that every
point in controversy between Aliiinair,) and /:imlelf
Ihould be submitted to thlc (ccili ,n (,i Lh'ir iove-
reign; that until his award ws l:;iowi, eacl

h Zaratc, lib. iii. . 8. I' rrcra, ecc. 6. lib. ii. c. i.j.

¥ jhranfihulJ

B 0 0 K ihould retain undisturbed pofleffion of whatever

Vi.
A-_--' part of the country he now occupied; that Ferdi-
'537' nand Pizarro should be set at liberty, and return

instantly to Spain, together with the officers, whom
Almagro purposed to fend thither to represent the
justice of his claims. Obvious as the design of
Pizarro was in those propositions, and familiar as
his artifices might now have been to his opponent,
Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infatua-
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an
agreement on there terms .

s iprepa- THE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered

r-tions fur
War. his liberty, the governor, no longer fettered in his

operations by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw off every difguile which his concern for it
had obliged him to aflumne. The treaty was for-
gotten; pacific and conciliating measures were no
more mentioned; it was in the field, he openly
declared, and not in the cabinet; by arms, and
not by negociation; that it mult now be deter-
mined who should be master of Peru. The rapi-
dity of his preparations flited such a decisive relb-
lution. Seven hundred men were soon ready to
5385. march towards Cuzco. The command of thele

was given to his two brothers, in whom he could
perfectly confide for the execution of his mod vio-
lent schemes, as they were urged on, not only by
the enmity flowing from family rivalfhip, but

T Herrcrn, dec. 6. lih . iii. c. g. Zarate. lib. iii, c. 9.

comarallil!. c. ,i.o. Vclg , l" 11. li

. i n.
C. 35

animated

animated with the desire of vengeance, excited by B o V K
recolletion of their own recent disgrace and sus- -
ferings. After an unsuccessful attempt to cross 153.'
the mountains in the direc road between Lima
and Cuzco, they marched towards the south along
the coast as far as Nafca, and then turning to the
left, penetrated through the defiles in that branch
of the Andes which lay between them and the
capital. Almagro, in(tead of hearkening to rome
of his officers, who advifld him to attempt the de-
fence of those difficult passes, waited the approach
of the enemy in the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons
seem to have induced him to take this resolution.
His followers amounted hardly to five hundred,
and he was afraid of weakening such a feeble
body, by fending any detachmnent towards the
mountains. -lis cavalry far exceeded that of the
adverse party, both in number and discipline, and
it was only in an open country that he could avail
himlilf of that advantage.

TItE Pizarros advanced without any obftru ion, ::, army

but what arose from the nature of the delert and cc,.
horrid regions through which they marched. As
soon as they reached the plain, both factions were
equally irpatient to bring this long-protraced con-
telt to an issue. Though countrymen and friends,
the fubjets of the fame sovereign, and each with
the royal (tandard displayed; and though they be-
held the mountains that surrounded the plain in
which they were drawn up, covered with a vafR

multitude

B 0 0 K multirude of Indians, assembled to enjoy the spec-

,--_1 tacle of their mutual carnage, and prepared to at-
1$;' tack whatever party remained master of the ficlid

so fell and implacable was the rancour which had
taken poflrffion of every brealt, that not one pa-
cific counsel, rot a tingle overture towards accomr
modation proceeded trom either fide. Unfortu-
nately for Almagro, he was so worn out with the
fatigues offervice, to which his advanced age was
unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he could
not exert his wonted activity; and he was obliged
to commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez,
who, thcugh an officer of great merit, did not
polfefs the iame ascendant either over the spirit or
alicdtions of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accustomed to follow and revere.

April 6. TIIE conflict was fierce, and maintained by each
Alir azon
defc;rcd, party with equal courage. On the fide of Alma-

gro, were more veceran soldiers, and a larger pro-
portion of cavalry; but thclf were counterbalanced
by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, and by two
companies of well-difciplined musketeers, which,
on receiving an account of the infurreflion of the
Indians, the emperor had sent from Spain '. As
the ulb of fire-arls was not frequent among the
adventurers in America ", hafily equipped tor
fcrvice, at their own expence, this frnall band of
ioldiers, regularly trained and armed, was a no,

m ll"erncr , dec. 6. ril). ii. c c.
"n 2.ra;tc, hIb. ill. c. y.

vclty

velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day. B O o K
W.,crcvcr it advanced, the weight of a heavy and ---
wcll-lultain, d fire bore down horle and foot before '538'
it; din Orgfgnrz, while he endeavoured to rally
and animate his troops, having received a dangerous
woui:d, the rout bcc.me general. The barbarity
ot the conquerors Itained the glory which they ac-
quired by this complete victory. The violence of
civil rage hurried on some to flaughtcr their coun-
trymen with incilicriminaie cruelty; the nmeannefs
of private revenge instigated others to single out
indiividu.il as th.- objects of their vengeance. Or-
go0nez antd 1iveral officers of diftincqtion were maf-
faircd in cold blood; above a hundred and forty
soldiers fell in the field; a large proportion, where
the number of combatants were few, and the heat
of the contest soon over. Almagro, though so
feeble that he could not bear the motion of a
horle, had insisted on being carried in a litter to an
eninence which overlooked the field of battle.
lroni thence, in the utmost agitati.n of mind, he
viewed the various movements of both parties, and
:t Lit beheld the total defeat of his own troops,
*: t! all the pafionate inlibnation of a vereran
rt.icr lonj accuflomed to vicetory. -Ie endea- and takcDe
;.i,:cd to save himl'clf by fliglir, but was taken
:lcncr, and guarded with the ltriiLeft vigilance".

- '.rate, li. ii;. c. 11, 1 :. Veg., p. II. lib. ii. c. 36-
I. ,iicr.i, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 1t- sz. lib. iv. c. 1-6.

THe

B o K THE Indians, instead of executing the resolution

VI. - which they had formed, retired quietly after the
s'58. battle was over; and in the hitory of the New

World, there is not a more striking instance of the
wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had ac-
quired over its inhabitants, than that after secing
one of the contending parties ruined and disperscd,
and the other weakened and fatigued, they had
not courage to fall upon their enemies, when for.
tune prefcnted an opportunity of attacking them
with such advantage P.

'ew expe- Cuzco was pillaged by the viAorious troops, who
ditio s.$A

found there a considerable booty, confiRing partly
of the gleanings of the Indian treafbrcs, and partly
of the wealth amanled by their antagonists from
the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far did thi,
and whatever the bounty of their leader could iad
to it, fall below the high ideas of the recompence
which they conceived to be due to their merit, that
Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratify such extra.
vagant expectations, had recourse to the fame ex-
pedient which his brother had employed on a fimi-
lar occasion, and endeavoured to find occupation
for this turbulent assuming spirit, in order to pre-
vent it from breaking out into open mutiny. With
this view, he encouraged his molt a&ive officcrs to
attempt the ditcovery and reduction of various
provinces which had not hitherto lubmittcd cu the

P Ziaratc, iib. iii. c. I1. V\ g-, p. 1
. lIb. ii. 3.

Slar, iirs.

Spaniards. To every standard erecEed by the B O0 K
leaders who undertook any of those new expedi- _--
tions, volunteers resorted with the ardour and hope Ss
peculiar to the age. Several of Alnmagro's soldiers
joined them, and thus Pizarro had the iatisfdAion
of being delivered both from the importunity of
his discontented friends, and the dread of his an-
cicnt enemies .

ALMAGRO himself remained for several months Alrgro
incuftody, under all the anguish of fulpence. For '','
although his doom was determined by the Pizarros
from the moment that he fell into their hands,
prudence constrained them to defer gratifying their
vengeance, until the soldiers who had served under
him, as well as lfveral of their own followers in
whom they could no. perfectly confide, had left
Cuzco. As loon as they set out upon their difler-
ent expeditions, Almagro was impeached of trea-
lon, formally tried, and condemned to die. The condemned,
lentence astonished him, and though he had often
braved death with undaunted spirit in the field, its
approach under this ignominious form appalled
him so much, that he had recourse to abjec ftup-
plications, unworthy of his former fame. IHe bc-
fought the Pizarros to remember the ancient friend-
fbip between their brother and him, and how much
he had contributed to the proflerity of their fa-
mily; he reminded them of the humanity with

1 /Zarate, lib. iii. c. iz, Gonmara llii. c. 141. Hl rreran
dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

which,

B o0 K which, in oppofirion to the repeated remonflrance,
_-,- .. of his own mors attached friends, he had sparcd

'S3 ' their lives when he had them in his power; he

conjured them to pity his age and infirmities, a'd
to susser him to pass the wretched remainder ot h;s
days in bewailing his crimes, and in making hii
peace with Heaven. The intreaties, fays a Spa.
nilh hiflorian, of a man so much beloved, touched
many an unfte!ing heart, and drew tears fro:-
many a hard eye. Bu: the brothers remained i:-
flexible. As soon as Almagro knew his fate to b:
inevitab!e, he met it with the dignity and fortitude
d i'put t of a veteran. He was strangled in prison, and as-

terwards publicly beheaded. He fuffc-red in the
feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by
an Indian woman of Panama, whom, though at
that time a prilbner in Lima, he named as fuccrlrjr
to his government, pursuant to a power which the
emperor had granted him '.

Dsr?9.; RAs, during the civil diflentions in Peru, all in-
lit.n of the tercourle with Spain was suspended, the declij of
court of
sai.n con- the extraordinary trantileions there did not loon

',' ot-'" reach the court. Unfortunately for the victorious
'."u. faction, the firfl intelligence was brought thither

by lbome of Almagro's oficcrs, who left the coun-
try upon the ruin of their caufc ; ;?nd they rcla:cd
what had happened, with every circumflance un-

Z.irate, lihb. iii c. :!. Conio ra IIifl. c. Ir 1. Vcg1 p. IP .
lib. ;i. c. 39. ihcrreuj, dec. 6. lib. iv, c. 9. 9lb. v. c. i.

4; sa;vourablle

favourable to Pizarro and his brothers. Their B o 0 K
ambition, their breach of the moil lilemn engage- -
ments, their violence and crulcty were painted 39
with all the malignity and exaggerati,.n of p.rty
hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who i irrived loon as-
ter, and appeared in court with extraord iiar. iplcn-
dor, endeavourcd to efface the iinprtfsi,,n which
theiraccufations had made, and to juil'lvy Iis bro-
ther and himself by reprifenring Al:nnaro as the
aggressor. The emperor and his nlinillcrs, tlou1gh
they could not pronounce which of tile conttnd Jg
faftions was moflt criminal, clearly difcerined the
fatal tendency of their dissentions. It was obvituLs,
that while the leader%, entruflnd with tie conduct
of two infant colonies, employed the arms which
ihould have been turned againit the common ene-
my, in deltroying o,;e another, all attention to the
public good muil cease, and there was reason to
dread that tile Indians might improve the advan-
tage which the dilunion of tlch Spaniards prelented
to them, and excirpat': : :':!i :i' x.i:tis nidj van-
quifhed. But thc ;vii wa iL: rc a;ppl;rc. t than the
remedy. \\'here t:c i:so' atic:i whvich had hICn
received was li;) ' i.'tLi c alIl I

nd i jcioi;s, an. tle

el:ne of action 1i n-i a,;ce, it was a.li, il inpo:i:'!,
to chalk ouL the line of coIndti; that oi.tgh to be
lollowed l and before any plan that flould be aI)-
proved of in Spa'iin could Lb c..rrild inio ,'xccu tion,
the situation of the partiec:, aI.i !i, c irI'(:cin lnies
ot afiairs, might alter to rlti: c!; as Lt lender its
cll.els e.xtrrnm ly pcr:ic.ious.

NC'THING

B o o K NOTHING therefore remained but to fend a per-

VI.

v _--"' Ion to Peru, vetted with excenfive and discretionary
V .5'9 power, who, after viewing deliberately the posture
Cae'o font
,iiAthr wth of affairs with his own eyes, and enquiring upon
o ',,. trhe spot into the conduct of the different leaders,

should be authorised to eftablilh the government
in that form which he deemed molt conducive to
the interelt of the parent state, and the welfare of
the colony. The man seleCted for this important
charge was Chrilloval Vaca de Castro, a judge in
the court of royal audience at Valladolid; and his
abilities, integrity, and firmnefs,jutified the choice.
His inftrudions, though ample, were not such as
to fetter him in his operations. According to the
different aspect of affairs, he had power to take
upon him different characters. If he found the
governor fill alive, he was to afrume only the title
of judge, to maintain the appearance of acting in
concert with him, and to guard against giving any
just cause of offence to a man who had merited so
highly of his country. But if Pizarro were dead,
he was entrufktd with a commiiflon that he might
then produce, by which he was appointed his fuc-
cefforin the government of Peru. This attention
to Pizarro, however, seems to have flowed rather
from dread of his power, than from any approba-
tion of his nieabfres; for at the very time that the
court seemed lb bolicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and

* confined

confined to a prison, where he remained above B 0o K
twenty years .

WHILE Vaca de Caltro was preparing for his 1;4.

Voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru. ..",,¢',per'
The governor, confidering himielf, upon the death .'.'.ng
of Almagro, as the unrivalled )poffcfTor of that vail
empire, proceeded to parcel out its territories
among the conquerors; and had this division been
made with any degree of impartiality, the extent
of country which he had ro bellow, was sufficient to
have gratified his friends, and to have gained his
enemies. But Pizarro condu6ted this tranfanion,
not with the equity and candour of a judge atten-
tive to discover and to reward merit, but with the
illiberal spirit of a party leader. Large ditricts,
in parts of the country molt cultivated and popu-
lous, were set apart as his own property, or grant-
ed to his brothers, his adherents and favourites.
To others, lots less valuable and inviting were as-
signed. The followers of Almagro, amongfl whom
were many of the original adventurers to whose va-
lour and perseverance Pizarro was indebted for his
success, were totally excluded from any portion in
those lands, towards the acqtifition of which they
had contributed so largely. As the vanity of every
individual fct an immoderate value upon his own
fcrvices, and the idea of each concerning the re-

* Gomara lil}. c. 14z. Vega, p. i . lib. ii. c. 4c.
lerrcra, d!c. io. Lb. vii. c. Io, Ia. l .

ib .

x. c.
VOL. III, G comnpenLCe

B O° K compence due to them rose gradually to a more
'- ---' exorbitant height in proportion as their conquests

3540' extended, all who were disappointed in their ex-

pelations exclaimed loudly against the rapacious-
nces and partiality of the governor. The partisans
of Almagro murmured in secret, and meditated
revenge.

ProrrTef of RAPID as the progress of the Spaniards in South
the Spanilh i
Arms. America had been since Fizarro landed in Peru,

their avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied.
The officers, to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated into
leveral new provinces, and though iume of them
were exposed to great hardships in the cold and
barren regions of the Andes, and others fuffcred
distress not inferior amidfl the woods and marthes
of the plains, they made dilcoverics and conquells
which extended their knowledge of the country, as
well as added to their power. Pedro de Valdivia
reaffuimed Almagro's scheme of invading Chili,
and notwithflanding the fortitude of the natives in
defending their olaCTior.s, nde iich procls inl
the conquest of the country, tha hli founcdd the
city of St. Jago, anti gave a bcginning to t:ce cila-
blilliThent of t!i, S.pniill doninioi:o ii th.t pro-

Rtem:lialc vince '. LBtlt (f all tl)e cntcri rllj :s uncJ-tiakcn
CX[ tJ lltllll
of Cin.lo about this period, tiat of C Gnzl).> Pizarro wV.S

t 'iL'g , p 1- II l,. iii. c. 2. II r ;l, d-c. 6( .

ii.
c. 5.

" ;Lr;lte, lil'. ii.
ii . . O v .'t, 1ib. ii. c. I, ,,& .

the

the most remarkable. The governor, who seems B O,° K
to have resolved that no pcrlon in Pern should pof- .----
fcfs any station of diffinuifhed eminence r;- autho- St.
rity but thole of his own family, had deprived Be-
nalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his com-
mand in that kingdom, and appointed his brother
GonzalO to take the government of it. IIe in-
flruced him to attempt the discovery and conquedf
of the country to the cast of the Andes, which,
according to the information of the Indians,
abounded with cinnamon and other valuable spices.
Gonzalo, not inferior to any of his brothers in
courage, and no less ambitious of acquiring dif-
tindion, eagerly engaged in this difficult service.
He set out from Quito at the head of three hun-
dred and forty soldiers, near one half of whom
were horsemen, with four thousand Indians to
carry their provisions. In forcing their way
through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of
which they were accustomed, proved fatal to the
greater part of their wretched attendants. The ,,rd;,,ps
Spaniards, though more robust, and inured to a du,c.
variety of climates, suffered considerably, and loft
some men; but when they descended into the low
country their dirfrefs increared. During two
months it rained incessantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their clothes x.
Thevafl plains upon which thty were now entering,

a Q atr, Jil. iv. c. z.

G 2 either

B 0 0 K either altogether without inhabitants, or occupied

-- by the rudell and leafl induflrious tribes in the
'5'°.' New \Wor!d, yielded little fubftilence. They could

not advance a Itep but as they cut a road through
woods, or made it through marshes. Such incc!-
sant toil, and continual scarcity of food, seem more
than sufficient to have exhau!ted and dilpiriced any
troops. But the fortitude and perfcverance of
Spaniards in the fixtecnth century were infuper-
able. Allured by frcquent but falle accounts of
rich countries before them, they perilfted in ftrug-
-ling on, until they reached the banks of theCoca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whose waters
pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labour, they built
a bark, which they expected would prove of great
utility, in conveying them over rivers, in procur-
ing provisions, and in exploring the country.
This was manned with fifty soldiers, under the
command of Francis Orellana, the officer next in
rank to lizarro. The fiream carried them down
with luch rapidity, that they were soon far a-head
of their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
difficulty by land.
ne'eted by AT this distance from his commander, Orellana,

a young man of an all)iring mind, began to fancy
himinllf independent, and transported with the prc.
dominant pafion of the age, he formed the fchene
of diflinguiffling himl.lfl as a diliovcrcr, by tbl-
lowing the cou4l of the Maragnon, until itjuincd

8 the

the ocean, and by surveying the vait regions B OO K
through which it flows. This fcherne of Orel- I
lana's was as bold as it was treacherous. For, if '540'
he be chargeable with the guilt of hating violated
his duty to his commander, and with having aban-
doned his fellow-boldiers in a pathless deferr, where
they had hardly any hopes of success, or even of
fdfety, but what were founded on the 1ervice which
they expected from the bark; his crime is, in some
measure, balanced by the glory of having ventured
upon a navigation of near two thousand leagues,
through unknown nations, in a vessel haflily con-
stru&ted, with green timber, and by very unskilful
hands, without provisions, without a compass, or
a pilot. But his courage and alacrity Iupplied
every dcfect. Committing himself frarlclsly to the s5;, i d
guidance of the stream, the Napo bore him along h ln. -
to the south, until he reached the great channel of
the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coast,
he held on his courle in that direction. l-ie made
frequent descents on both fides of the river, some-
times leizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce savages feated on its banks; and Iometines
procuring a l;pply of food by a friendly intercourse
with more gentle tribes. After a long lcries of
dangers, which he encountered with anazing for-
(itude, and of difircefrs which lie lupported with
no idcs m.iignanilmity, he reached the ocean ', where
new perils awaited him. lhelr hie likewile fur-

Y Sec NOTEl. XIII.

G 3 mounted,

B 0
O K mounted, and got safe to the Spanilh settlement in

V1.
c.- the island Cubagua; from thence he failed to Spain.

*54'. The vanity natural to travellers who visit regions

unknown to the reft of mankind, and the art of an
adventurer, lolicirous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an exrraor-
dinary proportion of the marvellous in the narra-
tive of his voyage. He pretended to have dilco-
vered nations so rich, that the roofs of their
temples were covered with plates of gold; and de-
fcribcd a republic of women so warlike and power-
ful, as to have extended their dominion over a con-
lideiable trad of the fcrtile plains which he had
visited. Extravagant as those tales were, they gave
rile to an opinion, that a region abounding with
gold, dihli.g!;:i.hecd by the name of ElDorado, and
a'community of Amazons, were to be found in
this part of the New World; and such is the pro-
penfity of mankir;d to believe whit is wonderful
that it h;ls been louwly and with difiiculty that rca-
son and obfcrvati-n have exploded thofc fables.
The voyage, however, even when itripped ofeveiy
romanti; cmbelliflmcnt, delerves to be recorded,
not only as one of the molt memorable occurrences
in that adventurous age, but as the first event
which led to any certain knowledge of the im-
lenfc rtgions thac ltretchl caltward from the Andes
to the ocean Y.

yv ' , i;1 , lib. iv. c. .. Gomara [lit. c. 85. Vega, p. i.

lil,. iii. c. . . i lrrrr:;, .hrc. (. lib. ix. c -- .

- 5. Rodilg' it7 k
l'rI4a ui y A3.liaz 11,.-, iub. 1. c. 3.

NO

No words can describe the conf[ernation of Pi- B O O K

zarro, when he did not find the bark at the con- '--
fluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had D;ni'rs of
ordered Orcllana to wait for him. He would not Pizarro
allow himself to suspect that a man, whom he had
intrufled with such an important commiand, could
be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him at
such a junaure. But imputing his abltnce from
the place of rendezvous to onme unknown accildent,
he advanced above fifty leagues along the banks
of the Maragnon, expecting every nioment to Ic-e
the bark appear with a supply of proviions. At Is5i.
length he came up with an officer whom ( rellana
had left to perish in the delert, because he had the
courage to remonstrate againtt his perfidy. From
him he learned the extent us Orcilana's crime, and
his followers perceived at once tht ir own delperate
situation, when deprived of their only relource.
The spirit of the ftoutefl hearted veteran funk with-
in him, and all demanded to be led back intsantly.
Pizarro, though he afi;nmed an appearance of tran-
quillity, did not oppole their inclination. BIut he
was now twelve hundred iniles irom Quito; and
in that long march the Spaniards encountered
hardships greater than tlho() they had endured in
their prorels outward, without the alluring hopes
which then loothed and animated thei under their
fuifirings. Hunger compeltld theCn ro tJed on
roots and berries, to eat ail their dJos .l;d horles,
to devour the molt loathlone reptiles, and even to

G 4 gnawv

h °o1 K gnaw the leather of their saddles and fword-belts,
.-- --' Four thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten

4 Spaniards perished in this wild disastrous expedi-

tion, which continued near two years; and as fifty
men were aboard the bark with Orellana, only
fourscore got back to Quito. Thele were naked
like 1avag-s, antd so emaciated with famine, or
worn out with fatigue, that they had more the ap-
pearance of fpeccrcs than of men .

NJurerrof BUT, inflead of returning to enjoy the repose
rent, iU which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering

Quito, received accounts of a fatal event that
threatened calamities more dreadful to him, than
those through which he had passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of
his conquests which has been mentioned, the ad-
herents of Almagro, confidering themselves as pro-
fcribed by the party in power, no longer enter-
tained any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in despair retorted to Lima, where
the house of young Almagro was always open to
them, and the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them fubfilfence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
had served under the elder Almagro devoted
himself to his incrrefts, was quickly transferred to

Z: rate, lib. iv. c. z-i. Vseg., p. I. lib. iii. c. 3, 4, ;

14. I-lcrcra, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lil. ix. c. z2- . L'cc
?. lib.iii. c. 14. I'izar. Vanorez Illullr. 349), &c.

his

his fron, who was now grown up to the ace of B o 0 K
manhood, and poffrecd all the qualities which -
captivate the affections of soldiers. Of a graceful con,,IC
appearance, dexterous at all martial exercifs, bold, y'"" , ,I'
open, generous, he lierned to be formed for corn- tllclrleder.
mand; and as his father, conlcious of his own
inferiority from the total want of education, had
been extremely attentive to have him inllructed in
every science becoming a gentleman; the accom-
plifhments which he had acquired heightened the
refpea of his followers, as they gave him diltindcion
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a point of
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor was affection for Al-
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their own diItreflcs. Many of then:, deltitute
of common necefTlries', and weary of loitering
away life, a burden to their chief, or to such of
their associates as had saved omrne remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed im-
patiently for an occasion to exert their a6civity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of all their misery.
'1heir frequent cabals did nor pass unobserved; cnp;ire
and the governor was warned to be on his guard l,.e ,f ,
againil men who meditated some desperate deed, rro,
and had rcfolution to execute it. But ilther from

-' Fce NOTrE XIV.

the

B 0 0 K the native intrepidity of his mind, or from con.

Ve. _---'.- tempt of persons whose poverty seemed to render

their machinations of little consequence, he dif.
regarded the admonitions of his friends. " Be in
no pain," said he carelciely, " about my life, it
is perfcLqly safe, as long as every man in Peru
knows that I can in a moment cut off any head
which dares to harbour a thought againf it." This
itcurity gave the Al;iagrians full leilure to digest
and ripen every pare of their scheme; and Juan de
Herrada, an oIticcr of great abilities, who had t,;e
charge of Alilm:gro's education, took the direc.
tion o' their conlultations, with all the zeal which
this connection in!pired, and with all the authority
which the ascendant that he was known to have
over the mind of his pupil gave him.

.ndLkil ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid-
..... day, the season of tranquillity and repose in all

sultry climates, Hlerrada, at the head of eighteen
of the mos dteerrmined conifirators, sallied out of
Alm'igro's houlci in comnplete armour; and d:rav-
ing their swords, as thcy aidvanced haflti'y towards
the governor's palacc, cried out, " l.ong live the
kin, but let the tyrant die !" Their afociactcs,
warned of tlrhir motions by a fign.l, were in arms
at j.ffr rent fhatioais ready to lupport therm. T'hou-h
lirzarro was usually tlrrouncdJ by such a nume-
rru train <(f attendallnts nas suited thie m;:i;ift'rnce
of the molt o;,nlKnt IIubjctL or thc age in which he
lived, yet as lie was jull ril'n fronm lble, anJ r;ofll

or

of his domestics had retired to their own apart- B 0 0 K.

VJ.

ments, the conspirators passed through the two -,
outer courts of the palace unobserved. They were 'j'
at the bottom of the staircase, before a page in
waiting could give the alarm to his malter, who
was converting with a few friends in a large hall.
The governor, whose (teady mind no form of dan-
ger could appal, starting up, called for arms, and
commanded Francisco de Chavcs to make fast the
door. But that officer, who did not rerain so much
presence of mind as to cbey this prudent order,
runnning to the top of the ilair-cafe, wildly ailked
the conspirators what they meant, and whither
they were going ? Inflead of answering, they flab-
bed him to the heart, and burfl into the hall.
Some of the persons who were there threw tliem-
fclves fiom the windows; others attempted to fly;
and a few drawing their swords, followed their
leader into an inner apartment. The conspirators,
animated with having the objc t of their vengeance
now in view, rulhed forward after them. l'izarro,
with no other arms than his sword and buckler,
defended the entry, anti flpported by his half-
brother Alcantara, and his little knot of friends,
;e maintained the un( qual contelt with intr-pidiity
worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigour of
a youthful combatant. ' Courage," crit-ld I,

companions, we are yet cnow to make t{;o/e

traitors repent of their audacity." But the armllour
nl the conlifirators prottl:edl them, while every
thrill they made took cffcct. Alcantara 'fel dead

B o K at his brother's feet; his other defenders werf

Vi.
--L-- mortally wounded. The governor, so weary thai
'54' he could hardly wield his sword, and no lonper

able to parry the many weapons furiouny aimed at
him, received a deadly thrust full in his throat,
funk to the ground, and expired.

Almagro As Coon as he was slain, the afTallns ran out
ockhnowe
Icdd ashi, into the itreets, and waving their bloody Iworc:,
celrsor. proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above tv.

hundred of their associates having joined thea.,
they conducted young Almagro in solemn pro-
ceflion through the city, and assembling the magi-
firates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge him as lawful successor to his father
in his government. The palace of Pizarro, toge-
ther with the houses of several of his adherents,
were pillaged by the soldiers, who had the farilf
faEtion at once of being avenged on their enemies,
and of enriching themselves by the spoils of thole
through whose hands all the wealth of Peru had
pasfd b

rw uP. THE boldness and success of the conspiracy, as

pcall -cs of
.iiosii. well as the name and popular qualities ot Alma-

gro, drew many soldiers to his standard. lvery
adventurer of (deliperate fortune, all who who were
dilfatisfied with Pizarro, and from the raplcioull-

1, Zarate, lib. iv. c. 6-8. Gomara lift . c. .4>, 1 4. '

V.c a, p. 1 1. lib. iii. c. 5-7. Herrera, dec. 6, lib. x. c. -7.
1i'zairo V\ r. 1lluil. I'. l '3

ndr I

ness of his government in the latter years of his B o o K
life, the number of malcontents was considerable, i----
declared without hesitation in favour of Almagro, 54I'
and he was Coon at the head of eight hundred of
the most gallant veterans in Peru. As his youth
and inexperience disqualified him from taking the
command of them himself, he appointed Herrada
to at as general. But though Almagro speedily
colleeed such a refpeaable force, the acquiescence
in his government was far from being general.
Pizarro had left many friends to whom his memory
was dear; the barbarous aflaflination of a man to
whom his country was so highly indebted, filled
every impartial person with horror. The ignomi-
nious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful
title on which he founded his pretensions, led
others to confider him as an usurper. The officers
who commanded in tome provinces refused to re-
cognize his authority, until it was confirmed by
the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal standard was erected, and preparations
made to revenge the murder of their ancient
leader.

THOSE feeds of discord, which could not have Arrival of

lain long dormant, acquired great vigour and aEti- carod
vity, when thl arrival of Vaca de Castro was
known. After a long and difaltrous voyage, he
was driven by firess of weather into a 'mall har-
bour in the province of Ilopayan; and proceeding
from thence by land, after a journey no less tedious

B o0 K than difficult, he reached Quito. In his way he
« -y received accounts of Pizarro's death, and of it:
who:,t,..'. events which followed upon it. He immnieiately
Ohtrnttr.' produced the royal commiflion appointing him

governor of Peru, wirh the fame privileges and
authority; and his jurisdiction was acknowledged
without hesitation by Benalcazar, Adclantado, or
lieutenant general for the emperor in Popayan,
and by Pedro de Puclles, who, in the abfcence of
Gonzalo Pizarro, had the command of the troops
left in Quito. Vaca de Castro not only afTuntel
the supreme authority, but Ifiewed that he pof-
lefTed the talents which the exercise of it at that
juncure required. By his influence and addrfsl he
soon alTembled such a body of troops, as not only
set him above all fear of being expoled to any in-
fult from the adverse party, but enabled him to
advance from Quito with the dignity that became
his character. By dispatching persons of confi-
dence to the diflerent cfttlements in Peru, with a
formal notification of his arrival and of his com-
minfion, he communicated to his countrymen the
royal pleasure with refpe& to the government of
the country. By private cnifrEries, he excited
Iuch officers as had discovered their dilapprobation
of Almagro's proceedings, to manifclt their diL.t
to their lfvereign by supporting the person honour-
ed with his conmifion. Those measures were pro-
duct ive of great eCIctls. l ncouragdl by the al)-
proach ot the new governor, or pparpared by Ini
macliiniations, tile loyal were confirnued in tlc:r

p 1i, 'ni' ',,

principles, and avowed them with greater bold- B ,0 K
ness; the timid ventured to declare their senti- '--_-
ments; the neutral and wavering, finding it ne-
ceffary to chufe a fide, began to lean to that which
now appeared to be the safest as well as the most
jut '.

ALMAGRO observed the rapid progress of this ConduA of

spirit of difaffeflion to his caule, and in order to Ai"'ago.
give an effectual check to it before the arrival of
Vaca de Caitro, he set out at the head of his troops s541.
for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of
opponents had erected the royal standard, under
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During
his march thither, Herrada, the skilful guide of
his youth and of his counsels, died; and from that
time his measures were conspicuous for their vio-
lence, but concerted with little sagacity, and exe-
cuted with no address. Holguin, who, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de-
scending towards the coast at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco, deceived his
unexperienced adversary by a very simple itrata-
gem, avoided an engagement, and efitfted a junc-
tion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who had
been the firlt to declare againit Almagro as an
ulkirper.

SOON after, Vaca de Cafiro entered their camp Prvrr..,(
with the troops which he brought from Q)ito, V, ....

c I1nznn, lihb iii. c. 9. Z. a tc, lib. i. . I. Gi. linara,

C. 14",
t 47. 11crera, dec 6.
1I,. x. c. I, z, 3. 7, 5..

;1I1d

B o°V K and ereting the royal standard before his o,.,

. tent, he declared, that as governor, he would di;-
'5'4' charge in person all the functions of general oi

their combined forces. Though formed by the
tenour of his past life to the habits of a sedentary
and pacific profelffon, he at once afTumed the a&-
vity and discovered the decision of an officer lonlg
accustomed to command. Knowing his ftiength to
be now far superior to that of the enemy, he was
impatient to terminate the contest by a battle.
Nor did the followers of Almagro, who had no
hopes of obtaining a pardon for a crime so atro-
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that
Sept. 6. mode of decision. They met at Chupas, about two

hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with all
the fierce animosity inspired by the violence of
civil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the
eagerness of revenge, and the last efforts of despair.
Defrat A). Vi&tory, after remaining long doubtful, declared

at last for Vaca de Castro. 'I he superior number
of his troops, his own intrepidity, and the martial
talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran officer
formed under the great captain in the wars of
Italy, and who on that day laid the foundation of
his future fame in Peru, triumphed over the
bravery of his opponents, though led on by young
Almagro with a gallant Ipirir, worthy of a better
cause, and deserving another fate. The carnage
was great in proportion to the number of the com-
batants. Many of the vanquished, cfpecially Ihch
as were conscious that they might be charged s\ith

beriln

being accessory to the assassination of Pizarro, rush- B °o K
ing on the swords of the enemy, chose to fall like ----
soldiers, rather than wait an ignominious doom. 5'
Offourten hundred men, the total amount of com-
batants on both fides, five hundred lay dead on
the field, and the number of the wounded was still
greater .

IF the military talents displayed by Vaca de ,vertyor

Caltro, both in the council and in the field, fur- ,,igsP'
prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were fill more
astonished at his condu& after the viCtory. As he
was by nature a rigid dilpenf-r ofjuftice, and per-
fuaded that it required examples of extraordinary
severity to restrain the licentious spirit of soldiers
bs far removed from the feat of government, he
proceeded directly to try his prisoners as rebels.
Forty were condemned to susser the death of trai-
tors, others were banished from Peru. Their
leader, who made his escape from the battle, be-
ing betrayed by some of his officers, was publicly
beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name of
Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was ex-
tin& c.

DURING those violent convulsions in Peru, the c.nrultJ.

tion, of tho
emperor and his ministers were intently employed ecmperor

concerning
hi. doni-

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 12-19. Gomara, c. 1.18. Vega, nion in

p. is. lib. iii. c. J a- i X. llcricra, dec. 7. lib. i. c. I, 2, 3. America.
lib. iii . c. I-l.

* Zarate, lib. iv. c. zr. Comarm, c. ri,. Ilerrera, dec. 7.

lib. ic. . lib.

vi. c.
. . , c.

VOL. I II in

B o o K in preparing regulations, by which they hoped not

- only to re-eftablilh tranquillity there, but to intro-
J54*' duce a more perfect system of internal policy into

all their fettlernents in the New World. It is ma-
lnifil: from all the events recorded in the hiflory of
America, that rapid and extensive as the Spanish
conquefis there had been, they were not carried
on by any regular exertion of the national force,
but by the occasional efforts of private adventurers.
After fitting out a few of the first armaments for
discovering new regions, the court of Spain, during
the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V.,
the former the most intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the most ambitious, was encumbered
with such a multiplicity of schemes, and involved
in war with so many nations in Europe, that it had
not leisure to attend to distant and lets interefling
objects. The care of prosecuting discovery, or (of
attempting conquft, was abandoned toindividuals;
and with such ardour did men pufl forward in
this new career, on which novelty, the spirit of
adventure, avarice, ambition, and the hope of
meriting heaven, prompted them with combined
influence to enter, that in less than Ihllf i century
almost the whole of that extensive empire which
Spain now poffeffcs in the New World, was Ifb-
je&ed to its dominion. As the Spanish court con-
tributed nothing towards the various expeditions
undertaken in America, it was not intitlcd to claim
much from their fucccls. The iverceignty of the
conquered provinces, with the fifth of the gold

and

and silver, was reserved for the crown; every B O O K
thing else was seized by the associates in each ex-. -
pedition as their own right. The plunder of the "42'
countries which they invaded served to indem-
nify them for what they had expended in equip-
ping themselves for the service, and the con-
quered territory was divided among them, accord-
ing to rules which custom had introduced, as
permanent establishments which their successful
valour merited. In the infancy of those settlements,
when their extent as well as their value were un-
known, many irregularities escaped obfcrvation,
and it was found necessary to connive at many ex-
cesses. The conquered people were pillaged with
deftrudtive rapacity, and their country parcelled
out among its new masters in exorbitant fliares, far
exceeding the highest recompence die to their
services. The rude conquerors of America, i.-
capable of forming their efiablillinents upon any
general or extenfivc plan of policy, attentive only
to private interest, unwilling to forego present g.ain
frtm the prolct of remote or public benefit, ,Lln:
to have had no object but to amass sudden wealth,
without regarding wihat mihlt be the conlccluenccs
of the means b' which they acquired it. But
when time at lcng:th difcovcred to the Spaniil
court the importaincc of its Ametican policfiions,
the neceficty of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
practices prevalent among military adventurers,

11 2 it

B °0 K it was found requisite to fubflitute the institutions

vi.
- -i of regular government.
'542.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the islands, and employed themselves in
searching fur gold and silver with the fame incon-
fiderate eagerness. Similar effets followed. The
natives employed in this labour by matters, who in
impoting tafls had no regard either to what they
felt or to what they were able to perform, pined
away and perished io fast, that there was reason to
apprehend that Spain, inflead of possessing coun-
tries peopled to such a degree as to be susceptible
of progreflive improvement, would soon remain
proprietor only of a vafl uninhabited desert.

THE emperor and his miniflers were so sensible

of this, and so solicitous to prevent the extin&ion
of the Indian race, which threatened to render their
acquisitions of no value, that from time to time
various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for securing to that unhappy people more
gentle and equitable treatment. But the diflance
of America from the feat of empire, the feeblenels
of government in the new colonies, the avarice and
audacity of soldiers unaccufiomed to reltraint, pre-
vented there salutary regulations from operating
with any considerable influence. The evil conti-

nued

nued to grow, and at this time the emperor found B O, o K
an interval ofleifure from the affairs of Europe to .-W-j
take it into attentive conlideration. He consulted Th p4rons
not only with his minillers and the members of the 'hth dvho,
council of the Indies, but called upon several
persons who had resided long in the New World, to
aid them with the result of their experience and
observation. Fortunately for the people of Ame-
rica, among these was Bartholomew de las Casas,
who happened to be then at Madrid on a miflion
from a chapter of his order at Chiapa '. Though,
since the miscarriage of his former schemes for the
relief of the Indians, he had continued Ihut up in
his cloilter, or occupied in religious functions, his
zeal in behalf of the former objects of his pity
was so far from abating, that, from an increased
knowledge of their sufferings, its ardour had aug-
mented. He seized eagerly this opportunity of
reviving his favourite maxims concerning the
treatment of the Indians. With the moving elo-
quence natural to a man on whose mind the
scenes which he had beheld had made a deep
impreflon, he described the irreparable waste of
the human species in the New World, the Indian
race almost totally swept away in the islands in
less than fifty years, and hastening to extinction on
the continent with the fame rapid decay. With
the decisive tone of one strongly prepoffc(fed with
the truth of his own fyltem, he imputed all this

' I'cmcfal IIil. de Chilia, p. r45.

II 3 to

B 0 0o K to a single cause, to the exations and cruelty of

VI.

- his countrymen, and contended that nothing could
54 prevent the depopulation of America, but the de-

claring of its natives to be freemen, and treating
them as fubjets, not as saves. Nor did he con-
fide for the success of this proposal in the powers
of his oratory alone. In order to enforce them, he
composed his famous treatise concerning the de-
ftrudion of America g, in which he relarct with
many horrid circumstances, but with apparent
marks of exaggerated dcfcription, the dcvaliati n
of every province which had been visited by the
Spaniards.

His fCl;ci- THE emperor was deeply afliicd with the re-
rude to in-
iroducea cital of so many actions shocking to humanity.
o-mnationof But as his views extended far beyond those of Las
overnment. Casas, he perceived that relieving the Inuian, from

opprelion was but one flep towards rendering his
possessions in the New World a valuable acqulii-
tion, and would be of little avail, unless he could
circumscribe the power and usurpations of his own
fubjets there. The conquerors of America, how-
ever great their merit had been towards their coun-
try, were mostly persons of such mean birth, and
of such abjec rank in society, as gave no diftinc-
tion in the eye of a monarch. The exorbitant
wealth with which rome of them returned, gave
umbrage to an age not accustomed to fee men in

g Remefal, p. 192. 199.

inferior

insir;or condition elevated above th, ir level, and nB " K

¥1.

rising to emulate or to furipafr th' ..nr ;!' r:hility -
in splendour. '1 hI- t(c: it i :c which liciti ic..itrs 5s4"
had appropriated to themlelves were of such enor-
mous extent h, that if the country should ever be
improved in proportion to the fertility of the foil,
they mufL grow too wealthy and too powerful for
fubjets. It appeared to Charles, that this abuse
required a remedy no less than the other, and that
tile regulations concerning both mult be enforced
by a mode of go vrnment more vigorous than had
yet been introduced into America.

WITHI this view he framed a body of laws, New regu.

larions tor

containing many falurary appointments with re- thispurpofe,
fpeR to the conititution and powers of the supreme
council of the Indies; concerning the flation and
jurisdiction of the royal audiences in different parts
of America; the adminittration of justice; the
order of government, both ecclesiastical and civil.
These were approved of by all ranks of men. But
together with them were issued the following regu-
lations, which excited universal alarm, and occa-
sioned the most violent convulsions: " That as the
repartimientos or shares of land seized by several
persons appeared to be exceflive, the royal
audiences are empowered to reduce them to a
moderate extent: That upon the death of any
conqueror or planter, the lands and Indians granted

h See NOTE XV.

H 4 to

B °0 K to him shall not descend to his widow or children,

vi.
- _----' but return to the crown: That the Indians shall
'51' henceforth be exempted from personal service, and

lhall not be compelled to carry the baggage of
travellers, to labour in the mines, or to dive in
the pearl fiffheries: That the flated tribute due by
them to their superior shall be ascertained, and
they shall be paid as servants for any work they
voluntarily perform: That all persons who are or
have been in public offices, ecclesiastics of every
denomination, hospitals and monasteries, ihall be
deprived of the lands and Indians allotted to
them, and these be annexed to the crown: That
every person in Peru, who had any criminal con-
cern in the contests between Pizarro and Almaero,
should forfeit his lands and Indians '."

rit sini- ALL the Spaniflh minilters who had hitherto
'lr.reagaint been entrusted with the direction of American
{hcnj.

affairs, and who were best acquainted with the slate
cf the country, remonfirated again1f thole regula-
tions as ruinous to their infant colonies. They
repr lented, that the number of Spaniards who
had hitherto emigrated to the New World was lb
c;xtrc:lcly iLmall, that nothing could be expectel
irom any efoirc of theirs towards improving the
vafit reiors over wvlich they were scattercd ; that
t!;'-- ilccels of every fIhclme for this purpose nn!lL

i lictrcra, dec. 7. lib. \i. c. '. I'¢rnm::dcz IJill. 1!b. i.
C. I,

dc ', *
uJ 'i"''i ' !

depend upon the ministry and service of the In- B o o K
dians, whose native indolence and aversion to la-
bour, no prospect of benefit or promise or reward 'si'.
could surmount; that the moment the right of im-
poling a talk, and exacting the performance of it,
was taken from their matters, every work of
industry muff cease, and all the sources from
which wealth begun to pour in upon Spain must
be flopt for ever. But Charles, tenacious at all
times of his own opinions, and so much impressed
at present with the view of the disorders which
reigned in America, that he was willing to ha-
zard the application even of a dangerous remedy,
persisted in his resolution of publishing the laws.
That they might be carried into execution with
greater vigour and authority, he authoriftd Fran-
cisco Tello de Sandoval to repair to Mexico as
Vifitador or superintendent of that country, and to
co.operate with Antonio de Mendoza, the viceroy,
in enforcing them. He appointed Blasco Nugnez A viceroy
Vela to be governor of Peru, with the title of p o'r.
Viceroy; and in order to flrengthen his admini-
flration, he established a court of royal audience S543.
in Lima, in which four lawyers of eminence were
to preside as judges k

THE viceroy and superintendent failed at t;he Efferi of

fame time; and an account of the laws which they i'n ig 'Ncw
were to enforce reached America before them. Slai'i.

k ar.tc, lib. iii. c. 24. Gomara, c. i; . Vcgi, p. 2.
lib. iii. c. 2o.

The

B o o K The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed as

Vi.

_--- the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited grant
'*543 of liberty to the Indians affected every Spaniard in

America without difiinaion, and there was haruly
one who might not onl obme pretext be incluied
under the other regulations, and luffer by theml
But the colony in New Spain had now beezn i
long accustomed to the reltraints of law and autlo.
rity under the Ready and prudent adminiliraiion
ofMendoza, that how much loever the spirit o'
the new tfatutes was detected and dreaded, no a:.
tempt was made to obllrucd the pubi:caticn c
them by any ac of violence unbecom;ng subjects.
The magistrates and princip.l inhabitants, hoi.
ever, presentcd dutiful addretlr s to the viceroy
and superintendent, reprelinting the fatal conf.c
quences of enforcing them. Happily for them,
Mendoza, by long residence in the country, was
so thoroughly acquainted with its ifate, th.it I;e
knew what was for its interest as well as what it
could bear; and Sandoval, though new in office,
displayed a degree of moderation ICldom poflcllcd
by persons just entering upon the exercise ot
power. They engaged to fulipend, for some time,
the execution of what was offensive in the new
laws, and not only consented that a deputation of
citizens lhould be sent to Europe to lay before the
emperor the apprelenfions of his fubjets in New
Spain with refpeC to their tendency and ellccts,
but they concurred with them in supporting their
sentiments. Charles, moved by the opinion of

3 nwen

men whlofe abil,t:ts and integrity intitled them to B O O K
dc.lde concerning what fell immediately under
tiier own view, granted flti(h a relax.ation of the 1543.
ri our of the l,'w :s r:--(',ibiifiled the colony in
its /ormer trancjiiii h.

IN Peru the -nrm gathered with an aspec still In Peru,

niore ficrce ;:nd threatenitng, u:ld was not so soon
dilperlcd. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
much inferior to thole who had ilubjeted Mexico
to the Spanifil crown, farther removed from the
in:pcqtion of rtl parent state, and intoxicated with
the ludden acquisition of wealth, carried on all
their operations with greater licence and irregula-
ri;y than any body of adventurers in the New
World. Amidll the general subversion of law
aad order, occasioned by two successive civil wars,
when each individual was at liberty to decide for
himfcif, without any guide but his own interest or
paflions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
of subordination. To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the introduction of regular government,
the power of a viceroy, and the authority of a re-
fpect.ble court of judicature, would have appeared
formidable reltraints, to which they would have
submitted with reluaance. But they revolted
with indignation against the idea of complying
with laws, by which they were to be firipped at

Fcrn.ndez Hifl. lib. i. c. 3, 4, 5. Vega, p. i . lib. ii.

c, 21, 22. Herrera, dec. 7. lit). v. c. 7. lib. vii. c. 14, IS-
Torqicm. Mon. Ind. lib. v . c. 13.

once

B °0 K once of all they had earned To hardly during many

V1.

_-,-- years of service and fufftring. As the account of
-'13' the new laws spread fuccefively through the dif.

ferent settlements, the inhabitants ran together,
the women in tears, and the men exclaiming
againfl the injustice and ingratitude of their fove.
reign in depriving them, unheard and unconvi&ed,
of their possessions. "Is this, cried they, the
recompence due to persons, who, without public
aid, at their own expence, and by their own v-
Jour, have fubje&ed to the crown of Castile terri.
tories of such vatt extent and opulence ? Are there
the rewards beltowed for having endured unparal-
leled ditlrcfs, for having encountered every fpe.
cies of danger in the I;rvice of their country?
Whose merit is so great, whose conduc has been
so irreproachable, that he may not be condemned
by some penal clause in regulations, conceived in
terms as loose and comprehensive, as if it had
been intended that all flould be entangled in their
snare? Every Spaniard of note in Peru has held
oime public office, and all, without diltindion,
have been conitrained to take an active part in the
contest between the two rival chiefs. Were the
former to be robbed of their property becaule they
had clone their duty ? \Were the latter to be 1l-0
nlshedl on account of whlat they could not avoicd
.h;;ll tlhe conquerors of ilis great elmpire, illitad
of recivineg marks c ,tdilliinltijn, be deprivedi (t
the nirural conltlation of providing for their wt-
douvs v;n! i'.il:rcin, an;d rlave thclci to lde)endl tor

lubfillen'.'c

fubfiilence on the scanty fopply they can extort Ba o K

vri

from unfeeling courtiers " ? We are not able now, ,_-
continued they, to explore unknown regions in '54S.
quell of more secure settlements; our conflitu-
tions, debilitated with age, and our bodies cover-
ed with wounds, are no longer fit for acive ser-
vice; but 1ill we poili-s vigour sufficient to aslrrt
our just rights, and we will not tamely susser them
to be wrested from us"."

BY discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe- A ;nfur-

mence, and listened to with univerlfl approbation, ..,.d ~y
their paflions were infl:incd to such a pitch, that the,, . .-
they were prepared for the molt violent nmcalfures; clo.
and began to hol i conifultations in di!,'rent places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the viceroy
and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws. From this,
however, they were diverted by the address of
Vaca de Castro, who flattered them with the hopes,
that, as soon as the viceroy and judges should ar-
rive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and
remonstrances, they would concur with them in
endeavouring to procure some mitigation in the
rigour of laws which had been framed without due
attention either to the slate of the country, or to
the sentiments of the people. A greater degree of
accommodation to these, and even some conceflions

m -cricra, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. II, I;.
"° omara, c. I;z. lieneri, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. to, II.
Vtg.1 p. I. b i:i. c. 2o. z2 . lih. i'. c 3, 4.

* * on

B o o K on the part of government, were now become re

vI.
a quifite to compose the present ferment, and ic
*543' sooth the colonists into submission, by inli)iring

them with confidence in their superiors. But with
out profound discernment, conciliating manners.
and flexibility of temper, iuch a plan could not be
The spirit carried on. The viceroy possessed none of tlite.

to - Of all the qualities that fit men for high command,
crfdb he was endowed only with integrity and courage
the viceroy. n c

the former harfli and uncomplying, the latter bor.
dering so frequently on rafhnels or obifinacy, to;:
in his situation they were defects rather than vi-
tarch 4, tues. From the moment that he landed at Tun:-

bez, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidered him.
felfmerely as an executive officer, without any ddf
cretionary power; and, regardless of whatever he
observed or heard concerning the slate of the
country, he adhered to the letter of the regu]atorns
with unrelenting rigour. In all the towns thr(Jiij
which he pafIed, the natives were declared to be
free, every person in public office was deprived ot
his lands and lervants; and as an example of obe.
dience to others, he would not fufTer a tingle In.
dian to be employed in carrying his own bag.i ge
in his march towards Lima. Amazement and
coniternation went before him as he approached;
and lb little soli itous was he to prevent thefie from
augmenting, that, on entering the capital, hie
openly avowed that he canoe ti obey the orders
of his sovereign, nor to dilpentc with his laws.
This har(h declaration was accompinied with what

rendterd

rendered it fill more intolerable, haughtiness in B o o K.
deportment, a tone of arrogance and decision in v -
dilcourfe, and an insolence of office grievous to 1543.
men little accustomed to hold civil authority in
high refpe&. Every attempt to procure a lul-
pension or mitigation of the new laws, the viceroy
confidered as flowing from a spirit of difaffction
that tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank
were confined, and some put to death, without
any form of trial. Vaca de Castro was arrested,
and notwithstanding the dignity of his former
rank, and his merit in having prevented a general
infurredion in the colony, he was loaded with
chains, and shut up in the common jail .

BUT however general the indignation was against The r l-

such proceedings, it is probable the hand of autho- Chu'' .,,,-
rity would have been strong enough to fupprels it, ~,~lc

. l"

or to prevent its burling out with open violence, l'''".
if the malcontents had not been provided with a
leader of credit and eminence to unite and to di-
ref their efforts. From the time that the purport
of the new regulations was known in Peru, every
Spaniard there turned his eyes towards Gonzalo
Pizarro, as the only person able to avert the ruin
with which they threatened the colony. From all
quarters, letters and addreflcs were lent to him,
conjuring him to stand fo)rth as their coinmoni) p)ro-
tecor, and offering to support him in the attempt

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 23, , 25. (;oInarj, c. 153--15.
pVa, p i. lib. iv . c. 4, 5. 1Fernil:z, lii. i. c. (--to.

'ilth

B °0 K with their lives and fortunes. Gonzalo, though
-S ., inferior in talents to his other brothers, was equally

543 ambitious, and of courage no less daring. The

behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his bro-
thers and himself, dwelt continually on his mind,
Ferdinand a fate prisoner in Europe, the children
of the governor in custody of the viceroy, and Icr,s
aboard his fleet, himself reduced to the condition
of a private citizen in a country, for the discover:
and conquest of which Spain was indebted to his
family. These thoughts prompted him to seek for
vengeance, and to afrert the rights of his family,
of which he now confidered himtelf as the guar-
dian and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily
surmount that veneration for his lbvereign which is
interwoven in his frame, the idea of marching in
arms against the royal standard filled him with hor-
ror. He hesitated long, and was frill unresolved,
when the violence of the viceroy, the universal
call of his countrymen, and the certainty of be-
coming loon a vitim himself to the severity of the
new laws, moved him to quit his residence at
Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and re-
ceived him with transports of joy as the deliverer
of the colony. In the fervour of their zeal, they
clected him procurator-general of the Spanish na-
tion in Peru, to solicit the repeal of the late regu-
lations. They empowered him to lay their re-
monstrances before the royal audience in Inima,
and upon pretext of danger from the Indians,

authori ed

nuthorifed him to march thither in arms. Under B 0o0 K
fantion of this nomination Pizarro took pofTefion --
of the royal treasure, appointed officers, levied 54
soldiers, fiizcd a large train of artillery which
Vaca de Caltro had deposited in Guamanga, and
cet out for Lima, as if he had been advancing
against a public enemy. Difatfet&ion having now
assumed a regular form, and being united under
a chief of fuich diltinguifhed name, many persons
of note reobrted to his flandard; and a confider-
able part of the troo)ps, railcd by the viceroy to
oppose his progress, defcrted to him in a body °.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had D Tenti ""

of tile vicc.
happened there, which encouraged him to proceed roy ard

o court of

with almost certainty of success. The violence of audience.
the viceroy's adminiftrarion was not more formi-
dable to the Spaniards of Peru than his overbear-
ing hiughtinels was odious to his associates, the
judges of the royal audience. During their voy-
age fro:n Spain, some Iyniptoms of coldneis began
to appear P. But as loon as they entered upon the
exercilr of their rclpertive offices, both parties
were lb mucl exasperated by frequent contests,
ariring from interfereuce of juril.iiliun, and con-
trarlery ot opinion, that their mutual disgust soon

° /arate, lil. v. C. . (;omarn, c. 15i , 1 .7. Vcga, p. 1.

lih. iv C.c 4-1z. 1crnandcz, litl. i. C, 12-17. Hcrrera,
dec. m bl. i ii. c. iS, &c. lib. viii. c. i- 5.

P Couin r;a, C. 171.
VOL. III. I grew

B O K. grew into open enmity. The judges thwarted the
L-_-i viceroy in every mealUre, let at liberty prifoneis

'544' whom he had confined, juflified the malcontents,

and applaudcd their renonltrances. At a time
when both departments of government should have
un;iced against the approaching enemy, they were
contending with each other for superiority. The

I'ltI^,.' judges at length prevailed. The viceroy, univer-
;rt. '. sally odious, and abandoned even by his own

guards, was seized in his palace, and carried to a
delert island on the coast, to be kept there until
he could be sent home to Spain.
v- co' THE judges, in consequence of this, having

afTumed the supreme direction of afi(irs into their
own hands, ilrued a proclamation fulpending the
execution of the obnoxioiLs laws, and lent a me'-
l.ige to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever le could requelf, to dismiss his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or
twenty attendants. They could hardly expec that
a man lb daring and ambitious would tamely com-
ply with this requisition. It was made, probably,
with no such intention, but only to throw a de-
cent veil over their own conduct ; for Cepeda, the
president of the court of audience, a pragmatical
and alpiring lawyer, ferms to have held a -lcrc.
correlpondence with Pizarro, and had already
tormed the plan, which he afterwards executed,
of devoting himself to his service. The imprilon-

5 mcnt

ment of the viceroy, the ufirpation of the judges, B o°O K
together with the universal confusion and anarchy -
consequent upon events so singular and unexpected, Is4.
opened new and vast prospects to Pizarro. He
now beheld the supreme power within his reach.
Nor did he want courage to push on towards the
object which fortune presented to his view. Car-
vajal, the prompter of his rcfolutions, and guide
of all his actions, had long fixed his eye upon it
as the only end at which Pizarro ought to aim.
Instead of the inferior function of procurator for
the Spanish fcttlements in Peru, he openly de-
manded to be governor and captain-general of the
whole province, and required the court of audi-
ence to grant him a commission to that effect. At
the head of twelve hundred men, within a mile of
Lima, where there was neither leader nor army to
oppose him, such a request carried with it the au-
thority of a command. But the judges, either
from unwillingness to relinquiih power, or fiom
a desire of preserving some attention to appear-
ances, hesitated, or seemed to hesitate, about com-
plying. Carvajal, impatient of delay, and impe- He afLumn
tuous in all his operations, marched into the city ment."""-
by night, seized several officers of distinction ob-
noxious to Pizarro, and hanged them without the
formality of a trial. Next morning the court of
audience ifued a comnniffion in the emperor's
name, appointing l'izarro governor of I'cru, with
full powers, civil as well as military, and he entered

I 2 the

B o° 0 K the town that day with extraordinary pomp, to

Vy.

-,--- take puffellion of his new dignity '

1544.

on. s3. BUT amidit the disorder and turbulence which
'IThe viccrov
crOv..s his accompanied this total difTolution of the frame
libery. of government, the minds of men, set loole troml

the ordinary reflraints of law and authority, aCcd
with such capricious irregularity, that events no
lets extraordinary than unexpected followed in a
rapid succession. Pizarro had ifcarcely begun to
exercise the new powers with which he was in-
vested, when he beheld formidable enemies rife up
to oppose him. The viceroy having been put on
board a vessel by the judges of the audience, in
order that he might be carried to Spain under
custody of Juan Alvarez, one of their own num-
ber; as soon as they were out at Tea, Alvarez,
either touched with remorse or moved by fear, fell
at the feet of his prisoner, declaring him from that
moment to be free, and that he himself, and every
person in the ship, would obey him as the legal
representative of their sovereign. Nugnez Vela
ordered the pilot of the vessel to flape his course
towards Tumbez, and as soon as he landed there,
erected the royal Itandard, and resumed his func-
tions of viceroy. Several persons of note, to whom
the contagion of the fedirious spirit which reigned
at Cuzco and Lima had not reached, inflantly

q Z.;aratc, lib,. v. c. 8-10. Vega, p. 1i. lib. iv . c. 1-

19. Goinara, c. 159- J63. I:ern.andez, lib. i. c. I&-z5.
llcrrciei, dec. 7. lib. viii . c. o-20.

avowed

avowed their resolution to support his authority '. B 0 ° K
The violence of Pizarro's government, who ob- *_ '
served every individual with the jealouly natural '544'
to ulurpers, and who punished every appearance
of difaffecRion with rigour, soon augmented the
number or the viceroy's adherents, as it forced
lome leading men in the colony to fly to him for
refuge. While he was gathering; luch strength at
Tumbez, that his forces began to assume the ap-
pearance of what was conlidered as an army in
America, Diego Centeno, a bold and active offi-
cer, exasperated by the cruelty and oppreion of
Pizarro's lieutenant governor in the province of
Charcas, formed a conspiracy against his life, cut
him off, and declared for the viceroy '

PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear- , 545.

- Pizarro
ances of holtility in the opposite extremes of the marches

a aiofi him.

empire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to
assert the authority to which he had artained, with
the spirit and contduct of an officer accultomed to
command, and marched directly against the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as moit
fornidable. As he was mafltr of the public re-
venues in Peru, and moil of the military men were
attached to his family, his troops were so nume-
rous, that the viceroy, unable to face them, re-

' Zaratr, lib. v . . 9 Comara, c. 1i6(. :crnalndcz, lib. i.
c. 23. Ilcrrcra, dec. ;. lib. viii. c. 15.

' Z/ar.at, lib. v. c. 18. Gomara, c. 16). llerrcra, dec. ;.
lib, ix. c. -7.

I 3 treated

B 0 0 K treated towards Quito. Pizarro followed him;

Vi.

aL_.- - and in that long march, through a wild moun-
1'545 tainous country, suffered hardships and encoun-

tered difficulties, which no troops but those ac-
cuflomed to fcrve in America could have endured
or surmounted ". The viceroy had scarcely reached
Quito, when the van-guard of l'izarro's forces ap-
peared, led by Carvajal, who, though near fotr-
Icore, was as hardy and active as any young fol.
dier under his command. Nugnez Vela instantly
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and with
a rapidity more resembling a flight than a retreat,
marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro
continued to pursue; bur finding it impoflble to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From thence
he difp.tchcd Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who
was growing formidable in the southern provinces
of the empire, and he himself remained there to
make head agJnift the viceroy ".

Th v;icsroy By his own activity, and the afliftance of Be-
ccfcacdj,

nalcazar, Nugnez Vela soon assembled four hun-
dred men in Popayan. As he retained, amidst all
his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and the
fame higli sense of his own dignity, he rejected with
disdain the advice of some of his followers, who
urged him to make overtures of accommodation

" Sec N OrE XVI.
x Zarate, lib. v. c. 15, 16-24. Gomnara, c. 167. Veg.1,

p. 1I. lib. iv. c. 2j-2S. JFrnandez, lib. i. c. 3+. 4°.
lierrcid, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 16. zo-z7.

to

to Pizarro, declaring that it was only by tle fwxordl B °O - K
that a contefl with rebels could be decided. \With %-
this intention he marched back to Quito. Pizarro, i-4G.
reyi)ng on the luperior number, and still more on
the dilcipline and valour of his troops, advanced
resolutely to meet him. The battle was fierce ani J ...u'y ,I.
bloody, both partics fighting lik:e men who l knew
that the polfTc ion (f a great empire, the fate of
their leaders, and their own future fortu:e, de-
pended uponl the ifliue of that day. But Piz.rro;
veterans pushed furwardi with fUich regular andc
well-directed force, that they lcon began to i!make
imprcflion on their cneniis. T'e \ iceroy, by ex-
traordinary exertions, in wliL h the abilities of a
commander and the courage of a soldier wure
equally dilplaycd, held victory ifr some time in
ifufpenle. At length he fell, pierced w\itlh nvanyv ;. 1,. i.
wounds; and the route of his followers bec.ane
general. They were hotly pursued. His head
was cut off, and placed on the public gibbet in
Quito, which Pizarro entered in triumph. The
troops alfembled by Centeno were dilperfed loon
after by Carvajal, and he himlelf compelled to fly
to the mountains, where he remained for leveral
months concealed in a cave. Every perifn in
Peru, from the frontiers of lopayan to thole of
Chili, submitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, un-
der Pedro de llinojofa, he had not only the unri-
valled command of the South-Sea, but had t.klen
ponfeflion of Panama, and placed a garrilu: in
Nombre de Dios, on the opposite fide of the

1 4 iflhirnus,

B o o K ilthmus, which rendered him matter of the usual

VI.

t-_ -avenue of communication between Spain and

z54a6 Pe r Y.

pirarro d- AFTER this decisive vicory, Pizarro anld his
fume the followers remained for some time at Quito, and
/Pv,'r'. during the firit transports of their exul:atiOn, they

ran into every excess of licentious inJulgrence, wich
the riotous 1pirit ulual among low adventurcis
upon extraordinary fuccels. But, anidlf this dil-
fipation, their chief and his confidents were oblig- d
to turn their thoughts sometimes to vwh:t was fe-
rious, and deliberated with much lblicitude con-
cerning the part that hI ought now to take. Car-
vajal, no lels bold and decilive in counl:l than i:
the field, had from the beginning warned Plizarr,
that in the career on which he was enteringL, it was
vain to think of holding a middle courle; that lie
must either boldly aim at all, or attempt notl:ing.
Froum the time that Pizarro obtained poflT'eon of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater carneltnels. Upon r ceiving
an account of the victory at Quito, he remonilrated
with him in a tone flill more peremptory. '" You
lave ulurped (laid he, in a letter written to Pizarro
on that occasion) the ftuprcme power in this coun-
try, in contempt of the emnpcrur's commiflion to

v 'arate, lib. v. c. 31, 32. (;ornara, c. 1-o. Vc::i, .

1'

lib. ii. c. 33, 34. IFcrnijndcz, lib. i. c. q i- ,4. Iler tr.J,
d1(. 7. . x. C.

x .

c -z. d2c. e-.

c b. i. c. 1-3. 13.j",
lib. ii. c. zz.

2 tile

the viceroy. You have marched,, in hoilile arra, n o o K
ag;infl the royal Itandard ; you have attacl.cd the --
iJep;l:,ritative uo your 1ov',rein in the lield, have 1546
detcated him, and cut o:i his head. Thiik not
that ever a monarch will rorgive fich iliults on his
dignity, or that any reconclliatioun wivt him can be
cordial or sincere. IDpend no louner on the pre-
carious favour ot anothier. A. u.ne youriclf the
lovercignty over a country, t.J the dominion of
whi.-.'h your famnily has a t.tlc iounllcd on the ri.hts
both of diflcove y a:in conquc!t. It is in your
power to attach every Slaniird in Peru of any
conliquence inv.olably to your intercle by liberal
grants of lanids an-1 of Indians, or by inlituting
rinks of nobility, andl creating titles of honour
similar to thole which arc courted with lb much
eagerness in Europe. By etla!)lifhin, ori'ers of
knighthoodi, with privilcegs and diliricstions re-
lembling thole in Spain, you nl y beltow a grati-
fication upon the officers in your lervice, fiuited to
the ideas of military men. Nor is it to your couii-
trymen only that you ought to attend ; endeavour
to gain the natives. By marrying the Coya., or
dauglier of the Sun next in luccet'ion to the crnwn,
you will induce the Indians, out of veneration obr
the blood of their a.ncient princes, to iitite with
the S'painia.rdls in lijpport of your authority. 'Ihu. ,
at the head of the ancient inhabitants of Peru, as
urll as of the new settlers there, you may set at
iclin.l c the p)owcr of Spain, and repel with eale
any feeble force which it can lend at such a dil-

tance."

B °v K tance."' Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now i'
1-.- zarro's confidential counfcllor, warmly secondec
'546* Carvajal's exhortations, and employed whatcv,

learning he pflt'ni.d inl demonftraring, that all tl;
founders of great monarchies had been railid ti
pre-eminence, not by the antiquity of their lineac-,
or the validity of their rights, but by their oc:
aspiring valour and pcrlonal merit'.
B., churrs PIZARRO lilnened attentively to both, ant co::.

lo ,ekocilte

I^ '',cthe not conceal the fjtrisfacLion with wi:ich he conrct.-

C j"t
of plated the obic'tL that they preicnted to his vi".:.

But happily for the tranquillity of the world, fctv
men poliFcs that fiiuerior firength of miind, a:,i
extret of abilitics, whiicl are capable of formiig
and execuitng such daring Ichemes, as cannotr c
accomplished \wihout overturning the tftablflt.i
order of focicty, and violating thc i maxin. c:
duty which men are accuftomte to hold lhcir,.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumncrijbc;
his ambition within more narrow linits. Intlcad
of alfiring at indcpencle;:t power, he confined his
views to the oh:aining fri:nl the court of Sp.,in a
con;lir;natior of the authioriry which he now piil
1lleld ; and for tihat purpo!e, he lent an officcri
dillindcion thither, to give such a representation (C1
his condu3, and of thic farc of the country,
might induce the emnperor and his minillers, eitlic

/ Vgn, p. 11. lil). iv. C 4. -. Fctiinndi c7, lib. i. c. :

lib. i.. c. i. ,'. e Icrrer., dcI .
: - . li. i i. c. o.

from inclination or from neceflity, to continue B o°V K
him in his present station.

1546.
WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refpcct to conntl^u-

Zm?3~~ * lions of the

the part which hI- should take, confiltations were Spaniih m-
held in Spain, with no lcfs solicitude, concerning the
incalures which ougTht to be piuriued in order to re-
clltblith the empero"'s authority in Peru. Though
rnacquainted with the lafi cxtcfls of: outrage to
which the malcontents had proceeded there, the
court had received an account of the insurrection
against the viceroy, of his imprifonmert, and the
usurpation of the g)vernment by Pizarro. A revo-
l'j:ijn so alarming called for an immediate interpofi-
tiunofthe enmperor's abilities and authority. But
as he was fully occupied at that time in Germany,
i: condtuaing the war againf: the famous league ot
Smalkalde, one of the molt interesting and ardu-
ous enterprises in his reign, the care of providing
a remedy for the dilbrders in Peru devolved upon
his lon Philip, and the counsellors whom Charles
had appointed to afnifi him in the government of
Spain during his ablence. At firtl view, the ac-
t:ons of Pizarro and his adherents appeared so re-
pugnant to the duty of fuhjedLs towards their so-
vercign, that the greater part of the minilters in-
filced on declaring them in!tantly to be guilty of
rebellion, and on proceeding to punilh them with
exemplary rigour. But when the fervour of their
::cal and indignation began to abate, innumerable
obflacles to the execution of this Ineafure prelcntcd

themlelves.

B 0 o Kr themselves. The veteran bands of infantry, t;

-- fiRrcngth and glory of the Spanish armies, wec
1546' then employed in Germany. Spain, exhaufltdc

men and money by a long Icries of wars, in whli
{he had been involved by the reltlils ambition c
two successive monarchs, cou!d not easily equii, a:
armament of sufficient force to reduce Iizarro. lT
tranlrort any relpetable body of troops to
country lb remote as Peru, appelared almnol i:.
polLible. While Piz.lrro continued maftcr ofi ',
South-Sea, the dircce route by Nombre de l),i
and Panama was inpraCticab]e. An atteimpt tr
march to Quito by land thruugh the new kintr
of Granada, and the province of Popayan, acrc!i
regions of vast extent, desolate, unhealthy, or in-
habited by fierce and hollile tribes, would be a:-
tended with unsurmountable danger and hardiilip.
The paffdge to the South-Sea by the Straits,:
Magellan was so tedious, lo uncertain, and1
li;tle known in that age, that no confidence co.'L
be placed in any effort carried on in a courfi (:
navigation lb remote and precarious. Noth:i;,
then remained but to relinquifl the iyflem wi:;:i
the ardour of their loyalty had tirft iuggclled, ar;.
to attempt by lcnier.t nicalurcs wliat could not bc
efecrtcd by for-e. It was manifct-, from l'iz.,rro's
fulicitude to reprelent his conduc: in a f;vour.ili
light to the emlperor, that, notwithlandnllng tli
excesses of which he had been guilty, lie fill re-
tained fcitilments of veneration for his ltIvet iJll.
By a proper appl)ic4tion to tlicfc, to-cthcr vwi i

lulic

some such concefflons as should discover a spirit of i °0 K

vy.

nmoderation and forbearance in ,covernment, he
might be yet reclailnmcd, or the ideas of loyalty na- 546.
tulr;l to Spani.rds minhlt f, far revive among his
+ollowers, that they would no longer lend their
aid to uphold his ulfurped authority.

THE fuccers, however, of this negociation, no Ci.-ap-

pPi nted to

lss crlic.tte than it was important, depended en- rpair o
tirtly orl the abilities an 1 address of the person to fit1,,".
whom it fllould be comi:ted. After weighing
with muclh attntion the comparative merit ot va-
rio:s persons, the Spanilh mriniters fixed with
unanimiry of choice upon Pedro de l. Gafca, a
pricti in no higher flarion than that ofcounlellor to
t:e Inquisition. Though in no public office, he
had been occafiona!!y emp'oyed by government in
affairs of trun and conli'quence, and had conduRt-
edi them with no lels killl than fucclfs; dillaying
a gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied with
triichl firnmnefs; probity, fuprilur to any) feeling of
private intrtret; and a cautious circulmt-ec. ion in
concertingr mealures, followed by fuchl vigour in
executing them, as is rarely found in P:li.nce with
the other. Thele qualities marked him out for the
funfcion to which he was defined. T'he emperor,
to whom Galca was not unknown, warmly ap-
Iroved of the choice, and communicated it to himin
in a letter, containing exprefnions of good-will and
confidence, no lelis hoi:ourable to the prince who
wrote, than to the lubljetc who received it. Gafca,

notwitli-

B °0 K notwithflanding his advanced age and feeble confii
- .- --. tution, and though, from the apprehensions nature

1546. to a man, who, during the course of his life, hai

never been out of his own country, he dreaded ti,t
effects of a long voyage, and of an unhealthy
climate', did not helitate a moment about comr.

r;,modera- plying with the will of his sovereign. But as a
ralnion.

proof that it was from this principle alone he a&ed,
he refused a bishopric which was offered to him,
in order that he might appear in 'eru with a more
dignified character; he would accept of no hightr
title than that of president of the court of audience
in Lima; and declared that he would receive no
1alary on account of his dilcharging the duties of
that office. All he required was, that the expence
of lupporting his family should be defrayed by the
public, and as he was to go like a minister of
peace with his gown and breviary, and without
any retinue but a few domestics, this would not
load the revenue with any enormous burden °.

Th- powers BUT while he discovered such difinterefled mo-
commr itted
to him. deration with relpect to whatever related personally

to himfielf, he demnanded his official powers in a
very different tone. He infifled, as he was to be
employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourls tu

Icrnandez, lib. ii. c. 17.

b 2Z,.r;itc, lib. vi. c.0. Gonmara, c. 174. Fcrnandcz. lib. j;.

c. 14-1 6. Vega, p. ii. lib. v. c. i. IlkrrLrn, dcc. S lib.i.
c. 4, &c.

his

his fuvereign for new infirucRions on every emer- B o 0 K
cence; and as the whole fucccls of his nego- ,
ci:ltions mult depend upon the confidence which *5.6.
lthe people with whom he had to treat could place
in the extent of his powers, that he ought to be
inverted with unlimited authority; that his juril-
diEion mult reach to all perbons and to all caufcs;
that he mufl be empowered to pardon, to punilh,
or to reward, as circumiranccs and the behaviour
of different men might require; that, in cafe of
r:iillance from the malcontents, lie might be au-
thorifed to reduce them to obedience by force of
arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to call
for afliltance from the governors of a'l the Spanifl
Icttlements in America. These powers, though
manifeltly conducive to the great o!;ijccs of his
nifnion, appeared to the Spanish minilters to be
inalienable prerogatives of royalty, which ought
not to be delegated to a fubjecct, and they refused
to grant then. But the emperor's views were
more enlarged. As from the nature of his tmploy-
ment, Gafca must be cnrrufc: i vwith ilfcretionary
po.ver in fcveral points, andl all hi's clFrts might
'rove ineffectual if he was circur.lcribcd in any
one particular, Cha:les ILrupled not to invert him
v.ith authority to the full extent tliar he demanded.
I ighly satisfied with this freli proot of hii malter's
confidence, Gafca haflened his departure, and,
v.ithout either money or troops, set out to quell a Miy ,.
iurmiidable rebellion .

c l''-enan'C7, }'!b ;'. c¢. r-C 1 .

ON

B 0 K ON his arrival at Nombie de Dios, he found

Ve.
,, - Hernan Mexia, an officer of note, poflei there,

ju427. by order of Pizarro, with a confidcrablc body of
HS arrivAl men, to oppose the landing of any holile forces.
at Panama..

But Galca appeared in flich pacific guise, with a
train so little formidable, and with a title of no
such dignity as to excite terror, that he was re-
ceived with much refpecd. From Nombre deDios
he advanced to Panama, and met with a fimil.ir
reception from HIinojloa, whom Pizarro had cn.
trusted with the government of that town, and the
command of his fleet stationed there. In both
places he held the fame language, declaring th.it
he was l-nt by their l;)vcreign as a messenger or
peace, not as a minifler of vengeance; that lie
came to redress all their grievances, to revoke the
laws which had excited alarm, to pardon palt
offences, and to re-eltablilh order and juiticr in the
government of Peru. His mild deportment, the
simplicity of his manners, the lanctiy ot his proef-
lion, and a winnirng appearance of candoir, g,: icd
credit to his eirclarations. The veneration due toa
perlon clothed with legal authority, and .aclinlg in
virtue of a royal commiilion, began to rev i v aniorg
men accuflonled for fomne time to nothing more
refpetable than ;:n ulurped juriflicion. I linojol.,
Mexia, and leveral other officers of diltinciiol, to
each of whom (Gafca applied separately, were gained
over to his intereli, and waited only for tonce t:c-
cent occasion of declaring openly in his favour d.

a .
Fern.anic.z, lib. ii. c. 21, &c. Z.rate, lib. \i. (. , 7.
Gomura, c. 175. \'eg i, 1 1. & i. Ib. v. c. 3.

' ll' IL

THIS the violence of Pizarro soon aTorded them. B O0 K

vi.

As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival at Panama, -_-_m
though he received, at the fame time, an account viointpro.
of the nature of his commission, and was informed p'd,^o0'
of his offers to render every Spaniard in Peru easy
concerning what was paR, by an act of general
oblivion; and secure, with refpec to the future,
by repealing the obnoxious laws; instead of accept-
ing with gratitude his sovereign's gracious con-
celffons, he was so much exasperated on finding
that he was not to be continued in his station as
governor of the country, that he instantly resolved
to oppose the president's entry into Peru, and to
prevent his exercising any jurifdi6tion there. To
this desperate resolution he added another highly
preposterous. He sent a new deputation to Spain
tojuftify this condu&, and to insist, in name of all
the communities in Peru, for a confirmation of the
government to himself during life, as the only
means of preserving tranquillity there. The per-
lons entrusted with this strange commission, inti-
mated the intention of Pizarro to the president, and
required him, in his name, to depart from Panama
and return to Spain. They carried likewise lecret
inRru&ions to Hinojofa, directing him to offer
Gafca a present of fifty thouland pesos, if he would
comply voluntarily with what was demanded of
him; and if he should continue obstinate, to cut
him off either by affafination or poifun c.

' Zarate, lib. vi. c. 8. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 33, 34.

Hcrcera, dec. 8. lib. ii. c. 9, Io.
VOL. Ill. K MANY

B o0 K MANY circumstances concurred in pushing on

Vi.

- -. -- Pizarro to those wild menaures. Having been
ck.46;in, once accullomed to supreme command, he could
hi flci. not bear the thoughts of dcfcending to a private

Rfation. Conscious of his own demerit, he fufpecc-
ed that the emperor fludied only to deceive hiiin,
and would never pardon the outrages which he had
committed. His chief confidents, no lels guilty,
entertained the fame apprehensions. The approach
of Gafca without any military force excited no
terror. There were now above fix thousand Spa-
niards fettled in Peru'; and at the head of thcl-
he doubted not to maintain his own independence,
if the court of Spain should refuse to grant what
he required. But he knew not that a spirit of de.
feetion had already begun to spread among thole
whom he trusted molt. Hinojofa, amazed at Pi-
zarro's precipitate resolution of letting himself in
opposition to the emperor's commiifon, and dif
daining to be his instrument in perpetrating the
odious crimes pointed out in his fecrct intlrudionc,
publicly recognized the title of the prrfident to
the supreme authority in Peru. The officers under
his command did the fame. Such was the conta-
gious influence of the example, that it reached
even the deputies who had been lent from Peru;
and at the time when Pizarro expeEted to hear
either of Gafca's return to Spain, or of his death,
he received an account of his being mailer of the
fleet, of Panama, and of the troops stationed there.

llcrrera, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. i.
2 hIRRITATCE

IRRITAtED almost to madness by an event so B 0 0 K

Vi.

unexpected, he openly prepared for war; and in 'v
order to give some colour ofjuftice to his arms, he PiSrro re
appointed the court of audience in Lima to pro- w,.r.
ceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of
having seized his ships, reduced his officers, and
prevented his deputies from proceeding in their
voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though a&ing as a
judge in virtue of the royal commiiflon, did not
Icruple to prostitute the dignity of his function by
finding Gafca guilty of treason, and condemning
him to death on that accounts. Wild, and even
ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it imposed on
the low illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was
filled, by the semblance of a legal fanftion war-
ranting Pizarro to carry on hostilities against a con-
vited traitor. Soldiers accordingly rcolrred from
every quarter to his itandard, and he was soon at
the head of a thousand men, the best equipped
that had ever taken the field in Peru.

GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force must Preparatio,
be employed in order to accomplish the purpose of f ofca.
his miflion, was no leis afliduous in collecling
troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
settlements on the continent; and with such fuc-
ces, that lie was loon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet, with a considerable body of

e Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 5. Vega, p. l. lib v. c. 7. /Her-
rcra, dec. Y. lib. iii. c. 6.

K a soldiers,

3 °o K soldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance

excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did not
Aprl. attempt for some time to make any descent, they

did more effetual service, by setting ashore in dif-
ferent places persons who dispersed copies of the
a& of general indemnity, and the revocation of
the late edits; and who made known every where
the pacific intentions, as well as mild temper, of
the president. The effet of spreading this in-
formation was wonderful. All who were diffatis-
fled with Pizarro's violent administration, all who
retained any sentiments of fidelity to their fove-
reign, began to meditate revolt. Some openly
deserted a cause which they now deemed to be un-

inrurreaion just. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he lay
oCcntcno, concealed, afflmbled about fifty of his former ad-

herents, and with this feeble half-armed band ad-
vanced boldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in
the night-time, in which he displayed no less mili-
tary flill than valour, he rendered himself mailer
of that capital, though defended by a garrison of
five hundred men. Most of these having ranged
themselves under his banners, he had soon the
command of a refpeaable body of troops h.

gai;nitt PIZARRO, though altonifhed at beholding one
,rro, enemly approaching by sea, and another by land,
ma"ches, at a time when he trusted to the union of all Peru

in his favour, was of a spirit more undaunted, and

h Zarate, lib. vi. c. 13-i6. Gomara, c. i80, 181. Ser-
nandez, lib. ii. c. zS. 64, &c.

morC

more accustomed to the viciflitudes of fortune, B O°° K
than to be disconcerted or appalled. As the dan- --
ger from Centeno's operations was the most urgent, '547
he instantly set out to oppose him. Having pro-
vided horses for all his soldiers, he marched with
amazing rapidity. But every morning he found
his force diminished, by numbers who had left him
during the night; and though he became fufpi-
cious to excess, and punilhed without mercy all
whom he fufpeAed, the rage of desertion was too
violent to be checked. Before he got within fight
of the enemy at Huarina, near the lake Titiaca,
he could not muller more than four hundred fol-
diers. But these he juffly confidered as men of
tried attachment, on whom he might depend.
They were indeed the boldest and most desperate
of his followers, conscious like himself of crimes
for which they could hardly expe& forgiveness,
and without any hope but in the success of their
arms. With there he did not hesitate to attack onober o.
Centeno's troops, though double to his own in
number. The royalists did not decline the com-
bat. It was the molt obstinate and bloody that had
hitherto been fought in Peru. At length the intre- ,"" nddrt
pid valour of Pizarro, and the superiority of Car-
vajal's military talents, triumphed over numbers,
and obtained a complete vi&ory. The booty was
immense', and the treatment of the vanquiffied
;ruel. By this single success the reputation of

S See NOTE XVII.

K 3 Pizarro

B °0 K Pizarro was re-eftablilhed, and being now deemed
-.i- invincible in the field, his army increased daily in
147. number .

But events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the fplcndid
viscory at Huarin. Pizarro had scarcely left Lima,
when the citizens, weary of his oppressive domi-
nion, ereted the royal standard, and Aldana, with
a detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took pof-

G'ca lands session of the town. About the fame time', the
at 'cru.

president landed at Tumbez with five hundred
men. Encouraged by his presence, every fettle-
ment in the low country declared for the king.
The situation of the two parties was now perfectly
reverted; Cuzco and the adjacent provinces were
poffefled by Pizarro; all the reft of the empire,
from Quito southward, acknowledged the jurif-
di&ion of Gafca. As his numbers augmented fait,
XGafca advanced into the interior part of the coun_
try. His behaviour frill continued to be gentle
and unassuming; he expressed, on every occasion,
his ardent wish of terminating the contelt without
bloodshed. More solicitous to reclaim than to
punish, he upbraided no man for past offences, but
received them as a father receives penitent children
returning to a fcnfe of their duty. Though desirous

k Zaratc, lib. vii. c. 2, 3. Gnmara, c. ipi. Veg., p. II.

lib. v. c. 18, &c. Fernandcz, lil. ii. c. 79. l drrc:;, dc. s.
lib. iv. c. I, 2.

ZIrate, lib. vi. c. 17.

o'

of peace, he did not flacken his preparations for B ° o K
war. He appointed the general rendezvous of his --
troops in the fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road s547.
to Cuzco ". There he remained for lbme months, Advances
not only that he might have time to make another cuz'o.
attempt towards an accommodarion with Pizarro,
but that he might train his new loldiers to the use
of arms, and accullom them to the discipline of
a camp, before he led them against a body of vic-
torious veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with the
success which had hitherto accompanied his arms,
and elated with having again near a thousand
men under his command, refused to liften to any
terms, although Cepeda, together with ieveral of
his officers, and even Carvajal himllt ', gave it as
their advice to close with the pre;dent's offer of a
general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws °. Gafca having tried in vain every
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the blood
ot his countrymen, began to move towards Cuzco, Dec. 29
at the head of sixteen hundred men.

PIZARRO, confident of vitory, fulfered the Both pJtie

pr'p Ire lot

royalifs to pass all the rivers which lie between bajl..
Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and to 154t
advance within four leagues of that capital, flat-
tering himself that a defeat in such a situation as

" Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Fernandez, lib. i:. c. 77. 82.
"See NOTE XVIII.
"Zaratc, lib. vii. c. 6. Vega, p. i1 . lib. v. c. z7.

K 4 rendered

B i0 K rendered a retreat impraticable would at once
a_-_ terminate the war. He then marched out to meet

'548. the enemy, and Carvajal chose his ground, and
April 9. made the disposition of the troops with the discern.

ing eye, and profound knowledge in the art of war,
conspicuous in all his operations. As the two
armies moved forward slowly to the charge, the
appearance of each was singular. In that of Pi.
zarro, composed of men enriched with the spoils
of the most opulent country in America, every
officer, and almost all the private men were clothed
in susss of tilk, or brocade, embroidered with
gold and silver; and their horses, their arms, their
ltandards, were adorned with all the pride of
military pomp P. That of Gafca, though not so
splendid, exhibited what was no less itriking. He
himf.lf, accompanied by the archbishop of Lima,
the bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a great num-
ber of ecclfiaftics, marching along the lines, bless.
ing the men, and encouraging them to a resolute
discharge of their duty.

PT.2Tro de. WHEN both were just ready to engage, Cepeda
ferred hy h a
uopjir. set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and surrendered

himfclf to the prelident. Garcilaflo de la Vega,
and other officers of note, followed his example.
The revolt of persons in such high rank struck
all with amazement. The mutual confidence on
wniih the union and strength of armies depend,

r Zaratc, lib. vi. c. XI,

ceased

ceased at once. Diltruft and coniternation spread B 0 o K
from rank to rank. Some silently flipped away, --
others threw down their arms, the greatest number rs
went over to the royalists. Pizarro, Carvajal, and
some leaders, employed authority, threats, and
entreaties, to stop them, but in vain. In lefl
than half an hour, a body of men, which might
have decided the fate of the Peruvian empire,
was totally dispersed. Pizarro, feeing all irretriev-
ably loft, cried out in amazement to a few officers
who till faithfully adhered to him," What remains
for us to do?" " Let us rush, replied one of
them, upon the enemy's firmest battalion, and die
like Romans." DejeEted with such a reverse of
fortune, he had not spirit to follow this soldierly
counsel, and with a tameness disgraceful to his
former fame, he surrendered to one of Gafca's
officers. Carvajal, endeavouring to escape, was taken,
overtaken and seized.

GASCA, happy in this bloodless vitory, did not adnd put to
Rain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a
small number of the molf ditinguilhed or noto-
rious offenders, were punithed capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he lurrendered. He
submitted to his fate with a ctmpoled dignity, and
stemed desirous to atone by repentance for the
crimes which he had committed. The end of Car-
vajal was suitable to his lite. On his trial he offer-
ed no defence. When the sentence adjudging him
to be liaped was pronounced, he careletsly re-

ljlied,

B O o K plied, " One can die but once." During the in
<» *»- terval between the sentence and execution, he dif

's54' covered no sign either of remorse for the past, or

of solicitude about the future; scoffing at all wh.
visited him, in his usual farcaflic vein of mirth,
with the fame quickness of repartee and gross plea.
fantry as at any other period of his life. Cepeda,
more criminal than either, ought to have shared
the fame fate; but the merit of having deserted
his associates at such a critical moment, and with
such decisive effet, saved him from immediate
punishment. He was sent, however, as a priloncr
to Spain, and died in confinement q.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

historians have given of the civil dissentions that
raged in Peru, with little interruption, during ten
years, many circumstances occur so striking, and
which indicate such an uncommon Klate of manners,
as to merit particular attention.

No merce- THOUGH the Spaniards who first invaded Peru
in ,he ci i, were of the lowest order in society, and the greater
V,,". part of those wh9 afterwards joined them were lrr-

sons of desperate fortune, yet in all the bodies ot
troops brought into the field by the different leai-
ers who contended for superiority, not one nian

q Zaratc, lib. vii. c. 6, 7, R. Cornara, c. !'', [~;.

Vega, p. I i. lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, lib. Ii. c. s: ,'c
Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &c.

t jdcd

aled as a hired soldier, that follows his Ifandard B o o K
for pay. Every adventurer in Peru confidered '.-.
hi.nfelf as a conqueror, entitled, by his services, to '54 .
an etablifhment in that country which had been
acquired by his valoutr. In the contells between
the rival chiefs, each chose his fide as he was di-
reted by his own judgment or affcctions. He
joined his commander as a companion of his for-
tune, and disdained to degrade himlelf by receiving
the wages of a mercenary. It was to their sword,
not to pre-eminence in office, or nobility of birth,
that most of the leaders whom they followed were
indebted for their elevation; and each of their
adherents hoped, by the fame means, to open a
way for himself to the pofflflion of power and
wealth '.
BUT though the troops in Peru served without Arm'cs ;m-

1nn-.liy e.-

any regular pay, they were railed at immense ex- pensive;
pence. Among men accultomned to divide the
Ipoils of an opulent country, the delire of obtain-
ing wealth acquired incredible force. The ardour
ofpurfuit augmented in proportion to the hope of
flccefs. Where all were intent on the fame objcC',
and under the dominion of the fame paifion, there
was but ore mode of gaining men, or us fecurinL,
lihir attachment. Officers of name and inflitcncc,
belides the promile of future eltablifinments, re-
''icd in hand large gratuities from the chief with

' eg,, p. 11. lib. iv. c. 3R. 41.

whom

iB o0o K whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro, in order
-.e--o to raise a thousand men, advanced five hundred
as ' thousand pesos '. Gafca expended in levying the

troops which he led againit Pizarro nine hundred
thousand pesos'. The distribution of property,
beflowed as the reward of services, was still more

and im. exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompence of his
pene re-
wards lo in- perfidy and address, in persuading the court of

*'id<' royal audience to give the lanftion of its authority

to the usurped jurificiion of Pizarro, received a
grant of lands which yielded an annual income of
a hundred and fifty thousand pesos ". Hinojofa,
who, by his early defection from Pizarro, and fur.
render of the fleet to Gafca, decided the fate of
Peru, obtained a district of country affording two
hundred thousand pesos of yearly value '. While
such rewards were dealt out to the principal offi-
cers, with more than royal munificence, propor-
tional shares were conferred upon those of inferior
rank.

Their pro. SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its
ifxuy.and natural effects. It gave birth to new wants, and

new desires. Veterans, long accustomed to hard.
flip and toil, acquired of a sudden a tafle for pro-
fule and inconsiderate diclipation, and indulged in
all the excefl's of military licentioufnels. The

* Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 54.
' Zarate, lib. vii c. to. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
u Pomara, c. t5. ' Vega, p. i I. lib. vi. c. 3'

riot

riot of low debauchery occupied some; a relish for B 0 0 K
cxpenfive luxuries spread among others Y. The v

- -

meanest soldier in Peru would have thought him- '54S
self degraded by marching on foot; and at a time
when the prices of horses in that country were ex-
orbitant, each insisted on being furnished with one
before he would take the field. But though less
patient under the fatigue and hardships of service,
they were ready to face danger and death with as
much intrepidity as ever; and animated by the
hope of new rewards, they never failed, on the
day of battle, to display all their ancient va-
lour.

TOGETHER with their courage, they retained re-ocit,
all the ferocity by which they were originally dif- their com
tinguiihed. Civil discord never raged with a more arie4 on,
fll spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To
all the paflions which usually envenom contests
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expected upon the
death of every opponent, shut the door against
mercy. To be wealthy, was of itself sufficient to
expose a man to accusation, or to subject him to
punilhment. On the slightest suspicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the molt opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching for
any pretext to jufify his cruelty, cut oft many

terrera, dec. 5. lb. ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. viii. c. to.
a imore.

B o0 K more. The number of those who suffered by the

VI.

I , - hand of the executioner, was not much inferior to
J'45' what fell in the field z; and the greater part was

condemned without the formality of any legal
trial.

a*n want THE violence with which the contending parties
es faith.

treated their opponents was not accompanied with
its usual attendants, attachment and fidelity to
those with whom they aCted. The ties of honour
which are held sacred among soldiers, and the
principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly in
the Spanish chara6er as in that of any nation,
teem to have been equally forgotten. Even regari
for decency, and the sense of fl(ame, were totally
loft. During their dissensions, there was hary,
a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party
which he had originally espoused, betray the ai b.
ciates with whom he had united, and viol;te the
engagements under which he had come. ' he vic,-
roy Nugnez Vela was ruined by the treachery cf
Cepeda and the other judges of the royal a::licncc,
who were bound by the duties of their funcdi;,n to
have supported his authority. The chief advilers
and companions of Gonzalo Pizarro's revolt, wcre
the firit to forsake him, antd Lbmit to his ene-
mies. His fleet was given up to Gafca, by the
man whom he had singled out among his oflicerr
to entrust with that important command. On the

a Sce NOTI' XIX.

day

day that was to decide his fate, an army of vete- B 0 o K
rans, in fight of the enemy, threw down their arms
without firiking a blow, and deserted a leader who
had often conduded them to victory. Inltances
of such general and avowed contempt of the prin-
ciples and oltligarions which attach man to man,
and bind them together in social union, rarely oc-
cur in hillory. It is only where men are far re-
moved from the feat of government, where the
rtftraints of law and order are little felt, where the
prospect of gain is unbounded, and where immense
wealth may cover the crimes by which it is ac-
quired, that we can find any parallel to the levity,
the rapaciousness, the perfidy and corruption pre-
valent among the Spaniards in Peru.
ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in Caca de-

vise$ ern-
every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and pioymenr

for his fol-

tranquillity seemed to be perfectly re-established. diers,
But tvo very interefling objects still remained to
occupy the president's attention. The one was to
find immnediately such employment for a multitude
of turbulent and daring adventurers with which
the country was filled, as might prevent them
from exciting new commotions. The other, to
beRlow proper gratifications upon those to whose
loyalty and valour he was indebted for his success.
The former of there was in tome measure accom-
plifhed, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to pro-
lccute the conquest of Chili; and by empowering
Diego Centeno to undertake the discovery of the

valt

B o0o K vast regions bordering on the river De la Plata,

,--~_ The reputation of those leaders, and the hopes of
354L acquiring wealth, and rising to consequence in some

unexplored country, alluring many of the most in.
digent and desperate soldiers to follow their Ptand.
ards, drained off no inconsiderable portion of that
mutinous spirit which Gafca dreaded.

Hi, ois a d
ion of he THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty,
country and to be adjufled with a more attentive and deli.
among his
followers. cate hand. The repartimientos, or allotments of

lands and Indians which fell to be distributed, in
consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for-
mer possessors, exceeded two millions of pesos of
yearly rent'. Gafca, when now absolute master
of this immense property, retained the fame difn-
terested sentiments which he had originally pro-
sessed, and refused to reserve the fmallefl portion
of it for himself. But the number of claimants
was great; and whilst the vanity or avarice of
every individual fixed the value of his own fervicet,
and estimated the recompence which he thought
due to him, the pretensions of each were so extra-
vagant, that it was impoflible to satisfy all. Gafca
litened to them one by one, with the most patient
attention; and that he might have leisure to weigh
the comparative merit of their several claims with
accuracy, he retired, with the archbishop of Lima
and a tingle iecretary, to a village twelve leagues

a VCga, p. ii. lib. vi. c. 4.

from

from Cuzco. There he spent several days in allot- B 0 0 K
ting to each a diftrid of lands and number of In- --
dians, in prop' rton to his idea of their past ser- 54.
vices and future importance. But that he might
get beyond the reach of the fierce ftorn of clamour
and rage, which he foresaw would burst out on the
publication of his decree, notwithstanding the im-
pirtial equity with which he had framed it, he feu
out for Lima, leaving the inltrument of partition
lealed up, with orders not to open it for oime days
after his departure.

THE indignation excited by publifLing the de- A.it, r.
cree of partition was not less than Gafca had ex- tent it oc-
peded. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, shame,
rage, and all the other paflions which most vehe-
mently agitate the minds of men when both their
honour and their interest are deeply affected, con-
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out with
all the fury of military insolence. Calumny,
threats, and curses were poured out openly upon
the president. lie was accuscd of ingratitude, of
partiality, and of injustice. Among soldiers
prompt to action, such Itditious discourse would
have been lbon followed by deeds no less violent,
and they already began to turn their eyes towards
fomedifcontented leaders, expecting them to t(and
forth in redrels of their wrongs. By tome vigorous
interpositions of government, a timely check was
given to this nmtinous spirit, and the danger
VOL. Ill. L 9f

B o0 K of another civil war was averted for the pre-

VI.

. fent.b.

s549. GASCA, however, perceiving that the flame was

bll', or- fupprefred rather than extinguilhed, laboured wlnh
dr ..nd go- the utmost assiduity to soothe the malcontents, by

bestowing large gratuities on some, by promnifin
repartimientos, when they fell vacant, to others, and
by carefling and flattering all. But that the pub.
lic security might reft on a foundation more ftublk
than their good affe&tion, he endeavoured to
strengthen the hands of his successors in offic, by
re-establishing the regular adminifftration of justice
in every part of the empire. He introduced order
and simplicity into the mode of colleting the royal
revenue. He issued regulations concerning the
treatment of the Indians, well calculated to protect
them from oppreflion, and to provide for their in-
ftru6tion in the principles of religion, without de-
priving the Spaniards of the benefit accruing froni
,550. their labour. Having now accomplished every

object of his miflion, Galca, longing to return
again to a private station, committed the govern-
ment of Peru to the court of audience, and set ou!

Tfb. i. for Spain. As, during the anarchy and turbulence
for Spain. of the four last years, there had been no remittance

made of the royal revenue, he carried with hiin

b Zaratc, lib. vii. c.g. Gomara, c. IS7. Vea, p. l

lib. vii. c. i, &c. Fern;ndez, p. lI. lib. i. c. l, &c. I-Jeri
dec. 8. lib. iv. C. 17, &c.

tll iiticl

thirteen hundred thousand pesos of public money, B o0 K
which the cconomy and order of his adminiftra. --.-v
tion enabled him to save, after paying all the ex. JssO'
pences of the war.

HE was received in his native country with uni- Ha; recep.

versal admiration of his abilities, and of his virtue. on th.
Both were, indeed, highly conspicuous. Without
army, or fleet, or public funds; with a train so
simple, that only three thousand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping him , he set out to oppose
a formidable rebellion. By his address and talents
he supplied all those defects, and seemed to create
instruments for executing his designs. He ac-
quired such a naval force, as gave him the com-
mand of the sea. He raised a body of men able
to cope with the veteran bands which gave law to
Peru. He vanquished their leader, on whose arms
vidory had hitherto attended, and in place of
anarchy and usurpation, he established the govern-
ment of laws, and the authority of the rightful so-
vereign. But the prails bestowed on his abilities
was exceeded by that which his virtue merited.
After refding in a country where wealth presented
allurements which had seduced every person who
had hitherto possesed power there, he returned
from that trying station with integrity not only
untainted but 4nfufpeAed. After distributing
among his countrymen poffefflons of greater ex-

' Fcrnandcz, lib. ii. c. 18.
z L 2 tent

B 0o K tent and value than had ever been in the disposal of

,i a subjet in any age or nation, he himself remained
'55°0 in his original state of poverty; and at the very

time, when he brought such a large recruit to the
royal treaftiry, he was obliged to apply by petition
for a small fum to discharge some petty debts
which he had contraced during the course of his
service d Charles was not insensible to such difin-
terested merit. Gafica was received by him with
the most diftinguilhing marks of esteem, and be-
ing promoted to the bishopric of Palencia, he
passed the remainder of his days in the tranquillity
of retirement, refpeEted by his country, honoured
by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

NOTWITHSTANDINC all Gafca's wife regulations

the tranquillity of Peru was not of long continu-
ance. In a country, where the authority of go-
vernment was almost forgotten during the long
prevalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there
were difappoinred leaders ripe for revolt, and fedi-
tious soldiers ready to follow them, it was not dii-
ficult to raise combuflion. Several successive in-
furrefions desolated the country for some years.
But as thole, though fierce, were only tranflent
storms, excited rather by the ambition and turbu-
lenceof particular men, than by general or public
motives, the detail of them is not the objet of t!hi
history. These commotions in Peru, like every

MS. penes me.

thi 'it-

thing of extreme violence either in the natural or B O°° K
political body, were not of long duration, and by ,
carrying off the corrupted humours which had 1550.
given rife to the disorders, they contributed in the
end to flrengchen the society which at firlt they
threatened to destroy. During their fierce con-
tests, several of the first invaders of Peru, and
many of those licentious adventurers whom the fame
of their success had allured thither, fell by each
other's hands. Each of the parties, as they alter-
nately prevailed in the fitruggle, cleared the coun-
try of a greater number, by executing, proscribing,
or banishing their opponents. Men less enter-
prifing, less desperate, and more accustomed to
move in the path of fober and peaceable industry,
fettled in Peru; and the royal authority was gra-
dually established as firmly there as in the other
Spanilf colonies.

L 3

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THE
I I S T O R Y

F
A I E R I C A.

B O O K VII.
A S the conquest of the two great empires of 3 0 o K

Mexico and Peru forms the molf splendid

and incerefling period in the history of America, a
view of their political institutions, and a delcrip-
tion of their national manners, will exhibit the
human species to the contemplation of intelli-
gent observers in a very singular flage of its pro-
grefs a.

WHEN compared with other parts of the New Mxico and

Peru more
World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as p,lifed

than other

polished itates. Instead of small, independent, part ofr
holtile tribes, struggling for fubfiftcnce amidst Aleri"c.
woods and marlhes, strangers to indultry and arts,
unacquainted with Iubordination, and almost with-
out the appearance of regular government, we find

See NOTE XX.

L 4 countries.

B o0 K countries of great extent fubje&ed to the dominion

Vii.
Ac- -V of one sovereign, the inhabitants collccted toge-

gether in cities, the wisdom and foresight of ru-
lers employed in providing for the maintenance and
security of the people, the empire of laws in Ibn;e
measure established, the authority of relision re-
cognized, many of the arts cliintial to ;if
brought to tome degree of maturity, and the
dawn of fuchi as are ornamental beginning to

appear.

Their infe- BUT if the comparison be made with the people
riority to
thinations of the ancient continent, the inferiority ot Arc-
of the . .

n-

ient contio- rica in improvement will be cojljii.cous, and nei-
'C"''t ther the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be entitled

to rank with those nations which merit the name of
civilized. The people of both the great empires
in America, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the ul.fil metals,
and the progress which they had made in extending
their dominion over the animal creation was in-
considerable. I he Mexicans had gone no farther
than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a Ipecies of
small dogs, and rabbits b. By this feeble essay of
ingenuity, the means of fubfiltence were rendered
somewhat more plentiful and fccure, than when
men depend solely on hunting; but they had no
idea of attempting to subdue the more robust ani-
npals, or of deriving any aid from their ministry in

hI Ierrcra, dec. II. lib, vii. c. z.

carrying

carrying on works of labour. The Peruvians seem B 0O K
to have neglected the inferior animals, and had * -'
not rendered any of them domeflic except the
duck ; but they were more fortunate in taming
the Llama, an animal peculiar to their country,
of a form which bears some reflmblance to a deer,
and rome to a camel, and of a size somewhat lar-
ger than a (heep. Under the protecion of man,
this species multiplied greatly. Its wool furniflhed
the Peruvians with clothing, its flelh with food.
It was even employed as a beats of burden, and
carried a moderate load with much patience and
docility c, It was never used for draught; and the
breed being confined to the mountainous country,
its service, if we may judge by incidents which
occur in the early Spanish writers, was not very
eenfive among the Peruvians in their original
state.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed
towards civilization, the discovery of the useful
metals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
animal creation, have been marked as felps of ca-
pital importance in their progrels. In our conti-
nent, long after men had attained both, lociety
continued in that state which i; denominated bar-
barous. Even with all that command over nature
which these confer, many ages clapf'e, before in-
duilry becomes so perfect as to render fubfitence

Vega, p. i. 'ib. viii c. 16. Z rate, lib. i. C. 14.

lecure,

B 0 0 secure, before the arts which supply the wants ant
-.--.- fumifh the accommodations of life are invented

and before any idea is conceived of the vario.is in
Ilitutions requisite in a well-ordered society. Tlih
Mexicans and Peruvians, without knowledge ol
the ufrful metals, or the aid of domefic animals,
laboured under disadvantages which muff have
greatly retarded their progress, and in their highest
(tate of improvement their power was so limited,
and their operations so feeble, that they can hardly
be confidered as having advanced beyond the in.
fancy of civil life.

v;«wofthe ArTER this general observation concerning the
[nSlitution -
·adm.nncn most singular and diltinguilhing circumltance in

t

ec he state of both the great empires in America, I

Shall endeavour to give such a view of the conlti.
tution and interior police of each, as may enable us
to ascertain their place in the political scale, to allot
them their proper Ration between the rude tribes
in the New World, and the polihfed states of the
ancient, and to determine how far they had risen
above the former, as well as how much they fell
below the latter.

impelfect MEXICO was first subjected to the Spanilh crown.
concern:in But our acquaintance with its laws and manners is
Meico. not, from that circumfance, more complete.

What I have remarked concerning the defective
and inaccurate information on which we must rely
with refpe& to the condition and customs of the

savage

savage tribes in America, may be applied likewise B 0 0
toour knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes, _
and the rapacious adventurers who accompanied
him, had not leiiure or capacity to enrich either
civil or natural hitory with new observations.
They undertook their expedition in quell of one
objet, and seemed hardly to have turned their
eyes towards any other. Or, if during some (hort
interval of tranquillity, when the occupations of
war ceased, and the ardour of plunder was sus-
pended, the institutions and manners of the people
whom they had invaded drew their attention, the
inquiries of illiterate soldiers were conduded with
so little sagacity and precision, that the accounts
given by them of the policy and order eftblifhed
in the Mexican monarchy are superficial, confuefd,
and inexplicable. It is rather from incidents which
they relate occasionally, than from their own de-
duftions and remarks, that we are enabled to form
some idea of the genius and manners of that people.
The obscurity in which the ignorance of its con-
querors involved the annals of Mexico, was aug-
mented by the fuperitition of those who succeeded
them. As the memory of patl events was preserved
among the Mexicans by figures painted on skins,
on cotton cloth, or on the bark of trees, the early
millionaries, unable to comprehend their meaning,
and firuck with their uncouth forms, conceived
them to be monuments of idolatry which ought to
be destroyed, in order to facilitate the conversion
of the Indians. In obedience to an edit issued

by

1 o o K by Juan de Zummaraga, a Franciscan monk, the
.o -_ first bishop of Mexico, thole records of the an-

cient Mexican story which could be collected were
committed to the flames. In consequence of this
fanatical zeal of the monks who firit visited New
Spain, and which their successors loon began to
lament, whatever knowledge of remote events such
rude monuments contained was almon! entirely
loft, andno information remained concerning the
ancient revolutions and policy of the empire, but
what was derived from tradition, or from flme
fragments of their historical paintings that escaped
the barbarous researches of Zummaraga ". From
the experience of all nations it is manifest, that
.the memory of past tranfa&ions can neither be
long preserved, nor be transmitted with any fide-
lity, by tradition. The Mexican paintings, which
are supposed to have served as annals of their em-
pire, are few in number, and of ambiguous mean-
ing. Thus, amidst the uncertainty of the former,
and the obscurity of the latter, we muff glean
what intelligence can be collected from the scanty
materials scattered in the Spanish writers.

elpiin of ACCORDING to the account of the Mexicans
the Mcxi-
tn mo. themselves, their empire was not of long duration.
adcQF. Their country, as they relate, was oripina!ly 1p01

sessed, rather than peopled, by small indepenlccnt

d Acofta, lib. xi. c. 7. Torquem, Proem. lib. ii. lib.'ii
¢. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

tiibes,

tribes, whose mode of life and manners resembled 8 o °O
those of the rudest savages which we have de- .

-v

fcribed. But about a period corresponding to the
beginning of the tenth century in the Christian
xra, several tribes moved in fuccefilve migrations
from unknown regions towards the north and
north-west, and cettled in difTerent provinces of
Anabac, the ancient name of New Spain. These,
more civilized than the original inhabitants, began
toform them to the arts of Iocial life. At length,
towards the commencement of the thirteenth cen-
tury, the Mexicans, a people more polished than
any of the former, advanced from the border of
the Californian gulf, and took possession of the
plains adjacent to a great lake near the centre of
thecountry. After residing there about fifty yeats,
they founded a town, since distinguished by the
name of Mexico, which from humble beginnings
soon grew to be the molt considerable city in the
New World. The Mexicans, long after they were
cftablifhed in their new poffeflions, continued, like
other martial tribes in America, unacquainted with
regal dominion, and were governed in peace, and
con:!ufled in war, by luch as were entitled to pre-
eminence by their wifdomn or their valour. But
among them, as in other (Rates whole power and
territories become cxtenfive, the fuprene autho-
rity centred at last in a single person; and when
the Spaniards under Cortes invaded the country,
Montezuma was the ninth monarch in crder who

had

B °o0° 1 had swayed the Mexican sceptre, not by heredi.
_ . ^- tary right, but by election.
Very rcnt. SucH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans

concerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very short. From
the first migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the eftablilhnient of monarchical government, not
above a hundred and thirty years, according to
one account ', or a hundred and ninety-feven, ac-
cording. to another computation ', had elapsed.
If, on one hand, we suppose the Mexican Rate to
have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub-
sifted during such a length of time as the Spanilh
accounts of its civilization would naturally lead us
to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, among
a people who possessed the art of recording events
by pictures, and who confidered it as an efflntial
part of their national education, to teach their
children to repeat the historical songs which cele-
brated the exploits of their ancestors g, the know-
ledge of past transactions should be so slender and
lismiied. If, on the other hand, we adopt their
own fyftcm with refpe& to the antiquities of their
nation, it is no less difficult to account either for
that improved state of society, or for the extcn-
five dominion to which their empire had attained,

* Acof. Hill. lib. vii. c. 8, &rc. r Purchas Pilgr. iii.
p. ao68, &c. g Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18.

3 when

when first visited by the Spaniards. The infancy e o 0 K
of nations is so long, and, even when every cir- I-
cumlfance is favourable to their progress, they ad-
vance so (lowly towards any maturity of ftrcngth
or policy, that the recent origin of the Mexicans
terms to be a strong prelumption of some exagge-
ration, in the fplcndid delcriptions which have
been given of their government and manners.
BUT it is not by theory or conjectures that Fao h;ic,

prov¢ their

history decides, with regard to the state or charac. Progrefr in
ter of nations. It produces fa&s as the foundation civiis'ation.
of every judgment which it ventures to pronounce.
In collecing those which must regulate our opinion
in the present inquiry, some occur that suggest an
idea of considerable progress in civilization in the
Mexican empire, and others which seem to indicate
that it had advanced but little beyond the savage
tnbes around it. Both shall be exhibited to the
view of the reader, that, from comparing them,
he may determine on which fide the evidence pre-
ponderates.

THE right of private property was perfetly Therightof

understood, and e[tabli.fhet in its full exrenr. frPy fa-
Among several savage tribes, we have fecn, that blilncd.
the idea of a title to the separate and exclusive pof-
session of any objed was hardly known; and that
among all, it was extremely limited and ill-defined.
But in Mexico, where agriculture and industry had
made Ibme progreis, the diftindtion between real

and

B o 0 K and moveable poffellions, between property in land

VIr.
a_.< _and property in goods, had taken place. Both

might be transferred from one person to another
by fate or barter; both might descend by inherit-
ance. Every person who could be denominated a
freeman had property in land. This, however,
they held by various tenures. Some poiffeffd it in
full right, and it descended to their heirs. The
title of others to their lands was derived from the
office or dignity which they enjoyed; and *hen
deprived of the latter, they loft poffcllon of the
former. Both there modes of occupying land
were deemed nobl-, and peculiar to citizens of the
highest class. l he tenure, by which the g.ca:r
body of the people held their property, was very
different. In every district a certain quantity of land
was mealured out, in proportion to the number of
families. This was cultivated by tbl. joint labour
of the whole; its produce was deposited in a com-
mon florehoulc, and divided among them accord-
ing to their refpctive exigencies. The members
of the Calpullee, or aflociations, could not alienate
their share of the common estate; it was an indivi-
fible permanent property, destined for the support
of their families h. In consequence of this dillri-
bution of the territory of the ltate, every man had
an interest in its welfare, and the halpinels of
the individual was connected with the public
security.

h llerrera, dec. 3. lib. ir. c. IS. Turquem. IeTn. M .1.
llb. xiv . c. Corita, MS,

2 O';0

ONE of the most striking circumstances, which B 0o K

diftinguifhcs the Mexican empire from those na-
tions in America we have already described, is the Vhenum.
number and greatness of its cities. While society ,reatnuec of

their citicg

continues in a rude lcate, the wants of men are so
few, and they sLind lo little in need of mutual
aflitlailce, that their inducements to crowd together
are extremely feeble. Their industry at the fame
time is so imperfect, that it cannot secure fubfifl-
ence for any considerable number of families set-
tled in one spot. 1 hey live dispersed, at this
period, from choice as well as from neceflity, or at
the utmost assemble in fimall hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or on
the border of some plain left open by nature, or
cleared by their own labour. The Spaniards, ac-
cuflomed to this mode of habitation among all thy
savage tribes with which they were then acquaint-
ed, were aflonifhed, on entering New Spain, to
find the natives rcfiding in towns of such extent
as resembled those of Europe. In the first ferv9ur
of their admiration, they compared Zempoalla,
though a town only of the second or third size, to
the cities of greatest note in their own country.
When, afterwards, they visited in fuccefflon Tlaf-
cala, Cholula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mexico i:-
self, their amazement increaled so much, that it
led them to convey ideas of their magnitude and
populoufncfs bordering on what is incredible. Even
when there is leisure for observation, and no in-
terelt that leads to deceive, conjeaural Uftimates of

VOL. 111. M thq

0o 0 K the number of people in cities are extremely loose,
v - and usually much exaggerated. It is not furpri-

sing, then, that Cortez and his companions, little
accustomed to such computations, and powerfully
tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merit of
their own discoveries and conquefis, should have
been betrayed into this common error, and have
raised their descriptions considerably above trutii.
For this reason, some conficerable abatement ought
to be made from their calculation of the number
of inhabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may
fix the standard of their population much lowlr
than they have done; but till they will appear to
be cities of such confcquence, as are not to bc
found but among people who have made tome
considerable progress in the arts of social life:.
Mexico, the capital of the empire, items to have
contained sixty thousand inhabitants.

The Rpra.- TIHE separation of professions among the Mexi-
fe^ons.f cans is a symptom of improvement no lcks remark-

able. Arts, in the early ages of society are To felv
and so simple, that each man is sufficiently maller
of them all, to gratify every demand of his own
limited desires. The savage can form his buow,
point his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his
canoe, without calling in the aid of any hand more
skilful than his own. Time must have augmentedt
the wants of men, and ripened their ingenuiry,

t Sec NOTE XXI.

bce ur

before the productions of art became so compli- O ,, K
cated in their flru&urc, or lb curious in their L-a-~
fabric, that a particular course of education was
requifire towards forming the artificer to expert-
ness in contrivance and workmanship. In propor-
tion as refinement spreads, the diftindtion of pro-
ffrfions increases, and they branch out into more
numerous and minute subdivisions. Among the
Mexicans, this separation of the arts nececfary in
life had taken place to a considerable extent. The
functions of the mnfon, the weaver, the goldfinith,
the painter, and of several other crafts, were car-
ried on by different persons. Each was regularly
inftrucqed in his calling. To it alone his industry
was confined; and by assiduous application to one
object, together with the persevering patience pectl-
liar to Americans, their artizans attained to a de-
gree of neatnels and perfection in wo,.k, far beyond
what could have been expected from the rude tools
which they employed. Their various productions
were brought into commerce; and by the ex-
change of them in the flated markets held in the
cities, their mutual wants were supplied k, in fIch
orderly intercourle as characterizes an improved
fate of society.

'THE difiniction of ranks establishcd in the Mcxi Thl, d;n;,nc

io of

can empire is the next circumstance that merits rN,,k.

k Co'tes Re!at. ap. Rnmuii. iii. 239, &c. G:):I. Cren. c 79.
Tocqlucn, lib. xiii. c. 34. I-errera, dcc. A. lib. vii. c. ;, &c.

M 2 attention.

B o0 K attention. In surveying the savage tribes of Anic

vi'.
.- -- rica, we observed, that confcioufncfs of equality,

and impatience of subordination, are fentimrnts
natural to man in the infancy of civil life. During
peace, the authority of a superior is hardly felt
among them, and even in war it is but little ac-
knowledged. Strangers to the idea of property,
the difference in condition resulting from the in-
equality of it is unknown. lirth or titles confer
no pre-eminence; it is only by perlonal merit and
accomplishments that dilfindion can be acquired.
The form of lociety was very different among the
Mexicans. The great body of the people was in a
most humiliating (late. A considerable number,
known by the name of Mayeques, nearly relembling
in condition those peasants who, under various
denominations, were confidered, during the pre-
valence of the feudal lyft'em, as inflrtin;ents ot
labour attached to the ioil. The M[a)cqzis could
not change their place of rclidence without permil-
sion of the superior on whom they depended.
They were conveyed, together with the lands on
which they were fettled, from one proprietor to an-
other; and were bound to cultivate the ground,
and to perf,,rm frevral kinds of Iervile work .
Others were reduced to the lowfit form of fibjec-
tion, that of domeltic servitude, and felt the ut-
rnolt rigour of that wretched state. 'Iheir condi-
tion was held to be so vile, and their lives deemed

IIrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 37. Corita, MS.

2 to

to be of so little value, that a person who killed B 00 o K
one of those slaves was not fubjeded to any punilh- --
ment ". Even those confidered as freemen were
treated by their haughty lords as beings of an infe-
rior species. Th!e nobles, poflicied of ample terri-
tories, were divided into various classes, to each
of which peculiar titles of honour belonged.
Some of these titles, like their lands, defccnded
fron father to son in perpetual fucccffion. Others
were annexed to particular offices, or conferred
during life as marks of personal diftinftion ". The
monarch, exalted above all, enjoyed extensive
power, and fuprenme dignity. Thus the diltinc-
tion of ranks was completely eftablilhed, in a line
of regular subordination, reaching from the highest
to the lowest member of the community. Each of
these knew what he could claim, and what he
owed. The people, who were not allowed to wear
a dress of the fame fashion, or to dwell in houses
of a form similar to those of the nobles, accolied
them with the molt submissive reverence. In the
presence of their sovereign, they durst not lift their
eyes from the ground, or look him in the face°.
The nobles themselves, when admitted to an audi-
ence of their fovcreign, entered bare-footed, in
mean garments, and, as his slaves, paid him ho-
mage approaching to adoration. This relpeA due
from inferiors to those above them in rank, was

lerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7.
Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Coritl, MS.
llcrrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 14.

M 3 eltablifhced

B 0 0 K ellablihfed with such ceremonious accuracy, that

ViI.

-~
- it incorporated with the language, and influencedl

its genius and idiom. The Mexican tor.nue
abounded in exprefflons of reverence and court!iy.
The flile and appellations, uled in the intercoiLrle
between equals, would have been so unbecomin,
in the mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he
accosted a perlbn in higher rank, as to be dc!c:;cl
an insult P. It is only in societies, which tin.e and
the institution of regular government have nmulcl-
ed into form, that we find such an orderly arr :r.c-
ment of men into different ranks, and such n.:ce
attention paid to their various rights.

Their poli- TIlE fLirit of the Mexicans, thus famiiiariztd
¢ical conil-'
'uo". ' and bended to Subordination, was prepared for

submitting to monarchical government. But the
descriptions of their policy and laws, by the Spa-
niards who overturned them, are so inaccurate and
contradiEtory, that it is difficult to dehneate the
form of their constitution with any precision.
Sometimes they represent the monarchs of Nicxico
as absolute, deciding according to their plenft:rc,
with respect to every operation of the fla:e. On
other occasions, we dilcover the traces of cla-
blifhed customs and laws, framed in order to cir-
cumfcribe the power of the crown, and we meet
with rights and privileges of the nobles which ficm
to be opposed as barriers against its encroaclhnents.

' See NOTE XXII.
3 'Ihis

This appearance of inconsistency has arisen from B o 0 K
inattention to the innovations of Montrzuma upon -- * -.
the Mexican po!icy. His afpirinr: ambition sub-
vertrd t'-. or, in.il iv(e. :' . c. ?',v'rciin rt, and in-
t.'r C ,'-; - :
c' d.. til!ll. le ic cilrrg.irded the

ient laws, violated the privilees heici most

sacred, and reduced his iubjetts of every orcer to
the level of slaves . The chiefs, or robles of the
firlt rank, submitted to the yoke with such reluc-
tance, that, from impatience to sh.ake it off, and
lope of recovering their rights, many of them
courtedl the p-otedion of Cortes, and joined a so-
r:ign power against their domellic oppreflbr . It
is not then under the dominion of Mont, zumna, hut
under the ,overn'.ent of his predeccflors, that we
can difcovcr what was rl'e original torm and penius
of Mexican policy. From the foundation of the
monarchy to the clcction of Mnntczuma, it seems
to have fubfiflcd with little variati;n. That body
or citizens, which may be distinguished by the
;namt of nobility, formed the chief and moss re-
fpcCtable order in the state. T'hey were of various
ranks, as has already been oblfrved, and their
honours were acquired and transmitted in difteicne
manners. Their number i-emns to have been great.
According to an author accutlomed to examine
with attention what he relates, there were in the
Mexican empire thirty of this order, each of whom

' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 1.I. Tolquem, lib. ii. c. 69.
' ilercra, dic. z. lib. v. c. to, i . '1'orqueni, hl. iv. c. 49.

M 4 had

o0o 0 had in his territories about a hundred thousand
V... people, and subordinate to these, there were about

three thousand nobles of a lower class '. The tel.
ritories belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco and
Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to those of
the Mexican monarch ". Each of these poffefced
complete territorial jurifdition, and levied taxes
from their own vassals. But all followed the tfan-
dard of Mexico in war, serving with a number of
men in proportion to their domain, and moil of
them paid tribute to its monarch as their lupcriur
lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican con-

ilitution, an image of feudal policy in its molt
rigid form rites to view, and we discern its thr:e
distinguishing characteristics, a nobility pufflfling
almost independent authority, a people deprtffed
into the lowest slate of subjection, and a king en-
trufled with the executive power of the fate. Its
spirit and principles seem to have operated in the
New World in the fame manner, as in the ancient.
The jurifdition of the crown was extremely limit-
ed. All real and effective authority was retained
by the Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the
lhadow of it only left to the king. Jealous to ex-
cess of their own rights, they guarded with mofl
vigilant anxiety against the encroachments of their
bSvereigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,

Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. viii. c. 12.
! Torquem, lib. ii. c. 57. Corita, MS,

ii

it was provided that the king should not determine B 0 0o t
concerning any point of general importance, with. ^
out the approbation of a council composed of the
prime nobility '. Unless he obtained their content
he could not engage the nation in war, nor could
he dispose of the most considerable branch of the
public revenue at pleafu e; it was appropriated to
certain purposes from which it could not be di-
verted by the regal authority Y. In order to secure
full effec to those constitutional restraints, the
Mexican nobles did not permit their crown to de-
scend by inheritance, but dilpofed of it by election.
The right of election seems to have been originally
veiled in the whole body of nobility, but was after-
wards committed to fix electors, of whom the
Chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were always two.
From refpea for the family of their monarchs, the
choice fell generally upon tome person sprung
from it. But as the acivity and valour of their
prince were of greater moment to a people perpe-
tually engaged in war, than a strict adherence to
the order of birth, collaterals of mature age or
liflinguifhed merit were often preferred to those
who were nearer the throne in direct descent '. To
this maxim, in their policy, the Mexicans appear
to be indebted for such a fucceflion of able and

x Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16,
Cori'a, MIS.

Ilerrera, dlc. 3. lib. iv. c. 17.

' Acnta lib. vi. c. 2t. Ilerrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 13.
Clrita, M S.

warlike

B °0 K warlike princes, as raised their empire in a short
--v--. period to that extraordinary height (f power,

which it had attained when Cortes lar;ntd in New
Spain.

Powerand WHILE the jurisdiction of the Mexican mo.
plcnd..ur of
their o- narchs continued to be limited, it is probable thi t

it was exerciled with little oftent.iion. But as
their authority became more extenlive, the I'len.
dour of their government augmer.ted. It was in
this lal fItate that the Spaniards beheld it; :inr
itruck with the appearance of Montezuma's coLrr,
they describe its pomp at great length, and vtih
much admiration. The number of his atrctni.,n:.,
the order, the silence, and the reverence vwirh
which they served him ; the vail extent of his r,.il
mansion, the variety of its apartments allcrtru to
different officers, and the oftentatiun with vlhichl
his grandeur was displayed, whenever he permitted
his fubjets to behold him, seem to relcmble the
magnificence of the ancient monarchies in A li,
rather than the simplicity of the infant flates in t:h
New World.

Order of BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty
,I.'C.t. that the Mexican potentates exhibited their power,

they manifestld it more beneficially in the ocrer
and regularity with which they conducted the in-
ternal administration and police of their dominionr.
Complete jurildiEtion, civil as well as crinili.;l,
over its own immediate valfals, was velled in tlic

crown.

crown. Judges were appointed for each depart- B 0O K
nent, and if we may rely on the account which *

-

tlh Spanish writers give of the maxims and laws
ulpon which they founded thi-ir dccifions with re-
jL:&t to the dillribution or property and the punilh-
ncntc of crimes, justice was adilinillred in the
M.ixican emipire, with a degree of order and equity
r:;:i .'i):g what takes place in locieties highly
C.; I.z'lJ.

TH:E R attention in providing for the support of Provirfon

for the sup-

governlmcnt was not led i lSgacious. Taxes were port ui it.
1..I upon land, upon the acquisitions of industry,
:d upon commodities of every kind exposed to
ile in the public markers. Thcfe duties, though
considerable, were not arbitrary, or unequal. They
vere impc li:d according to elnablifhed rules,
and each knew what flare of the common burden
he had to bear. As the use of money was unknown,
all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
the natural productions of all the different pro-
vinces in the empire, but every species of manufac-
ture, and every work of ingenuity and art, were
collected in the public (tore-houfes. Irom those the
emperor lupplied his numerous train of attendants
in peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with clothes, and ornaments. People of inferior
condition, neither porcflingb land nor engaged in
commerce, were bound to the performance of va-
rious services. By their flated labour the crown-
lands were cultivated, public works were carried

On,

B o0 K on, and the various houses belonging to the erpe-

VyI ror were built and kept in repair .
Their po. THE improved Rate of government among the

Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points efrcn-
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but in
several regulations of inferior consequence with re.
fpet to police. The inflitution, which I have al-
ready mentioned, of public couriers, flationed ar
proper intervals, to convey intelligence from one
part of the empire to the other, was a refinement
in police not introduced into any kingdom of Eu-
rope at that period. The ftruture of the capital
city in a lake, with artificial dykes, and caufcways
of great length, which served as avenues to it from
different quarters, erected in the water, with no
less ingenuity than labour, seems to be an idea that
could not have occurred to any but a civilized
people. The fame observation may be applied to
the ftruAure of the aqueducts, or conduits, by
which they conveyed a stream of frell water, from
a considerable distance, into the city, along one
of the causeways b. The appointment of a num-
ber of persons to clean the streets, to light them by
fires kindled in different places, and to patrole as
watchmen during the night c, discovers a degree

a Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16, 17.
See NOT'r E XXIII.

b See NO1'E XXIV.
c Herrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. 4. Toiribio, MS,

(Js

of attention which even polished nations are late in B o o K
acquiring. -

THE progress of the Mexicans in various arts, is Their *m.
confidered as the molt decifivc proof of their fupe-
riorrefinement. Cortes, and the early Spanith au-
thors, dtlcribe this with raptuiie, and maintain,
that the most celebrated European artists could
not furpals or even equal then in ingenuity and
nearness of workmnanfnip. They represented men,
animals, and other objets, by such a disposition
of various coloured feathers, as is said to have pro-
duced all the effcts of light and shade, and to have
imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their
ornaments of gold and lilver have been described
r) be of a fabric no less curious. But in forming
any idea, from general descriptions, concerning the
state of arts among nations imperfealy polished,
we are extremely ready to err. In examining the
works of people whole advances in improvement
are nearly the fame with our own, we view them
with a critical, and often with a jealous eye.
Whereas, when conscious of our own superiority,
we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
we are aftonilhed at works executed by them un-
derfuch manifest disadvantages, and, in the warmth
of our admiration, are apt to represent them as
produaions more finished than they really are. To
the influence of this illusion, without supposing
any intention to deceive, we may impute the

exaggeration

o 0 K exaggeration of some Spanish authors, in their ac
VII.
-.^_-' counts of the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from con-

fidering such specimens of their arts as are fill pre.
served, that we must decide concerning their de
gree of merit. As the ship in which Cortes fcnt
to Charles V. the most curious produclions of the
Mexican artisans, which were collected by tlc
Spaniards when they first pillaged the empire, vc:
taken by a French corsair ', the remains of thi1ir
ingenuity are less numerous than those of the l'e
ruvians. Whether any of their works vith fc.-
thers, in imitation of painting, be fRill extant in
Spain, I have not learned; but many of their or-
naments in gold and silver, as well as various
ttenfils employed in common life, are dcpofited in
the magnificent cabinet of natural and artificial
productions, lately opened by the king of Spain;
and I am informed by persons on whole judgmren
and taste I can rely, that thele boafled efforts oi
their art are uncouth representations of common ub-
jects, or very coarse images of the human and l omc
other forms, dcftitute of grace and propricty'.
The justness of these obfcrvations is contirmed by
infpceting the wooden prints or copper-plates of
their paintings, which have been puli!hedci bv va-
rious authors. In them every figure of nicn, of
quadrupeds, or birds, as well as every rprlrcln:a-

I Relac. d. Cort. Rnmrnf. iii. Z94, F.
Sec N O IE XXV.

tinrl

tion of inanimated nature, is extremely rude and B 0o K
aukward. The hardest Egyptian ftilc, stiff and
imrperfetd as it was, is more elegant. The scrawls
ot children delineate objecs almost as accurately.

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may
be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different station belongs to them, when
confidercd as the records of their country, as hilto-
rical monuments of its policy and transactions;
and they become curious as well as irterefiing ob-
njs of attention. The noblest and most beneficial
hivention of w'.ich human ingenuity can boast, is
trat of writing. But the first essays of this arr,
which hath contributed more than all others to the
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfection fowly, and by a
gradual progreltion. WVhen the warrior, eager
tor fame, wifhe;3 to tranfinit some knowledge of
hlis exploits to succeeding ages; when the grati-
tude of a people to their sovereign prompted them
to hani down an account of his beneficent deeds
to polterity; the firfl method of accomplishing
this, tlat Ieems to have occurred to them, was to
dclincate, in the bell manner they could, figures
reprlclrting the anion of which they were folici-
tous to prel.'rve the memory. Of this, which has
very properly been c;lledl piz7lre-writing ', we find
traces among Tfion of the moll fiivage tribes of
America. \hen a leader returns fromn the field,

r Divine Legat. of Moses, iii. 73.

hie

B 0 0 K he strips a tree of its bark, and with red paitc

v-,- _ scratches upon it some uncouth figures, which rc-

present the order of his march, the number ot his
followers, the enemy whom he attacked, the c :lps
and captives which he brought home. To thole
simple annals he trusts for renown, and foorhes
himself with hope that by their means he hiall re-
ceive praise from the warriors of future times :.

COMPAR ED with tlofe a-ikward efrys of their

ravage countrymen, the paintings of the Mvx;cdais
may be confidered as wurks of compolitiun and dc-
sign. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording tranladions, than
that of delineating the objects which they wished
to represent. But they could exhibit a more com-
plex series of events in progreflive order, and dct
scribe, by a proper disposition of figures, the oc-
currences of a king's reign from his accefflon to
his death; the progress of an infant's education
from its birth until it attained to the years of ma-
turity; the different recolnpences and marks of
diffinftion conferred upon warriors, in proportion
to the exploits which they had performed. Some
singular specimens of this pidure-writing have
been preserved, which are jutly confidered as the
most curious monuments of art brought from the
New World. The most valuable of thefi was

z Sir W. Johnson Philof. Tranrfa!. vol. Ixiii. p. 141. ?Ic1".
de la lIoi:tan. ii. ,91. Lafitau, Macurs de SaJv. ii. 43.

publinfie

published by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. Ic is di- B o o K
vided into three parts. The first contains the '-v-
hitfory of the Mexican empire under its ten mo-
narchs. The second is a tribute-roll, representing
what each conquered town paid into the royal
treasury. The third is a code of their inltitutions,
domerfic, political, and military. Another fpcci-
men of Mexican painting has been published in
thirty-two plates, by the present archbishop of
Toledo. To both are annexed a full explanation
of what the figures were intended to represent,
which was obtained by the Spaniards from Indians
well acquainted with their own arts. The flyle of
painting in all thefr is the fame. They represent
things, not words. They exhibit images to the
eye, not ideas to the understanding. They may,
therefore, be confidered as the earliefl and mot
imperfect essay of men in their progress towards
discovering the art of writing. The defets in
this mode of recording tranfaftions muff have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from
its nature, a very tedious operation; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any society, its annals muit have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Betides this, no objects could
be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions
of the mind had no corporeal form, and as long as
picture-writing could not convey an idea of thefc,
it must have been a very imperlfet art. The ne-
ceflity of improving it murl have rouzcd and sharp-
ened invention, and the human mind holding the

VOL. 111. N . nme

B 0 0 K fame course in the New World as in the Old,

VIA.
i , ' might have advanced by the fame fucceflive fleps,

first, from an acual pi6ure to the plain hierogly-
phic; next, to the allegorical symbol; then to the
arbitrary character; until, at length, an alphabet
of letters was discovered, capable of exprefling all
the various combinations of found employed in
speech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we, ac-
cordingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
among them. Upon an attentive inrpeaion of the
plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
obme approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,
where lbme principal part or circumstance in the
subjec't is made to stand for the whole. In the an-
nals of their kings, publified by Purchas, the
towns conquered by each are uniformly represented
in the fame manner by a rude delineation of a
house ; but in order to point out the particular
towns which submitted to their victorious arms,
peculiar emblems, sometimes natural objet6s, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbilhop of To-
ledo, the house, which was properly the picture of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. The Mexicans teem
even to have made some advances beyond this,
towards the use of the more figurative and fanciful
hieroglyphic. In order to delcribe a monarch,
who had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he

fubducel.

subdued. But it is only in one instance, the no- B o° K
tation of numbers, that we discern any attempt to A---
exhibit ideas which had no corporeal form. The
Mexican painters had invented artificial marks, or
fgns of convention, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be
paid into the royal treasury. 'The figure of a
circle represented unit, and in small numbers, the
computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were expressed by a peculiar mark, and
they had such as denoted all integral numbers,
from twenty to eight thousand. The short dura-
tion of their empire prevented the Mexicans from
advancing farther in that long course which con-
duts men from the labour of delineating real ob-
jeets, to the simplicity and ease of alphabetic
writing. Their records, notwithstanding some
dawn of such ideas as might have led to a more
perfect style, can be confidered as nothing more
than a species of piture-writing, so far improved
as to mark their superiority over the savage tribes
ofAmerica; but still so defetive, as to prove that
they had not proceeded far beyond the first Itage
in that progress which must be completed be-
fore any people can be ranked among polished
nations d.

THEIR mode of computing time may be confi- Tlrer mrn.l

of rompm.
dered as a more decisive evidence of their progress 'ia time.

d Sec NOTE XXVI.

N 2 in

B o o K in improvement. They divided their year into
L- , . eighteen months, each confifing of twenty days,

amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But
as they observed that the course of the fun was not
completed in that time, they added five days to
the year. These, which were properly intercalary
days, they termed supernumerary or wale ; and as
they did not belong to any month, no work was
done, and no sacred rite performed on them; they
were devoted wholly to feflivity and pallime-.
This near approach to philosophical accuracy is a
remarkable proof that the Mexicans had bestowed
rome attention upon inquiries and speculations,
to which men in a very rude state never turn their
thoughts.

as inii- SUH-i are the most striking particulars in the

c-.lng a
'na" pro- manners and policy of the Mexicans, which ex-
gf!ss In ci-

.z.. hihit them to view as a people considerably refined.

From other circumfRances, one is apt to furpet
that their character, and many of their institutions,
did not differ greatly from those of the other inha-
bitants of America.

Their ,a-s LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mcxi-
coIlriltJal
anr troci- cans were incessantly engaged in war, and the mo-

tives which prompted them to hostility seem to
have been the fame. They fought, in order to
gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of

Actpla, lib. vi, c. 2.

their

their enemies. In battle they were chiefly intent B O 0 K
on taking prisoners, and it was by the number of -^--
there that they efimated the glory of vietory. No
captive was ever ransomed or spared. All were
sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh devoured
with the fame barbarous joy as among the fiercest
savages. On some occasions it rose to even wilder
exceires. Their principal warriors covered them-
selves with the skins of the unhappy vidims, and
danced about the streets, boasting of their own va-
lour, and exulting over their enemies '. Even in
their civil infliutions we discover traces of that
barbarous disposition which their s)ysem of war
inspired. T he four chief counfcllors of the em-
pire were diltinguifhed by atrocious titles, which
could have been assumed only by a people who
delighted in blood g. This ferocity of character
prevailed among all the nations of New Spain.
The Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan, and
other states at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted
equally in war, and treated their prisoners with the
fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind combine
in social union, and live under the influence of
equal laws and regular policy, their manners sos-
ten, sentiments of humanity arile, and the rights
of the species come to be underltood. The firrce.
ness of war abates, and even while engaged in
holtility, men remember what they owe one to
another. The ravage fights to dcleroy, the citizen

icrrera, dec. 3. li). ii .

c. 1. Gom. Cliron. c. 217.
See NOTE XXVII.

N3 to

B 0 oi K to conquer. The former neither pities nor spares,

.--.-.. the latter has acquired sensibility which tempers

his rage. To this sensibility the Mexicans seem
to have been perfect strangers, and among them
war was carried on with so much of its original
barbarity, that we cannot but fufpea their degree
of civilization to have been very imperfect.

Their fune- THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than
»al rites.

those of the molt savage tribes. On the death of
any diltinguilhed personage, especially of the Em-
peror, a certain number of his attendants were
chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate victims were put to death with.
out mercy, and buried in the fame tomb h.

TIher ag.; THOUcHG their agriculture was more extensive
Ir'ca. than that of the roving tribes who trufled chiefly

to their bow for food, it seems not to have lup-
plied them with such subsistence as men require
when engaged in efforts of active industry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been firuck with any
fuperioriry of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their oblsrvation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the strength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of fevcral Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty dier, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give

-Herrcra, dcc. 3. lib. ii. c. s18 Gom. Chrln. c. 20-.

firmncF ;

firmness to the conflitution. Such a remark could B O 0 K.

vii.

hardly have been made with refpecc to any people v
furnished plentifully with the neceflaries of life.
The difficulty which Cortes found in procuring
fubfitence for his small body of soldiers, who
were often constrained to live (,n the sponraneous
productions of the earth, fcems to confirm the
remark of the Spanish writers, and gives no high
idea of the state of cultivation in the Mexican em-
pire '.

A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain A farthr

- proof of

appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican this.
women gave fuck to their children for several
years, and during that time they did not cohabit
with their hufbandsk. This precaution against a
burdensome increase of progeny, though necessary,
as I have already observed, among savages, who,
from the hardships of their condition, and the pre-
carioufnefs of their subsistence, find it impossible
to rear a numerous family, can hardly be supposed
to have continued among a people who lived at
ease and in abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, which Doubts con-

ce/ning the

has been confidered, and with justice, as the most Yextntoflic
decisive proof of a considerable progress in regu- Cmp'"c.

i Re!at. ap Ranmif. iii. 306, A. IIerrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv.
c. i-. dec. z. lib. vi. c. i6.

k GUom. ChoIon. c. zc8. Ilerrcra, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

N 4 lar

B o o K lar government and police, is oneof those fals in

_-v-./ the hiltory of the New World which seems to have

been admitted without due examination or fuffi-
cient evidence. The Spanish historians, in ordcr
to magnify the valour of their countrymen, are
accustomed to represent the dominion of Monte.
zuma as firetching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the North to the Southern Ocean.
But a great part of the mountainous country was
pofltffed by the Otomies, a fierce uncivilized
people, who fcmn to have been the residue of tle
original inhabitants. The provinces towards the
north and weft of Mexico were occupied by the
Cbichcmecas, and other tribes of hunters. None
of there recognized the Mexican monarch as their
superior. Even in the interior and more level
country, there were several cities and provinces
which had never submitted to the Mexican yoke.
Tlaicala, though only twenty-one leagues from the
capital of the empire, was an independent and ho-
file republic. Cholula, though fiill nearer, had
been fubjeóted only a Ihort time before the arrival
of the Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the difsance of
thirty leagues from Mexico, seems to have been
a separate state, governed by its own laws
Mechoacan, the frontier of which extended within
forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom,
remarkable for its implacable enmity to the Mexi-

llerrcra, dec. 3. lib. x. c.. 15 . B. Diaz. c. 132.

( .111

can name m. By these hostile powers the Mexican B ° o K
empire was circumscribed on every quarter, and A
the high ideas which we are apt to form of it from
the description of the Spanish hitorians, should be
coniiderably moderated.

IN consequence of this independence of several Littl in.

tercoutfe

lates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire, mon. its
there was not any considerable intercourse between v,, .1'"
its various provinces. Even in the interior coun-
try, not far distant from the capital, there seem to
have been no roads to facilitate the communication
of one diftri& with another; and when the Spa-
niards first attempted to penetrate into it, they had
to open their way through forests and marfhesn.
Cortes, in his adventurous march from Mexico to
Honduras in 1525, met viithobftrutions, and en-
dured hardthips, little inferior to those with which
he must have struggled in the most uncivilized re-
gions of America. In tome places, he could
hardly force a patfage through impervious woods,
and plains overflowed with water. In others he
found so little cultivation, that his troops were
frequently in danger of perishing by famine. Such
falis correspond ill with the pompous description
lhich the Spanifi writers give of Mexican police
and induflry, and convey an idea of a country
nearly similar to that possessed by the Indian tribes

" lerrera, (tec. 3. lib. ii. c. 0o.
" B. Diz. c. 1(1'.. c - 176.

in

B °o,° K in North America. IFere and there a trading or a

-- war path, as they are called in North Amnirica

led from one elttlement to another , but generally
there appeared no sign of any established commu-
nication, few marks of industry, and no monu.
ment of art.

Fathrr A PROOF of this imperfection in their commer.
,h's.s cial intercourse no leis ltriking, is their want of

money, or fomn univelfal standard by which to
eltimate the value of commodities. The discovery
of this is among the steps of greatest conlequence
in the progress of nations. Until it has been made,
all their tranfa&ions mufr be tb aukward, so ope-
rose, and so limited, that we may boldly pro-
nounce that they have advanced but a little way
in their career. The invention of such a commer-
cial standard is of such high antiquity in our hemi-
sphere, and riles so far beyond the ara of authentic
history, as to appear almost cceval with the exist-
ence of society. The precious metals teem to have
been early employed for this purpose, and from
their permanent value, their divilibility, and many
other qualities, tlhey are better adapted to firve as
a common standard than any other fulbllance ol
which nature has given us the command. But in
the New World, where thcfe metals abound molt,
this ule of them w.as not known. The exigencies
of rude tribes, or of monarchics imperfctly civi-
lized, did not call for it. All their comnmercial

° Iltricu;c , di'c. 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

intcrcot;l [d

intercourse was carried on by barter, and their ig. B °o K
ncrance of any common standard by which to faci- _..-
litate that exchange of commodities which contri-
butes so much towards the comfort of life, may be
jutly mentioned as an evidence of the infant Ilate
oftheir policy. But even in the New World the
inconvenience of wanting Iome general instrument
of commerce began to be felt, and some efforts
were made towards supplying that defet. The
Mexicans, among whom the number and greatness
of their cities gave rile to a more extended com-
merce than in any part of America, had begun to
employ a common standard of value, which ren-
dered smaller tranlicaions much more easy. As
chocolate was the fivourite drink of persons in
every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao,
of which it is composed, were of such universal
consumption, that, in their Rated markets, these
were willingly received in return for commodities
of small price. Thus they came to be confidered
as the instrument of commerce, and the value of
what one wished to dispose of, was eltimated by
the number of nuts of the cacao, which he might
expect in exchange for it. This seems to be the
utnmot length which the Americans had advanced
towards the discovery of any expedient for supply-
ing the use of money. And if the want of it is to
be held, on one hand, as a proof of their barba-
rity, this expedient for supplying that want, flould
be admitted on the other, as an evidence no lels
liisfiying, of lbme progrscls which the Mexicans

had

B 0 0 K had made in refinement and civilization, beyond

vil.

t--v- the savage tribes around them.

Douh corn- IN such a rude state were many of the Mexican
¢crnlPg Ihe
flr ofthcir provinces when first visited by their conquerors.

CS Even their cities, extensive and populous as the),

were, seem more fit to be the habitation of mna
just emerging from barbarity, than the residence
of a polished people. The delcription of Tlalcala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low firaggling huts, scattered about ir-
regularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
prietor, built with turf and stone, and thatched
with reeds, without any light but what they re-
ceived by a door, so low that it could not be en.
tered upright P. In Mexico, though, from the
peculiarity of its situation, the disposition of the
houses was more orderly, the ilruture of the
greater part was equally mean. Nor does the fa-
T:mplcs, bric of their temples, and other public edifices, ap-

pear to have been such as entitled them to the
high prailes bellowed upon them by many Spanilh
authors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
fcure and inaccurate descriptions, the great temple
of Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, wlich
has been represented as a magnificent building,
raised to such a height, that the ascent to it was by
a flair-cafe of a hundred and fourteen fleps, was 1
solid mars of earth of a square form, faced partly

P iIcrrcra, decc. . lib. vi. c. 12.

witli

with lfone. Its base on each fide extended ninety B O° 0 K
feet, and decreafitg gradually as it advanced in -
height, it terminated in a quadrangle of about
thirty feet, where were placed a shrine of the deity
and two altars on which the vicims were facri-
siced q. All the other celebrated temples of New
Spain exactly resembled that of Mexico'. Such
flrulures convey no high idea of progress in arc
and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive that a
form more rude and simple could have occurred to
a nation in its first efforts towards erecting any
great work.
GREATER skill and ingenuity were displayed, if and other

public

we may believe the Spanish historians, in the buildings.
houses of the emperor and in those of the principal
nobility. There, some elegance of design was vi-
fible, and a commodious arrangement of the apart.
ments was attended to. But if buildings corre-
fponding to such descriptions had ever existed in
the Mexican cities, it is probable that some re-
mains of them would still be visible. From the
manner in which Cortes conducted the siege of
Mexico, we can indeed easily account for the to-
tal deftrution of whatever had any appearance
of splendor in that capital. But as only two cen-
turies and a half have elapsed since the conquclt of
New Spain, it seems altogether incredible that in
a period so flort, every vestige of this boafled ele-

q Herrera, dec. z. lib. vii. c. 17.
, Sce NOT XXVII.

gance

oB 0oI K gance and grandeur should have disappeared; and
i_, ' that in the other cities, particularly in those which

did not susser by the destructive hand of the con.
querors, there are any ruins, which can be con.
fidered as monuments of their ancient magnifi.
cence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there are

buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling-houfes. Such as are defined
for holding the council of the tribe, and in which
all assemble on occasions of public festivity, may
be called stately edifices, when compared nxith the
reft. As among the Mexicans the diftinrion of
ranks was established, and property was unequal:l
divided, the number of distinguished structures in
their towns would of course be greater than in
other parts cf America. But there teem not to
have been either so solid or magnificent as to merit
the pompous epithets which 1ome Spanish authors
employ in describing them. It is probable that,
though more ornamented, and built on a larger
scale, they were erected with the fame flight ma-
terials which the Indians employed in their com-
mon buildings', and Time, in a 1pace much lels
than two hundred and fifty years, may have swept
away all remains of them '.

Filno, this enumeration of faces, it seems, upon
the whole, to be evident, that the slate of society

' See NOTE XXI\. ' See NOT I XXX.

I:qg~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. ~in

in Mexico was considerably advanced beyond that B n o K
of the savage tribes which we have delineated. .v-_i
But it is no less mlanifefl, that with refpecc to many
particulars, the Spanifl accounts of their progrcls
appear to be highly embellilhed. There is not a
more frequent or a more fertile sburce of deception
in describing the manners and arts of favare na-
tions, or of such as are imperfeóly civilized, than
that of applying to them the names and phrafcs
appropriated to the inflitutions and refinements of
polished lite. When the leader of a finall tribe,
or the head of arude community, is dignified with
the name of king or emperor, the place of his
rtidence can receive no other name but that of
his palace; and whatever his attendants may be,
they mult be called his court. Under such ap-
pellations they acquire an importance and dignity
which does not belong to them. The illusion
spreads, and giving a false colour to every part of
the narrative, the imagination is so much carried
away with the resemblance, that it becomes diffi.
cult to discern objects as they really are. The
paniards, when they first touched on the Mexican
coal, were so much ifruck with the appearance of
ttainments in policy and in the arts of life, far
uperior to those of the rude tribes with which they
cre hitherto acquainted, that they fancied they
ad at length discovered a civilized people in the
ew World. This comparilbn between the people
fMexico and their uncultivated neighbours, they
Ppear to have kept constantly in view, and ob-

fcrving

B 0 O K serving with admiration many things which marked

--- Jthe pre-eminence of the former, they employ In

describing their imperfec policy and infant arts,
such terms as are applicable to the inftitLltios of
men far beyond them in improvement. Both
these circumstances concur in detracting from rhe
credit due to the descriptions of Mexican manrers
by the early Spanish writers. By drawing a parz!.
lei between them and those of people so much tick
civilized, they raised their own ideas too high. By
their mode of describing them, they corvened
ideas to others no less exalted above truth. Later
writers have adopted the style of the original Li lo.
rians, and improved upon it. The colours wl:h
which De Solis delineates the chara&er of ioln-
tezuma, the splendour of his court, the laws and
policy of his empire, are the fame that he mull
have employed in exhibiting to view the monarch
and institutions of an highly polished peoFle.

BUT though we may admit, that the warm ima-

gination of the Spanish writers has added !or;:
embellifiment to their descriptions, this will no;
justify the decisive and peremptory tone, v:
which several authors pronounce all their acccu-it
of the Mexican power, policy and laws, to bc :h
fictions of men who wished to deceive, or ul o ('
lighted in the marvellous. There are few hil!o,;Cl
salts that can be ascertained by evidence moire K
exceptionable, than may be produced in l r'0'
of the material articles, in the dcfclription (1 t1

5 Ix

Mexican constitution and manners. Eye-witnelTes B o°v K
relate what they had beheld, men who had resided --
among the Mexicans, both before and after the
conquest, describe institutions and customs which
were familiar to them, persons of such different
profeflions that objects must have presented them-
selves to their view under every various aspect;
soldiers, priests, and lawyers, all concur in their
testimony. Had Cortes ventured to impose upon
his sovereign, by exhibiting to him a picture of
imaginary manners, there wanted not enemies and
rivals who were qualified to detect his deceit, and
who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But ac-
cording to the just remark of an author, whose
ingenuity has illustrated, and whose eloquence has
adorned, the history of America u, this supposition
is in itself as improbable, as the attempt would
have been audacious. Who among the destroyers
of this great empire was so enlightened by science,
or so attentive to the progress and operations of
men in social life, as to frame a fictitious fyflem of
policy so well combined and so confifienr, as that
which they delineate, in their accounts of the
Mexican government ? Where could they have
borrowed the idea of many institutions in legifla-
tion and police, to which, at that period, there
was nothing parallel in the nations with which they
were acquainted ? There was nor, at the beginning
of the sixteenth century, a regular etablifliment of

M. I'Abbi Riynal IIilt. pliilof. & pcit. & . iii. i 17.
VOL. III. O pon s

Bn 0 K polts for conveying intelligence to the fovereikn

-.- of any kingdom in Europe. The fame observation

will apply to what the Spaniards relate, w'ith re-
fpea to the ftruclure of the city of Mexico, the
regulations concerning its police, and various laws
tclablithed for the adminiltration of jultice, or le-
curing the happiness of the community. Whoever
is accultomed to contemplate the progress of na-
tions, will often, at very early stages of it, dilcover
a premature and unexpected dawn of those ideas,
which give rife to inltitutions that are the pride
and ornament of its molt advanced period. l'ven
in a state as imperfeStly polilhed as the Mexican
empire, the happy genius of tome sagacious ob.
fcrver, excited or aided by circumstances unknown
to us, may have introduced inflitutions which are
seldom found but in fbcieties highly refined. But
it is almost impossible that the illiterate conquerors
of the New World ihould have formed in any one
instance a conception of cuftons and laws, beyond
the standard of improvement in their own age and
country. Or if Cortes and his followers had been
capable of this, what inducement had thole by
whom they were fuperleded to continue the de-
ception ? Why should Corita, or Motolinea, or
Acoila, have amnulcd their lovcrcign or their fellow
citizcns with a tale purely fabulous ?

p.;;,... of IN one particular, however, the guides whonl
...'...' we must follow have r)rcprcnted the Mexicans to

be more barbarous, perhaps, than they really were.

Their

Their religious tenets, and the rites of their wor- B 0 K

VII.

hfip, are described by them as wild and cruel in
an extreme degree. Religion, which occupies no
considerable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any superior power are ob-
Icure, and his sacred rites few as well as simple,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular
system, with its complete train of priests, temples,
victims, and festivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the state of the Mexicans was very dif-
ferent from that of the ruder American tribes.
But from the extravagance of their religious no-
tions, or the barbarity of their rites, no conclusion
can be drawn with certainty concerning the degree
of their civilization. For nations, long after their
ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to refine,
adhere to systems of superstition founded on the
crude conceptions of early ages. From the genius
of the Mexican religion we may, however, form
a molt just conclusion with respect to its influence
upon the character of the people. The aspec of
luperflition in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious.
Its divinities were clothed with terror, and delight-
ed in vengeance. They were exhibited to the
people under detestable forms, which created hor-
ror. The figures of serpents, of tygers, and of
other deltrutive animals, decorated their temples.
Fear was the only principle that inspircd their vo.
taries. Fafis, mortifications, and penances, all
rigid, and many of them eccruciating to an ex-
treme degree, were the means employed to appeale

0 2 the

B o0 K the wrath of their gods, and the Mexicans never

--- approached their altars without sprinkling them

with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of
all offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the
most acceptable. This religious belief, mingling
with the implacable spirit of vengeance, and adding
new force to it, every captive taken in war was
brought to the temple, was devoted as a vicim to
the deity, and sacrificed with rites no lels lolem!i
than cruel '. The heart and head were the portio;!
consecrated to the gods; the warrior, by whose
prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried of:
the body to fealt upon it with his friends. Under
the irpreffion of ideas so dreary and terrible, arl
accustomed daily to scenes of bloodshed rendterc
awful by religion, the heart of man muff harder,
and be steeled to every sentiment of humaniy).
The spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly u;n-
feeling, and the genius of their religion lbu Lt
counterbalanced the influence of policy and art,,
that, notwithstanding their progress in both, their
manners, inflead of softening, became more fierce.
To what circumstances it was owing that uliperPi-
tion assumed such a dreadful form among th;
Mexicans, we have not sufficient knowledge u'
their hiltory to determine. But its influence is
visible, and produced an effrct that is fingul.ir ii
the history of the human species. The manners of

Cort. Rel.r. ap. Ramus. iii. 240.o, &c. P. D);..

Acolta, lib. v. c. 13, &c. lierrera, dec. 3. lil. t. c. i1;,
Gomara Chron. c. So, Sc. See NOTL XXXI.

t!::

the people in the New World who had made the B 0 0 K
greatest progress in the arts of policy, were the
molt ferocious, and the barbarity of some of their
customs exceeded even those of the savage state.

THE empire of Peru boasts of an higher anti- Pretenfon,

of Peru to

quity than that of Mexico. According to the tra- an high an-
ditionary accounts colleted by the Spaniards, it tlUity
had fubfifled four hundred years, under twelve
fucceflive monarchs. But the knowledge of their
ancient tfory, which the Peruvians could commu-
nicate to their conquerors, must have been both
imperfect and uncertain'. Like the other Ame- uncertain.
rican nations, they were totally unacquainted with
the art of writing, and deltitute of the only means
by which the memory of past tranfaEtions can be
preserved with any degree of accuracy. Even
among people to whom the use of letters is known,
the era where the authenticity of history com-
mences, is much posterior to the introduction of
writing. That noble invention continued long
subservient to the common business and wants of
life before it was employed in recording events,
with a view of conveying information from one
age to another. But in no country did ever tra-
dition alone carry down historic knowledge, in any
full continued diream, during a period of half the
length that the monarchy of Peru is said to have
lubfited.

i See NOTE XXXII.

0 3 T.H-

B 0 O K THE 2utipos, or knots on cords of different co.

.--»--1 lours, which are celebrated by authors fond of the

their -" marvellous, as if they had been regular annals of
'g'poby the empire, imperfectly supplied the place of writ-

ing. According to the obscure description or
them by Acofia ', which Garcilaffo de la Vega has
adopted with little variation and no improvement,
the quipos seem to have been a device for render-
ing calculation more expeditious and accurate. By
the various colours different objecs were denoted,
and by each knot a diflinc number. Thus an ac-
count was taken, and a kind of regifler kept, or
the inhabitants in each province, or of the levcral
productions collected there for public use. But as
by these knots, however varied or combined, no
moral or abstract idea, no operation or quality of
the mind could be represented, they contributed
little towards preserving the memory of ancient
events and institutions. The Mexican paintings
and symbols, rude as they were, conveyed more
knowledge of remote transactions, than the Peru-
vians could derive from their boafled quipos. Had
the latter been even of more extensive use, and
better adapted to supply the place of written re-
cords, they perished so generally, together with
other monuments of Peruvian ingenuity, in the
wreck occasioned by the Spanish conquest, and the
civil wars fublequent to it, that no accession of
light or knowledge comes from them. All the
zeal ofGarcilaffo de la Vega, for the honour of that

' lilt, lib. vi. c. 8.

race

race of monarchs from whom he descended, all B 0 K
the industry of his researches, and the superior ad- .J
vantages with which he carried them on, opened
no source of information unknown to the Spanish
authors who wrote before him. In his Royal Com-
mentaries, he confines himi!lf to illuffrate what
they had related concerning the antiquities and in-
ftitutions of Peru b; and his illustrations, like their
accounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary
tales current among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de-

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquests, and private character of the
early Peruvian monarchs. Wve can reft upon no-
thing in their flory, as authentic, but a few fads,
so interwoven in the system of their religion and
policy, as preserved the memory of them from be-
ing loft; and upon the description of such cufloms
and inflitutions as continued in force at the time of
the conquest, and fell under the immediate obfer-
vation of the Spaniards. By attending carefully to
there, and endeavouring to separate them from
what appears to be fabulous, or of doubtful au-
thority, I have laboured to form an idea of the
Peruvian government and manners.

THE people of Peru, as I have already ob- Origin of

their civil
served ', had not advanced beyond the rudest form rL,.",

b Lib. i. c. so. C Book vi. p. 21, &c.

0 4 of

B 0 0 KX of savage life, when Manco Capac, and his con-

_-- - fort Mama Ocollo, appeared to inftruc and civi-

lize them. Who there extraordinary personages
were, whether they imported their system of legilf
lation and knowledge of arts from some country
more improved, or, if natives of Peru, how they
acquired ideas so far superior to those of the people
whom they addressed, are circumstances with re.
spec to which the Peruvian tradition conveys no
information. Manco Capac and his consort, tak-
ing advantage of the propensity in the Peruvians
to fuperflition, and particularly of their veneration
for the Sun, pretended to be children of that glo-
rious luminary, and to deliver their inflrutions in
his name and authority. The multitude listened
and believed. What reformation in policy and
manners the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of
their empire, and how, from the precepts of the
Inca and his consort, their ancestors gradually ac-
quired some knowledge of those arts, and rome
relish for that industry, which render subsistence
secure and life comfortable, hath been formerly re-
lated. Those bleslings were originally confined
within narrow precints; for the authority of the
irft Inca did not reach many leagues beyond Cuz.
co. But, in process of time, his successors ex-
tended their dominion over all the regions that
firetch to the weft of the Andes from Chili to
Quito, establishing in every province their peculiar
policy and religious inflitutions.

TIlE

THE most singular and firiking circumstance in B O O K
the Peruvian government, is the influence of reli- ' -
gion upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas Fnddin
make such a feeble imprelnon on the mind of a
fivage, that their effect upon his sentiments and
manners is hardly perceptible. Among the Mexi-
cans, religion, reduced into a regular Iyftem, and
holding a consider-able place in their public infi-
tutions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in
forming the peculiar chara6cer of that people.
But in Peru, the whole fyflem of civil policy was
founded on religion. The Inca appeared not only
as a legislator, but as the mefflnger of Heaven.
His precepts were received not merely as the in-
junctions of a superior, but as the mandates of the
Deity. His race was held to be sacred; and in
order to preserve it ditfinct, without being polluted
by any mixture of less noble blood, the sons of
Manco Capac married their own filters, and no
person was ever admitted to the throne who could
not claim it by such a pure descent. To those
Children of the Sun, for that was the appellation
bestowed upon all the offspring of the Iirfit Inca,
the people looked up with the reverence due to
beings of a superior order. They were deemed to
be under the immediate protection of the deity
from whom they issued, and by him every order
of the reigning Inca was supposed to be dic-
tated.

FROMA

B 0 0 K FROM those ideas two confcquences reluled.
kvi. -' The authority of the Inca was unlimited and abfo.
Two re-
narkable lute, in the molt extensive meaning of the words.
tbh's of Whenever the decrees of a prince are conlidcred as

the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an adt
of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or oppose

The abfo- his will. Obedience becomes a duty of religion;
lute po er
ot the Inca. and as it would be profane to controul a monarch

under the guidance of teaven, and prefutilp:uous
to advise him, nothing remains but to submit with
implicit refpct. This mull neccflarily be the es-
set of every government established on pretensions
of intercourle with luperior powers. Such accord.
ingly was the blind fubmilffon which the Peruvians
yielded to their Jbvereigns. The persons of highcti
rank and greatest power in their dominions ac-
knowledged them to be of a more exalted nature;
and in teitirony of this, when admitted into their
pretence, they entered with a burden upon their
Shoulders, as an emblem of their servitude, and
willingnels to bear whatever the Inca was plealed
to impose. Among their lubtjets, force was not
requisite to second their commands. Every officer
entruited with the execution of them was revered,
and, according to the account of an intelligent ob.
Icrver of PIruvian manners ', might proceed alone
from one extremity of the empire to another,witliout
meeting opposition; for, on producing a fringatroin
the coyalBorla, an ornanent peculiar to the reigning

.1 '/rate, lib. i. c, ii .

I.'ii'1.

Inca, the lives and fortunes of the people were at B O O K
his disposal. -
ANOTHER consequence of effablifhing govern- All crimes

pu,,ifled

ment in Peru on the foundation of religion was, capirtjy.
that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were not confidered as tranfgreflions of human laws,
but as insults offered to the Deity. Each, without
any diflinction between fich as were flight and
such as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and
could be expiated only by the blood of the offender.
Consonantly to the fame ideas, punishment follow-
ed the trespass with inevitable certainty, because
an offence against Heaven was deemed such an
high enormity as could not be pardoned c. Among
a people of corrupted morals, maxims of jurif-
prudence so severe and unrelenting, by rendering
men ferocious and desperate, would be more apt
to multiply crimes than to restrain them. But the
Peruvians, of simple manners and unfufpicious
faith, were held in such awe by this rigid difci-
pline, that the number of offenders was extremely
small. Veneration for monarchs, enlightened and
direted, as they believed, by the divinity whom
they adored, prompted them to their duty; the
dread of punishment, which they were taught to
confider as unavoidable vengeance inflited by of-
fended Heaven, withheld them from evil.

° Vega, lib. ii. c. 6.

THE

B 0 0 K THE system of fuperflition on which the Incas
_v -a ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority,
lvh,1o geni as

'f their cr was of a genius very different flom that eflabiifhed
'JiO'. among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned the

veneration of his followers entirely towards natural
objects. The Sun, as the great source of light, ut
joy, and fertility in the creation, attractted tlicir
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as co-
operating with him, were entitled to secondary ho.
nours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore some fuperi()
power, takes this direction, and is employed i;
contemplating the order and benificcnce that really
exist in nature, the spirit of fuperflition is mild,
\Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
and the fears of men, are supposed to preside in
nature, and become the objecs of worship, fu-
perflition always assumes a more severe and atro
cious form. Cf the latter we have an example
among the Mexicans, of the former among th(
people of Peru. The Peruvians had not, in
deed, made such progress in observation or ir.
quiry, as to have attained just conceptions of tih
Deity; nor was there in their language any pro
per name or appellation of the Supreme Power
which intimated, that they had formed any idea o
him as the Creator and Governor of the World'
But by directing their veneration to that gloriou
luminary, which, by its universal and vivifyinf
energy, is the belt emblem of divine bencliccncc

f Acolla, lib. v. c. 3.

tl h

the rites and observances which they deemed ac- B 0 O K
ccptableto him were innocent and humane. They -.
offered to the Sun a part of those productions
which his genial warmth had called forth from the
bolmn of the earth, and reared to maturity. They
fIcrificed, as an oblation of gratitude, some of the
animals who were indebted to his influence for
nourilhment. They prcfented to him choice fpe-
cimens of those works of ingenuity which his light
had guided the hand of man in forming. But the
Incas never stained his altars with human blood,
nor could they conceive that their beneficent father
the Sun would be delighted with such horrid vic-
tims g. Thus the Peruvians, unacquainted with
those barbarous rites which extinguish sensibility,
anil suppress the feelings of nature at the fight of
human sufferings, were formed, by the spirit of
the superstition which they had adopted, to a na-
tional charater, more gentle than that of any
people in America.

THE influence of this fuperflition operated even rir.flutnre

upon their civil institutions, and rended to correct I ,ycv,
in them whatever was adverse to gentleness of cha-
racter. The dominion of the Incas, though the
most absolute of all despotisms, was mitigated by
its alliance with religion. 'Ihe mind was not
humbled and depressed by the idea of a forced
fubjcction to the will of a superior; obedience,

* Sec NOTI XX\III.

paid

B O O K paid to one who was believed to be clothed with

.

--.- divine authority, was willingly yielded, and im-

plied no degradation. The sovereign, conscious
that the fubmilive reverence of his people flowed
from their belief of his heavenly descent, was con-
tinually reminded of a difrinction which prompt-
ed him to imitate that beneficent power which he
was supposed to reprefenr. In confequenceofthufe
impressions, there hardly occurs in the traditional
history of Peru, any inltance of rebellion againlt
the reigning prince, and, among twelve fucccfli;e
monarchs, there was not one tyrant.

and on their EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, were
militiry yncm. carried on with a spirit very different from that of

other American nations. They fought not, like
savages, to deltroy and exterminate; or, like the
Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities with
human sacrifices. They conquered, in order to
reclaim and civilize the vanquished, and to diffule
the knowledge of their own institutions and arts.
Prisoners seem not to have been exposed to the in-
fults and tortures, which were their lot in every
other part of the New World. The Incas took
the people whom they subdued under their pro-
tetion, and admitted them to a participation of
all the advantages enjoyed by their original sub-
je&s. This practice, lo repugnant to American
ferocity, and resembling the humanity of the molt
polified nations, mutf be ascribed, like other pe-
culiarities which we have observed in the l'criuvin

5 am;[ns ;ei,

manners, to the genius of their religion. The B OV0 KC
Incas, confidering the homage paid to any obe .--v--
but the heavenly powers which they adored as
impious, were fond of gaining prollytes to their
favourite system. The idols of every conquered
province were carried in triumph to the great
temple at Cuzco h, and placed there as trophies
of the superior power of the divinity who was the
protector of the empire. The people were treated
with lenity, and instructed in the religious tenets
of their new maflers ', that the conqueror might
have the glory of having added to the number of
the votaries of his father the Sun.

THE slate of property in Peru was no lIss rin- Peui;ar

giUlar than that of religion, and contributed, like- perty.
wile, towards giving a mild turn of character to
the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three shares. One was conre-
crated to the Sun, and the produt of it was ap-
plied to the erecion of temples, and furnilhing
what was requifire towards celebrating the public
rites of religion. The second belonged to the
Inca, and was set apart as the provision made by
the community for the support of government.
The third and largest share was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. No perlfn, however, had a right
of exclusive property in the portion allotted to

'' Ierera, dec. 5. lib. iv c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c, Iz.
fierrca, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. S.

ii i ,.

B o vl K him l' e poffled it only for a year, at the ex-

cc-» -piration of which a new division was made, in pro.

portion to the rank, the number, and exigenci;;
of each family. All those lands were cultivated
by the joint indultry of the community. T,
people, fummonect by a proper officer, repaired q;
a body to the fields, and performed their common
task, while songs and murical intfruments cheercA

zEfa, of them to their labour k. By this singular dhi'r,-
this.

bution of territory, as well as by the mode uj
cultivating it, the idea of a common interest, an.!
of mutual fubferviency,was continually inculcated.
Each individual felt his connection with tlhoc
around him, and knew that he depended on thei:
friendly aid for what increase he was to reap. A
Hfate thus conftitted may be confidered as c:.:
great family, in wliich the union of the nemin.-;
was so complete, and the exchange of good oefces
so perceptible, as to create stronger atrachmen:,
and to bind man to man in closer intercourfc, t!.::i
'ubfifted under any form of society eflablifludi in
America. From this resulted gentle manners, a'i.
mild virtues unknown in the savage slate, and vi.:
which the Mexicans were little acquainted.

Inequal;ry RUT, though the institutions of the Incas wcel
ofrank,. so framed as to Itrengthen the bonds of afi'eticn

among their fubjeas, there was great inequality ;n
their condition. The diflintion of ranks wais tuli~

k lleirera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. z. Vcga, lib. v. c. 5

7 cflabliflht;

established in Peru. A great body of the inhabit- B O o K
ants, under the denomination of ranaconas, were ..D
held in a star (,f lervitude. Their garb and
houles were of a form different from tholC of free-
men. Like the Tamemes of Mexico, they were
employed in carrying burdens, and in performing
every other work of drudgery'. Next to them In
rank, were such of the people as were free, but
diltinguifhed by no official or hereditary honours.
Above them were raised, those whom the Spaniards
call Orejones, from the ornaments worn in their
cars. They formed what may be denominated
the order of nobles, and in peace as well as war
held every office of power or trust m. At the head
of all were the children of the Sun, who, by their
high descent, and peculiar privileges, were as much
exalted above the Orejones, as there were elevated
beyond the people.

SUCH a form of society, from the union of its Stataorfrta.

members, as well as from the dillincclion in their
ranks, was favourable to progrels in the arts.
But the Spaniiards having been acquainted with the
improved ftnte of various arts in Mexico, fcveral
years before they discovered Peru, were not so
much llruck with what they oblerved in the latter
country, rind dcl'cribe the appearances of ingenuity
tlere with les warmth of admiration. The Peru-

I He'rera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. $.
m Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. I.
Voe. III. P vians,

B VI K vians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond the

Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life, and
in such as have some title to the name of elegant.

Improvdc IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necef-
fsste ol alti.-
cul urt. fity in lbcial life, was more extensive, and carried

on with greater flikll than in any part of America.
The Spaniards, in their progrcis through the coun-
try, were so fully supplied with provilions of every
kind, that in the relation of their adventures we
meet with few of those dilmal scenes of diftreis oc-
cafioned by famine, in which the conquerors of
Mexico were so often involved. The quantity of
foil under cultivation was not left to the dilcretion
of individuals, but regulated by public authority
in proportion to the exigencies of the community.
Even the calamity of an unfruitful lealbn was but
little felr, for the product of the lands consecrated
to the Sun, as well as thole set apart for tle
Incas, being deposited in the Tamvos, or public
ftorehoulcs, it remained there as a flared provilion
for times of scarcity ". As the extent of cultiva-
tion was determined with such provident attention
to the demands of the slate, the invention and in-
dulfry of the Peruvians were called forth to ex-
traordinary exertions, by certain defects peculiar
to their climate and lbil. All the vail rivers that
flow from the Andes take their cou f; c,:llward to
the AtlU:.tic Ocean. Peru Is walierel c;':1 ly by lbme

" arate, lib. i. c. '1
. \' g iib. i. c. S.

11 reanms

fireams which rufl down from the mountains like B 0 1 K
torrents. A great part of the low-country is sandy ---,
and barren, and never refrefned with rain. In
order to render such an unpromising region fertile,
the ingenuity of the Peruvians had recourse to va-
rious expedients. By means of artificial canals
conduacdt , with much patience and considerable
art, from the torrents that poured across their
country, they conveyed a regular supply of moi-
fture to their fields . They enriched the foil by
manuring it with the dung of sea-fowls, of which
they found an inexhaustible store on all the ifands
scattered along their coasts P. In describing the
cutloms of any nation thoroughly civilized, such
practices would hardly draw attention, or be men-
tioned as in any degree remarkable; but in the
hiltory of the improvident race of men in the New
'World, they are entitled to notice as singular proofs
of industry and of art. The use of the plough,
indeed, was unknown to the Peruvians. They
turned up the earth with a kind of mattock of hlrd
wood 1. Nor was this labour deemed so de,-rad-
ing as to be devolved wholly upon the women.
Both sexes joined in perforniing this necessary
work. Even the children of the Sun fct an ex-
ample of indlLufry, by cultrivatin r a ficl'i near Cuzt.o
with their own hands, and they digniliicd tlii tli ic-
° Z.r.atr, lib. i. c.4. V(e::I lit) v. c. i. & 24..

Acoila, lib. iv. c. 37. Ve g., .,. v. c. 3. b, ."c 4 Q . ?E
XXXI\'.

q Z.ta'c,, lb. i. c. 8.

1' 2 tin,

B 0 0 K tion, by denominating it their triumph over the

----- earth .
Their build. TIHE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob-

vious, likewile, in the conltruaion oftheir houles
and public buildings. In the extcnfive plains
which tlretch along the Pacific Ocean, where the
sky is perpetually lcrene, and the climate mild,
their houses were very properly of a fabric extreme-
ly flight. But in the higher regions, where rain
falls, where the vicissitude of seasons is known,
and their rigour felt, houles were constructed with
greater solidity. They were generally of a !quare
form, the walls about eight feet high, buiit wviil
bricks hardened in the fun, the door low ald ftrair,
and without any windows. Sinmple as these ilruc-
tures w re, and rude as the mnLtcrals may feein to
to be, clf v!i:h they were formed, t':ey were fb
dura'c,!, t;;a' m~aryv · f thic'n liill lubflif in dflrcrcnt
parts ofl Pr'u, 1 .'n; after every nmonumnent that inight
hiave conveyed to us any idea of the doncflic slate
of the otler Anmrrican nations has vaniintd from
the face ot the earth. But it was in the temples
consecrated to the Sun, and in the buildings de-
fli;cd lr the rcrfide.lce of their monarchs, that tile
Peruvians displaycd tie utimnof extent of their art
and colltivance. '1 he detcriptions of them by
such of the Spanifli writers as had an opportunity
of conItemplating them, while, in Ionie aclure,

' Vca, lib. v. c. 2.

2 entire,

entire, might have appeared highly exaggerated, B 0 O K
if the ruins which still rc:;ain, didl not vouch the -
truth of their relations. TlIele ruins of lacred or
royal buildings are found ia every provinice of the
empire, and by their frequency deipnonllratc thlat
they are mnonuments or'a pt, verful peopl, w !lh must
have lublilted, during a p-iicl or lur cexscnt, in
a ltate of no inconfider;:h!z i :provemlcnt. They
appear to have been rd::iics variio:s in their l(i-
mennions. Some of a mn-licr. [iz-, m:iv o; i.n-
menle extent, all rrmarkal-e *or iO ai;iy, and re-
I'm'bl:ng each other in th- 1' i! oi- arc!,iictur-c.
The trmple of P.achacamac, togt!hl:r with a pla-
lace of the Inca, ncrid :i lotlrc!s, \wre IL conneC-Ctc
together as to Iormn one rc.it tiruitture, ::jvc hair
a league in circuit. I:i this pjroc;M: ;us p.le, tl;e
fame singular talt in building is cj:ltsicuOuus, .is
in other works of the Peruvians. is they were
unacquainted with the ui: of the pulley, and other
mechanical powers, an. could not elevate the larde
flones and bricks which they emplo)ed in buildl:ni
to any conlider.ible licigilc, tile walls of thini cdi-
fice, in which they lecni to have mlade their g'ceat-
elt cfobrr towards magnilicence, (lid not ile .,bove
twelve feet from the ground. 'houtlg tlh)y hail
not dilcovercd the u!ii of mortar or t f a; y Ithcr
cement in building, the bri(k i LJlr lones wtcc j .in-
ed with to much nice1'y, thlat thelL Ic.ln c: ii.:r,1l ly

t diilcerncd'. ' lie apalll tenits, as la-r as ilc itill.

See N OT XXXV.

P 3 tributin

B °0 K tribution of them can be traced in tie ruins, were

VII.
' _---'J ill-dilpolcd, and afforded little accumrmodation.

There was not a single window in any p..rt of the
building; and as no light could enter but by the
door, all the apartmencs of largcit dimension mult
either have been perfeEtly dark, or illuminated by
some other means. But with all these, and many
other imperftdions that might be mentioned in
their art of building, the works of the Peruv.ins
which still remain, must be confidered as Itupen-
dous efforts of a people unacquainted with the use
of iron, and convey to us an high idea of the
power possessed by their ancient monarchs.

Te;, public THESE, however, were not the noblest or molt
-'°AI' ul-fuil works of the Incas. The two great roads

from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter-
rupted stretch above five hundred leasgues, are en-
titled to still higher praise. The one was conduct-
ed through the interior and mountainous country,
the other through the plains on the fea-coait.
From the language of admiration in whicd some
of the early writers exprels their aftoninflnhm'nt when
they firit viewed tliofe roads, and from the more
p pmious dcfcriptions of later writers, who lahour
to ;iil'port f(,tne favoi.ite theory concerning Ame-
r!ia, one n.l miht be led to coinpare this work of
the Incas to the famous military ways which re-
main a3 nmonuments of the RLoman power: But in
a cotlutry whlere i thre w.is no tame animall except
the L1lji.', hiiL v .'t nci\'t r ulc' d r Idr lu htr, ;a:d

*-- b/!l

but little as a beast of burden, where the high R (J K
roads were seldom trod by any but a human foot, -
no great degree of labour or art was requilite in
forming them. The Peruvian roads were only
fifteen feet in breadth', and in many places so
slightly formed, that time has effaced every vestige
of the course in which they ran. In the low
country little more seems to have been done, than
to plant trees or to fix posts at certain intervals, in
order to mark the proper route to travellers. To
open a path through the mountainous country was
a more arduous task. Eminences were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and for the preservation of
the road it was fenced with a bank of turf. At
proper ditances, Tainbos, or florehou!ifc were
erected for the accommodation of the Inca and his
attendants, in their progrels t!:rough his dnmii-
nions. From the manner in which the road was
originally formed in this higher and more imper-
vious region, it h.s proved moe: durable; anid
though, from the inattention of the Spaniards to
every object but that of working their mines, no-
thing has been done towards keeping it in re;:ir-,
its courli may fiill be traced ". Such was the cc-
lebrated road of the Incas; and even frorn ti;:i d<e-
scription, tlivclied of every circumllsmance of miani-
telt exaggeration, or of Ifuliicious allpecl, it miutt

Cica, c. (o.

u Xercz, p. ).

1 I l. Z.:ralt, lil. i. c. xI , r4.. \ -V,-:
lii). ix. C. i :;. B u:)c r V 'y.i:L , p). lj. U!lua L' 1 :cllTc ,i , 11-

1-, 4 be3'
P 4 be

o o° Kc be confidered as a firiking proof of an extraordi.
L r -, nary progress in improvement and policy. To

the savage tribes of America, the idea of facilii at-
ing communication with places at a distance had
never occurred. To the Mexicans it was hardly
known. Even in the most civilized countries cf
Europe, men had advanced far in refinement, be-
fore it became a regular objet of national police
to form such roads as render intercourse commo-
dious.
la btidges. TnE formation of those roads introduced an-

other improvement in Peru equally unktnown ovwr
all the rett of America. In its courle trom tlm.Ih
to north, the road of the Incas was interlccted by
all the torrents which roll from the Andes tow.ards
the Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their
course, as well as from the frequency and viulence
of their inundation, there were unnavigable. Some
expedient, however, was to be found for patsing
them. ]'he Peruvians, from their unacquaintance
with the ule of arches, and their inability to work
in wood, could not conflluct bridges either ot
itone or timber. But necessity, the parent of in-
vention, Ifu'gcflcd a device which supplied that
defeLct. -I ly tf(rmned cables of great ter)ngil, by
twiiling together tonme of the pliable witlis or ofT idc,
with which their country abounds; fix of wich
they tretclied across the fiream parailll to onl an-
other, and made them falls on each fide. 'flilr
they bound firmly together by intcrweaviQn,

mlna lr
i

fnaller ropes so close, as to form a compact piece B o K
ot net-work, which being covered with branchcs of
trees and earth, they pafled along it with tolerable
fc-urity '. Proper perlbns were appointed to at-
trnl at each bridge, to keep it in repair, and to
a.ilti p.siri'n'ers Y. In the level countrv, where the
rivers became deep and broad a-d Ithil, they are
pllEd in B ?lzas, or fl atcs; in the con(tLru'ti.)i, as
well as navigation of which, the ingenuity ot the
I'ruvians appears to be far flperior to that ot any
pcol)le in Anmerica. '1 hee h:id advanced no far-
ther in naval tkill than the ule of the paddle, or
tar; the Peruvians ventured to rail; a inafl, and
i)rcad a fail, by means of which their baizas not
o:lly went nimbly before the wind, but could veer
a::i tcck with great celerity '.

NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians Modeeofr-

fining filvefg

con:i,:e. ltolely to o'jects ot cffential utility. They o...
hid made lomc progress in arts, which may be
calle. elegint. They pofilclcd the precious me-
ta!i in "rc.atrr abundance than any people (o Ame-
rica. 'I'L.y obraincld old in the lame manner with
lie Mexicans, by lcarching in the channrtls of ri-
vers, or waffling the earth in wvhich p.irtic Ics of it
were coictailne.. Bot in order to lrocuri filvcr,
they exerted no inconsiderable degice of lkill and

'S c NO r . \xVI.
/ S nch.o :,.. . ,!ln. ii. 176, !. /Za'alc, lib. i.. c. 4. Vega,
Ih. ii, . C. 7, 3. Ilrr lr ra, dec. .. lib. iv. C. 3, 4.

L'lloa Voy. i. 16;, &c.

invention.

B o 0 " invention. They had nor, indeed, attained the ar
.-- ,.. of finking a shaft into the bowels of the earth, and

penetrating to the riches concealed there; but they
hollowed deep caverns on tie banks of rivers and
the fides of mountains, and emptied such veins as
did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. In otiler
places, where the vein lay near the surface, tl;iy
dug pits to such a depth, that the perlon who
worktd below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in lbalkets a. They had d(ilcoverei. the art or
incilting and refining this, either by the imnpic ai,.
plication ot fire, or where the ore was more llub.
born, and impre,?nated with foreign fubltanccs, by
plcin( it in frnall ovens or furnaces on hii
grounds, tb artiticially conllruclcd, that the
draught of air performed the function of a bel-
lows, an engine with which they were tot;lii un-
acquainted. By this simple device, the pu:;r urcs
were fi;eltecl with facility, and the quanti:y or ili
ver in Peru was so considerable, that m.al;y of ti)l
utensils employed in the functions of conLi:iion li;e
were made of it '. Several of thole vctffcs and
trinkets are said to have merited no f:inall delgicc t
eilimation, on account of the neatnels ot rCc vo:;..-
manlhip, as well as the intrinsic valuc oli the i:a-
terials. But as the conquerors of Areric.' v.r'c
well acquainted- vith the latter, but i.id lal.;
any conception of the former, molf of tlhem v.:'

a R-muin lo, iii. .t.4 , A.
1h :AcIlla, lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Veg'S, p. I.b.

vl. ..*.
'illo.i L';it.ct':I . 2 8.

1n1ci::,[

melted down, and rated according to their weight B OO R
and fineness in the divifi on of the lpoil. V.

IN other works of nm.re curiosity or crnament, Works of

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many J,,lacc.
ipecimenl of those have been dulg out ot t!:e GuCa-
(as, or mounds of earth, with which the Peruvians
covered tile bodies of the dead. Among thele are
mirrors of various dimensions, of hard fliining
stones highly polinfed; vefTels of earthen ware of
different forms; hatchets, and other inltruments,
obme destined for war, and others for labour.
Some were of flint, fotne of copper, hardened to
such a degree by an unknown process, as to s'ip-
ply the place of iron on several occations. I-lad
the ufc of those tools formed of copper been gene-
ral, the progress of the Peruvians in the arts m:;ht
have been such, as to emulate that of more culti-
vated nations. But either the n'etal was lo rare,
or the operation by which it was tiadened, lo te-
dious, that their initrunienrs of copper were few,
and so extremely final I, that they seem to have been
employed only in llighter works. But even to
Iuch a ci;cumlc!ibed 1le of this impIer;e met.Il,
:he I'ruvians were indebted tbo ttheir tuiperiority to
hc other pe,)pl of Am nerica in varlims arts c. The
.Tme oblervation, however, may be applied to
:hem, which I forlmerly manlle wlth relicct to the
Ints of the Mexicans. F'rom Ieveral lpecimens crf

Ulioa Voy. tom. i. 3 1 , &c. i.:. Eiretent. p. ó.), &c.

'Peruvian

B 0 K Peruvian utensils and ornaments, which are dep
_ -- - ifited in the royal cabinet of Madrid, and from lobr

preserved in different colleCtions in other parts <
Europe, I have reason to believe th.;t the worl
rnanlhip is more to be admired on account otch
rude tools with which it was executed, than o
account of its intrinsic neatnels and elegance; an
that the Peruvians, though the mofi improved o
all the Americans, were not advanced beyond tli
infancy of arts,

An imper- BUT notwith(landing so many circumsiLnc;;
· % civsili-
'ation. which seem to indicate an high degree of imjr;ivc

ment in Peru, others occur that fiiggetl the ii.,
of a society flill in the first tfages of its tranlitlor
from barbarism to civilization. In all the (don:i

N. citri nions of the Incas, Cuzco was the only l_-lace thai
but cuzco. had the appearance, or was entitled to the rin:ce oi

a city. Every where elle, the peop!t lived iiuliiy
in detached habitations, dispersed over the couniry,
or, at the utmost, fettled together in ifl :11 ,l-
lages". But until men are brought to afii.:,bie in
numerous bodies, and incorpor..ted in lut-l clolc
union, as to enjoy frequent intcrcourl', ;;n. to
feel mutual dependence, they never iniLibe l:cr-
fectly the spirit, or aflume tle mannlers oi 1,, i.;l
life. In a country of immcnl exctnt, wit oilj
one city, the progrcfs of manreis, anrd the ii;-
provement either of tle ncccfliry oir mure Icilnel

Z7,rate, lib. i. C. 9. lIcrer., dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 4.

al! ,

arts, mult have been so flow, and carried on un- B O0O K

VII.

dr such difadvintages, that it is more surprising _--
r[e Peruvians (hould have advanced ii far in refinc-
nrnt, than that they did not proceed farther.
I. consequence of this slate of imperfeLl union, MN perf^

feparration of

rthe fearation of proftffions in Peru was not so proflcll" n.
complete as among the Mexicans. The less closely
n:,n associate, the more simple are their manners,
and the fewer their wants. The crafts of com-
mon and molt necefrary use in life do not, in luch
a lite, become so complex or difficult, as to ren-
d:rit req'uisite that men Ihould be trained to them
lt any particular course of education. All thife
-fcfliorns were accordingly exerciid by every Pe-
ruvian indiscriminately. None but the artifls, em-
ployed in works of mere curofity or ornament, con-
i:uted a separate order of men, or were diftin-
guifned from other citizens'.

FRO,.i the want of cities in Peru, another con- I.;tir com.
f-quence followed. There was little commercial rut 'rli.c
ir tcrcourle among the inhabitants of that great cm-
I re. The aa.ivity of colmmerce is coeval with
thc foundation of cities; and from lie monment
that the members of any comniunity fcttle in con-
fiderable numbers in one place, its operations be-
come vigorous. The citizen mull depend for lub-
'llence on the l.bour of those who cultivate the

' Acofa, lib. vi. c. i;. Vega, lib. v. c. . -errra,
ic. 5. lib. iv. c. 4.

SrounLL

B 0 o K ground. They, in return, must receive fTn
_ _yj equivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is elt.iblifl

ed, and the productions of art are regularly e:
changed for the fruits of agriculture. In the rown
of the Mexican empire, flated maikets were hrl]
and whatever could supply any want or dc.rre o
man was an object of commerce. But in Penr
from the singular mode of dividing property, an
the manner in which the people were fettlc(l, thtr
was hardly any species of commerce carried oni b
tween diffircnt provinces ', and the coni'muni:
was less acquainted with that active irtcrcuur:
which is at once a bond of union, and an inccntwv
to improvement.

IY nw3.iike BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvianrs W
ft:rlt (f 'he

,ruv..ns,. the most remarkable, as well as most fatal cdir

in their charactere. The greater part (of the rnc
nations of A merica opposed their invaders vi:h u;
daunted ferocity, though with little conduct or fiq
ccls. The Mexicans maintained the nrulc i
defence of their liberties, with such perlcvcri;
fortitude, that it was with difficulty the Spaniard
triumphed over them. Peru was lubdutd c 1i one
and almtoft without reiftance; and the mnoll t
vourable opportunities of regaining their Jrrcelon
and of cruffling their opprcflors, were loll throut
the tiniidity of the people. Though the tuiii

, Ve, n, lib. vi. c. 8.
r. Xtrc,. 19o. Sancho a,'. Ram. iii. 372. 1 rt.C, " r'.
lib. i. C. 3.

toJl,

tional history of the Peruvians reprelents all the Ba o s
Incas as warlike princes, frcquently at the head of _---
armies, which they led to victory and conquelt;
few symptoms of luch a martial Ipirit appear in any
oftheir operations subsequent to the invaiion of the
Spaniards. The influence, perhaps, of those in-
flititions which rendered their manners gentle,
gave their minds this unmanly softness; perhaps,
the conRtant serenity and niildnefs of the climate
may have enervated the vigour of their frame;
perhaps, some principle in their government, un-
known to us, was the occasion of tlhis political de-
b;lity. Whatever may have been the cauif, the
ia&e is certain, and there is not an instance in Ilil
tory of any people so little advanced in refinimerelt,
lb totally deltitute of military enterprize. This
character hath defccnded to their poflerity. The
Inlians of Peru are now more tame and depreftcd
than any people of America. Their feeble fpiri:s,
relaxed in lifelels inaction, feern hardly capable of
any hold or manly exertion.

BUT, besides those capital clefcls in tl;e politi-
tical slate of Peru, some ietracr(l circumftlnces
ad facts occur in the Spainifh *.vitcr, wl-ich iii-
cover a confi,'erable remnindier of tirba;-:rv in tll Ir
manners. A cruel custom, rh.it r-revailc in lbo;m
't the molt lavage tribes, 1fbfil-ed amroig t rc 1':-
m:vi.Lns. On tle d(lath of tiec lncas, ;;:nl of otlir

tsriteint )crlons, a conliderabljc I. l !; l:-:- (;1i tIll r
itrnlJanti 'was puit to dca.[i, and illt:rcld ;:ro(u;dl

I 'icir

B io K their Guacas, that they might appear in the nez

_- - world with their tormer dignity, and be Ikrve

with the fame refpedt. On the death o' tlua3r
Capac, the nmof powerful of their monarcns, ab ,
a thousand vitimrs were doomed to acconm.'-.
him to the tombh. In one par:icular, tl)cir nma
ners appear to have been more barbarous t:ir
thole of molt rude tribes. Though acq..ain:
with the use of fire in preparing maize, a!nd utl:.
vegetables for food ; they devoured b)t!h iclh ir.
filh perfedCly raw, and astonished the Spai.ia;-:
with a pracice repugnant to the ideas of all cl,
lizcd people .

Other dr- BUT though Mexic(; and Peru are the p;fic:ior
rninion$ of
Spain in of Spain in the New V' orld, which, on iaccoL.!

both of their antient and prtrf.eit !tlte, have ia
traded the greatest attention ; her o:licr dtunliiior
there are far from being inconfidcrable, citlicr i
extent or value. Thle gcreater part of them v.,
reduced to fulibjetio during the lirif part ol ti
fixternth century, by private ad lentulrer, wlo ;
ted out their frnall armanicnts either il lili;.,,i:
or in Old Spain; and were we to follow each. liha:
in his progrels, we mlould dilc)ver the fthe f la;'i
courage, the fame Ipcrftveriil ardniur. tlhei l:
rapacious desire of wealth, ;r(d the jaie ca.;)a
of enduring and furmiounting every thing in o0lc

h Acofa, lib. v. c. 7.
I Xcrez, p. 1go. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372, C. llrrer;
dec. 5. lib. i. c. 3.

to attain it, whlich diflinguifhed the operations of B '.. '
tlh Spaniards in thei r gr\rer .\rlic.,i c,)qqUCil'-.. ---.
But, inflUad of clLtcringt into a detail, which, trom
the fimillarity of the il.iillatCtin, woL, ld appl:ar .1l-
most a repetition of what has been already rclated,
I fhtll farisfyv nmyril: with lintcil a view Ollhol pro- A !,.;-f ...
vinces of the .panifil empire in Almlericia, whlI ":l ';-.'.lh-
have not hitherto b-cn in ntioned, as nmly convey
to my readcrs an adeq;ate idea ot its grcatnl;l, tfr-
tility, and opulence.

I BEGIN with the countri-s conti.ltious to tlhe s: has.re

two great monarchics, of whovl hlitury and in- ti irmi;,c
flitutions I have given tfubm account, ..nd flill ' I
then briefly dcleribe the olther dliir;ctsof Spanlii
America. The juriklfiition of the viceroy of Nc;v
Spain extends over leveral provinces, which were
not fubjct to the dominion of the 'iexicats '1 lie c

'I l .

C n]

countries of Cinaloa and Soinur., tliat ltretchi alonr
tile ealt fide of the Vernilion iea, or gulf of Cal-
fornia, as well astlih imiientl ki:,!doins of Newv
Navarre and New vlMexico, vvlli1 beinci towa:i's
the wetl and n,)rtii, did noc acln)wlcciee tle 1;)-
vicrignty of MNOn!tCzllna, or l.is prc-J cfcll;s.
Tlicle regions, not inicrior in nsa'nit.dc to all rih
Mexican tempire, ar. r-cJi1'ei lonic to a gctetir,
otii-rs to a cli's dlgirce li, I1!;hj:ct iton trie ); n lai;iil
yoke. 'I'hey cxtnelled tliruuohll t;c Illt *1, lijil -
t i part of tile teilip)el-rate zuone; Li r

i ; il is, iil

[':-'nral, re'i.irk.il)!y fertile', and all their i',ia ltl -
tions, whether alniail or vegetablel , are [,Iult pjcr-

VUL. 111. kt

B O o K fe& in their kind. They have all a communica.

_- - tion either with the Pacific Ocean, or with the

Gulph of Mexico, and are watered by such rivers
as not only enrich them, but may become fubcfr-
vient to commerce. The number of Spaniards
Ptttled in thole valf countries, is indeed extremely
Imall. They may be said to have frbdued, rather
than to have occupied them. But if the popula-
tion in their ancient eftablifhmnents in 4 merica fha!l
continue to incrcalec, they may gradually spread
over thole provinces, of which, however inviting,
they have not hitherto been able to rtke full pof.
feftion.
Ri:. r.i.'c. ONE circumflance may contribute to the speedy

population of lone dilr;>.s. Very rich mines
both of gold and fiiver have been discovered in
many of the regions which I have mentioned.
Wherever theie are opened, and worked with fuc-
c-ls, a multitude of people resort. In order to
supply them with the necessaries of life, cultivation
mull be incrteas.d, artilans of various kinds mufl
affleble, and induflry as well as wealth will be
gradually diftil'cd. Many examples of this have
occured in different parts of America since they
fell under the dominion of the Spaniards. Po-
pulous villages and large towns have suddenly ari-
len amidl't uninhabited wilds and mountains; and
the working of mines, though far from being the
most proper object. towards which the attention of
an infant focicty flould be turned, may beconme

the

the means both of promoting ufcful aaivity, and n

a ' "K

of augmenting the number of people. A recent --
and singular initance of this has happened, which, a^ dn 'r
as it is but little known in Europe, and may he ,' '-
produltive of great efTRccs, merits attention. The
Spaniards lettled in the provinces ot Cinaloa and
Sonora, had been long disturbed by the depreca-
tions of some fierce tribes of Indians. In the year
1765, the incurfionsof thole lavages became so fre-
quent, and so deflruaive, that the Spanish inha-
bitants, in despair, applied to the Marquis de
Croix, viceroy of MNlxico, for such a body of
troops as might enahle them to dvive thofc iorimi-
dable invaders from their places of rctic.;t in t;-e
mountains. But the trealury oft .lI::co was j
much exhaured by the vast fums draw:, fro:i it,
in order to support the late war againfl Great Bri-
cain, that the viceroy could afford them no aid.
The refptcl due to his virtues, accomplished what
his official power could not effect. lHe prevailed
with the merchants to advance about two hundred
thousand pesos fur defraying the expence of the
expedition. The war was condusted by an officer
of abilities ; and after being protracled for three
years, chiefly by the difficulty of purfiiing the s;i-
gitives over mountains and through dchles which
were almost impassable, it tern;inated, in the year
1771, in the final submission of the tribes, which
had been so long the object of terror to the two
provinces. In the courle of this lervice, the Spa-
niards marched through countries into which they

Qt 2. feenl

B 0 iK frem not to have penetrated before that time, and

-- ' discovered mines of such value, as was afonifning

even to men acquainted with the riches contained
in the mountains of the New World. At Cine-
guilla, in the province of Sonora, they entered a
plain of fourteen leagues in extent, in which they
found gold in grains, at the depth ot only sixteen
inches, o such a size, that some of them weighed
nine marks, and in such quantities, that in a short
time, with a few labourers, they colleted a thou-
Iand n arks of gold in grains, even without taking
time to wafll the earth that had been dug, which
appeared to be so rich, that persons of ikill com-
puted that it might yield what would be equal in

P- halle value to a million of pesos. Eefore the end of rhe
*ietas .of
1,1... year 177i, above two thousand persons were fittled

in Cineguilla, under the government of proper
magifirates, and the infpetion of several ecclcfl-
altics. A s several other mines, not inferior in
riches to that of Cineguilla, have been difcovcred,
both in Sonora and Cinaloak, it is probable that
thefl neglected and thinly inhabited provinces,
may soon become as populous and valuable as any
part of the Spanilh empire in America.
California, THE peninsula of California, on the other fide of

''' the Vermilion sea, fetms to have been less known

to the ancient Mexicans, than the provinces which
I have mentioned. It was dilcovered by Cortes in

k See NOTE XXXVII.

the

the year 15,6 '. During a long period it continued n 00 K
to be so little frequented, that even its form was ---,
unknown, and in molt charts it was represented as
an island, not as a pennifula "'. Though the cli-
mate of this country, it we may jud.oe iro. its
situation, mufi be very delirable the Spaniards
have made finall progrels in peopling it. Towards
the clole of the la(t century, the Jel'uits, who had
great merit in exploring this neglc:ed province,
and in civilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly
acquired a dominion over it as complete as that
which they pol;lered in th.ir milons in l'arag.ay,
and they laboured to introduce into it the famle po-
licy, and to govern the natives by the faLme maximl.
In order to prevent the court of Spain from con-
ceiving any jealousy of their designs and operations,
they seem fludioully to have depreciated the coun-
try, by repretenting the climate as lo dillgrecable
and unwholesome, and the to!l as 1o barren, that
nothing but a zealous desire or converting the na-
tives, could have induced them to fct:le tiere ".
Several public-fpiritcd citizens endeavoured to un-
deceive their lovereigns, andl to give them a bet-
ter view of Califoraia.; but in v.in. At lIngth, , i

. l,,.

on the expulsion <of tlhe JCft:its flom the Spai ii 1i,,l'h
dominions, the court of Miadrid, as, prone at that
junaure to fafpct the puriry of the Orelr's in-
rcntions, as lormerly to conilide in them with in-

1 1'nlk v. vol. ii. -" S'c; N () I E X: XV IT.
*V\ ncg',; iii.t. of t a'i ornij, ji . .

Q. 3 l3ici

B O n K plicit trust, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, whose
t--,j abilities have since raised him to the high rank of

minilter for the In.ie-, to visit that peninsula. llis
account of the country was favourable; he found
the pearl fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and
discovered mines of gold of a very promising ap-
pearance °. From its vicinity to Cinaloa and So-
nora, it is probable, that if the population of these
provinces shall increase in the manner which I have
fibppofed, California may, by degrees, receive from
them such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no
longer reckoned among the defola-e and ufeltfs
dillriEls of the Spanish empire.

VYca .n 0O the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Honduras
an Hon-1
dura,. are comprehended in the government of New

Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said to
have formed a part of the Mexican empire. The'C
large provinces, stretching from the Bay of Cam-
peachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, like
the other territories of Spain in the New Wo;ld,
derive their value either from the fertility of their
foil, or the richness of their mines; but they pro-
duce in greater abundance, than any part of Ane-
rica, the logwood tree, which, in dying some co-
lours, is so far preferable to any other material,
that the consumption of it in Europe is confider-
able, and it has become an article in commerce of
great value. During a long period, no European

"Loicnzano, 349, 350.

nation

nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those pro- B o,0 K
vinces, or attempted to obtain any (hare in this --
branch of trade. But after the conquefl of Ja-
maica by the English, it soon appeared what a for-
midable rival was now feated in the neighbourhood
of the Spanish territories. One of the first objets
which tempted the English, was the great profit
anring from the logwood trade, and the facility of
wresting some portion of it from the Spaniards.
Some adventurers from Jamaica made the first at- Their de-

dline,

tempt at Cape Catoche, the south east promontory
of Yucatan, and by cutting logwood there, carried
on a gainful traffic. When most of the trees near
the coast in that place were felled, they removed
to the island of Trift, in the Bay of Campeachy;
and in later times, their principal fration has been
in the Bay of Honduras. The Spaniards, alarm-
ed at this encroachment, endeavoured by negocia-
tion, remonfirances, and open force, to prevent
the Englifl from obtaining any footing on that
part of the American continent. But after fnrug-
gling against it for more than a century, the ucll-
afters of last war extorted from the court of M.,drid
a relutant consent to tolerate this Itttlrnment es so-
reigners in the heart of its territories r. '1 1 p.i
which this humbling concel'ion occafioneJl , Irc us
to have prompted the SpaniarJis to (I(cv.'c a. mt:-
thod of rendering it oflittle conlfqucti(ie, moie e'r-
iedual than all the efiorts (,f negociatiun or vio-

r Treaty of P.ai,, Art. xviii.

Q-2_
+ 1'nl.%

B o( K lence. The logwood produced on the weft coast

_.--- of Yucatan, wlhere the loil is drier, is in quality

far superior to that which grows on the mar!ny
anJd ev;val grounds where the Englifi are Ittletd. Py c::

coura.gin: the CUttin!lg of this, and pcrlI)ltin teti
importation of it into Spain witilout p.ivin, any
duty q, such vigour has been -:iven to this branch
of coinmerce, and the logwood whichi the l r.,l!h
bring to market has funk so much.in va!ue, thut
t!.iir trade to the 1.iy of [-!onduras hlas gra.i.:l'.i;
(!'ili:cdl r lince it obtained ai lcal ltn&tilu:i; and,
it is probable, will !;Ln le tinaaly aban.d3ne,. In
that event, Yucatan and Hlonduras %xill bc'cn:i.
potiF'ii.ns of conlidcrable ii)po;;rancc to Spairi.
c ,'. :, STILL farther ealf t!.an IHonduras '.- t!h tv,,'

pl.

" roviincs of Colia Rlica :;;d Veragua, v ..ich i';-

wile hilong to the vice-roy.llty of New Spain; b.'
b-th ihave been lo milrilu negle1tedb th!e Spar;.iar ,
a;:l are apparently of such fnilall value, that t'.,
imeiit no particulatr attention.
c;.i:i. THE mop; important province ccpcnlinlg c: ;!,-

vicc-roya:lry of Peru, i; Chili. Tie ica, l.t
,:l.liblP.icecl their doninion in lome of its no; thril
J il riils; but in the greater pa: t of the- ccL.n:l',
its ga!l.lnt and hi^,h liritcd inhabitants ni,.it;'i.i'
their indlepc-ni!nc(. 'Ihe S!)ani..rls, allur-Ld by
tlie fa.l;ie tc its optulence, early attempted th: cun-

* r ie.t]'T.il . , (-'.'n1]om:s:t'%, iii. ' .5.
* a ' ) v1' )riE \xIX.

J: l1u1c't

quest of it under Diego Almagro; and after his B 0 , K
deith, Pedro de Va!divia re!umed the design. -
Both met with fierce opposition. The former re-
linquifhed the enterprize in tbe manner which I
have mentioned '. The latter, after having given
many dilplays, both of courage and militdry fkiill,
was cut off, together with a confidcrable b dy of
troops under his command. Francisco de viil.igra,
\ al;ivia's lieuttnant, by his fpiri;ed con-(uct,
checked the natives in their carecr, and Iaved the
remainder of the Spaniards fromn tlrltruti.o:;. By
(dgrceS, all the cioamlpa'ni country ;long the
roatl wa.s so ibeterd to tlie Spanifn donainion, 'he
mountainous country is fiill polTcffTd by the I'uel-
ches, Arau.co::, and other tribes of its original in-
hazbicant:,, fnr:r.iclab'ie nei:rhbours ta the Spa.:ia ds;
with whom, duriin the courlr of tV:o Cc-nTLrics,
they have been obiigcd to maint.:in almon. perpe-
tual hostility, fuilented only by a few intervals of
inficure peace.

THnAT part of Ciili then, wich may properly txcelrnc.

of ilt th-.

be td(-;'Ci eia n . , :; ; :r;'.': , is a1 nmrrow dillriJt, tn'. 'lai
ex:l'i.,iin ;do.n; r'i. c t

o:l:t tl.;:n t'- c deltert of Ata-

c,'il;a; t

o the si.::; of

: ( hl,)c, .:1) vce mine hundred

nl)ilt It; cli',:;.':t. i, th. nmlc:t (!'licious in the
' "' '.'.'orlie, ;A ;' 1 i' e.::wAlJ c i-( il!c. -v that of any

rt :', n o' jtl< ...

f r ot s c

th.e T''1,' uiiyh border-
!i1 o:1 tlic lTor:c! /..uli, i. .cver ccl-s the extre-

" Eio.k vi. p. (o, &c.

mity

B o 1° K mity of heat, being £creened on the eafl by the
-----' Andes, and refre(hed from the weft by cooling tea.

breezes. The temperature of the air is lo mild
and equable, that (he Spaniards give it the pre.
ference to that of the southern provinces in their
native country. The fertility of the foil corre.
fponds with the benignity of the climate, and is
wonderfully accommodated to European produc.
tions. The molt valuable of thece, corn, wine,
and oil, abound in Chili, as if they had been na-
tive to the country. All the fruits imported from
Europe attain to full maturity there. The animals
of our hemisphere not only multiply, but improve
in this delightful region. The horned cattle are
of larger size than those of Spain. Its breed of
horses surpasses, both in beauty and in spirit, the
famous Andalufian race, from which they 1prung.
Nor has nature exhausted her bounty on the fur-
face of the earth; ihe has stored its bowels with
riches. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of cop-
per, and of lead, have been discovered in vari0ou
parts of it.

cstre ofir;t A COUNTRY distinguished by so many blelffngs,
being nt-
gl" bhy we may be apt to conclude, would early become a
nrad&. favourite station of the Spaniards, and mufl havi

been cultivated with peculiar predilectiun anJ c.dl.
Instead of this, a great part of it remains unoccu-
pied. In all this extent of country, there are nrit
above eighty thlouland white inhabitants, and alboumt
three times that number of negroes and peopl'- u:

a niixJ!
i

a mixed race. The most fertile foil in America B o 0 K
lies uncultivated, and some of its most promising *
mines remain unwrought. Strange as this neglec
of the Spaniards to avail thenfelves of advantages,
which seemed to court their acceptance, may ap-
pear, the causes of it can be traced. The only
intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the South
Sea, was carried on during two centuries by the
annual fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce of
thece colonies were ihipped in the ports of Callao,
or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and carried from
thence across the isthmus. All the commodities
which they received from the mother-country, were
conveyed from Panama to the fame harbours.
Thus both the exports and imports of Chili passed
through the hands of merchants fettled in Peru.
These had of ccurfe a profit on each; and in both
tranfations the Chilcfe felt their own fubordina-
tion; and having no direct intercourse with the pa-
rent (fate, they depended upon another province
for the disposal of their produccions, as well as for
the supply of their wants. Under such discourage-
ments, population could not increase, and industry
was destitute of one chief incitemnent. But now prorpe ot
that Spain, from nitltives winch I hall mencion Im".ret'' -
hereafter, has .dopte.l a new }lyflem, and carries
on her commerce with the colonies in the Southl
Sea, by ships which go round Cape sHorn, a di-
rec intcrcourfi is oened i between Chili and the
Mother country. 'I he gold, the lilvir, and the
other commodities of the province will bc ex-

changed

B c) 0 K changed in its own harbours for the manufatRurcl
--v-1 ,of Europe.i Chili may speedily rile into that im,

-portance aniong the Spanish settlements to which
it is entitled by its natural advantages. It may
-become the granary of Peru, and the other pro.
vinces along the Pacific Ocean; it may lupply,
them with wine, with cattle, with horses, with
hemp, and many other, articles for which they new
depend upon Europe. Though the new Iyilcm
has been established only a few years, thole efic.s
of it begin already to be observed '. If it lhall be
adhered to with any fleadinefs for half a cent rry,
one may venture to forctel, that population, in-
dufiry, and opulence will advance in this province
with rapid progrcls.

prnvnr ; * To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tii-
or ]tUc-h
ml an"d cuman and Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, ar.c
Phtao' like it were dependent on the Vice-royaly of Peru.

Thele regions of immense extent firetch in length
from north to south above thirteen hundred milts,

,orthern and in breadth more than a thousand. This coun-

a e 1, uth-
ern dv.. try, which is larger than mofl European kingdoms,

n naturally forms itself into two great divisions, one

on the north, and the other on the fcuth of IZio de
]a Plata. 1 he former comprehends 'Paraguay, th'
famous milfions of the Jeluirs, and fcveral other
liliritls. But as difputcs have longr fubilfed be.
tween the courts of Spain and Portugal, concern-

Cimponmancs, ii. Jr-.

iI,.,

ing its boundaries, which, it is probable, will be B 0 0 K
loon finally afcerrained, either amicably, or by the _._
iccifion of the sword, I chule to relrve my ac-
count of this northern division, until I enter upon
the hiRtory of Portuguefi America, with which
i: is intimately connected; and, in relating it, I
shall be able from authentic materials, supplied
both by Spain and Portugal, to give a full and
accurate description of the operations and views of
theJefuits, in rearing that singular fabric of po-
licy in America, which has drawn Ib much atten-
tion, and has been so imperfIctly underflcod. The
latter divilion of the province contains the govern-
ments of Tucuman and Buenos-A yr-s, and to chele
I (hall at present confine my obflrvations.

I'HE Spaniards entered this part of America by viw of the
the river De la Plata; and though a flicccflion of
cruel disasters besel them in their early attempts to
c,'ablifh their dominio n in it, they were encouraged
to ecrfift in the design, at first hby the hc)'s of !ii-
tovering mines in the interirer conltry, n:ld after-
wards by the necllTity of occlu;pyin; ir, in oricr to
prevent any other naition f,)omn 1ttlin;', ti'ir;e, and
penetrating by this route into th!ir rich

: !) il i .ns

n l'eru. But cxccitt Bucnos-A i.rcs', tl.L- h.l.ve
mtade no ferttlmcnt of any conliccjiu(c.c in aIl t!i
valt space wvhich I liave mncrti;nct1. iicrc are,
indeed, scattered over it, a few places on which
t'iey have beltowcd the name of todwn, arid to
! h:ieh they have endcavoured to add limc dignlity,

by

Vs K by erefting them into bilhoprics; but they are r
-_.- better than paltry villages, each with two or thr

hundred inhabitants. One circumstance, how
ever, which was not originally foreseen, has cor
tributed to render this diftrit, though thinl
peopled, of considerable importance. The ;:.
vince of Tucuman, together with the country t
the south of the Plata, instead of being covere
with wood like other parts of America, fornms o,
vast open plain, almost without a tree. The fIl
is a deep fertile mould, watered by many Itrean,
descending from the Andes, and clothed in per
petual verdure. In this rich paflurage, the horli
and cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europ
have multiplied to a degree which almoff exceed
belief. This has enabled the inhabitants not onl
to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by supplying
it with cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry on
a commerce no less beneficial, by the exportatin
of hides to Europe. From both, the colony ha
derived great advantages. But its commodiou
situation for carrying on contraband trade, ha
been the chief source of its prosperity. While the
court of Madrid adhered to its ancient fyllemn, witl
respect to its communication with America, the
river De la Plata lay so much out of the courlt of
Spanish navigation, that interlopers, almost with
out any rifque of being either observed or ob
struted, could pour in European manufactures in
such quantities, that these not only fupplicl the
wants of the colony, but were conveyed into al

till

the eastern diftries of Peru. When the Portu- B o o K
guefe in Brasil extended their settlements to the _l
banks of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities flowed
into the Spanifi terrirnries, with fiill more facility,
,,, it greater abundance. T'his illegal traffic,
however detrimental to the parent state, contri-
buted to the increase of the settlement, which had
the immediate benefit of it, and Buenos-Ayres
became gradually a populous and opulent town.
What may be the effect of the alteration lately
made in the government of this colony, the nature
of which Ihall be described in the subsequent Book,
cannot hitherto be known.
ALL the other territories of Spain in the New Otherrri-

tories of

World, the islands excepted, of whose discovery Spain.
and reduction I have formerly given an account,
are comprehended under two great divisions; the
former denominated the kingdom Tierra Firmc,
the provinces of which firetch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to the
mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New King-
dom of Granada, situated in the interior country.
With a flort view of these I shall close this part of
my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-
jcEt to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the iflhmus of
l)arien. Though it was in this part of the con- Drien.
tinent that the Spaniards firit began to plant co-

lonies,

B o 1i K lonies, they have made no considerable prorc,-; in

_--. . peopling it. As the country is extren ely noun.

tainous, deluged with rain during a good part uo
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and conta:ins n
mines of great value, the Spaniards woull pro.
bably have abandoned it altogether, if they tai,
not been allured to continue by the excellence or
the harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and! iL
of Panama on the other. Thele have b'ecn caJ,;l
the kr-vs to the communication between the nior:
and Ifoutli I:i, between Spain and her moll val:;; c:
colonies. In conicquence of this advaintag,, ila.
nama has become a conliderable and thriving t,;n.
The peculiar noxioufnels of its climate has pre-
vented Porto-bello from increaling in the tI'me r1.
portion. As the intercourse with the flttlemcin:s
in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on by anotli.r
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bello a.n
Panama will decline, when no longer nor:ili.cd
and enriched by that commerce to which ti:t'
were indebted for their prolperity, and even ti:c r
exiflence.

c.,rih.prna THE provinces of Carihagena and Santa ivlartha
M;Id hIJ. firetchl to the eallward of the ilthnmus of l)aricn.

T'he country fiill continues mountainous, but i:'.
vallies begin to expand, are well warcr d, aid ctx-
trenrely tertile. Pedro de l-eredia lbjesdtcd lti.s
p.rt of America to the crown of Spain, ab ut tiC !
year 1532. It i; thinly peopled, and of coutr e lil
cultivated. It produces, however, a varicty ()i

Va lt.iLtc

valuable drugs, and some precious stones, parti- B o0 K
cularly emeralds. Bur its chief importance is de- .. -..
rived from the harbour of Carchagena, the safest
and best fortified of any in the American dominions
of Spain. In a situation so favourable, commerce
soon began to flourifil. As early as the year 1544,
it ieems to have been a town of some note. But
when Carthagena was chosen as the port in which
the galeons Ihould first begin to trade on their ar-
rival from Europe, and to which they were di-
recRed to return, in order to prepare for their voy-
age homeward, the commerce of its inhabitants
was so much favoured by this arrangement, that
it soon became one of the most populous, opulent,
and beautiful cities in America. There is, how-
ever, reason to apprehend, that it has reached its
highest point of exaltation, and that it will be so
far asseted by the change in the Spanish fyfrem of
trade with America, which has withdrawn from it
the desirable visits of the galeons, as to fcl at least
a temporary decline. But the wealth now collcqted
there, must find or create employment for itielf,
and may be turned with advantage into some new
channel. Its harbour is ol fate, and lo conve-
niently situated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchants have been so long accuf-
tomed to convey these into all the adjacent pro-
vinces, that it is probable they will still retain this
branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to be a
city of great importance.

VOL. III. R THI

B 0 0 K THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on

VII.

..-..-. the east, was firt visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in
Venezuela. the year 1499 "u and the Spaniards, on their

landing there, having observed some huts in an
Indian village built upon piles, in order to raise
them above the flagnated water which covered the
plain, were led to bestow upon it the name of
Venezuela, or Little Venice, by their usual pro-
penfity to find a resemblance, between what they
discovered in America, and the objecs which were
familiar to them in Europe. They made some at-
tempts to fettle there, but with little success. The
final reduCtion of the province was accomplished
by means very different from those to which Spain
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the New
World. The ambition of Charles V. often en-
gaged him in operations of such variety and ex-
tent, that his revenues were not sufficient to defray
the expence of carrying them into execution. A-
mong other expedients for supplying the deficiency
of his funds, he had borrowed large fums from
the Velfers of Augfburgh, the most opulent
merchants at that time in Europe. By way of
retribution for there, or in hopes, perhaps of ob-
taining a new loan, he bellowed upon them the
province of Venezuela, to be held as an hereditary
fief of the crown of Castile, on condition that
within a limited time they fliould render them-
selves malaers of the country, and eltablifh a co-

B Cook ii. vol. i. r. r 83.

lony

Klny there. Under the direcion of such persons, B 0, K
it might have been expected, that a settlement L--.j
would have been eltablilhed on maxims very dif-
ferent from those of the Spaniards, and better cal-
culated to encourage such useful industry, as mer-
cantile proprietors might have known to be the
only certain source of prosperity and opulence.
But unfortunately they committed the execution
of their plan to some of those soldiers of fortune
with which Germany abounded in the Sixteenth
century. These adventurers, impatient to amass
riches, that they might speedily abandon a station
which they soon discovered to be very uncomfort-
able, instead of planting a colony in order to cul-
tivate and improve the country, wandered from
diftri& to district in search of mines, plundering
the natives with unfeeling rapacity, or opprefling
them by the imposition of intolerable talks. In
the course of a few years, their avarice and exac-
tions, in comparison with which those of the Spa-
niards were moderate, desolated the province so
completely, that it could hardly afford them sub-
silence, and the Velfers relinquished a property,
from which the inconsiderate condut of their
agents left them no hope of ever deriving any ad-
vantage x. When the wretched remainder of the
Germans deserted Venezuela, the Spaniards again
took poffefion of it; bur, notwithstanding many

'Civedo y Bagnos I ini. de Venezuela, p, 1 , &,c.

R 2 natural

D °0 K natural advantages, it is one of their moti lan.

VI'.

* ,·- guilhing and unproducive settlements.
Caraccas ad Tna provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the

last of the Spanifl territories on this coast; but in
relating the origin and operations of the mer-
cantile company, in which an exclusive right
of trade with them has been vested, I llail here-
after have occasion to confider their state and pro-
ductions.

New king. THE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an
dom of Gra.-
nada. inland country of valt extent. This important ad-

dition was made to the dominions of Spain about
the year 1536, by Sebastian de Benalcazar andt
Gonzalo Ximenes de-Quefada, two of the bravel
and moi accomplished officers employed in the
conquest of America. The former, who com-
manded at that time in Quito, attacked it from
the south; the latter made his inv.fion from Santa
Martha on the north. As the original inhabitants
of this region were farther advanced in improve-
ment, than any people in America but the Mexi-
cans and Peruvians Y, they defended thelrmlves
with great resolution and good condua. ]'he
abilities and perseverance of Benalcazar and Q(e-
fada surmounted all opposition, though not wiih-
out encountering many dangers, and reduced the
country into the form of a Spanifl province.

y i;-.)ok iv. vo'. 'i . , .'.r.

I4C :

THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far ele- B O 1 K

vated above the level of the sea, that though it e-
approaches almolt to the equator, the climate is
remarkably temperate. The fertility of its vallies
is not inferior to that of the richest diltrits in
America, and its higher grounds yield gold and
precious flones of various kinds. It is not by
digging into the bowels of the earth that this gold
is found; it is mingled with the foil near the fur-
fice, and separated from it by repeated waffling
with water. This operation is carried on wholly
by negroe slaves; for though the chill fubter-
ranean air has been discovered, by experience, to
be lb fatal to them, that they cannot be employed
in the deep silver mines, they are more capable of
performing the other species of labour than In-
dians. As the natives in the New Kingdom of
Granada are exempt from, that service, which has
wafted their race so rapidly in other parts of Ame-
rica, it is remarkably populous. Some dilriRs
yield gold with a profusion no less wonderful than
that in the vale of Cineguilla, which I have for-
merly mentioned, and it is often found in large
pepitns, or grains, which manifelf the abundance
in which it is produiced. On a rising ground near
l'.lmplona, tingle labourers have colleEted in a
day what was equal in value to a thouland pesos'.
A late governor of Santa lS' brought with him
to Spain a lump of virgin gold, ettimated to be

Piedrahita IIin. del N. Reyno, p. 491, MS. penes me.

R 3 worth

B o0 K worth seven hundred and forty pounds sterling.

v1'.
%-v-__ This, whi:h is, perhaps, the largefl and finelt

fpecimren ever found in the New World, is now
deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid. But
without founding any calculation on what is rare
and extraordinary, the value of the gold usually
colle&ed in this country, particularly in the pro-
vinces of Popayan and Choco, is of considerable
amount. Its towns are populous and fourilhing.
The number of inhabitants in almost every part of
the country daily increases. Cultivation and in.
duftry of various kinds begin to be encouraged,
and to prosper. A considerable trade is carried on
with Carthagena, the produce of the mines, and
other commodities, being conveyed down the great
river of St. Magdalen to that city. On another
quarter, the new Kingdom of Granada has a com-
munication with the Atlantic by the river Orinoco;
but the country which firetches along its banks
towards the east, is little known, and imperfetly
occupied by the Spaniards.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

THE
H I S T O R Y

F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK VIII.
AFTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards B o o K

in their discoveries and conquelts during v.,
more than half a century, I have conducted them vew""Oth.

policy and
to that period when their authority was established trioof the

Sphni~ co-

over almost all the vast regions in the New World loPics.
still fubjeac to their dominion. The effecR of their
settlements upon the countries of which they took
poffclion, the maxims which they adopted in
forming their new colonies, the interior ftrutcure
and policy of there, together with the influence of
their progressive improvement upon the parent
flare, and upon the commercial intercourse of na-
tions, are the objects to which we now turn our
attention.

THE first visible consequence of the eflabliflh. ,rpqo,.ll

ments made by the Spaniards in America, was the n...ica the
diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree or tiie

R 4 equally

B °0 K equally aflonilhing and deplorable. I have already,

on different occasions, mentioned the dilaftrous
influence under which the connection of the Ame-
ricans with the people of our hemisphere com-
menced, both in the islands, and in lcveral parts
of the continent, and have touched upon various
causes of their rapid consumption. Wherever the
inhabitants of America had reiolution to tiake
arms in defence of their liberty and rights, many
Ferifhed in the unequal contest, and were cut (;:'
by their fierce invaders. But the greatest dclola-
tion was followed after the Iword was fheathlcd,

Caufs of and the conquerors were fettled in tranquillity. It
thi, 'n the
lands and was in the islands, and in those provinces of the
f°the copi- continent which stretch from the Gulf of Tri-
"C"t. nidad in the confines of Mexico, that the fatal

effets of the Spanish dominion were firfl and molt
fenfibjy felt. All these were occupied either by
wandering tribes of hunters, or by such as had
made but small progress in cultivation and in-
duftry. When they. were compelled by their new
nmafters to take up a fixed residence, and to apply
to regular labour; when talks were imposed upon
them dilproportioned to their firength, and were
exaeted with unrelenting severity, they pulfclre(!
not vigour either of mind or of body to ljLlain tl.;i
unusual load of oppreflon. Dejection and cfipai;
drove many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine deflroyed more. In all thpli: exteinljv
re_,ions, the original race of inliabitants watlll
axyyi in fonge it wa totally extinguifnled. In

3 MexiL,C

Mexi:o, where a powerful and martial people B o o K
diftinguithed their opposition to the Spaniards by .
efforts of courage worthy of a better fate, great
numbers fell in the field; and there, as well as in
Peru, still greater numbers perished under the
hardships of attending the Spanish armies in their
various expeditions and civil wars, worn out with
the incessant toil of carrying their baggage, provi-
sions, and military stores.

BUT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- in New

niards were lb defirutive to the people of Mexico iP "and
and Peru, as the inconfiJerate policy with which
they established their new settlements. The former
were temporary calamities, fatal to individuals;
the latter was a permanent evil, which, with gra-
dual consumption, wafted the nation. When the
provinces of Mexico and Peru were divided
among the conquerors, each was eager to obtain
a difri&, from which he might expect an inldan-
taneous reconmpelrce for all his lerviccs. Soldiers,
accustomed to the carlcilelef and dillipation of a
military life, had neither indultry to carry on any
plan of regular cultivation, nor patience to wait
for its nlow, but certain returns. Inflead of set-
tling in the vallies occupied by the natives, wlhel
the fertility of the foil would have amply rcwariled
the diligence of the planter, they cholc to fix their
flations in obme of tie mountainous regions, fre-
quent both in New Spain and in Peru. To search
for mines of gold and silver, was the chief object

of

B 0 0 K of their acivity. The valt profpeds which this

.*.-- opens, and the alluring hopes which it continually

presents, correspond wonderfully with the spirit of
enterprize and adventure that animated the first
emigrants to America in every part of their con-
duct. In order to push forward those favourite
projets, so many hands were wanted, that the
service of the natives became indispensably requi-
site. They were, accordingly, compelled to aban-
don their ancient habitations in the plains, and
driven in crowds to the mountains. This sudden
transition from the sultry climate of the vallies, to
the chill penetrating air peculiar to high lands in
the torrid zone; the fatigue of exorbitant labour,
scanty or unwholesome nourishment, and the
despondency occasioned by a species of oppreflion
to which they were not accustomed, and of which
they saw no end, affected them nearly as much
as their less industrious countrymen in the islands.
They funk under the united pressure of those cala-
mities, and melted away with almost equal rapi.
dity 2. In consequence of this, together with the
introdu&ion of the small-pox, a malady unknown
in America, and extremely fatal to the natives',
the number of people both in Spain and Peru was
lo much reduced, that in a few years the accounts
of their ancient population appeared almuft in-
credible .

' Torqucmada, i. 613. a B. Diaz, c. 124. IMcrrcra,
!'c.. lib. x. c. 4. Ullm)a Einuiten. zo6.

orqlurcn. 615. 62z, 643. See NOTE XL.

Sucii

SucH are the mofl considerable events and R o

o K

causes, which, by their combined operation, con- -
tributed to depopulate America. Without attend- rut ofthe'
ing to there, many authors, aftonilhed at the fud- cam of
dennefs of the dfeolation, have ascribed this unex-
ampled event to a system of policy no lets profound
than atrocious. The Spaniards, as they pretend,
conicious of their own inability to occupy the val:
regions which they had discovered, and foreseeing
the impofibility of maintaining their authority
over a people infinitely luperior to themillves in
number, in order to prelerve America, relblved to
exterminate the inhabitants, and by converting a
great part of the country into a delert, endeavoured
to f;cure their own dominion over it'. But nations
Ieldom extend their views to objects to remote, or
lay their plans. o deep; and, for the honour of
humanity, we may observe, that no nation ever
deliberately formed such an execrable Icheme.
The Spanish monarchs, far from acting upon any
such system of delrution, were uniformly lulici-
tous for the preservation of their new liibjecs.
With Isabella, zeal for propagating the christian
faith, together with the desire of communicating
the knowledge of truth, and the conlblations of
religion to people destitute of Ipiritual light, were
more than ostensible motives for encouraging Co-
lumbus to attempt his discoveries. Upon his fuc-
cess, she endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpose,

c See NOTE XLI.

and

B 11° K and manifcfRed the most tender concern to fect:re

_--_.. not only religious inftrudtion, but mild treatment,

to that inoffnfinve race of men fubjedcd to ter
crownd. Her fuccesTors adopted the lame ideas;
and, on many occalions, which I have nentionc,
their authority was interpored in the most vi'or(us
exertions, to protea the people of America from
the oppression of their Spanifil fubjccts. Their
regulations for this purpole were numerous, ald
often repeated. They were framed with wilsdo),
and diAated by humanity. After their poflcflions
in the New World became so cxtenfive, as niigilt
have excited some apprehensions of difficulty In
retaining their dominion over them, the Ip:ri:t of
their regulations was as mild as when their jettle.
ments were confined to the islands alone. Their
solicitude to prote&t the Indians seems ratherto
have augmented as their acquisitions incrcaftd;
and from ardour to accomplifl this, they ena3tc',
and endeavoured to enforce the execution of laws,
which excited a formidable rebellion in one of tliir
colonies, and spread alarm and dilaffction tlhroL!ugh
all the reft. But the avarice of individuals vlas
too violent to be controulcd by the authority of
laws. Rapacious and daring adventurers, far ic-
moved from the leat of government, little: iC-
cuflomed to the restraints of military tlil)illinc
while in service, and still less dilpofed to rcl)dc
the feeble jurifdi&cion of civil power in an iiiflnt

d Sec NOTE XLII.

colony,

colony, despised or eluded every regulation that B 0O K
scc bounds to their exactions and tyranny. The ,---
parent state, with persevering attention, issued
edicts to prevent the oppression of the Indians; the
colonifls, rcgardlefs of these, or trusting to their
distance for impunity, continued to confider, and
treat them as slaves. The governors themselves,
and other officers employed in the colonies, several
of whom were as indigent and rapacious as the ad-
venturers over whom they presided, were too apt
to adopt their contemptuous ideas of the conquer-
ed people; and, instead of checking, encouraged
or connived at their exceffls. The desolation of
the New World should not then be charged on the
court of Spain, or be confidered as the effe& of
any fyflem of policy adopted there. It ought to be
imputed wholly to the conquerors and firfm planters
of America, who, by measures no less inconsiderate
than unjust, countera&ed the edics of their fove-
reign, and have brought disgrace upon their country.

WITH fill greater injustice, have many authors nor thr, -

fe' .,f elt-

represented the intolerating spirit of the Roman gion.
Catholic religion, as the cause of exterminating the
Americans, and have accused the Spanifi ecclefi-
aftics of animati ng their countrymen to the slaughter
of that innocent people, as idolators and enemies of
God. But the lirll mifTioniries who visited Ame-
ric., though weak and illiterate, were pious men.
Tlhey early clpouured the defence of the natives, and
vindicated their character froni the alpcrfions of

their

B 0o K their conquerors, who, describing them as inr
_ , capable of being formed to the offices of civil life,

or of comprehending the doctrines of religion, con-
tended, that they were a subordinate race of men,
en whom the hand of nature had set the mark of
servitude. From the accounts which I have given
of the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanifl
miflionaries, in proteting the helpless flock com-
mitted to their charge, they appear in a light which
reflects lustre upon their function. They were
ministers of peace, who endeavoured to wrest the
rod from the hands of oppressors. To their power-
ful interpofirion, the Americans were indebted for
every regulation tending to mitigate the rigour of
their fate. The clergy in the Spanish settlements,
regular as well as secular, were tfill confidered by
the Indians as their natural guardians, to whom
they have recourse under the hardships and ex-
ations to which they are too often exposed '.

The nunrbr BUT, notwithltanding the rapid depopulation of
o; the In-
dians fill America, a very considerable number of the native
r-.ining. race till remains both in Mexico and Peru, efpe-

cially in thofc parts which were not exposed to the
firit fury of the Spanish arms, or desolated by the
firlt efforts of their industry, flill more ruinous.
In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, and the other
delightful provinces of the Mexican empire, which
firetch along the south-sea, the race of Indians is
still numerous. Their settlements in tome places

c See NOT E Xl[.1I.

are

are so populous, as to merit the name of cities f. B o0 K
In the three audiences into which New Spain is di- .---
vided, there are at least two millions of Indians;
a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient population,
but such as still forms a body of people superior
in number to that of all the other inhabitants of
this vast country . In Peru several diiricds, par-
ticularly in the kingdom of Quito, are occupied
almost entirely by Indians. In other provinces
they are mingled with the Spaniards, and in many
of their settlements practise the mechanic arts, and
fill most of the inferior flations in society. As
the inhabitants both of Mexico and Peru were ac-
customed to a fixed residence, and to some degree
of regular indultry, leTs violence was requisite in
bringing them to some conformity with the Euro-
pean modes of civil life. But wherever the Spa-
niards fettled among the savage tribes of Ame-
rica, their attempts to incorporate with them
have been always fruitless, and often fatal to the
natives. Impatient of restraint, and disdaining
labour as a mark of servility, they either aban-
doned their original feats, and fought for inde-
pendence in mountains and forests inaccessible to
their opprefolrs, or perihced when reduced to a
lUte repugnant to their ancient ideas and habits.
In the diflriCts adjacent to Carthagena, to Panama,
and to Buenos-Ayres, the delolation is more ge-
ieral than even in those parts of Mexico and 'Ceru,
fSec NOTE XLI'V. :Se NOTE XLV.

of

B 0 0v K of which the Spaniards have taken mofl full Fol.

VIII.
L ,-J session.

Ceneral BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the
ideas of the
policy of New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabi-
Spain in its
colonie. tants, were made at a period when that monarchy

was capable of forming thern to belt advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful state, equal to so great an un-
dertaking. Its monarchs, having extended their
prerogative far beyond the limits which once cir.
cumfcFibed the regal power in every kingdom of
Europe, were- hardly fubje& to controul, either
in concerting or in executing their measures. In
every wide extended empire, the form of govern-
ment mull be simple, and the Iovereign authority
such, that its resolutions may be taken with promp-
titude, and may pervade the whole with fufficcent
force. Such was the power of the Spanish mo-
narchs, when they were called to deliberate con.
cerning the mode of establishing their dominion
over the rnoft remote provinces, which had ever
been fubjeaed to any European ftlre. In this
deliberation, they felt themselves under no con-
flitcuional restraint, and that, as indcpendent
maiters of their own resolves, they might iffuc
the editts requisite for modelling the govern-
ment of the new colonies, by a mere aft of pre-
rogative.

THIS

THIS early interpofirion 6f the Spanifl crown, B 0o K

in order to regulate the policy and trade of its co- --
lonies, is a peculiarity which diflinguilhes their pofiion oe
progress from that of the colonies of any other 'htrog
European nation. When the Portuguese, the
Englilh, and French, took poffefion of the re-
gions in America which they now occupy, the ad-
vantages which these promised to yield were so re-
mote and uncertain, that their colonies were sus-
sered to struggle through a hard infancy, almost
without guidance or protetion from the parent
slate. But gold and silver, the firtt productions
of the Spanish settlements in the New World, were
more alluring, and immediately attra&ted the at-
tention of their monarchs. Though they had con-
tributed little to the discovery, and almolt nothing
to the conquest of the New World, they instantly
assumed the function of its legislators; and hav-
ing acquired a species of dominion formerly un-
known, they formed a plan for exercising it, to
which nothing similar occurs in the history of hu-
man affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanilh jurifpru- All power

p

*i r n P .1and property

dence with refped to America, is to confider what vrcde Io ,l
has been acquired there as vested in the crown,
rather than in the Iate. By the bull of Alex-
ander VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
founded its right, all the regions that had been,
orfhould be discovered, were bellowed as a free
gift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. They and their

VOL. 111. S fucccnrorS

B 0 0 KR fuccel'ors were uniformly held to be the universal

VIII.
i ,_-- & proprietors of the vast territories, which the arms

of their fubjets conquered in the New World.
From them, all grants of land there flowed, and
to them they finally returned. The leaders ,ho
conducted the various expeditions, the governors
who presided over the different colonies, the offi-
cers ofjuftice, and the miniflers of religion, were
all appointed by their authority, and removable
at their pleasure. The people who compoied in-
sant settlements were intitled to no privileges in-
dependent of the sovereign, or that firved as a
barrier against the power of the crown. It is true,
that when towns were built, and formed into bo-
dies corporate, the citizens were permitted to elect
their own magistrates, who governed them by laws
which the community enaced. Even in the molt
despotic flates, this feeble spark of liberty is not
extinguiflled. But in the cities of Spanifn America,
this jurifdiclion is merely municipal, and is con.
fined to the regulation of their own interior com-
merce and police. In whatever rl.ates to public
government, and the general interest, the will of
the sovereign is law. No political power origi-
nates from the people. All centres in the crown,
and in the officers of its nomination.

Al; ie, ncw WVTr N the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame-
dun iniorn
.,' Sp;in rica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
fiLjrlj t,, to
, .v.c-. tthe plan of interior policy for their new dominions,

t' divided them into two immense governments, one

fu bj ri

fubjeEt to the viceroy of New Spain, the other to B °o ° K
the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdition of the for- -_-
mer extended over all the provinces belonging to
Spain in the northern division of the American
continent. Under that of the latter, was compre-
hended whatever she possessed in South America.
This arrangement, which, from the beginning,
was attended with many inconveniencies, became
intolerable when the remote provinces of each
viceroyalty began to improve in induetry and po-
pulation. The.people complained of their sub-
jetion to a superior, whose place of residence was
Ib distant, or so inacceflible, as almost excluded
them from any intercourse with the feat of go-
vernment. The authority of the viceroy over
diRfrics so far removed from his own eye and ob-
servation, was unavoidably both feeble and ill di-
reted. As a remedy for those evils, a third vice-
royalty has been established in the present century,
at Santa Fc de Bogota, the capital of the new
kingdom of Granada, the jurifdition of which
extends over the whole kingdom of Tierra Firme,
and the province of Quito b. Those viceroys not Their
only represent the person of their sovereign, but
possess his regal prerogatives within the precincts
of their own governments, in their utmost extent.
Like him, they exercise supreme authority in every
department of government, civil, military, and
criminal. They have the ofle right of nominating

Voy. de UlloR, i. 23. 255.

S 2 the

*0 0 K the persons who hold many offices of the highest
*---.-a importance, and the occasional privilege of sup.

plying such as are in the royal gift3 until the fuc.
ccffor appointed by the king shall arrive. The
external pomp of their government is suited to its
real dignity and power. Their courts are formed
upon the model of that at Madrid, with horse and
foot guards, a household regularly established, nu-
merous attendants, and ensigns of command, dif-
playing such magnificence, as hardly retains the
appearance of delegated authority'.
Courts of BUT as the viceroys cannot discharge in person

the fun&tions of a supreme magistrate in every part
of their extensive jurisdiction, they are aided in
their government by cfficers and tribunals similar
to those in Spain. The condu& of civil affairs in
the various provinces and diftri&s, into which the
Spanilh dominions in America are divided, is com-
mitted to magistrates of various orders and deno-
nminations; tome appointed by the king, others
by the viceroy, but all fubjeSt to the command of
the latter, and amenable to his jurifdiAion. The
adwirriifration of justice is vested in tribunals,
known by the name of Audiences, and formed
upon the model of the court of Chancery in Spain.
These are eleven in number, and dispense juflice
to as many diltrits, into which the Spanish do-
minions in America are divided k. The number

Uiloa, Voy. i. 432. Cage 61.
See N O' E XLVI. o

of

of judges in the court of Audience is various, ac- B °1 ° K
cording to the extent and importance of their ju- ,-
rifdifion. The station is no less honourable than
lucrative, and is commonly filled by persons of
such abilities and merit as renders this tribunal
extremely respectable. Both civil and criminal
causes come under their cognizance, and for each
peculiar judges are set apart. Though it is only Thei jUrif.
in the most despotic governments, that the fove-
reign exercises in person the formidable prerogative
of adminifteringjuftice to his fubjefts, and in ab-
solving, or condemning, consults no law but what
is deposited in his own breast; though, in all the
monarchies of Europe, judicial authority is com-
mitted to magistrates, whole decisions are regu-
lated by known laws and eftablilhed forms, the
Spanilh viceroys have often attempted to intrude
themselves into the feat of justice, and, with an
ambition which their distance from the controul
of a superior rendered bold, have aspired at a
power which their marler does not venture to as-
fume. In order to check an usurpation which
must have annihilated justice and security in the
Spanilh colonies, by fubjeEting the lives and pro-
perty of all to the will of a tingle man, the vice-
roys have been prohibited, in the most explicit
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in the
judicial proceedings of the courts of Audience, or
from delivering an opinion, or giving a voice with
refped to any point litigated bleore them'. In

Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35. 3'. 4.. lib. iii i. ti. iii.
. 36, 37.

S 3 some

X v x rfome particular cafes, in which any question of ci-
.%, ---' vil right is involved, even the political regulations

ps the viceroy may be brought under the review
of the court of Audience, which, in thole in-
fiances, may be deemed an intermediate power
placed between him and the people, as a conlti-
tutional barrier to circumscribe his jurildicliun.
But as legal restraints on a person who reprefnts
the sovereign, and is clothed with his authority, are
little fuired to the genius of Spanish policy ; th
hesitation and reserve with which it confers tiis
power on the courts of Audience, are remarkable.
They may advise, they may rcmontlrate; bur, in
the event of a direct collision between their opinion
and the will of the viceroy, what he determines
mull be carried into execution, and nothing re-
mains for them, but to lay the matter before the
king and the council of the Indies ". But to be
intitled to remonstrate, and inform against a per-
son, before whom all others must be silent, and
.tamely fubmic to his decrees, is a privilege which
adds dignity to the courts of Audience. This is
farther augmented by another circumstance. Upon
the death of a viceroy, without any provision of a
successor by the king, the supreme power is velted
in the court of Audience resident in the capital of
the viceroyalty, and the senior judge, afilttid by
his brethren, exercises all the functions of the vicc-

" Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. c. 3. n. 4%, 41. rct. p.
ib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii. 1. 34. l .L. i. t ix. I . 1.y

roy

roy while the office continues vacant". In matters BR O O)
which come under the cognizance of the Audi-. v
ences, in the course of their ordinary juril;lition,
as-courts of juttice, their fcntcnces arc linal in
ekfery litigation concerning property of Icf; value
than fix thousand pesos but when the subject in
dispute exceeds that fum, their decifrons are sub-
ject to review, and may be carried by appeal be-
fore the royal council of the Indies ".

IN this council, one of the nmol considerable in Co<5;" .of

the Iricit.

the monarchy for dignity and power, is veiled the
tupreme government of all the Spanilh dominions
in America. It was first eftablifned by Ferdinand,
in the year 51 1, and brought into a more perfect
form by Charles V. in the year 1524. Its juril- 'ts rowe-.
dition extends to every department, ecclcfialtical,
civil, military, and commercial. All laws and
ordinances relative to the government and police
of the colonies originate there, and mult be ap-
proved of by two-thirds of the members, before
they are iflued in the name of the king. All the
offices, of which the nomination is relcrved to the
crown, are conferred in this council. To it each
perlon employed in America, from the viceroy
downwards, is accountable. It reviews their con-
duet, rewards their Ifrvices, and inflits the pu-
nihilncncs due to their malverlations P. Before irt

Rccop. lih. ii. tit. xv. I. 57, &c.
Rccop. lib. v. tit. xii:. i. 1, &c.
t Rccoio . lib. ii. tit. ii. 1. I , &, c.

S 4 is

8 01 K is laid whatever intelligence, either public or fe-
T-V-c- crer, is received from America, and every scheme

of improving the administration, the police., or the
commerce of the colonies, is submitted to its con
fideration. From the first inflitution of the coun-
cil of the Indies, it has been the constant object of
the catholic monarchs to maintain its authority,
and to make such additions from time to time,
both to its power and its splendor, as might render
it formidable to all their fubjeas in the Nev
World. Whatever degree of public order ard
virtue till remains in that country, where so many
circumstances conlpire to relax the former, and to
corrupt the latter, may be ascribed in a great mea-
sure to the wile regulations and vigilant inlpecion
of this refpeclable tribunal q.

CJa de As the king is supposed to be always present in
:ontratao
con. his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in

the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been instituted, in order to regulate such com-
mercial affairs as required the immediate and per-
fonal inspection of those appointed to superintend
them. This is called Cdfa de la Contratacion, or
the house of trade, and was establishcd in Seville,
to whose port commerce with the New World was

irs rfrc. confined, as early as the year 1o50. It may be
tuns". confidered both as a board of trade, and as a court

of judicature. In the former capacity, it takes

S Sulorz. de Jure Tnd. lib. iv. 1. z2.

cognizlince

cognizance of whatever relates to the intercourre B ° ° K
of Spain with America, it regulates what commo-
dities Ihould be exported thither, and has the in-
fpecion of filch as are received in returnm It de-
cides concerning the departure of the fleets for the
Weft Indies, the freight and burden of the ships,
their equipment and deltination. In the latter
capacity, it judges with refped to every que-
llion, civil, commercial, or criminal, arising in
conlequence of the tranlat ions of Spain with Ame-
rica; and in both these departments, its decisions
are exempted from the review of any court but that
of the council of the Indies r.

SucH is the great outline of that fy(lem of go-
vernment, which Spain has efiablifhed in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
subordinate boards and officers employed in the
administration of justice, in collecting the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of the
country; to describe their different funtions, and
to enquire into the mode and effeC of their opera-
rations; would prove a detail no less intricate than
minute and uninterefling.

THE first objec of the Spanish monarchs was to Firn l(,ie.

fccure the producRions of the colonies to the parent c ac..Vlve
state, by an ablolute prohibition of any intercourl 'e
with foreign nations. They took poffeion of

'Recop. lib. ix. tit. i. Vcitii Norte la Contratacion,
lib i. c. A.

America

lB o ° K America by right of conquest, and, conscious not

,y only of the feeblenels of their infant fettlemenrn

but aware of the difficulty in eftablihling their do.
minion over such vail regions, or in retaining so
many reludtant nations usider the yoke, they dread.
ed the intrusion of firangers; they even shunncd
their infpeaion, and endeavoured to keep them at
a distance from their coasts. This spirit of jea-
lousy and exclusion, which at firit was natur,},
and perhaps necessary, augmented as their Ix.fii.
sions in America extended, and the value ot them
came to be more fully understood. In consequence
of it, a system of colonizing was introduced, to which
there had hitherto been nothing fimilr among man-
kind. In the ancient world, it was not unco.m.
mon to fend forth colonies. But they were of tn
kinds only. They were either migrations, whiih
served to disburden a state of its luiperflious sub.
jres, when they multiplied too fast for the terl:
tory which they occupied : or they were nsiinar)
detachments liationed, as garrisons, in a conqucred
province. The colonies of some Greek republcs,
and the fwarns of northern barbariar;s which IcitlciJ
in different parts of Europe, were of the firl[ l tei ILs.
The Roman colonies were of the fccond. In tile
former, the conneiflon with the nlothcr-countiry
quickly ceased, and they became independent l;tci.
In the latter, as the disjunction was not comp)llC,

Itegulitions the dependence continuied. In their Atwc rlicil
4,r that
ptupof. fcttlements, the Spaniflh onarchs took wi.it wv,

peculiar to each, and lludicd to unite tlheim. By

2 kuldnillg

fending colonies to regions lb remote, by establish- B O o K
in" in each a form of interior policy and admini- -
ltration, under d;ftin&t governors, and with pecu-
liar laws, they disjoined them from the mother-
country. By retaining in their own hands the
rights of legillarion, as well as that of imposing
taxes, together with the power of nominating the
perobns who filled every department, civil or mi-
I;ary, they tJcured th!ir (dependence. 1 .plply
tor Spain, the situation of her colonies was LIch,
,s rendered it possible to reduce tis new idea into
pradice. Almost all the countries which l h: had
dilcovered and occupied, lay within the tropics.
The produftions of that large portion of that globe
are different from thole of Europe, even in its molf
luihern provinces. Tlhe qualities of the climate
and of the foil naturally iurn the induflry of luch
as fettle there into new channels. \hen the Spa-
n:ards firit took potcffion ot their domains in A me-
riwa, the precious metals which they yielded, were
tie only objet that attracted their artention. EIven
wicen their efiorts began to take a better iirection,
tllrc ers;ployed themlclves alinosl wholly in rearing
Iit.h peculiar productions of the climnate, as, front
Iciir rarity or value, were of chief deiallnd in the
lauthrlr-country. Allured by vaif prolpets of im-
ni;j'j;ite wealth, they dilldained to waste their in-
I;u!lry on what was less lucrative, but of superior
nmonlrcr. In order to render it impoflible to cor-
t.d't ii's error, and to prevent them from making
"n) cflbrts in industry which might interfere with

tholt:

B vIs K those of the mother-country, the eftablilhmentof
'--I_-' several species of manufactures, and even the cul.

ture of the vine, or olive, are prohibited in the
Spanish colonies ', under severe penalties '. They
must trull entirely to the mother-country for the
objects of primary neceflity. Their clothes, their
furniture, their instruments of labour, their luxu
ries, and even a considerable part of the provifio,
which they consume, were imported from Spain.
During a great part of the sixteenth century, Sfai",
pofleffing an extensive commerce and flourifh:ng
manufactures, could Iupply wi:h ease the growing
demands of her colonies, from her own stores.
The produce of their mines and plantations M:s
given in exchange for these. But all that the co-
lonies received, as well as all that they gave, was
conveyed in Spanish bo.toms. No vessel be-
longing to the colonies was ever permitted to carry
the commodities of America to Europe. Even the
commercial intercourse of one colony with another,
was either absolutely prohibited, or limited by
many jealous refrictions. All that America yields
flows into the ports of Spain; all that it consumes
must issue from them. No foreigner can enter its
colonies without express permilfion; no veffcl of
any foreign nation is received into their harbours;
and the pains of death, with confiscation of move-
ables, are denounced againit every inhabitant who

a See NOTE XIVII.
' . Ullloig RIab. des MlinuF. &c. p. 206.

prcfumes

presumes to trade with them ". Thus the colonies 8 o on K
are kept in a state of perpetual pupillage; and by --
the introduction of this commercial dependence, a
refinement in policy of which Spain set the firfl ex-
ample to the European nations, the supremacy of
the parent irate hath been maintained over remote
colonies during two centuries and a half.

SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spa- siow pro-

nilh monarchs teem to have attended in forming p'lt, .''
their new settlements in America. But they could fro E
not plant with the fame rapidity that they had de-
firoyed; and, from many concurring causes, their
progress was extremely flow, in filling up the im-
mense void which their devastations had occasioned.
As soon as the rage for discovery and adventure be-
gan to abate, the Spaniards opened their eyes to
dangers and distresses, which at first they did not
perceive, or had defpiled. The numerous hard-
Ihips with which the members of infant colonies
have to struggle, the diseases of unwholesome cli-
mates, fatal to the constitution of Europeans; the
difficulty of bringing a country, covered with forests,
intoculture; the want of hands necessary for labour
in some provinces, and the flow reward ofinduflry
in all, unless where the accidental discovery of mines
enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were evils
universally felt and magnified. Discouraged hy
the view of ther-, the spirit of migration was ib

" ecopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvii. I. 1. 4. 7, &c.

much

B o o K much damped, that sixty years after the dilcovey
*-_v-d of the New World, the number of Spaniards in 21|

its provinces is computed not to have exceeded si:-
teen thousand '.

Dircourged THe mode in which property was distributed i
by the i/lae
of property, the Spanifi colonies, and the regulations eltablii:,

ed with rcfpea to the transmission of it, whether
by descent or by sale, were extremely unfavourab::
to population. In order to promote a rapid in.
crease of people in any new lettlement, property
in land ought to be divided into small lhares, and
the alienation of it should be rendered extrernly
easy Y. But the rapaciousness of the Spanish con.
querors of the New World paid no regard to this
fundamental maxim of policy; and, as they p.l-
feflid power, which enabled them to gratify the
utmofl extravagance of their wilhes, many l'izcd
districls and provinces of vast extent, and iihld
them as envcomiend!as. By degrees they obtained the
privilege of converting a part of thefer into ,A,"",7
rafgcs, a species of fief, introduced into thc Spa-
nifh fyflem of feudal jurirpridecnce, which can
neither be divided nor alicnated. Thlius a rreat
portion of l:ndcd properry, under this rigid form
of entail, is withheld from circularion, and dI-
scends from father to l;)n unimproved, and ol
litt[l value either to the proprictor or to the rorn-
munlity. In the account which I have 'iven; ol

* S N () 1 ' Xi V 11. y Dr. S, iL' lrqui,) ,. i .

* Rc .

or .

lib , u.

i. h.
1.

rlie

the reduction of Peru, various examples occur of B O o K
enormous tracAs of country occupied by some of , ·
the conquerors '. The excesses in other provinces
were similar, for as the value of the lands which
they acquired, was originally estimated according
to the number of Indians which lived upon them,
America was in general so thinly peopled, that
only diltricts of great extent could afford such a
number of labourers as might be employed in the
mines with any profpet of considerable gain. The
pernicious effects of those radical errors in the dif-
tribution and nature of property in the Spanish
settlements, are felt through every department of
industry, and may be confidered as one great cause
of a progress of population so much flower than
that which has taken place in better constituted
colonies b.
To this we may add, that the support of the en- nd the na-

lure of tlhir

ormous and expensive fabric of their ecclesiastical elcflatili
etabliflmnent, has been a burden on the Spanifhl Pol'y
colonies, which has greatly retarded the progress
of population and induRry. The payment of
tythes is a heavy tax on industry; and if the ex-
ation of them be not regulated and circumscribed
by the wisdom of the civil magistrate, it becomes
intolerable and ruinous. Bur, instead of any re-
Itraint on the claims of ecclefiaflics, the inconfi-
der::te zeal of the Spanish legislators admitted them
'Book vi. p. 139. b See NOT E XLIX.

into

0 0
V K into America in their full extent, and at once i;;
-.-v-I posed on their infant colonies a burden which is in

no night degree oppressive to society, even in it,
molt improved state. As early as the year 1501
the payment of tythes in the colonies was enjoined,
and the mod e of it regulated by law. Every ar.
ticl of primary neceflity, towards which the at-
tention of new settlers mull naturally be turned, is
fubjcited to that grievous exacion c. Nor were the
demands of the clergy confined to articles of simple
culture. Its more artificial and operose produc.
tions, luch as figar, indigo, and cochineal, were
soon declared to be tythable d; and thus the in-
duftry of the planter was taxed in every flageof
its progress, from its rudefl essay to its highest in-
provement. To the weight of this legal impofi
tion, the bigotry of the American Spariards has
made many voluntary additions. From their fond
delight in the external pomp and parade of reli-
gion, and from superstitious reverence for ecclefi-
aftics of every denomination, they have bellowed
profuse donatires on churches and monafleries, and
have unprofitably wafted a lage proportion of that
wealth, which might have nourished and given vi-
gour to produAive labour in growing colonies.

V.;o, or- BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of
p]tin tlc America which the Spaniards have occupied,
coonie. that, notwithflanding all the circumllances which

* Recop. lib. i. tit. xiv. I. z.
4 Rccop. lib, i. tit. 1ir. 3 ann 4.a

~5 ha~~~Ilve

have checked and retarded population, it has gra- B 'oo K
dually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain .--v--.
with citizens of various orders. Among these, the
Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diflinguilhed
by the name of Cbaperones, are the firlt in rank and Chpitone'
power. From the jealous attention of the Spanish
court to secure the dependence of the colonies, all
departments of consequence are filled by persons
lent from Europe; and, in order to prevent any of
dubious fidelity from being employed, each muff
bring proof of a clear descent from a family of
Old Christians, untainted with any mixture of Jew-
ilh or Mahometan blood, and never disgraced by
any censure of the inquisition'. In such pure
hands, power is deemed to be safely lodged, and
almost every public function, from the viceroyalty
downwards, is committed to them alone. Every
person, who by his birth, or residence in America,
may be fufpe6ted of any attachment or interest ad-
verse to the mother-country, is the object of dif-
trust to such a degree, as amounts nearly to an ex-
clufion from all offices of confidence or authority r.
By this conspicuous predilection of the court, the
Chapetones are railed to such pre-eminence in
America, that they look down with dildain on every
other order of men.

THE charater and slate of the Creols, or de- Crrol tlhe

ltond,

fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the

' Recopil. lilb. ix. tit. xxvi. I. 1, 16.
I Sec NOTE L.
VOL. III. T fccond

B3 0 K second class of fubjets in the Spanish colonies, have
---- enabled the Chapetones to acquire other advan-

tages, hardly less considerable than those which
they derive from the partial favour of government,
Though some of the Creolian race are delcendte
from the conquerors of the New World; thoug'i
others can trace up their pedigree to the noblct
families in Spain; though many arc pc,.nTcl :
ample fortunes, yet, by the enervating iiinu..;cc u;
a sultry climate, by the rigour of a jealous 'tvcr:i-
ment, and by their despair of attaining that cii.ii;ic-
tion to which mankind naturally aflire, the vi,:our
of their minds is so entirely broken, that a great
part of them wafle life in luxurious indulencirt,
mingled with an illiberal fc.perfli:ion flill murel de-
bating. Languid and unintcrprifing, the opera-
tions of an active extended commerce would Le to
them so cumbersome and oppressive, that in almuf)
every part of America they decline engaging in it.
The interior traffic of every colony, as well as it'
trade with the neighbouring provinces, and \ih
Spain itself, are carried on chiefly bv the Chaic-
tones a ; who, as the reccmpenice of their iniditr)y,
amass immense wealth, while the Creoles, 1:I:-, i:
sloth, are satisfied with the revenues of their p.a-
ternal ellates.

Rvlfip FRoM this stated competition for power .11i(
tifc." wealth between thoie two orders of citiz.ns, :in

g Voy. de Ulloa, i. 27. zj i. Voy. dc l"rczici, :

the various paflions excited by a rivalfhip so inte- B O° K

VII.

refling, their hatred is violent and implacable. On t
every occasion, symptoms of this aversion break
out, and the common appellations which each be-
flows on the other, are as contemptuous as thole
which flow from the molt deep-rooted national an-
tipathy h. The court of Spain, from a refinement
of dillrullful policy, chcrifhes thole feeds of dii-
cord, and foments this mutual jealousy, which not
only prevents the two most powerful clalcfs of its
l-ujects in the New World frum combining againlt
the parent slate, but prompts each, with the nmolf
vigilant zeal, to observe the mnotions and to coun-
teract the fchemcs of the other.

THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanilh co- A nix;I

lonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of an tjlr tli;d
Luropean and a negro, or of an European and ci.i.ZCi.
Indian, the former called Mulattoes, the latter
Mllfcizos. As the court of Spain, lolicitous to in-
corporate its new vair.ls with its ancient lubjeCts,
early encouraged the Spaniards fettled in Anmerica
to marry the natives of that country, leveral al-
liances of this kind were fcr:ned in their infant co-
lonies '. But it has been more owing to licentious
indulgence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their ovcreigns, tl:at this mixed breed has

l' (C I',y'. StirvyC , 9. 9. Irezitcr. 226.

I R'ec,.jpil. l i . tit. i.. 1. z. I rrcra, dec.. i. lib. v. . 2.
Dec. 3. lib. :ii. c. 3.

T 2 multiplied

B V 0 K multiplied so greatly, as to conflitute a considerable

--
- part of the population in all the Spanilh fettle-

ments. The several stages of descent in this race,
and the gradual variations of slade until the Afri-
can black, or the copper colour of America,
brighten into an European complexion, are accu-
rately marked by the Spaniards, and each dilsin-
guifhed by a peculiar name. Those of the firfl
and second generations are confidered, and treated
as Indians and Negroes; but in the third descent,
the charadterillic hue of the former disappears;
and in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is bl
entirely effaced, that they can no longer be diltin-
guifhed from Europeans, and become entitled to
all their privileges k. It is chiefly by this mixed
race, whose frame is remarkably robust and hardy,
that the mechanic arts are carried on, and other
acive functions in society are discharged, which
the two higher classes of citizens, from pride, or
from indolence, dildain to exercise '.

"Ngrocs THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the
frm theD 0
t ..urh or. inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. 'I he inrro-

duction of that unhappy part of the human fpecics
into America, together with their services and luf-
ferings there, ihall be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to point out a peculiarity in their situation under

k Voy. dc Ull'oa, i. p. 27.
' Voy. de U!l(a, i. zr. Voy. de Botugler, p. o04. Me-
Icndez, T1efoos VcrdlaJcos, i. 354.

the

the Spanish dominion. In several of their fettle- o OK
ments, particularly in New Spain, negroes are -
chiefly employed in domestic service. They form
a principal part in the train of luxury, and are
cherished and carefled by their superiors, to whose
vanity and pleasures they are equally subservient.
Thcirdrefs and appearance are hardly less splendid
than that of their maflers, whole manners they irni-
tate, and whose pations they imbibe". Elevated by
this diltinction, they have assumed such a tone of
superiority over the Indians, and treat them with
such inlolence and scorn, that the antipathy be-
tween the two races has beco.;,e implacable.
Even in Peru, where negroes ficnl to be more
numerous, and are employed in field-work as well
as domeffic service, they maintain their afcendanr
over the Indians, and the mutual hatred of one to
the other fubfiffs with equal violence. The laws
have industriously fomented this aversion, to which
accident gave rife, and, by molt rigorous injunc-
tions, have endeavoured to prevent every inter-
course that might form a bond of union between
the two races. Thus, by an artful policy, the
Spaniards derive strength from that circunftince
in population which is the weakness of other 1 u-
ropean colonies, and have secured as affociatcs and
defenders, thole very perlons who cllcwherc are
objeas of jealousy and terror ".

' Gage, p. 56. Voy. de Ullow, i. 4 1.

Rccopil. lib. vii. tit. v. 1. 7. llcrrcra, dcc. 8. lib. vii.
c. 11. Frezicr, z2.(.

T 3 'IIE

B 0 0 K THE Indians form the last, and the most de-
---4- pressed order of men in the country, which bc-
Thein,'" longed to their ancellors. I have already yrac.d
Jla order of the progress of the Spanish ideas with r-fl;:cL to
C:izens.

the condition and trearmerr of lhat ptokic., and
have nentiLned tlhe moil iniiortant cj their i:lo ;
early regulations, concerning a matter of i-L mt cih
conlequcnce in the adiln:ilratiori of thei. n w do.
minions. BIt since the period t; wv!icl I have
brcn uht down tie hlflorv ol America, the informa-
tion and experience acquired during two centuries,
have enabled the court of Spain to make fucli i.n-
provements in r' ls part of its Anmerican fyflem, tl1ha
a ihort view of the prclent condit:on cf the Inil.::-x
may prove both curious and interctiig.

Their pre- By the famous regulations cf Char!es V. in 15 2,
sent c rndi-
lion. which have been 1 often mentioned, tiec hl :i

pretensions of the conquerors of the New V'oriJ,
who confidered its inhabitants as slaves, to v.l:oe
service they had acquired a full right of propert:,
were finally abrogated. From that period, tl-.
Indians have been reputed freemen, and en:it!c!
to the privileges of fubjets. When admitted ii:lt:
this rank, it was deemed juti, that they lioulJ!
contiibute towards the support and inipruvenniL
of the lociety which had adopted them as n.ei;-
bers. But as no considerable benelit could bLe x-
pected from the voluntary efforts of mc tinlln'-
quainted with regular induttry, and avecie tu lIi-
bour, thc court of Spain found it necellary to i,:

and

and lecure, by proper regulations, what it thought B o O K
reasonable to exact from them. With this view, -- -
an annual tax was imposed upon every male, from p',d ,,,'
the age of eighteen to fifty ; and, at the larnme time, 't"'"
the nature as well as the extent of the lervices
which they might be required to perform, were
ascertained with precision. This tribute varies in
difftrent provinces ; but if we take that paid in
New Spain as a medium, its annual amount is
nearly four flillings a head; no exorbitant fumr in
countries where, as at the l'. -cc of wealth, the
value of money is extremely low , The right of
levying it likewile varies. In Anerica, every In-
dian is either an immediate va;ial of the crov. n, or
depends upon lome fubjct to who:m the di:lri-t,
in which lie rerides, has been granr:e tfor a limited
time, under tile denomination of an 'nlcoili:']a.
In the former cafe, about thr.e-fourths of the tax
il paid into the royal treasury; in the latter, the
fame proportion of it belongs to the holder of the
grant. When Spain sirs took poflcJlion of Ain-
rica, the greater part o:it was parcelled out among
its conquerors, or tholt who lirlt fettled there, and
but a filall portion relfrved fur tlih crown. lAs
those grants which were imadtl for two lives only P,
reverted fuccl cively to t le l; ,vrci ,n, ihe h a it in
his power either to dill'tl- hi:; lavours by -grants to

° Sec N 0 1' I.I. Rccopil. ih'.. i. iic. v. 1. z. Ilacl:-
luyt, )ol. i.i. p. 4|.

I' Reco;;il. lib. vi. tit. Iiii. ..18. . . S. oz. d 11n1. Jure,
lib. ii. c. 1,.

T 4 new

B V0o K new proprietors, or to augment his own revenue
a- _- by valuable annexations '. Of thele, the latter

has been frequently chosen ; the number of In:
dians now depending immediately on the crown,
is much greater than in the first age after the con-
quest, and this branch of the royal revenue con-
tinues to extend.

ihe rvices THE benefit ariing from the fcrvices of the In-
-rminced.

dians accrues either to the crown, or to the holder
of the encomienda, according to the -ame rule ob-
lerved in the payment of tribute. Those tfrvice,
however, which can now be legally exacted, arc
very different from the servile talks originally im-
posed upon the Indians. The nature of the work
which they must perform is defined, and an equi-
table recompence is granted for their labour. The
hated services demanded of the Indians, may be
divided into two branches. They are either em-
ployed in works of primary necessity, without which
society cannot subsist comfortably, or are com-
pelled to labour in the mines, from which the
Spanith colonies derive their chief value and im-
portance. In conliquence of the former, they are
obliged to assist in the culture of maize, and other
grain of ncceTffry consumption ; in tending cattle;
in erecting edifices of public utility; in building
bridges; and in flrllnng hith- roads' ; but ticy

q See N OTl LII.
* Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iii. 1. 1 . So!cr . dc Ind. Jure, ii.
lib. i. c. 0, 7. 9.

canno!

cannot be conftraiend to labour in rairing vines, B 0° K
olives, and sugar-canes, or any species of cultiva- ----
lion, which has for its object the gratification of
luxury, or commercial profit'. In consequence
of the latter, the Indians are compelled to under-
rake the more unpl-aalint taflc, of extracting ore
from the bowels of the earth, anti of refining it by
fticceflive processes, no lels unwholcfome than ope-
role'.

THE mode of exacting bothl there services is the Th- mrde
fame, and is under regulations framed with a view tilc.
of rendering it as little oppreflive as pofTible to the
Indians. They are called out alternately in divi-
lions, termed Mitas, and no peroln can be com-
pelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
ber called out must not exceed the seventh part of
the inhabitants in any diftrid ". In New Spain,
where the Indians are more numerous, it is fixed
at four in the hundred w. During what time the
labour of those Indians, who are employed in aCri-
culture, continues, I have not been able to learn
But in Peru, each Mita, or division, dftlincd for
the mines, remains there fix months; and while
engaged in this ftrvice, a labourer never receives
less than two flillings a day, and often earns more
hlan double that iIm Y. No Indian, residing at a

Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. S. Solorz. lib. i. c. 7. N"41,
..c.

SCe N () T E 1 11. U Rccopil. lb. vi. tit. xii. 1. 1.
" Kcopil. lib. vi. I . 2. cc N 0 1' L LIV.
Lllo;a llltrctc. zbj, z06.

greatcr

B 0 0 K greater diltance than thirty miles from a rmi:e, is

VIII. i
is . _ included in the Mita, or division emplosvd :n

working itc; nor are the inhabitants of tl;r ]h .
country exposed to certain deltrution, by c i.
pelling them to remove from that warm cli;i,.c,
to the cold elevated regions wheie nili,;,,
abound .
now go- THE Indians who live in the principal tow-,

" ' are entirely fubje& to the Spanifl laws and n. :

itrates; but in their own villages, they arc :
verned by Caziqucs, lome of wholi arc tit ci. -
icendants of their ancient lords, others are ;.:. ;
by the Spanifn viceroys. These regulate the ;;-::
affairs of the people under them, acconriini
maxims of justice, transmitted to them tr....-
tion from their ancestors. To the Inulli., [li,:
jurifdiEtion, lodged in Inch friendly han,'s, a,;o;,
Ibme consolation; and so little formidable is t; ;
dignity to their new masters, that they often al!,;'
it to descend by hereditary right". For the iar
ther relief of men so much expolcd to oppre:uon,
the Spanish court has appointed an officer in eviry
difrict, with the title of Protector of the Indi.;:s.
It is his funtion, as the name implies, to aiL;t
the rights of the Indians; to appear as their t'-
fender in the courts of jultice; and, by the i::tc-
pufition of his authority, to let bounds to tl hec:

R Rccopil. lib. v;. tit. xii. 1. 3.

" Ibid. 1. 29. andtit. i. 1. 13. Sec N 0T F' I.V.
b Sololz. de Jurc Ind.lib. i. c. z6. lccopil. lili. ir i . ;

croachmln'n

croachments and exacions of his countrymen '. A B o O K
certain portion of the reserved fourth of the an- -- --
nutl tribute, is dcfiined for the salary of the ca-
ziques and protectors; another is applied to the
maintenance of tie clergy employed in the inflruc-
lion of the Indians '. Another part seems to be
Iappropriated for the benetir of the Indians them-
i 'vcs, anti is applied for the payment of their tti-
bute in years of famine, or when a particular ii-
i.:.t is afictdcl by any extraordinary calamlity .
L dlccs this, provision is nmade by various laws,
that h!fpitals lhall be founded in every new lettlc-
!cent for the reception of Indians f. Such holpi-
trls have accordingly been erected, both for the
indigent and infirm, in .ima, in Cuzco, and in
Mexico, where the Indians are treated with ten-
dcrnels and humanity r.

Such are t!he leading principles in the jurifpru-
dtnce and policy by which the Indians are now
governed in the provinces belonging to Spain. In
thilcl regulations of the Spaninf monarchs, we dif-
cover no traces of that cruel lfltcem of extermina-
liin, which they have been charged with adopt-
ntg; and if we admir, that the ncceicity of *:cur-
Mi0 1ilbfilience for their colonies, or the advantages
(derived from working the mines, give them a rigtil

Snlrrz. ilb. i . 27. p. 2! I. R] 'Cop. i') xi. tit. vi.
1' I '')pi. ill .

i tt .

v. tit. v. .1.

. ''

. x . 1, 1

' ccopil i.

l i. i. tit. iv. 1. 1 ;.

f lbid. li . i. tit. iv. 1. 1, &c.
Voy, tic Ullo;i, i, 4:9. 5'-9· . Churchill, il, .

t.O

B o o K to avail themfelvcs of the labour of the Indians,

we must allow, that the attention with hich thtv
regulate and recompense that labour, is provident
and hagacious. In no code of laws is greater so!.
citude dili)lyed, or precautions mulciplied itth
more concern for the preservation, the Iccuriy,
and the happinels of the lubjec&, than we dlciCovcr
in the collection of the Spanilh laws for tlhe Inmi(s.
But tholi later regulations, like the more early
edits which have been already mentioned, have
too often proved inefrectual remedies agai:1 the
evils which they were intended to prevent. In
every age, if the fame causes continue to operate,
the fame effects must follow. From the imm(n;c
distance between the power entrulted with the exe-
cution of laws, and that by whose authority they are
enated, the vigour even of the most ablblutc go-
vernment must relax, and the dread of a fupcror,
too remote to observe with accuracy, or to 1pu!:lln
with dilpatch, must insensibly abate. Not itrh-
itanding the numerous injunEtions of the Spanil.
:nonarchs, the Indians still susSer, on many occa-
lions, both from the avarice of individuals, anJ
from the exaAions of the magistrates, who oiLlii
to have prorected them; unrealona.ile talks arc
imnpo:ld ; the term of their labour Is prolongil,
.t:id they groan under all the inuilts and wnron
which are the lot of a dependent people". -'ron
ltil.e infornmation on which I can ,depend, lu''!

-'t. N O' '"
!.\'1.

oppri'fli,)'

ci-preftion abounds more in Peru, than in any B o O K
other colony. But it is not general. According i-- -,
to the accounts, even of rhofe authors who are
mno!t dipofed to exaggerate the lufflrings of the
Indians, they, in Icveral provinces, enjoy not only
cafe, but affluence; they puffTfs large sa:ms; they
are maflers of numerous ihrdes and flocks; and, by
the knowledge which they have acquired of Euro-
pean arts and induilry, are supplicd not only with
the necefflrics, but with many luxuries of life'.

AFTER explaining the form of civil government EjclfCai;-
in the Spanish colonies, and the state of the vari- tution u

the colo-

ous orders of persons subjed to it, the peculiarities nis.,
in their ecclesiastical constitution merit confidera-
tion. Notwithflanding the fuperflitious veneration
wikh which the Spaniards are devoted to the H-oly
See, the vigilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand
early prompted him to take precautions againlt
te introduction of the papal dominion into Ame-
rica. With this view, he solicitcd Alexander VI. R'n"lt'"

on thr .ia-
fora grant of the tythes in all the newly-difcovered pa. r::'

- * Ci lon.

countriesk, which he obtained on condition of his
making provision for the religious inflru'tion of
the natives. Soon after, Julius II. conferred on
him the right of patronage, and albfulute diioflal
of all the cclcfiaftical benefices there '. Both

i Gage's Survry, p. r;. 9o. 104. 1r9, &c.
k Bulla Alcx. \ 1. A. 1). i.;ol, L p alorz. de Jure Ind. ii.
P. 4CS.

Bulla Julii, ii. o 5c', ;ap Solo,z, de Jure Ind. ii. 509.

there

B 0 0 K these pontiffs, unacquainted with the value c:
^_.. what he demanded, bestowed those donations vi;;:

an inconsiderate liberality, which their fuccc(brs
have often lamented, and wished to recal. In con.
sequence of those grants, the Spanifll inonarc:s
have become, in effect, the heads of the Americ.:
church. In them the adminiflration cf its r,..
nues is invelted. Their nomination of perfo::: ;r
supply vacant benefices is instantly coni;nrlccl
the pope. Thus, in all Spanish America, aut;o.
rity of every species centres in the Crown. TI:er:
no collision is known between spiritual and t;:-:;.
ral jurisdiction. The king is the only iuFcrior, ;
name alone is heard, and no dependence upon a;.:
foreign power has been introduced. Pa '.l L.i>
cannot be admitted into America, nor arc t;::: o:
any force there, until they have been prcviouli,
examined, and approved of by the royal co-::-:;
of the Indies ''; and if any bull flould be furr; :l-
tioufly introduced, and circulated in Ame;ica v.ii;-
out obtaining that approbation, ecccl'i.;ilics .
required not only to prcvcnt it from takinig ti'-.
but to seize all the copies of it, and tranlnlir tl:c i.
to the council of the Indies". To thls lin;i;;;:
of the papal jurifdicti( n, equally finrul.ir, x!,'c.it
we confider the age and nation in whic!h it w.stlc-
viled, or the jealous attention with w hich i cr!i-
nand, ant his successors, have fludlied to nt:a;lin.li

" Rccopil. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. z. an,3 Autis dcl Ccni'j. dl'
India,, clxi. " Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 55.

3 11

it in full force °, Spain is indebted, in a great R o o K
measure, for the uniform tranquillity which has .-.-._
reigned in her American dominions.

TIHE hierarchy is established in America in the Form and

endowments

fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- of the
tifiops, bishops deans, and other dignitaries. thspihn,l
The inferior clergy are divided into three clafnes, colonic".
under the denomination of Curas, Dofrineros, and
,.'1ijficrcs. The first are parifh-priefts in those
parts of the country where the Spaniards have set-
tled. Ihe second have the charge offuch districts
as are inhabited by Indians subjected to the Spanish
government, and living under its protection. The
trird are employed in converting and inftru&ing
those fiercer tribes, which disdain fubmilfion to the
Spanifli yoke, and live in remote or inaccelfble
regions, to which the Spanish arms have not pene-
trated. So numerous are the ecclesiastics of all
those various orders, and such the profuse libera-
lity with which many of them are endowed, that
the revenues of the church in America are im-
mense. I he fuperltition of Rome appears with
its utinofl pomp in the New World. Churches
anJl convents there are in:tnificent, and richly
adorned ; and on high iellivals, the dilplay of
gold and silver, and precious stones, is lfch as
exceeds the conception of an lEuropean p. An ec-
cleliallical eftablifnlment so splendid anti expenlive,
° Rccop. ill,. i. tit. vii. I. 55. p:inim.

' Voy. dc Ullon, i. 430.

is

B o o K is unfavourable, as has been formerly observed, to

VIII.
z- --I .the progress of riring colonies; but in countries

where riches abound, and the people are lo de-
lighted with parade, that religion must affune
it, in order to attrac their veneration, this pro-
peniity to oflentation has been indulged, and be-
comes less pernicious.

Pe.r.n;.;os THE early inititution of monasteries in the Spa-
morl,.lcin- nilh colonies, and the inconliderate zeal in nul:;-

plying them, have been attended with confequcnces
more fatal. In every new lettlement, the first ob-
ject is to encourage population, and to incite every
citizen to contribute towards augmenting the
strength and number of the community. During
the youth and vigour of society, while there is
room to spread, and sustenance is procured with
facility, mankind increase with amazing rapidity.
But the Spaniards had hardly taken poflefiion ot
America, when, with a most preposterous policy,
they began to erec convents, where perlbns of
both sexes were shut up, under a vow to defeat
the purpose of nature, and to counteract the firll
of her laws. Influenced by a miiguided piet!,
which ascribes transcendent merit to a Itate ot celi-
bacy, or allured by the profpec of that lifilcle calc,
which, in sultry climates, is deemed filpreme feli-
city, numbers crowd into those mansions of sloth
and fuperflition, and are loft to society. As none
but persons of Spanish extract are admitted into the
monafleries of the New World, the evil is more

5 Iciilibly

sensibly felt, and every monk or nun may be con- B o l K
fidered as an acive person withdrawn from civil '---v
life. The impropriety of such foundations in any
situation where the extent of territory requires ad-
ditional hands to improve it, is lo obvious, that
iome catholic states have expressly prohibited any
person in their colonies from taking the monastic
vows'. Even the Spanifl monarchs, on some oc-
cafions, teem to have been alarmed with the spread-
ing of a spirit so adverse to the increase and pro-
fperiry of their colonies, that they have endea-
voured to check itr. But the Spaniards in Ame-
rica, more thoroughly under the influence of fu-
perftition than their countrymen in Europe, and
directed by ecclefialfics more bigoted and illiterate,
have conceived such an high opinion of monaflic
fanitity, that no regulations can restrain their zeal;
and, by the excess of their ill-judged bounty, reli-
gious houses have multiplied to a degree no less
amazing than pernicious to society'.
IN viewing the slate of colonies, where not only crs,,ar or

eccclrfiaI rti .

the number but influence of ecclesiastics is so great, in spni.h
the character of this powerful body is an objeCt that i
merits particular attention. A considerable part
of the secular clergy in Mexico and Peru are na-
tives of Spain. As persons accustomed, by their

I Voy. tic Ul'oa, ii. 1r4.
' ilerrcra, dec. v. li!,. ix. c. i, 2. Recop. lib. I. t:t. iii.
i. . '. it. iv. c. 2. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 23.

Sec N OTE LVII.
VOL. III. U education,

B o oK education, to the retirement and indolence of aca

VIII.

demic life, are more incapable of active enter.
prize, and less disposed to ltrike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclefiaflical adventu-
rers by whom the American church is recruited,
are commonly such as, from merit or rank in life,
have little profpet of success in their own country.
f the s.- Accordingly, the secular priefls in the New Worid

are frill less distinguished than their brethren in
Spain, for literary accomplishments of any species;
and though, by the ample provision which has
been made for the American church, many of its
members enjoy the ease and independence which
are favourable to the cultivation of science, the
body of secular clergy has hardly, during two cen-
turies and a half, produced one author whole works
convey such useful information, or possess such a
degree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attract the attention of enlightened nations.

oi the ie- But the greatest part of the ecclefialics in the Spa.
gulars. nifh iettlements are regulars. On the clifcovery oi

America, a new field opened to the pious zeal of
the monastic orders; and, with a becoming alacrity,
they immediately sent forth mifionaries to labour
in it. The firit attempt to inftrua and convert the
Americans, was made by monks; and, as loon
as the conquell of any province was conimpltted,
and its ecclesiastical efltablifhirrnr. began to afliume
obme form, the popes permitted the rni'ion;irrs l'
the four mendicant orders, as a reward for ithlr
services, to accept of parochial charges in Ameinca,

'0

to perform all spiritual funtions, and to receive B o°° K
the tythes, and other emoluments of the benefice,
without depending on the jurifdition of the bishop
of the diocese, or being fubjecl to his censures.
In consequence of this, a new career of ufcfulnef,
as well as new objcats of ambition, prefcnted them-
selves. Whenever a call is made for a freth supply
of missionaries, men of the most ardent and afpir-
ing minds, impatient under the refiraint of a
cloifler, weary of its insipid uni:ormity, and fa-
tigued with the irksome repetition of its frivolous
functions, offer their service with eagerness, and
repair to the New World in quest of liber.y and
diftindion. Nor do they pursue diflinftion with-
out success. The highest ecclefiaflical honours, as
well as the molf lucrative preferments in Mexico
and Peru, are often in the hands of regulars ; and
it is chiefly to the monastic orders that the Ame-
ricans are indebted for any portion of science which
is cultivated among them. They are almofl the
only Spanifl ecclesiastic, from whom we have
received any accounts, either of the civil or natural
hitfory of the various provinces in America. Some
of them, though deeply tinged with the indelible
lfperflition of their profeflion, have publishcd
books which give a favourable iJea of their abi-
lities. The natural and moral liflory of the New
World, by the Jcluii Acofta, contains more ac-
curate observations, pelraps, and m :re )found fci-
cnce, than are to be found in any dcflripLion

U 2 of

B o o K of remote countries published in the sixteenth

v--- ' century.

Dif lute BUT the fame difgult with monastic life, to which
manners of
sone of America is indebted for tome inftrutors of worth

h. and abilities, filled it with others of a very (lifcer-

ent chara&er. The giddy, the profligate, the ava-
ricious, to whom the poverty and rigid diftcpiine
of a convent are intolerable, confider a niiflin to
America as a release from mortification and bo.-
dagc. There they soon obtain some parochil
charge, and far removed, by their situation, from
the infpe&ion of their monaflic fupericrs, andl ex-
empt, by their character, from the juri'.licihn ci
their diocesan ", they are hardly fi;bjtct to a:-y
controul. According to the testimony of the mu t
zealous catholics, many of the regular cier)y :n
the Spanish lettlements are not only deftitutc uo
the virtues becoming their profcffion, b:ut regar.-
less of that external decorum and refpec& for the
opinion of mankind, which preserve a femblarco
of worth, where the reality is wanting. Secure or
impunity, oume regulars, in contempt ol thiir
vow of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and
are 1l rapaciously eager in amafling wealth, that
they become the moll grievous opprcfiors us tile
Indians, whom it was their duty to have protecied,
OtLers, witli no less flagrant violation of their vo'v

" Avcndano Thef. Irdic. ii. z53.

C.

of chastity, indulge with little dilguife in the molt B 0° K
dissolute licentioufiefs '. _

VARIOUS schemes have been propose.l for re-

dressing enormities lb manifcfl and offensive. Se-
veral persons, no less eminent for piety than dif-
cernmenr, have contended, that the regulars, in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to
be confined within the walls of their cloiiters, and
flould no longer be permitted to encroach on the
functions of the secular clergy. Some pubiic-
spirited magistrates, from conviction of its being
neceflary to deprive the regulars of a privilege, be-
flowed at first with good intention, but of which
time and experience had discovered the pernicious
effcs, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
their attempts to afTrrt their own rights. 'The i6iS.
prince D'-fquilache, viceroy of Peru under Phi-
lip III. took measures so decisive and effectual for
circumscribing the regulars within their proper
sphere, as firuck them with gencral ccn!terna-
tion Y. They had recourle to their uujal arts.
They alarmed the superstitious, by representing
t!:e proceedings of the viceroy as innovations fatal
to religion. They employed all the refinements of
intrigue, in order to gain persons in power; anti
kcconded by the powerful influence of the Jcluits,
who claimed and enjoyed all the privileges wilicn
belonged to the Mendicant orders in America,

' Sec NOTE LVILI. Sec NOTE LXIX.

U 3 they

B o o KC they made a deep impression on a bigoted prince,
- -,, and a weak ministry. The ancient pracice was

tolerated. The abuses which it occasioned con-
tinued to increase, and the corruption of monks,
exempt from the restraints of discipline, and the
inspection of any superior, became a disgrace to
religion. At last, as the veneration of the Spa.
niards for the monaltic orders began to abate, and
the power of the Jesuits was on the decline, Ser-

June 13, dinand VI. ventured to apply the only effircual
'757' remedy by issuing an edit, prohibiting Regulars

of every denomination from taking the charge of
any parish with the cure of fouls; and declaring,
that on the dcmife of the pre1ent incumbents, no:n
but secular priests, fubje to the jurifdicRion of
their diocesans, shall be presented to vacant bene-
sices Z. If this regulation is carried into execution
with fleadinefs in any degree proportional to the
wisdom with which it is framed, a very confider-
able reformation may take place in the ecclcfiafti-
cal slate of Spanish America, and the secular clergy
may gradually become a refpe&able body of men.
The deportment of many ecclesiastics, even at prc-
sent, seems to be decent and exemplary, otherwile
we can hardly suppose that they would be held in
such high eimrnation, and possess such a wonderful
ascendant over the minds of their countrymen
throughout all the Spanilh settlements.

Real Ccdula MS. penes me.

BUT,

BUT whatever merit the Spanilh ecclesiastics in B o O K

Viii.

America may possess, the success of their endea- --
vours in communicating the knowledge of true re. -g,"` P'°.
ligion to the Indians, has been more imperfe&t .,i,,,
than might have been expected, either from the '""'.,,
degree of their zeal, or from the dominion which
they had acquired over that people. For this,va-
rious reasons may be assigned. The first minion-
aries, in their ardour to make prolelytes, admitted
the people of America into the christian church,
without previous instruction in the doctrines of re-
ligion, and even before they themselves had ac-
quired such knowledge of the Indian language, as
to be able to explain to the natives the mysteries of
faith, or the precepts of duty. Refting upon a
subtle diftintion in fcholaftift theology, between
that degree of afflnt which is founded on a com-
plete knowledge and conviction of duty, and that
which may be yielded when both these are imper-
fct, they adopted this itrange practice, no less
inconfillent with the lipirit of a religion which ad-
dresses itself to the understanding of men, than re-
pugnant to the dicates of reason. As soon as any
body of people, overawed by dread of the Spanilh
power, moved by the example of their own chiefs,
incited by levity, or ) ielding from mere ignorance,
expressed the slightest desire of embracing the reli-
gion of their conquerors, they were inltantly bap-
tized. While this rage of conversion continued,
a single clergyman baptized in one day taove five
thousand Mexicans, and did not dcfil until he was

U 4 lo

B o0 K so exhausted by fatigue, that he was unable to lit
L ,__# his hands . In the course of a few years, after

the redution of the Mexican empire, the acr,--
ment of baptifin was adminifiered to more :!;:r
four millions b. Prol-lytes adopted with ;fu.J l.
considerate haste, and who were nei:her iIllilrt.ctt
in the nature of the tene;s to which it was lfiuppu;',.
they had given affenr, nor taught tihe abiirJiitv (,
those which they were required to rclinquifln, re-
tained their veneration for their ancient flpcilli-
tions in full force, or mingled an aita. hrrment to is
doctrines and rites with that slender knowliede of
Chriltianity which they acquired. Tlhtc senti-
nien:s the new converts transmitted to their voile-
rity, into whose rninds they have funk lo diep,
that the Spanilh ecclesiastics, with all their indul2ry,
have not been able to eradicate them. The reli.
gious institutions of their ancestors are flill remem-
bered, and held in honour by the Indians, both
in Mexico and Peru; and whenever they thin:;
thernfelves out of reach of infpetion by the Spa-
niards, they affenlble and celebrate their idolatrous
rites c.

BuT this is not the molt unfurmountablle o-

flacle to the progress of Chrillianity among the In-
dians. The powers of their uncultivated under-

, P. T'rribio, MS. Torquem. MponI. In.l. lib. xvi. r. !,.
b P. I'orribio. MS. Torqipein. lib. xvi. c. 8.
· Vuy. d: Ullua, i. 3 1 . Torquc.i. li. . . '. 3. lib. xvi.
c. z8. G ige, 1;.

ftindings

atandings are so limited, their observations and B O 0 K
reflections reach so little beyond the mere obje&s ,
of itnfe, that they seem hardly to have the capa-
city of forming abftra6t ideas, and poffcfs not lan-
guage to exprcfs them. To such men, the sublime
and spiritual do&rines of Christianity mult be in-
comprehensible. The numerous and splendid ce-
remonies of the popish worflip catch the eye,
-lease and interelt them; but when their initruc-
[rirs attempt to explain the articles of faith, with
v.Jich those external observances are connected,
irough the Indians may liflen with patience, they
ob little conceive the meaning of what they hear,
that their acquiescence does not merit the name of
belief. Their indifference is still greater than their
incapacity. Attentive only to the present moment,
and ingroffed by the obje&s before them, the In-
dians so seldom reflect upon what is past, or take
thought for what is to come, that neither the pro-
mi:es, nor threats of religion, make much im-
pression upon them; and while their foresight
rarely extends lb far as the next day, it is almost
imipofible to inspire them with fulicitude about
the concerns of a future world. Aftonified equally
at their slowness of comprehension, and at their in-
mnfsbil)ity, some of the early miflionaries pro-
nounced them a race of men so brutish, as to be
incapable of undcrllanding the fiplt principles of
religion. A council held at Lima decreed, that,
on account of this incapacity, they ought to
'e excluded from the lacrament of the Eucha-

rift.

B 0 0 K rift d. And though Paul III. by his famous bull,
:-v- issued in the year 1537, declared them to be ra.

tional creatures, entitled to all the privileges of
Christians'; yet, after the lapse of two centuries,
during which they have been members of the
church, so imperfect are their attainments in know.
ledge, that very few pofTefs such a portion of fpi.
ritual discernment, as to be deemed worthy of be.
ing admitted to the holy communion '. From this
idea of their incapacity and imperfect knowledge
of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. eftabliflh
the inquisition in America in the year 1570, the
Indians were exempted from the jurifdidion of
that severe tribunal g, and itill continue under the
infpeaion of their diocesans. Even after the moll
perfect inftruaion, their faith is held to be feebk
and dubious; and though some of them have been
taught the learned languages, and have gone
through the ordinary course of academic education
with applause, their frailty is still so much iufpct-
ed, that no Indian is either ordained a prict, or
received into any religious order h.

FROM this brief survey, some idea may be form-

ed of the interior Itate of the Spanish colonies.

Po,^,liono The various productions with which they flupply
of the Spa-
,iih to.
l'uict. d Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 20.

e Torquem. lib. xvi. c. 25. Garcia origin. 311.
f Vy. de Ulloa, i. 343.
g Recop. lib. vi. tit.. . . 35.
t Torquem. lib. xvii. c. 13. See NOTE LX.

and

and enrich the mother country, and the system of 8 0, K
commercial intercourse between them, come next , e
in order to be explained. If the dominions of
Spain in the New World had been of such mode-
rate extent, as bore a due proportion to the pa-
rent state, the progress of her colonizing might
have been attended with the fame benefit as that
of other nations. But when, in less than half a
century, her inconsiderate rapacity had seized on
countries larger than all Europe, her inability to
fill such valt regions with a number of inhabitants
sufficient for the cultivation of them, was so obvi-
ous, as to give a wrong direction to all the efforts
of the colonists. They did not form compa& fettle-
ments, where industry, circumscribed within pro-
per limits, both in its views and operations, is
conduEed with that fober persevering Ipirit, which
gradually converts whatever is in its poffeflion to a
proper use, and derives thence the greatest ad-
vantage. Instead of this, the Spaniards, reduced
by the boundless profpcd which opened to them,
divided their poffcffions in America into govern-
ments of vafi extent. As their number was too
small to attempt the regular culture of the immense
provinces, which they occupied rather than peopled,
they bent their attention to a few objects, that al-
lured them with hopes of sudden and exorbitant
gain, and turned away with contempt from the
humbler paths of industry, which lead more (lowly,
but with greater certainty, to wealth and increase
of national strength.

3 Or

B o o K OF all the methods by which riches may be ac-

VIII.

quired, that of searching for the precius metals is
,o't'ei' one of the molt inviting to men, who are c:t cr

unaccurtomed to the regular assiduity *ith \l,..h
tile culture of the earth and the operations cf cc:n.
merce must be carried on, or so enterprising a:;1
rapacious as not to be satisfied with the ora!ual
returns of profit which they yield. Accoir.ii;ly,
as ioon as the several countries in America \tre
fubjEted to the dominion of Spain, this was A..
moll the only method of acquiring wealth whi!
occurred to the adventurers, by whom they wire
conquered. Such provinces of the continirii;
.id not allure them to ll-ttle, by the profiec:
their affording gold and silver, were totally :.-
glkcced. Thole in which they met wi:h a c:I.:.-
pointment of the sanguine expctlations tlry iil
formtd, were abandoned. Even the va!ue(:- '.
ifands, the first-fruits of their discoveries, an l ti
firit objtet of their attention, funk lb much i lai. r
estimation, when the mines which had been ul,:,'i
in them were exhausted, that they were t!clc: :,
by many of the planters, and citL to be ocLcu!.J
by more indultrious polInfurs. All cluo ci 10
Mexico and Peru, where the vast quaLntiuiic u
gold and silver found among the n:atlvc; w!.u
lcarched for them with litle indui;iry a1J ic:s
Ikill, promised an unexhaufilcd ltore, ds :,' ic'
compence of more intcdliOent a;id pir1.c':.'.
cfttits.

7

Dc::l:;

DURING several years, the ardour of their re- B 0°o K
searches was kept up by hope, rather than fuccers. ,-.

Disoverv of

At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Peru, thle,,F ,t'o.
were accidentally discovernd in tile year 1545, ', '. " S-
t.y an 'ndian, as he was clambering up the moun-
tain, in pursuit of a Llama which had firayed from
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in
New Spain, little inferior to the other in value,
were opened. From that time, successive disco-
verics have been made in both colonies, and ilver
mines are now -o numerous, that the working of
thum, and of some few mines of gold in the pro-
vinces of Tierra Firm>n, and the new kingdom of
Granada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a fyficm no less
complicated than interrfting. To describe the na-
ture of the various ores, the mode of extracting
them from the bowels of thl earth, and to explain
the several procTeffs by which the metals are fepa-
rated from the substances with which they are
ningl-d, either by the action of fire, or the at-
trative powers of mercury, is the province of the
natural philosopher or chymifl-, rather than of the
historian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the moun- Rih,,

tains of the New World poured forth their trea- ),IJ'.
furcs, aflonif(ed mankind, accuflomed h:tlitrto to
receive a penurious supply of the prccious mclal',

F ernanJiz, p. i. lib. xi, c. Ii.

i uOn

B 0o K from the more scanty flores contained in the mines
a, *-' of the ancient hemisphere. According to prin-

ciples of computation, which appear to be ex.
tremely moderate, the quantity of gold and silver
that has been regularly entered in the ports of
Spain, is equal in value to four millions fier'li
annually, reckoning from the year 1492, in which
America was discovercd, to the present time.
This, in two hundred and eighty-three years,
amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two rril-
lions. Immense as this fum is, the Spanish writers
contend, that as much more ought to be added to
it, in consideration of the treasure which has been
extracted from the mines, without paying duty to
the king. By this account, Spain has drawn
from the New World a supply of wealth, amount-
ing at least to two thouland millions of pounds
flerling k.

Spirhit to THE mines, which have yielded this amazing
which thibis
gives rife. quantity of treasure, are not worked at the expence

of the crown, or of the public. In order to en-
courage private adventurers, the person who dif-
covers a new vein, is entitled to the property of i:.
Upon laying his claim before the governor of the
province, a certain extent of land is mealured off,
and a certain number of Indians allotted him,
under the obligation of his opening the mine

k l.z'ariz Theor. y Prae. de C(,nmetiiu, c. ,. it-

ca, dc. viii. lib. xi. c.. 1. S Ne N' E
' I.X.

within

within a limited time, and of his paying the cuf- B o o0 K
tomary duty to the king, for what it shall produce.
Invi ed by the facility with which such grants are
obtained, and encouraged by some striking ex-
amples of success in this line of adventure; not
only the sanguine and the bold, but the timid and
diffident enter upon it with astonishing ardour.
With vast objecs always in view, fed continually
with hope, and expeAing every moment that for-
tune will unveil her iecret stores, and give them
up to their wishes, they deem every other occupa-
tion insipid and uninterefling. The charms of this
pursuit, like the rage for deep play, are so be-
witching, and take such full pofTclnfon of the mind,
as even to give a new bent to the natural temper.
Under its influence, the cautious become enter-
prizing, and the covetous profuse. Powerful as
this charm naturally is, its force is augmented by
the arts of an order of men known in Peru by the
cant name offearchers. These are commonly per-
sons of delpcrate fortunes, who, availing them-
selves of fIme flill in mineralogy, accompanied
with the infinuaring manner, and confident pre-
tensions peculiar to projectors, address the wealthy
and the credulous. By plausible descriptions of
the appearances which they have discovered of rich
veins hitherto unexplored; by producing when re-
quifite, specimens of promising ore; by affirming,
with an imposing assurance, that success is certain,
and that the expence mull be trifling, they seldom
fail to persuade. An association is formed; a small

llum

Bo o K fum is advanced by each copartner; the mire is

VIIl.
t.... . opened ; thefearcher is entruffed with the sole di.

recion of every operation; unforeseen difficulies
occur; new demands of money are made; but,
amidst a fuccefflon of disappointments and delay:,
hope is never extinguished, and the ardour of ex-
pectation hardly abates. For it is observed, that
if any person once enter this seducing path, it is
almost impossible to return; his ideas alter, te
seems to be polffleed with another spirit, vifiors
of imaginary wealth are continually before hi;
eyes, and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams us
nothing ele '.
Fatal ntfca SUCH is the spirit that mufl be formed, whie;evc

the active exertions of any society are chiefly em-
ployed in working mines of gold and silver. No
spirit is more adverse to such improvement in agri
culture and commerce, as render a nation really
opulent. If the system of administration in the
Spanilh colonies had been founded upon principles
of found policy, the power and ingenuity of the
legislature would have been exerted with as much
ardour, in retraining its subjects from such perni-
cious industry, as is now employed in alluring
them towards it. " Proiects of mining (fays a
' good judge of the political conduct of nations)

instead of replacing the capital employeid in
"' them, together with the ordinary profit of locik,

a Ulloa Entreten. p. 223.

" colmmnonly

et commonly absorb both capital and profit. They B o0 oK

are the projects, therefore, to which, of all , -
' others, a prudent lawgiver, who desired to in-
" crease the capital of his nation, would leaf

chute to give any extraordinary encouragement,

" or to turn towards them a greater share of that
"capital than would go to them of its own ac-

cord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence
" which all men have in their own good fortune,

that wherever there is the least probability of

" success, too great a share of it is apt to go to
" them of its own accord"'." But in the Spanish
colonies, government is studious to cherish a spirit
which it (hould have laboured to depress, and, by
the fandion of its approbation, augments that in-
considerate credulity, which has turned the active
indultry of Mexico and Peru into such an impro-
per channel. To this may be imputed the slender
progrels which Spanish America has made during
two centuries and a half, either in useful manu-
faEtures, or in thole lucrative branches of cultiva-
tion, which furnifl the colonies of other nations
with their Itaple commodities. In comparilon
with the precious metals, every bounty of nature
is so much dcfpifed, that this extravagant idta of
their value has mingled with the idiom (,f lan-
guage in America, and the Spaniards littled there
denominate a country, rich, not from the fertility
of its foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exu-

m Dr. Smith's Inquiry, &c ii. 15S.
VtL. III. X berance

n °

0 K berance of its pastures, but on account of the mi.

'-v-'
, nerals which its mountains contain. In quest of

these, they abandon the delightful plains of Peru
and Mexico, and resort to barren and ur.comfor:
able regions, where they have built fomre of the
largest towns which they possess in the New Workl,
As the activity and enterprise of the Spaniards ori-
ginally took this direiflon, it is now so dificult to
bend them a different way, that although, frlm
various causes, the gain of working mines is much
decreased ; the fascination continues, and aln;.ol
every person, who takes any active part in the
commerce of New Spain or Peru, is still engagcd
in some adventure of this kind ".

Otler corn- BUT though mines are the chief object of the
inltiest of
the Spa iilh Spaniards, and the precious metals which theie yicld,
coloncs. form the principal article in their comnierce \i:h

America; the fertile countries which they polcls
there, abound iwith other commodities of furih
value or scarcity, as to attraCt a considerable de-
gree of attention. Cochineal is a production al-
inolf peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, ;nl it
vields luch prolit, as amply rewards tle ilbour
and care cmplo! ed in rearing the curious inlcfs to
which this valuable drug is compoled, and pre-
paring it for the market. Quinquina, or Jcltit;
Bark, the mioll salutary simple, perhaps, anId o

' See N OT1' LXIt.

moll

niof restorative virtur, that Providence, in corn- B o o K
pafion for human infirmity, has made known unto -v
man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords a
lucrative branch of commerce. 1 lie indigo of
Guatimala is superior in quality to that of any pro-
vince in America, and cultivated to a considerable
extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to the Spa-
nifh colonies, attains to its hilhelt Itate of perfec-
tion there, and from the great consumption of
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is a
valuable commodity. The Tobacco of Cuba, of
more exquisite flavour than any brought from the
New World; the sugar railed in that island, in
Hispaniola, and in New Spain, together with
drugs of various kinds, may be mentioned among
the natural produdions of America, which enrich
the Spanish commerce. To thtel mult be added,
an article of no inconsiderable account, the ex-
portation of hides ; for which, as well as for many
of those which 1 have enumerated, the Spaniards
are more indebted to the wonderful fertility of the
country than to their own foresight and indulfry.
The domestic animals of Europe, particularly
horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World
with a rapidity which almolt exceeds belief. A
few years after the Spaniards fettled there, the
herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned them by thousands °.

Ovicedo ap. Ramus. i i. 1o0, B. liackluyt, iii. .4(6,

X 2 Lcfs

B o0 K Less attention being paid to them, as they con.
< -,' ttinued to increase, they were suffered to run wild,

and spreading over a country of boundless extent,
under a mild climate, and covered with rich pa.
flure, their number became immense. They range
over the vait plains which extend from Buenos
Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of thirty or
forty thousand; and the unlucky traveller who
once falls in among them, may proceed fcveral
days before he can disentangle himself from among
the crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
seems to have no end. They are hardly less nu.
merous in New Spain, and in several other pro.
vinces: thele are killed merely for the fake of their
hides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is !f
great, that the flench of the carcases, which are
left in the field, would inseE the air, if large
packs of wild dogs, and vail flocks of ga'llnazc:,
or American vultures, the most voracious of al;
the feathered kind, did not inlsantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every fleet
to Europe is prodigious, and is a lucrative brar.ch
of commerce .

ALAiOST all thele may be confidered as fIaple

conmmodities peculiar to America, and different,
if we except that last mentioned, from the pro-
ductions of the mother-country.

P Acoltl, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo Ilifl. of Chili. Chulrc!.

Colle.t. iii. 4-. fep. Ibid. v. p. 60o. 692. Lettics Eit;. xii;.
235. I'cuilIc, i. 249.

WHVEN the importation into Spain of those va- B °0 K

VIII.

rious articles from her colonies, firfl became active I-
and considerable, her interior industry and manu- vhichs ain
faCiures were in a (tate tb profpcrous, that with hrioln,'s.
the pruduc& of thelfc she was able both to purchase
the commodities of the New World, and to an-
fwer its growing demands. Under the reigns of
Ferdinand and llabell.i, and Charles V. Spain was
one of the molt industrious countries in Europe.
11ir manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk,
were so extensive, as not only to furnish what was
sufficient for her own consumption, but to afford
a surplus for exportation. When a market for
them, formerly unknown, and to which (he alone
had access, opened in America, she had recourse
to herdonmelic store, and found there an abundant
supply q. This new employment must naturally
have added vivacity to the fpiric of industry.
Nourifled and invigorated by it, the manufac-
tures, the population, and wealth of Spain might
have gone on increasing in the lame proportion
with the growth of her colonies. Nor was the
!tate of the Spanih marine at this period less
flourishing than that of its manufactures. In the
beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain is said
to have poffffed above a thousand merchant
ships ', a number probably far superior to that of
any nation in Europe. By the aid which foreign
trade and domestic induflry give reciprocally to
9 See NO TE LXIII. ' Camponancs, ii. 14o.

X 3 eaclj

B o0 K each other in their progress, the augmentation of
'-vl-- both must have been rapid and extensive, and

Spain might have received the fame accession of
opulence and vigour from her acquisitions in the
New World, that other powers have derived from
their colonies there.

Why (n, BUT various causes prevented this. The fame
dorr rnot
o. ,.Ir lve thing happens to nations as to individuals. Weilth,

which flows in gradually, and with moderate in-
crease, feeds and nourishes th.at activity which is
friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vi or-
ous and well-conducted exertions; but when
opulence pours in suddenly, and with too full a
fiream, it overturns all lober plans of inluftry,
and brings along with it a taste for what is wild
and extravagant, and daring in business or in ac-
tion. Such was the great and sudden augmenta-
tion of power and revenue, that the poflcfTion of
Anlerica brought into Spain, and lbme fympton-
of its pernicious influence upon the political opera-
tions of that monarchy soon be!an to appear. FIr
a considerable time, however, the -flpply of trca-
sure from the New World was scanty and prrca-
rious, and the genius of Charles V. conductlti
public measures with !-ch prudence, that the
ffrc(ts of this influence were little perceived,. lBlt
when Philip II. afccnded the Sp.nilhi throne, with
talents far inferior to thole of his f.tlher, and re-
mitt;:iiccs from tle colonies becaLcm a regCulalr ;: l
vail branch of revenue, the f.ilt.l opra;tion of tlhi

4 1:1pi!

rapid change in the state of the kingdom, both on n °o( R
the monarch and his people, was at once confpi- --
cuous. Philip, poffelIing that spirit of unceasing
assiduity, which often charasterizes the ambition of
men of moderate talents, entertained s;uch an high
opinion of his own r'ceurccs, that he- thoutght no-
tling too ardiuot:s lor him to undertake. Shut up
himflIlfin the solitude of the Escurial, he troubled
and annoyed ail the nations around hin. lie
w3aged open war with the Dutch and Englifhl; he
encouraged and aided a rebellious faction in
France; he conquered Portugal, and mnaintained
armies and garrilons in Italy, Africa, and both
the Indies. By such a multiplicity of great and
complicated opera ions, pursued with ardour
during the courle of a long reign, Spain was
drained both of men and money. Under the
weak adminiiration of his fuccefTor, Philip III.
the vigour of the nation continued to decreale,
anl funk into the lowest decline, when the incon- A.D. i6i.
fiderate bigotry of that monarch expelled at once
near a million of his moi. incduitrious lfubjects, at
the very time when the exhautced (tate of the
kingdom required rome extraordinary exerrion of
political widom to augment its numbers, andl to
revive its firength. Early in the fcvenecenth cen-
tury, Spain felt such a diminution in the number
of her people, that from inability to recruit her
armies, The was obliged to contract her operations.
Her flourishing mianufactures were fallen into (tc-
cay. 1Ier fleets, which had been the terror of all

X 4 E urope,

B l0 0 K Europe, were ruined. Her extensive foreign com-
,- rpr merce was lolf. The trade between different parts

of her own dominions was interrupted, and the
ships which attempted to carry it on, were taken
and plundered by enemies whom she once de-
spifed. Even agriculture, the primary objcc. of
induflry in every prosperous (late, was neglcclcel,
and one of the most fertile countries in I urope
hardly raised what was fufficicnt for the support of
its own inhabitants,

Rapnideo i IN proportion as the population and manufac-
cline of its
tLdAc. tures o) the parent Itate dcelinJ, tih cidmands of

her colonies continued to increase. 'ihe Spaniards,
like their monarchs, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, delerted the
paths ot indultry, to which they had been ac-
cuflomed, and iepaired with eagernels to thole re-
gions from which this opulence ifiluec. By this
rage of emigration, another drain was opened, and
the ftrcngth of the colonies augmented by Cxhauflt-
ing that of the mother-country. All thole eni-
grants, as well as the adventurers who had at sirs
fettled in America, depended ablolutely upon Spain
for almost every article of necefnary conlumption.
Engaged in more alluring and lucrative purluits,
or prcvtlnted by reltraints which government inM-
posed, they could not turn their own attention to-
wards cllablifhing the manufaculres requisite lor
conlfortable fubrilence. They received (as I h;ive
oblcrved in another place) their clothing, their

Iurn ittll'r4

furniture, whatever miniflers to the ease or luxury B O 0 Kc
of life, and even their instruments of labour, from _
Europe. Spain, thinned of people, and void of
induf(ry, was unable to supply their increasing de-
mands. She had recourse to her neighbours. The
manufaftures of the Low Countries, of England,
of France, and of Italy, wlich her wants called
into existence, or animated with new vivacity, fur-
nifled in abundance whatever she required. In
vain did the fundamental law, concerning the ex-
clufion of foreigners from trade with America,
oppose this innovation. Necessity, more powerful
than any flatute, defeated its operations, and
conltrained the Spaniards themselves to concur
in eluding it. The JEnglifli, the French, and
Dutch, relying on the fidelity and honour of Spa-
nifh merchants, who lend their names to cover the
deceit, fend out their manufatAures to America,
and receive the exorbitant price for which they are
lld there, either in specie, or in the rich commo-
dities of the New World. Neither the dread of
danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever induced
a Spanili fator to betray or defraud the pcrlon
who confided in hiimn ; and that probiry, which is
the pride and diltindtion of the natimn, contributes
to its ruin. In a flort time, not above a twentieth
part of tle commodities exported to America was
of Spanifi growth or fabric'. All the relt was
the pioperty of foreign merchants, though entered

Z avala Rrprcfcntacion, p. z26. ' Campomancs, ii. 13i.

jrn

B o o K in the name of Spaniards. The treasure of tile
v_ _
, New World may be said henceforwd: Iot to la*':e

belonged to .pain. Before it reachil 1' rpe, It
was anticipated as the price of goods p h. J
from foreigners. That wealth whic.i, by ; ;.
ternal circulation, would have lpread t rou;::,
vein of in(!ulry, and have conve ,cd li ;i:1., -
tivity ro every branch of manuftatEre, flo\ ..
of the kingdom w. ith such a rapid courfc, as n'z:.r
enrjcl.ed nor animated it. On the oti:er ha:nd, t'::
artizans of rival natfl;ns, encouraged by this esi,.:
file of their commodities, improved Io nmuh in.
skill and industry, as to be able to alTord them at
a rate so low, that the manufactures of S:a::i,
which could not vie with theirs, either in qulality
or cheapness of work,. were feill farther dcp cffe2,
This deftru'tive commerce drained o'F t: e riches
of the nation faftr and more completely, t'l:n
even the extravagant schemes of ambition carried
on by its monarchs. Spain wvas lo much asonil-
ed and diflrelcfd, at beholding her American trca-
fures vani!hli almoll as iton as they were imlo'".,
that Philip 11. unable to supply what was ri:: c
in circulation, issued an edict, by which he c; .!-
vourcd to raili: copper money to a value in :-
rency nearly equal to that of silver ; and the lord
of the Peruvian and Mexicanl mines was reduced
to a wretched expedient, which is the lafi rrclurcc
of pctty ilmpovcrinflid liates.

u Uztarcz, c. 104.

TIt S

THUS the poffeflons of Spain in America have B O o K

not proved a source of population and of wealth to .-, -
her, in the fame manner as thule of other nations.
In the countries of Europe, where the spirit of in-
duftry fubfits in full vigour, every perlbn fettled
in such colonies as are similar in their Situation to
those of Spain, is supposed to give employment to
three or four at home in supplying his wants '.
But wherever the mother-country cannot afford
this supply, every emigrant may be confidered
as a citizen loll to the community, andl frangers
muff reap all the benefit of answering his de-
mands.

SUCH has been the internal slate of Spain from in-ro,'. , v
the close of the sixteenth century, and such her in- r..ul::ng

its in:or-

abiliry to supply the growing wants of her colonies.. hu.r.. w;h
The fatal effecs of this liiproportion between their A"eia.
demands, and her capacity of answering them, have
been much increased by the mode in which Spain
has endeavoured to regulate the intercourse be-
tween the mother.country and the colonies. It is
ro:n her idea of monopolizing the trade with Ame-
rica, and debarring her futlhj-'cs there from any
communication with foreigners, that all her jealous
and systematic arrangements have arilen. lThele
are so singular in their nature and conlequenccs,
as to merit a particular explanatiun. In order to
kccure the monopoly at which fle aimned, Spain

Ciill on trade and colonies.

did

B 0 0 K did not vest the trade with her colonies ;n an ex.

--.-i
T clufive company, a plan which had V,"en ado,nted

by nations more commercial, and :L a period shken
mercarm;ie policy was an obit:t of greater atten-
tion, and ougit to have been better undtriood.
The Putch gave up the whole trade with their
colonies, both in the East and Weft Indies, to ex-
clufive companies. The English, the French, che
Danes, have imitated their ey-nnplc with relpet
to the East Indian commerce; and the twvo 'ui:.cr
have laid a similar reflraint upon fornr hr,,,cne
their trade with the New World. The
man cannot, perhaps, devifc a mctho: i(ii .;.,
ing the progrels of industry and popu!ar:,)n !n a
new colony more efltctual than this. 'The iitrelt
of the colony, and of the exclusive company, mul
in every point be diametrically oppiirte; in,, as
the latter posseses such advantages in this uncqual
contefi, that it can prescribe at pleasure the terms
of intercourle, the former mult not only buy clear
and fell cheap, but must susser the mortification
of having the increase of its lurplus ilock dilcou-
raiged by thole very persons to whom alone it can
dliIpolc of its producions Y,

Thi; rnn. SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from fall-
lt .

d to one .

o,1 in " ing into this error in policy, by the high ideas
S;'ai'' which ihe early formed concerning the riches of

the New World. Gold and silver were conino-

y Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171.

ditieS

dities of too high value to vest a monopoly of n ° ° K
them in private hands. The crown wi(hed to re- u---.
tain the dire&tion of a commerce so inviting; and,
in order to secure that, ordained the cargo of every
ship fitted out for America, to be inspected by the
officers of the Casa de Coniratacicn in Seville, be-
fore it could receive a licence to make the voyage;
and that on its return, a report of the commodities
which it brought should be made to the fame
board, before it could be permitted to land them.
In consequence of this regulation, all the trade of
Spain with the New World centred in the port of
Seville, and was gradually brought into a form,
in which it has been conducted, with little varia-
tion, from the middle of the fixreenrh century al-
most to our own times. For the greater security
of the valuable cargoes sent to America, as well as
for the more ealy prevention of fraud, the com-
merce of Spain, with its colonies, is carried on by
fleets which fail under firong convoys. These
fleets confifing of two squadrons, one diltinguifh-
ed by the name of Galeons, the other by that of
the io/a, are equipped annually. Formerly
they took their departure from Seville; but as the
port of Cadiz has been found more commodious,
they have failed from it since the year 1720.

TIE Galeons deflined to supply Tierra Firmn, Carried on

and the kingdoms of 'eru and Chili, with .;lmolt iuons,,
every article of luxury, or neccfTlry conlifuption,
that an opulent people can demand, touch lirft at

Cartlhigcna,

B OO K Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To the
{_---- former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas,

the New Kingdom of Granada, and several other
provinces, retort. The latter is the great mart fur
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the
season when the Galeons are expe&ced, the product
of all the mines in these two kingdoms, together
with their other valuable commodities, is tranl:
ported by sea to Panama. From thence, as soon
as the appearance of the fleet from Europe is an-
nounced, they are conveyed across the ifthmnus,
partly on mules, and partly down the river Chagre
to Porto-bello. This paltry village, whose cli.
mate, from the pernicious union of excessive hear,
continual moisture, and the putrid exhalations
arising from a rank foil, is more fatal to life than
any perhaps in the known world, is immediately
filled with people. From being the residence of a
few negroes and mulattoes, and of a milerable
garrilbn relieved every three months, its freets
are crowded with opulent merchants from every
corner of Peru, and the adjacent provinces. A
fair is opened, the wealth of America is exchanged
for the manufactures of Europe; and, during its
prescribed term of forty days, the richefr traffic on
the face of the earth is begun and finished, with
that simplicity of tranladion and unbounded con-
fidence, which accompany extensive comnmrce'.
and Flota. The Flota holds its courfl to Vera Cruz. 'Ihe

* See NOTE LXIV.

trcafurct

treasures and commodities of New Spain, and the B n o K
rpcnr.ding provinces, which were depoficed at v-
Pcbbla de los Angeles in expccaation of its arrival,
are carried thither, and the commercial operations
of Vera Cruz, conduictd in tile fame manner with
those of Porto-bello, are inferior to them only in
importance and value. Both fleets, as loon as they
have completed their cargoes from Anciica, ren-
dezvous at the 1-lavanna, and return in company
to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while n, ,sln,
thus fettered and refiriecld, came necessarily to be rs rmc
conduted with the fame spirit, and upon the fame
principles, as that of an exclusive company. Be-
ing confined to a single port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almolf the whole of
it was gradually engrollcd by a finall number of
wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now in
Cad.z. These by combinations, which they can
easily form, may altogether prevent that compe-
tirion which predirves commodities at their natural
price; and by ading in concert, to which they are
prompted by their mutual interest, they may raise
or lower the value of them at plealuii. In conlc-
quence of this, the price of 1 uropean goods in
America is always high, and often exorbitant. A
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundttcd
percent. are profits not uncomnmon in the coun-
mlcrce of Spain with her colonies "'. From the

a B. Ulloa Rctablinl. prt ii. p . 19'

l;'w e

B o0 1 K fame ingroffing spirit it frequently happens, t!at

traders of the second order, whole warehouses do
not contain a complete alrortment of commodities
for the American marker, cannot purzhafl fro;n
the more opulent merchants, such goods as tli!i
wanr, at a lower price than that for which they
are told in the colonies. \ith the fame vigilant
jealouly that an exclusive company guards againit
the intrusion of the free trader, thole overgrown
monopolists endeavour to check the progress c;
every one whose encroachments they dread . This
restraint of the American commerce to one por,
not only affects its domertic slate, but linits i:s
foreign operations. A monopolist may acquire
more, and certainly will hazard less, by a confined
trade which yields exorbitant prolir, than by an
extensive commerce in which he receives only a
moderate return of gain. It is often his intc:eft
not to enlarge, but to circumscribe the sphere cl
his activity; and, instead of calling forth more \vi
gorous exertions of commercial induitry, it mar
be the object of his attention to check and Inc
bounds to them. By some such maxim, the mer-
cantile policy of Spain seems to have regulated its
intercourse with America. Instead of furnishing
the colonies with European goods in such quantity
as might render both the price and the profit mo.
derate; the merchants of Seville and Cadiz i'cm
to have supplied them with a sparing hand, tlat

b Srnith's Inquiry, ii. i gi. Campomanes, Educ. Pp;. i.

iAe

the eagerness of competition amongst customers ob- n 'n K
ligcd to purchase in a 1fanty market, might enable -
their fadors to dispose of their cargoes with exor-
bitant eain. About the middle of the lati century,
when the exclusive traide to America from Seville
was in its molt flourishing Rlate, the burden of the
two united squadrons of the Galeons and Flota,
did not exceed twenty-fiven thousand five hundred
tons'. The supply which such a fleet could carry,
must have been very inadequate to the demands of
those populous and extensive colonies, which de-
pended upon it for all the luxuries, and many of
the necefaries of life.

SPAIN early became sensible of her declension Rrm ,di,

from her former prosperity, and many respectable P'°°o''
and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts in
devising methods for reviving the decaying in-
duftry and commerce of their country. From the
violence of the remedies proposcd, we may judge
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared.
Some, confounding a violation of police with cri-
minality against the slate, contended, that in or-
der to check illicit commerce, every perlbn con-
visted of carrying it on, should be puninhed with
death, and confiscation of all his efftes' . Others,
forgetting the diftindion between civil offences
and ads of impiety, infilted, that contraband trade

Camnpomancs, Educ. Poprl. i. 435. ii. 10o.

d M. de Santa Cruz Conmmcrcia Suclto, p. 1 2.
VOL. III. Y flioLJd

B o O. should be ranked among the crimes reserved for
* the cognizance of the Inquisition; that luch as

were guilty of it might be tried and punifie !, ;.c-
cording to the secret and summary form in which
that dreadful tribunal exercifts its juriliictio:'.-
Others, uninltruted by obfeiving the pernicious
effects of monopolies in every country where they
have been eflablifhed, have proposed to vefl the
trade with America in exclusive companies, whii
interell would render the most vigilant guardians
of the Spanish commerce against the incroachlnent
of the interlopers '.

BESIDE these wild projects, many schemes, bet-

ter digelfed and more beneficial, were suggestld.
But under the feeble monarchs, with whom the
reign of the Aufirian line in Spain closed, inca-
pacity and indecision are conspicuous in every de-
partment of government. Instead of taking for
their model the active administration of CharlesV.
they asseted to imitate the cautious procrastinating
wilodom of Philip II. and destitute of his talents,
they deliberated perpetually, but determined no-
thing. No remedy was applied to the evils under
which the national commerce, domeflic as well as
foreign, languished. These evils continued to in-
creale, and Spain, with dominions more extensive
and more opulent than any European tfate, pol

e Moncada Reflauracion politica dc Efpagna, p. 41.
f Zavalla y Augnon Reprcrentacion, &c. p. 190.

ftifed

sensed neither vigour, nor money h, nor indufiry. B ( 0i K.
At length, the violence of a great national con- --
vulfion rouzed the flumbc-ring genius of Spain.
The efforts of the two contending parties in the
civil war, kindled by the dispute concerning the
fucceflion of the crown at the beginning of this
century, called forth, in some degree, the ancient
spirit and vigour of the nation. While men were
thus forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
liberal than thole which had influenced the coun-
cils of the monarchy during the courle of a cen-
tury, Spain derived from an unexpeted Iource
the means of availing itself of their talents. The
various powers who favoured the prercnfions either
of the Austrian or Bourbon candidate for the Spa-
nifh throne, sent formidable fleets and armies to
their support; France, England, and Holland
remitted immense fums to Spain. These were
spent in the provinces which became the theatre of
war. Part of the American treasure, of which
foreigners had drained the kingdom, flowed back
thither. From this aera, one of the mnof intelli-
gent Spanish authors dates the revival of the mo-
narchy ; and, however humiliating the truth may
be, he acknowledges, that it is to her enemies his
country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate to
the exigencies of the public'.
t See NOTE LXV. ' Campomancs, i. 420.

Y 2As

B O 0 K As soon as the Bourbons obtained q lict p'.s ..
, ,----' sion of the throne, they dilcerned tis chalti: in
in '.1 .vI the Ii irit of the people, and in the ltate of t!:e n:
.I. ·.tl '= tion, and took advantage of it; fbr althou£!l thei.

.ihs, finily has not given monarchs to Spain, rtm a:k

anbe for superiority of genius, they have all bcrn
br-ncliccnt princes, attentive to the happ'inc!: (,r
tlihir lubjecCs, and fulicitous to pron(lut ir. I
·'a;, accordingly, the firit objc of Philip V. rt
fiuprels an innovation which had crept in du(lri:
the courle of the war, anti had overturned [t.c
,.hole I'yltem of the Spanifl commerce with \':-

i.< ..1,rg rica. T'he l nglifh and Dutch, by their fupe-
;,'...d-. riority in naval power, having acquired lch com-

rll oand o( thle sic, as to cut ofF all intercourle be-
tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to
fu:-ni fl her Ifubjets in America thole necefnaries or
lile, without which they could not exifi, and a;
the only means of receiving from thence any part
oi t;ltir trtaltire, departed tb far from the ulual
rigc'ur of its maxims, as to open the trade with
I'ru to her allies the French. ' he merchants ot

\t lalo, to whom louis XIV. granted the pri-

vilte of this lucrative commerce, engaged il it
ithl vigour, and carried i; on upon principles very
dificrent from thole of tle Spaniards. They fou)-
ylicld e'ru with European commodities at a nidc-
rate price, and nor in ili:;ite quantity. 'I'el go.°S
wlhich they imported were conveyed to every pro-
vincc of Spanish Ai \mrica, in such abl nd.aicc : 3
l;.i! never been known in any former period. Ir

r!l,

this intercourse had been continued, the exporta- B O° K
tion of European commodities from Spain must -----
have ceased, and the dependence of the colonies
on the mother. country have been at an end. The 713.
molt peremptory injunctions were therefore issued,
prohibiting the admission of foreign vessels into
;ny port of Peru or Chili k, and a Spanifil fqua-
cron was employed to clear the South Sea of in-
tiulJrs, whole aid was no longer necessary.

BUT thnugh, on the ceffltion of the war, which by chcLi;nR

conttral,,ll

was terminated by the treaty of Utrechr, Spain ,ra.,
obtained relief from one encroachment on her
commercial system, she was exposed to another,
which she deemed hardly less pernicious. As an
inducement that might prevail with Queen Anne
to conclude a peace, which France and Spain de-
fired with equal ardour, Philip V. not only con-
veyed to Great Britain the ./iseno, or contract for ps'tl:lly
futppiyying the Spanish coloiies with negroes, which lih Alin..o
had foinerly been enjoyed by France, but granted c ,"l}
it the more cxtrjordinary 1priviiege of Ictiing an-
nually to the fair of Portorhbllo, a flip of five
hu irc :1 r tons. laden with lLuioplu;: commotlities.
In c,!;rcqucnce of this, Britcif tfictories were clta-
li:hc.l .u1 ,i-thgnll a, ianaa, Vcra Lruz, L3ue-
Ir' .'\v'.-i, :il' o :ier lpanlillh feettlelments. 'I'he
'. \,!!,1 '\,:i'. Sp.iin hlia lhii'crto covered the
..... i.i .i!.,;; ;.. t.:f' iler colonies was removed.

' , '

. .1
i.. rt;ib. ii. 104., &c. Alccdo

i 3 IThc

B n o K The agents of a rival nation, residing in the towns
^--v--- of mott exteniive trade, and of chief resort, had

the belt opportunities of becoming acquainted with
the interior condition of the American provinces,
of oblerving their tated and occasional wants, and
of knowing what commodities might be imported
into them with the greatest advantage. In confe-
quence of information so authentic and expedi-
tious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other Eng.
lifl colonies who traded to the Spanish main, were
enabled to affo-t and proportion their caigocsio
exatly to the demands of the market, that the
contraband commerce was carried on with a faci-
lity, and to an extent unknown in any former pe-
riod. This, however, was not the most fatal con-
fequcnceof the Afliento to the trade of Spain. The
agents of the British South-Sea company, undr
cover of the importation which they were autlo-
rifed to make by the ihip font annually to Porto-
bello, poured in their commodities on the Spaniil
continent, without limitation or rcfrraint. Infead
of a {hip of five hundred tons, as stipulated in the
treaty, they usually employed one which exceeded
nine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
panied by two or three smaller vessels, which,
mooring in some neighbouring creek, supplicd her
clandestinely with fresh bales of goods, to replaci:
such as were fold. The infpeaors of the fair, and
officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant pre-
flents, connived at the fraud'. Thus, partly by

Sec N 0 TE LXVI.

h?, r

the operations of the company, and partly by the B ° ° K
acivity of private interlopers, almost the whole ,
trade of Spanilh America was ingroffed by so-
reigners. The immense commerce of the Ga-
leons, formerly the pride of Spain, and the envy
of other nations, funk to nothing, and the fqua- "37
dron irfelf reduced from fifteen thousand to two
thouland tons , served hardly any purpose but to
fetch home the royal revenue arising from the fifth
on silver.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, CuardaCof-

ias employed

and felt To sensibly their pernicious effecs, it was so this pur-
impossible not to make some effort to restrain pose.
them. Her first expedient was to itation Ihips of
force, under the appellation of Guarda CoaJas, upon
the coasts of those provinces, to which interlopers
mofl frequently retorted. As private interest con-
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded those
vessels vigilant and active, some check was given
to the progress of the contraband trade, though in
dominions so extensive, and so accessible by lea, no
number of cruisers was sufficient to guard againlt
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption of
an intercourse, which had been carried on with so
much facility, that the merchants in tihr Britifli
colonies were accustomed to confider it almolt as
an allowed branch of commerce, excited murmurs

m Alcedo y H-errcra, p. 359. Campomanes, i. 436.

Y 4 and

E o(O K and complaints. These authorised, in some mea.
.--~-.. sure, and rendered more interelting, by fcveral

unjustifiable afts of violence committed by tt c
captains of the Spanish Guarda Collas, precipitated
17;s. Great Britain into a war with Spain; in conlr-

quence of which the latter obtained a final relca!c
from the Affiento, and was left at liberty to reu.
late the commerce of her colonies, without being
rcetrained by any engagement with a forci:n

power.

The tre of As the formidable encroachments of the Engl:l1
infioduc-.y on their American trade, had discovered to the

Spaniards the vast consumption of European \eoo.:
in their colonies, and taught them the advantags
of accommodating their importations to the occ-.
fional demand of the various provinces, they e'-
ceivtd the neceflry of devising tome method co
supplying their colonies, dilFerent from tl:eir an-
cient one, of fending thither periodical fleets
That mode of communication had been found nt:
only to be uncertain, as the departure of the Ga-
leons and Flota was sometimes retarded by vario::s
accidents, and often prevented by the wars \\hich
raged in Europe, but to be ill adapted to affoidi
America a regular and timely lifpply of what i:
wanted. The scarcity of European goods in tlhe
Spanish settlements frequently became exceflve
their price role to an enormous height; the vigi-
lant eye of mercantile attention did not fail to ob-
fcrve this favourable opportunity, an ample 1lceip1

\,.,

was poured in by interlopers from the Englifl, the B 0 K
French, and Dutch islands; and when the Galrons --v
at length arrived, they found the markets so glut-
ted by this illicit commerce, that there was no de-
mand for the commodities with which they were
loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain permitted
a considerable part of her commerce with America,
to be carried on by rcijiecrl ips. Thcfe are fitted
out, during the intervals between the stated fealtns
when the Galcons and Plota fail, by merchants in
Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaini ig a licence from the
council of the Indies, fur which they pay a very
high premium, and are dlefined for tlofe ports
where any extraordinary demand is foreseen or ex-
pected. By this expedient, such a regular supply
of fresh commodities is conveyed to the American
market, that the interloper is no longer allured by
the fame prospect of cxceffive gain, or the people
in the colonies urged by the fame neceflity to engage
ia the hazardous adventures of contraband trade.

IN proportion as experience manifefled the ad- ThtOleon,

vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the
number of regifler Ihips increaled; and at length,
in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
laid aside. From that period there has been no
intercourse with Chili and Peru but by tingle flips,
dil'atched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expect a market will open.
'liele fail round Cape 1 lorn, and convey direclly

to

B o o K to the ports in the South Sea the producEions and

manufa;tures of Europe, for which the people,
fettled in those countries, were formerly obliged to
repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These towns, as
has been formerly observed, mufl gradually decline,
when deprived of that commerce to which t;ey
owed their exiflence. This disadvantage howcvcr
is more than compensated, for the whole continent
of South America receives supplies of European
commodities, with so much regularity, and in fitcil
abundance, as mult contribute greatly to the hap.
pineis and prosperity of all the colonies ettlkd
there. But as all the regiflter ships destined for the
South Seas, mull still take their departure frorn
Cadiz, and are obliged to return thither", thi
branch of the American commerce, even in 1ts
new and improved form, continues fubje& to the
rcftraints of a species of monopoly, and feels thole
pernicious effets of it, which 1 have already dc-
fcribed.

Scnemnes fr NOR has the attention of Spain been confined t)
,oncr, regulating the trade with its more flourilhing col;-

nies, it has extended likewise to the reviving com-
merce in those settlements where it was neglecle(',
or had decayed. Among the new taftes which thl;
people of Europe have acquired, in conlcqutncce
of their intercourfc witU the natives of tlhole cou:n-
tries which they conquered in America, that -'

" Campomanes, i. 431. 410.

clioccl3'c

chocolate is one of the most universaL The uif of 8 0 C l
this liquor made with a paste, formed of the nut, i
or almond of the cacao-tree, compounded with
various ingredients, the Spaniards first learned
from the Mexicans; and it has appeared to them,
and to the other European nations, Io palatable,
so nourilhing, and so wholesome, that it has be-
come a commercial article of coniderable import-
ance. The cacao-tree grows fpontaneoufy in fe-
veral parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the
bel quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the
South Sea, are produced in the rich plains of
Caraccas, a province of Tierra F'irmc. In conle-
quence of this acknowledged superiority in the
quality of cacao in that province, and its commu-
nication with the Atlantic, which facilitates the
conveyance to Europe, the culture of the cacao
there is more extensive than in any diftric of Ame-
rica. But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their
Iettlements in the small islands of Curazoa and
Buen-Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas, gradually
ingroffed the greatest part of the cacao trade,
The traffic with the mother-country for this va-
luable commodity ceased almost entirely; and such
was the supine negligence of the Spaniards, or the
defeCts of their commercial arrangements, that
they were obliged to receive from the hands of
foreigners this production of their own colonies, at
an exorbitant price. In order to remedy an evil :,y er.s;,i-
no lets disgraceful, than pernicious to his fubjecs, p'nvc i c(-
Philip V. in the year 1728, gianted to a body of '""

8 merchants,

B 0 o K merchants, an exclusive right to the conmmerci

-
, with Caraccas and Cunana, on condition of tht:

employing, at their own expence, a luli;-rt,
number of armed vessels to clear the co-st 0o 1!'
terlopers. This society, dillinguifled lionitimo.;
by the name of the Company of Guipulcoa, fr(:n
the province of Spain in which it is citabhll;.m!,
and sometimes by that of the (Companv (i Car,!-
cas, from the diftrit of America to which it tr..,
has carried on its operations with such viS ,ur,
success, that Spain has recovered an impr,
branch of commerce, which Ihe had iuferJ ,
be wrefled from her, and is plentifully I;JTi ,
with an article of extenrive conlumption at: ::.
derate price. Not only the parent tate, b;t :.
colony of Caraccas, has derived great aivan:.i.,
from this intlitution; for although, at the ii :
aspec&, it may appear to be one of those moInl'r-
lies, whose tendency is to check the ifpirit of in-
(tuftly, inflead of calling it forth to new exert!c%,
it has been prevented from operating in this mmn.
ner, by several salutary regu.tion, fra,.il t;''[
foresight of such bad tfl:cts, and of ptirp',c to
obviate them. The planters in the Carra.cc.;s a c
not left to depencl entirely on the comp;lin, c;t!
for the importation of lFuropean coininil,.iti - '
the sale of their own lrodu.tions. TIe i ')-
ants of the Canary iflincls have the pri'ili; (L
fending thither annually a recgiicr si:p of ((:;!:,::'-
able burden; and from Vera Crulz in New:v; i
a free trade is permitted in every purt (r',;''"

hi:., :I.

);cnded in the charter of the company. In confe- B o 0 KC
quence of this, there is such a competition, that _
br)th with relpecd to what the colonies purchase,
and what they fell, thi price seems to )e fixed at
i:s natural and equitable rate. The company has
r:o the power of railing the former, or degrading
the latter at plIcafule; and accordingly, since it
was efablflhc(d, the increale of culture, of popu-
lation, and of live Itock, in the province of Ca-
raccas, has been very confiderabie I.

BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquifl any Enlrre-
Ifllem which time has rendered venerable, or that commri

idca~ in

commerce can be diverted from the channel in SLin.
which it has long been accustomed to flow;
Philip V. in his new regulations concerning the
American trade, paid such deference to the an-
cient maxim of Spain, concerning the limitation of
all importation from the New World to one har-
bour, as to oblige both the register ships which
returned from Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan
Company from Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes
in the port of Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments
more liberal and enlarged begin to Ipread in Spain.

he spirit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the
glory of the present age to have turned from fri-
volous or abltrufc: speculations, to the business and
aHlirs of men, has extended its influence beyond
the Pyrenees. In the relearches of ingenious

o Sec NOTE LXVIi.

authors,

B 0 0 K authors, concerning the police or commerce o
L-, LJ nations, the errors and defcts of the Spanikf

system with refpet to both met every eye, an;
have not only been exposed with severity, but ar
held up as a warning to other states. The Sp.
niards, flung with the reproaches of these authors,
or convinced by their arguments, and admonished
by several enlightened writers of their own coun.
try, seem at length to have discovered the de.
firudive tendency of those narrow maxims, whlich,
by cramping commerce'in all its operations, have
so long retarded its progress. It is to the monarch
now on the throne, that Spain is indebted for the
first public regulation formed in consequence oi
such enlarged ideas.

Erbliib. ' WrrlLE Spain adhered with rigour to heran.

inent on C-
g:l ,pakt cient maxims concerning her commerce with
b0"'"t America, the was so much afraid of opening any

channel, by which an illicit trade might find ad.
minlion into the colonies, that Ihe almost shut her.
seif out from any intercourse with them, but that
which was carried on by her annual fleets. There
was no establishment for a regular communication
of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements.
From the want of this necessary institution, the
operations of the state, as well as the bufinclsot
individuals, were retarded or condu&ed unflil-
fully, and Spain often received from foreigners her
first information with refped to very interefing

evlnts

events in her own colonies. But though this de- B o o K
fe& in police was sensibly felt, and the remedy for -
it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanih monarchs guarded the exclusive trade, re-
frained them from applying it. Ar length
Charles III. surmounted those considerations which
had deterred his prcdeceflors, and in the year 1764
appointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the
firit day of each month, from Corugna to the Ha-
vanna or Porto-Rico. From thence letters are
conveyed in smaller vessels :o Vera Cruz and
I'orto-bello, and rranfmitted by post through the
kingdoms of Tierra Firme, Granada, Peru, and
New Spain. With no less regularity packet-boats
fail once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the
accommodation of the provinces to the east of the
Andes. Thus provision is made for a speedy and
certain circulation of intelligence throughout the
vast dominions of Spain, from which equal advan-
tages must redound to the political and mercantile
interest of the kingdom P. With this new arrange-
ment, a scheme of extending commerce has been
more immediately connected. Each of the packet.
boats, which are vessels of some considerable bur-
den, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
commodities as are the produt of Spain, and most
in demand in the ports whither they are bound.
In return for these they may bring home to Co.

Ponz Viage do Efpagna, vi. Prol. p. 15.

rugna

B o0 K rugna an equal quantity of American producti;, ;,

- _ * This may be confidered as the firit relaxatiui, c:

thole rigid laws, which confined the trade \itl ;':c
New World to a single port, and the firtt .:trii:;;
to admit the reft of the kingdom to sone fl,.:
in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more decifve. In
Ferrmrtd to
f.vel po- the year 1765, Charles 11I. laid open the tr..d to
."""'.. the windward islands, Cuba, Ilifpaniola, Porto.

Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his 1ubjcL -,
every province of Spain. He permitted them t:
fail from certain ports in each of thcfe, specified :
the ediEt, at any season, and with whatever cargo
they deemed most proper, without any other war-
rant than a simple clearance from the custom-
house of the place whence they took their de-
parture. He released them from the numerous
and oppressive duties imposed on goods exported
to America, and in place of the whole fubftituteJ
a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the corn
modities sent from Spain. He allowed them to
return either to the fame port, or to any other
where they might hope for a more advantagcou>
market, and there to enter the homeward cargo,
on payment of the usual duties. This ample pri.
vilege, which at once broke through all the fences
which the jealous policy of Spain had been labour-

q Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. p. 3 .

i;'.,

ing, for two centuries and a half, to throw round its B °0 K
commercial intercourse with the New World, was a-
soon after extended to Louisiana, and to the pro-
vinces of Yucatan and Campeachy '.

THe propriety of this innovation, which may be BReneficl

confidered as the molt liberal effort of Spani(h le-
giflation, has appeared from its effects. Prior to
the edit in favour of the free trade, Spain derived
hardly any benefit from its negleced colonies in
Hilpaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad.
Its commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and
that of Yucatan and Campeachy was engrossed al-
most intirely by interlopers. But as soon as a ge-
neral liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
course with those provinces revived, and has gone
on with a rapidity of progression, of which there
are few examples in the history of nations. In less
than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more
than tripled. Even in those settlements where,
from the languishing state of industry, greater es-
forts were requisite to restore its acivity, their
commerce has been doubled. It is computed,
that such a number of ships is already employed in
the free trade, that the tonnage of them far exceeds
that of the Galeons and Flora, at the molt flourilh-
ing ara of their commerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a few merchants,
established in a favourite port. They are diffused

' Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. 37. 54. 91.
VOL,. II. Z through

B Vo oK through every province of the kingdom; and Lb

opening a new market for their various produc.
tions and manufactures, must encourage and add
vivacity to the industry of the farmer and artificer
Nor does the kingdom profit only by what it tx
ports, it derives advantage likewise from wi;ar :
receives in return, anti has the profpeft of bling
oIon able to flipply itself with several commniod;it,
of extensive consumption, for which it forlmcr!l,
depended on foreigners. iie consumption (,r
sugar in Spain is ptrhaps as great in proportion to
the ntumber of its inhabitants, as that of any i'.
ropean kingdom. Eut though poffefled of ctin-
tries in the New World, whose ibil and climate arc
most proper for rearing the sugar-cane; tliouih
the do:;eftic culture of that valuable plant in t;:
kingdo:m of Granada was once considerable; luch
has been the fatal tendency of ill-judged inlidt-
tions in America, and such the pressure of impro-
per taxes in Europe, that Spain has loft al-mot
entirely this branch of induttry, which has enriched
other nations. 'This co:nmodity, which has now
become an article of primary necessity in Europe,
the Spaninrds were obliged to purchalf of foreign-
ers, and had the mortification to fee their countr:
drained annually of an inmmnenfe fum on that iec-
cotnt '. But if that fpirir, which the permiiiuon
of free trade has put in motion, shall perlcvere in
its efforts with the fame vigour, the cultivation ot
fugiar in Cuba and Porto-lico may incr-ale f0

" L'ztar:z, c. 4. much,

mUcll,

much, that in a few years their growth may be B O0 K
equal to the demand of the kingdom.

SPAIN has been induced, by her experience'of the Free trade

beneficial confcquences resulting from having re- b tcicent. e
laxed somewhat of the rigour of her ancient laws
with refpe& to the commerce of the mother-coun-
try with the colonies, to permit a more liberal in-
tercourfe of one colony with another. By one of
the jealous maxims of the old fyflem, all the pro-
vinces situated on the South Seas were prohibited,
under the most revere penalties, from holding any
communication with one another. Though each
of these yield peculiar productions, the reciprozal
exchange of which might have added to the happi-
ncfs of their respective inhabitants, or have facili-
tated their progress in induflry, so solicitous was
the Council of the Indies, to prevent their receiv-
ing any supply of their wants, hut by the periodi-
cal fleets from Europe, that in order to guard
against this, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in
Peru, in New Spain, in Guatimalj, and the New
Kingdom of Granada, from such a correspondence
with their fellow-fubje6s, as tended manifestly to
their mutual prosperity. Of all the numerous re-
ftridions devised by Spain for fccuring the exclu-
five trade with her American settlements, none per-
haps was more illiberal, none seems to have been
more sensibly felt, or to have produced more hurt-
ful effets. This grievance, coeval with the fettle-
ments of Spain in the New World, is at las re-

Z 2 dreclid,

0 0 KI drefled. In the year 1774, Charles III. published
' v_' an edid, granting to the four vast provinces which

I have mentioned, the privilege of a free trade with
each other . What may be the effctts of opening
this communication between countries destined by
their situation for reciprocal intercourse, cannot
yet be determined by experience. They can hardly
fail of being beneficial and extensive. The mo.
tives for granting this permiflion are manifestly no
less laudable, than the principle on which it is
founded is liberal; and both discover the progress
of a spirit in Spain, far elevated above the narrow
prejudices and maxims on which her system for re-
gulating the trade, and condu&ing the govern-
ment of her colonies, was originally founded.

Wew regu- AT the fame time that Spain has been intent
I.tions con-
cerning the on introducing regulations, suggested by more en-
ofthe co. larged views of policy, into her sysem of Ame-
onie. rican commerce, Ihe has not been inattentive to

the interior government of her colonies. Here too
there was much room for reformation and improve-
ment, and Don Joseph Galvez, who has now the
direction of the department for Indian affairs in
Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities, not only
of oblerving the defects and corruption in the po-
litical frame of the colonies, but of discovering
the sources of tholi evils. After being employed

t Real Ccdula penes me. Pontz Viage de Efpagna, vi.
Prologo. p. 2. NOT 1; LXVIII.

9 seven

seven years in the New World on an extraordinary B oO K
miflion, and with very extensive powers, as in- '
fpector-general of New Spain; after visiting in
person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora,
and California, and making several important al-
terations in the state of their police and revenue;
he began his ministry with a general reformation
of the tribunals of jutice in America. In confe- RefTorm-

tion of the

quence of the progress of population and wealth ourts of
in the colonies, the business of the Courts of Au- si'
dience has increased so much, that the number of
judges of which they were originally composed, has
been found inadequate to the growing labours and
duties of the office, and the salaries fettled upon
them inferior to the dignity of the ltation. As a
remedy for both, he obtained a royal edi&, ella-
blilhing an additional number of judges in each
court of Audience, with higher titles, and more
ample appointments .

To the fame intelligent minister Spain is in. New difri.

debted for a new distribution of government in its bgoin of
American provinces. Even since the eftablilh- mcat.
ment of a third viceroyalty in the New Kingdom
of Granada, so great is the extent of the Spanish
dominions in the New World, that several places
subjet to the jurifdi6cion of each viceroy, were at
luch an enormous distance from the capitals in
which they resided, that noither their attention, nor

Gazeta de Madrid, 19th March, 1776.

Z 3 their

B 0 O K their authority, could reach so far. Some pro.
*_-.._v zvinces subordinate to the viceroy of New Spai.,

lay above two thousand miles from Mexico. There
were countries subjet to the viceroy of Peru nill
farther from Lima. The people in thous remote
diftrias could hardly be laid to enjoy the benefit of
civil government. The oppreflion and inlblence
of its inferior miniflers they often feel, and ratl:r
fibmit to thele in ilence, than involve themfelvcs
in the expence and trouble of resorting to the d'.
slant capitals, where alone they can find redrel.

:. v cc- As a remedy for this, a fourth vice-royalty his
Aig.;776, been ereced, to thejurifdiction of which are tlb-
?PR!SI jeded the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos.

Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Porofi, St. Cruz de
la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoz.
and St. Juan. By this well judged arrangemenr,
two advantages are gained. All the inconvenien-
cies occafroned by the remote situation of thoec
provinces which had been long felt, and long com-
plained of, are removed. The countries noft di-
fiant fi-om Lima are separated from the viceroyalty
of Peru, and united under a superior, whose feat
of government at Buenos-Ayres, will be commo-
dious and acceflible. The contraband tradle with
the Portuguese, which was become so extcnfivc,
as must have put a final (lop to the exportationof
commodities from Spain to her southern colonits,
iiay be checked more thoroughly, and with greater
facility, when the supreme magistrate, by his vi-
cinity to the places in which it is carried on, canl

viCv

view its progress and effecs with his own eves. B no K
Don Pedro Zevallos, who has been railed to this ---
new dignity, with appointments equal to those of
the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with
the flare and the interest of the countries over
which he is to prcfide, having served in them long,
and with diftincion. By this d:fmembernmclr,
succeeding that which took place at the ereCtion 0o
the viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of GralnaJa,
alinol two-third parts of the territories, originallv
fibjecA to the viceroys of Peru, art now !opped ui'
from their jurildiaion.

TIE limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain have 'e, r'-

vc'rrlqlcn lt
likewise been considerably circumlcribed, and with in pnr.,,-i

or ..So0or...

no leTs propriety and dilcernment. Four of its a.
moss remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, Califor-
nia, and New Navarre, have been formed into a
separate government. The Chevalier de Croix,
who is intruted with this command, is not dig-
nified with the title of viceroy, nor does he enjoy
the appointments belonging to that rank, but his
jurifdicion is altogether independent on the vice-
royalty of New Spain. The erection of this last
government seems to have been fuggelted, not only
by the consideration of the remote situation ofthole
provinces from Mexico; but by attention to the
late dilcoveries made there, which I have men-
tioned . Countries containing such riches, and

B3o1k vii. P. 2 Z6.

Z 4 which

B vi K which probably may rife into fuchimportance, re.
uv quired the immediate infpedion of a governor, to

whom they were specially committed. As every
consideration of duty, of interest, and of vanity,
must concur in prompting those new governors to
encourage such exertions as tend to diffuse opu.
lence and prosperity through the provinces com-
mitted to their charge, the beneficial effe&s of this
arrangement may be considerable. Many diltri&s
in America, long depressed by the languor and
feebleness natural to provinces which compoi' the
extremities of an overgrown empire, may be ani-
mated with vigour, and a&ivity when brought so
near the feat of power, as to feel its invigorating
influence.

Attempts to SUCH, since the accession of the Bourbons to the
reform do-

eln, vpo- throne of Spain, has been the progress of their re-
'y'iY gulations, and the gradual expansion of their views

with refped to the commerce and government of
their American colonies. Nor has their attention
been so entirely engrossed by what related to the
more remote parts of their dominions, as to render
them neglecful of what was (ill more important,
the reformation of domestic errors and defers in
policy. Fully sensible of the causes to which the
declension of Spain, from her former profierity,
ought to be imputed; they have made it a great
object of their policy, to revive a Ipirit ofintdtnry
among their fubjets, and to give such extent andl
perfedtion to their mnanufadures, that they nray l)c

jiblQ

able to supply the demands of America from their s o o
own stock, and to exclude foreigners from a branch ---'
of commerce which has been so fatal to the king.
dom. This they have endeavoured to accomplifli
by a variety of edicts issued since the peace of Ut-
recht. They have granted bounties for the en-
couragement of rome branches of industry; they
have lowered the taxes on others; they have pro-
hibited, or have loaded with additional duties, such
foreign manufactures as come in competition with
their own; they have instituted societies for the
improvement of trade and agriculture; they have
planted colonies of husbandmen in Iome unculti-
vated diftrics of Spain, and divided among them
the waste fields; they have had recourse to every
expedient, devised by commercial wisdom, or com-
mercial jealousy, fur reviving their own industry,
and difcountenancing that of other nations. These,
however, it is not my province to explain, or to
inquire into their propriety and effeas. There is
no effort of legislation more arduous, no experi-
ment in policy more uncertain, than an attempt to
revive the 1pirit of indultry where it has declined,
or to introduce it where it is unknown. Nations,
already possessed of extensive commerce, enter into
competition with such advantages, derived fiom
the large capitals of their merchants, the dexterity
of their manufa;turers, the alertness acquired by
habit in every department of bufnefs, that the
state which aims at rivalling, or fupplanring them,
ilult expect to itruggle with many difficulties, and

be

B o° K be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of

VIII.
_ jralproducive indutfry, now in Spain, be comnpare;

with that of the kingdom under the last liltlI
monarchs of the Austrian line, its progress mril
appear confidtrable, and is fufficicnt to alairm tihe
jealousy, and to call forth the hmoft vigorous cr
forts, of the nations now in poflcffion of the lucra.
tive trade which the Spaniards aim at wrefling from
them. One circumstance may render tlofe exer.
tions of Spain an object of more serious attention to
the other European powers. They are not to be
ascribed wholly to the influence of the crown and
its miniflers. The sentiments and spirit of the
people seem to second the provident care of their
monarchs, and to give it greater effect. The na-
tion has adopted more liberal ideas, not only with
refpec to commerce, but domestic policy. In ail
the later Spanish writers, defects in the arrange.
ments of their country concerning both are ac-
knowledged, and remedies proposed, which igno-
rance rendered their ancestors incapable of dil-
cernifng, and pride would not have allowed them
to confess '. But after all that the Spaniarls have
done, much remains to do. Many pernicious in-
ll:tutions and abules, deeply incorporated with the
j'yfcm of internal policy and taxation, wliich hi3
Leen long ellablified in Spain, mufl be aboilhic,
het}ore indullry and manufatlures can recover a:I
e xrcnlive .dtiviry.

X .ec N OTE ILX X.

^ yni~~~~~~~ru,

STILL, however, the commercial regulations of °o 0 i
Spain with refpefet to her colonies, are too rigid _- --.b-

. Contraband

and fyfRematical to be carried into complete exe- t,adc.
cution. The legislature that loads trade with im-
positions too heavy, or fetters it by refRrictions too
severe, defeats its own intention; and, in truth,
is only multiplying the inducements to violate its
statutes, and proporfng an high premium to en-
courage illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in
Europe and America, circumscribed in their mu-
tual intercourse by the jealousy, or oppressed by
the exactions of the crown, have their invention
continually on the ftretcl how to elude its editq.
The vigilance and ingenuity of private interest dif-
cover means of effecting this, which public wis-
dorn cannot foresee, nor public authority prevent.
This spirit, counteracting that of the laws, per-
vades the commerce of Spain with America in all
its branches; and from the highest departments in
government, descends to the lowell. The very
officers appointed to check contraband trade, are
often employed as inftrumenrs in carrying it on;
and the boards instituted to refirain and punifl it,
are the channels through which it flows. The
king is supposed to be defrauded by various arti-
ficers, of more than one half of the revenue which
he ought to receive from Armerica ; and as long
as it is the interest of lb many persons to screen
thole artifices from detertion, the knowlcdge of
them will never reach the throne. " l-ow many

Y Solorz. de Ind. Jure, ii. lib. v.

" ordinances,

o 00 K "' ordinances, fays Corita, how many inftruEtions,

-, ' how many letters from our sovereign, are sent

· in order to corree abuses, and how little are
" they observed, and what imall advantageis de.
"· rived from them ! To me the old observation
·' appears juGs, that where there are many phyfi.
' cians, and many medicines, there is a want of
" health where there are many laws, and many
' judges, there is want of justice. We have
-' viceroys, presidents, governors, oydors, corrn.
·' gidors, alcaldes, and thousands of alguazils
" abound every where; but notwithstanding all
· these, public abuses continue to multiply'."
Time has increased the evils which he lamented as
early as the reign of Philip II. A spirit of cor.
ruption has infected all the colonies of Spain in
America. Men far removed from the feat of go.
vernment; impatient to acquire wealth, that they
may return speedily from what they are apt tocon-
fider as a slate of exile in a remote unhealthful
country allured by opportunities too tempting to
be resifted, and reduced by the example of those
around them ; find their sentiments of honour and
of duty gradually relax. In private life, they
give themselves up to a dissolute luxury, while in
their public condut they become unmindful of
what they owe to their sovereign and to their
country.

1 MS. penes me.

BEFORE

BEFORE I close this account of the Spanilh trade B o0 K
in America, there remains one detached, but im- _

Trade be-

portant branch of it, to be mentioned. Soon after tween New
his acceflion to the throne, Philip II. formed a thS Philin
scheme of planting a colony in the Philippine pic-
islands, which had been negle&ed since the time
of their discovery; and he accomplished it by
means of an armament fitted out from New Spainb 1564,
Manila, in the island of Luconia, was the station
chosen for the capital of this new eltablifhment.
From it an active commercial intercourse began
with the Chinete, and a considerable number of
that indultrious people, allured by the profped of
gain, fettled in the Philippines under the Spanish
protection. They supplied the colony so amply
with all the valuable produtions and manufactures
of the East, as enabled it to open a trade with
America, by a course of navigation, the longest
from land to land on our globe. In the infancy
of this trade, it was carried on with Callao, on
the coast of Peru; but experience having disco.
vered the impropriety of fixing upon that as the
port of communication with Manila, the staple
of the commerce between the east and weft was re-
moved from Callao to Acapulco, on the ceaft of
New Spain.

AFTE.R various arrangements, it has been brought

Jito a regular form. One or two (hips depart an-
nually from Acapulco, which may carry out silver

k Torqicmn. i, lib. v. c. 14,

to

B V0 K to the amount of five hundred thousand pesos

=--:/-' but have hardly any thing else of value on board;

in return for which, they bring back spices, drug,
china, and japan wares, calicoes, chintz, mufnins,
silks, and every precious article, with which the
benignity of the climate, or the ingenuity of its
people, has enabled the East to supply the relt or
the world. For some time the merchants of PIru
were admitted to participate in this traffic, and
might fend annually a ship to Acapulco, to wait
the arrival of the veflels from Manila, and receive
a proportional share of the commodities which they
imported. At length, the Peruvians were ex-
cluded by molt rigorous edicts, and all the com-
modities from the East reserved folcly tbr the con-
fumption of New Spain.

IN consequence of this indulgence, the inhabi-

tants of that country enjoy advantages unknown
in the other Spanish colonies. The manufactures
of the East are not only more suited to a warm
climate, and more Ihowy than those of Europe,
but can be fold at a lower price; while, at the
fame time, the profits upon them are Ib confider-
able, as to enrich all those who are employed,
either in bringing them from Manila, or vending
them in New Spain. As the interelt both of the
buyer and feller concurred in favouring this branch
of commerce, it has continued to extend in Ipite

C Recop. lib. ix. c. 45. 1. 6.

of

of regulations, concerted with the moi: anxious B o n K
jcaloufy to circumicribe it. Under cover of what i
the laws permit to be imported, vast quantities of
India goods a:e poured into the markets of New
Spain J, and when the flora arrives at Vera Cruz,
it often finds the wants of the people already sup-
plied by cheaper and more acceptable commo-
dicics.

THERE is not, in the commercial arrangements

of Spain, any circuniftance more inexp!icable than
the permillion of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its fun-
damental maxim of holding the colonies in per-
petual dependance on the mother-country, by pro-
libiting any commercial intercourle that might
suggest to them the idea of receiving a lupply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion must appear fill more extraordinary, from
confidering that Spain herfclf carries on no direct
trade with her settlements in the Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her American colonies,
which Ihe denies to her fubjcdts in Europe. It ;s
probable, that the colonists who originally took
poffefion of the Philippines, having been efnt out
from New Spain, begun this intercourse with a
country which they confidered, in tome measure,
as their parent {late, before the court of Madiid.
was aware of it:, conlcquences, or could eflablifh

' See NOTE LYX.

regulations

]B lO K regulations in order to prevent it. Many reman-

-
,_* firances have been presented against this trade, as

detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that treasure which
ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending to
give rife to a spirit of independence in the colonies,
and to encourage innumerable frauds, against
which it is impossible to guard, in tranfaCRions so
far removed from the infpe&ion of government.
But as it requires no flight effort of political wis-
dom and vigour to abolilh any pracice which
numbers are interested in supporting, and to which
time has added the fanCion of its authority, the
commerce between New Spain and Manila seems
to be as considerable as ever, and may be con.
fidered as one chief cause of the elegance and
splendor conspicuous in this part of the Spanilh
dominions.

Puhl;c re. BUT, notwithRtanding this general corruption in
Ancricf the colonies, and all the defalcations of the public

revenue, by the illicit importation of foreign com-
modities, or by the fraudulent arts of their own
fubjecs, the Spanish monarchs receive a very con-
fiderable turn from their American dominions.
This arises from taxes of various kinds, which
may be divided into three capital branches. '1 he
firit contains what is paid to the king, as Iove-
reign, or superior lord of the New World: to this
clals belongs the duty on the gold and silver railed
trom the mines, and the tribute exaaed from the

Indian;3

Indians; the former is termed by the Spaniards B °° K
the right of signiory, the latter is the duty of ' - 1L
vassalage. The second branch conmpreheids the
numerous duties upon commerce, which accom-
pany and oppress it in every ftep of its progrels,
from the greatest tranfaaions of the wholesale
merchant, to the petty traffic of the vender by re-
tail. The third includes what accrues to the king,
as head of the church, and administrator of eccle-
fiaftical funds in the New World., In consequence
of this he receives the first-fruits, annats, spoils,
and other spiritual revenues, levied by the apo-
fiolic chamber in Europe; and is entitled, like-
wife, to the profit arising from the sale of the bull
of Cruzado. This bull, which is published every
two years, contains, an absolution from past of-
fences by the pope, and, among other immunities,
a permission to eat several kinds of prohibited food,
during Lent, and on meagre days. The monks
employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their
virtues with all the fervour of interested eloquence;
the people, ignorant and credulous, liften with
implicit assent; and every person in the Spanith
colonies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race,
purchases a bull, which is deemed essential to his
salvation, at the rate set upon it by government".

WHAT may be the amount of those various funds, it, ,moun.
it is almost impoflible to determine with preci-

See NOTE LXXI.
VOL. 11, A a sion.

B o K sion. The extent of the Spanish dominions ir

,-v..' America, the jealousy of government, which ren-

ders them inacceflible to foreigners, the mysterious
silence which the Spaniards are accustomed to ob-
serve with refpeet to the interior state of their co-
lonies, combine in covering this fubje& with a
veil which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate than it is curi.
ous, has lately been published of the royal re-
venue in New Spain, from which we may form
some idea with refpe .to what is colleted in the
other provinces. According to that account, the
crown does not receive from all the departments of
taxation in New Spain above a million of our
money, from which one half must be deducted as
the expence of the provincial establishment '.
Peru, it is probable, yields a fum not inferior to
this, and if we suppose that all the other regions
of America, including the islands, furnish a third
ihare of equal value; we ihall not perhaps be far
wide from the truth, if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain, raised in America, does
not exceed a million and a half ferling. This
falls far short of the immense fums to which sup-
positions, founded upon conjecture, have raised
the Spanish revenue in America '. It is remark-
able, however, upon one account. Spain and
Portugal are the only European powers, who de-
rive a direEt revenue from their colonies, as their
quota towards defraying the general expence of

f See NOTE LXXII. g See NOTE I.XXIII.

government.

government. All the advantage that accrues to B o K
other nations, from their American dominions, -'-
arises from the exclusive enjoyment of their trade;
but beside this, Spain has brought her colonies to
contribute towards increasing the power of the
latre; and in return for protection, to bear a pro-
portional {hare of the common burden.

ACCORDINGLY, what I have computed as the

amount of the Spanilh revenue from America,
comprehends only the taxes collected there, and is
far from being the whole of what accrues to the
king from his dominions in the New World. The
heavy duties imposed on the commodities exported
from Spain to America h, as well as what is paid
by those which she fends home in return; the tax
upon the negroe-flaves, with which Africa sup-
plies the New World, together with several smaller
branches of finance, bring large fums into the trea-
fury, the precise extent of which I cannot pretend
to ascertain.

BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from Erpcnceof

America be great, the expence of administration .tin.r"
in her colonies bears proportion to it. In every
department, even of her domestic police and
finances, Spain has adopted a fyltem more com-
plex, and more encumbered with a variety of tri-
bunals, and a multitude of officers, than that of

" Sec NOTE LXXIV.

A a 2 any

B o o K any European nation, in which the sovereign pof.

c~ fesses such extensive power. From thejealous spirit

with which Spain watches over her American fettle-
ments, and her endeavours to guard against fraud
in provinces so remote from inspection; boards
and officers have been multiplied there with still
more anxious attention. In a country where the
expence of living is great, the salaries allotted to
every person in public office must be high, and
must load the revenue with an immense burden.
The parade of government greatly augments the
weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
the New Kingdom of Granada, as reprefcntatives
of the king's person, among people fond of often-
tation, maintain all the state and dignity of royalty.
Their courts are formed upon the model of that
at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a house-
hold regularly established, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, displaying such pomp, as
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
rity. All the expence incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have besides
peculiar appointments suited to their exalted lta-
tion. The salaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
tremely moderate, that of the viceroy of Peru is
only thirty thousand ducats'. Of late, they have
been raised to forty thousand.

Recop. lib. iii. tit. iii. c. 7z.

THESg

THESE salaries, however, conflitute but a small B O O K

part of the viceroy's revenue. The exercise of .-.~
an absolute authority extending to every depart-
ment of government, and the power of disposing
of many lucrative offices, afford them innumerable
opportunities of accumulating wealth. To these.
which may be confidered as legal and allowed
emoluments, vast fums are often added by ex-
a&ions, which in countries so far removed from
the feat of government, it is not easy to discover,
and impossible to refrain. By monopolizing some
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants,
a viceroy may raise such an annual revenue, as no
subje&t of any European monarch enjoys k. From
the tingle article of presents made to him on the
anniversary of his Name-day (which is always ob-
served as an high ffetival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thoufind
pesos. According to a Spanish faying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his conscience.
Serfible of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
formerly observed, grant a commiflion to their
viceroys only for a few years. This circumstance,
however, renders them often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour wherewith they
labour to improve every moment of power which
they know is hastening salt to a period ; and lhort

k See NOTE LXXV.

Aa 3 as

B v0
o ai.:its duration is, it usually affords sufficient time

1 *J for repairing a shattered fortune, or for creating a

new one. But even in situations so trying to hu-
man frailty, there are instances of virtue that re-
mains unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis
de Croix finished the term of his viceroyalty in
New Spain with onfufpeded integrity; and in-
fiead of bringing home exorbitant wealth, returned
with the admiration and applause of a grate-
ful people, whom his government had rendered
happy.

NOTES

N 0 T E S
NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

Aa4

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTES

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p.r.
IN tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New

Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our most

certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain a
minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpe& to them, and other
tran(faions in Pcru, is derived however from contempo-
rary and refpe&able authors.

THE mofi early account of Pizarro's tranfaaions in
Peru, was publifled by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary.
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no far-
ther than the death of Atahualpa, in 1533; for the author
returned to Spain in 1534, and soon after he landed,
printed at Seville his short History of the Conquest of
Peru, addrcffed to the emperor.

DON PEDRO SANCHO, an officer who served under Pi-
zarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which was
tranllated into Italian by Ramufio, and inserted in his
valuable collecion, but has never been published in its
original language. Sancho returned to Spain at the fame
time with Xerez. Great credit is due to what both those
authors relate concerning the progress and operations of

Pizarro

Pizarro; but the rcfidence of the Spaniards in Peru !;;j
been To fhorr, at the time when they left it, and their in-
tcrcourfc with the natives bo slender, that their knowlcdgle;
of the Peruvian manners and culloms is very impertc:.

THE next contemporary historian is Pedro CiczI i

Leon, who publifed his Cronica del Peru, at Sevi, I,
1553. It he had finiihed all that he propofcs in -l
general division of his work, it would have been the n:u!!
complete hiflory which had been published of any rcji,a;
in the New World. He was well qualified to cxccute :,
having servcd during fcventecn years in Aincrir.l, a1:I
titited in perron most of the provinces concerning Vwlhc
he had occasion to write. But only the first part ot hi
Chronicle has been printed. It contains a dcli ription o;
Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with an ac-
count of the inllitutions and customs of the nativeRs did
is. written with so little artc and such an apparent rcgarJ
for truth, that one must regret the loss of the other !,:L
of his work.

'IHIs loss is amply supplied by Don Augufiine Zara:t,

who publilhed, in 1555, his Hiftoria del Defcubrir.:c:;:,
y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarati wos a
mhn of rank and education, and employed in Pci t;
comptroller-general of the public revenue. His his,,
whether we attend to its matter or composition, is a i1c,(
of considerable merit; as he had opportunity to be .::
informed, and seems to have been inquilitivc with ic(,lc.
to the manners and tranfialions of the Peruvians, dc-J
credit is due to his teflinony.

DON DIFoo FYRNANDEZ publifled his Flifr:l &1

Pcru, in 1571. HSis iole objedt is to relate the difnlionI;Olls:
ci.vil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As hI lt.l

in

in a public flation in Peru, and was well acquainted both
with the country, and with the principal actors in those
singular scenes which he describes, as he pofleffed found
underfianding, and great impartiality, his work may be
ranked among those of the hiltorians most diflinguifhed
for their indufiry in research, or their capacity in judging
with refped to the events which they relate.

THE iapt author who can be reckoned among the con-

temporary hiflorians of the conquest of Peru, is Garci-
laflb de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part of his
work, intitled, Commentarias Reles del Origen cde los Incas
Rties dcl Peru, was not published sooner than the year
1609, feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the
last emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and was the
son of an officer of diftindion among the Spanish con-
querors, by a Coya, or lady of the royal race, on account
of which he always took the name of Inca, as he was
maetcr of the language spoken by the Incas, and ac-
quainted with the traditions of his countrymen, his au-
thority is rated very high, and often placed above that of
all the other historians. His work, however, is little
more than a commentary upon the Spanish writers of the
Peruvian story, and compoled of quotations taken from
the authors whom I have mentioned. This is the idea
which he himself gives of it, Lib. i. c. io. Nor is it in
the account of fasts only that he follows them servilely.
Even in explaining the inflitutions and rites of his an-
ceftors, his information fccms not to be more perfec than
theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is almost the fame
with that of Acolta. lle produces no fpcciinen of Peru-
vian poetry, but that wretched one which he borrows
from Blas Valera, an early miflionary, whole memoirs
have never been published. Lib. ii. c. 15. As for com-
polition, arrangement, or a capacity of distinguishing be-

tweell

tween what is fabulous, what is probable, and what is
true, one searches for them in vain in the commentaries
of the Inca. His work, however, notwithifanding its
great defects, is not altogether destitute of use. Some
traditions which he received from his countrymen are
preserved in it. His knowledge of the Peruvian language
has enabled him to correct rome errors of the Spanish
writers, and he has inserted in it some curious faEs, taken
from authors whose works were never published, and are
now loft.

NOTE II. p. 7.
O~N E may form an idea both of the hardships which

they endured, and of the sickliness of the regions

which they visited, from the extraordinary mortality
that prevailed among them. Pizarro carried out 112 men,
Almagro 70. In less than nine months 1 30 of there died.
Few fell by the sword; most of them were cut off by dif-
eases. Xerez, p. I80.

NOTE III. p. 1X.
T HIS island, fays Herrcra, is rendered so uncomfort-

able by the unwholefomenefs of its climate, its im-

penetrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude of insets and reptiles, that it is seldom anys lbfter
epithet than that of infernal is employed in describing it.
The fun is almost never fcen there, and throughout the
year it hardly ever ceafcs to 1..11. Dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3.
I)ampier toucled at this iflan;l in the year 1685; and Iis
account of the climate is rot more favourable. Vul. i.
p. 172. He, dliing his cruile un the coast, visitcd liolt
of the places where Pizarro landed, and his description of
theim throws light on the narrations of the early Sp.aiinh
hiftolialls.

N 0'T I

NOTE III. p.29.
BY this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spanish

settlements on the continent. WVhen Cortes began

his expedition in the year 1518, though his armament
was more considerable than that of Pizarro, and composed
of persons superior in rank to those who invaded Peru, he
could procure no more than sixteen horses.

NOTE V. p.30.

1N the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George

Juan, travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the

fame route which Pizarro took. From the description of
their journey, one may form an idea of the difficulty of
his march. The sandy plains between St. Michael de
Pieura and Motupe extend go miles, without water, with-
out a tree, a plant, or any green thing, on a dreary
stretch of burning sand. Voyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE VI. p. 36.
THIS extravagant and unseasonable discourse of Val-

verde has been censured by all historians, and with

justice. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigoted monk, nowire resembling the good Olmedo,
who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his address
to Atahualpa must not be charged wholly upon him. His
harangue is evidently a translation, or paraphrase of that
form, concerted by a junto of Spanish divines and lawyers
in the year 1509, for explaining the right of their king to
the sovereignty of the New World, :nd for directing the
officers employed in America how they flould take pof-
fffilon of any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. 'I'he

Ife tinllcInts

sentiments contained in Valverde's harangue mull not
then be imputed to the bigoted imbecility of a particular
man, but to that of the age. Gomara and Benzoni re-
late one circumfiance concerning Valvcrdc, which, i
authentic, renders him an object, not of contempt oniv,
but of horror. They aflert, that during the whole .i'u::,
Valverde continued to excite the soldiers to flatilhtcr
calling to them to firike the enemy, not with the edge,
but with the points of their swords. Gom. Cron. c. Il .
Bent. FHiftor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such behaviour
was very different from that of the Roman Catholic
clergy in other parts of America, where they uniforirnl
exerted their influence to protect the Indians, and to mo-
derate the ferocity of their countrymen.

NOTE VII. p. 37.
TWO different fyffems have been formed conccrnl;l:

the conduc of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers,

in order to juftifv the violence of their countrymen, coin-
tend, that all the Inca's profeflions of friendship were
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and
his followers at one blow; that for this purpose he ad-
vanced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
had arms concealed under their garments to execute thi;
scheme. This is the account given by Xeres and Zarate,
and adopted by Hcrrcra. But if it had been the plan of
the Inca to detfroy the Spaniards, one can hardly ima-
gine that he would have permitted them to march un-
molefled through the defcrt of Alotupe, or have ncglcSted
to defend the passes in the mountains, where they nliyht
have been attacked with so much advantage. If the lPc-
ruvians marched to Caxamalca with an intcntion to t.11l

UjpOl

upon the Spanjards, it is inconceivable, that of so great a
body of men, prepared for a&ion, not one ihould attempt
to make refifance, but all tamely susser themselves to be
butchered by an enemy whom they were armed to attack.
Atahualpa's mode of advancing to the interview, has the
arpca of a peaceable procession, not of a military enter-
prize. He himself and his followers were, in their habits
of ceremony, preceded, as on days of solemnity, by un-
armed harbingers. T'hough rude nations are fiequently
cunning and false, yet, if a scheme of deception and
treachery must be imputed either to a-monarch, that had
no great reason to be alarmed at a visit from firangers
who solicited admission into his presence as friends, or to
an adventurer so daring, and so little scrupulous as Pizarro,
one cannot hesitate in determining where to fix the prc-
/umption of guilt. Even amidst the endeavours of the
Spanish writers to palliate the proceedings of Pizarro,
one plainly perceives, that it was his intention, as well as
his interest, to seize the Inca, and that he had taken mea-
fures for that purpose previous to any suspicion of that
monarch's designs.

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to
vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the crime
of having concerted the deftrudlion of Pizarro and his fol-
lowers, and no less afraid to charge the Spaniards with
improper conduct towards the Inca, has framed another
fyflem. He relates, that a man of majeflic form, with
a long beard, and garments reaching to the ground, hav-
ing appeared in vision to Viracocha, the eighth Inca, and
declared, that he was a child of the Sun, that monarch
built a temple in honour of this person, and crcted an
image of him, resembling as nearly as pollible the singular
form in which he had exhibited himifclf to his view. In
this temple, divine hoqours were paid to him, by the

6 nalnc

name of Viracocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 22.
When the Spaniards firfR appeared in Peru, the length of
their beards, and the dress they wore, firuck every per.
son so much with their likeness to the image of Vira-
cocha, that they supposed them to be children of the
Sun, who had descended from heaven to earth. All con.
eluded, that the fatal period of the Peruvian empire was
now approaching, and that the throne would be occupied
by new possesSors. Atahualpa himself, confidering the
Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was so far from en-
tertaining any thoughts of refifling them, that he deter-
mined to yield implicit obedience to their command;.
From those Sentiments flowed his profeflions of love and
refpe&. To those were owing the cordial reception of
$oto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and the sub-
missive reverence with which he himself advanced to vij:
the Spanish general in his quarters; but from the gros,
ignorance of Philipillo, the interpreter, the declaration oi
the Spaniards, and his answer to it, were so ill explained,
that by their mutual inability to comprehend each other'i
intentions, the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all
its dreadful consequences, was occasioned.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperflitious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be
found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, previous
to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the two former
served under Pizarro at that time, and the latter vifitcJ
Peru soon after the conquest. If either the Inca himllf,
or his meflengers, had addressed the Spaniards in the
words which Garcilaflb puts in their mouths, they muli
have been firuck with such fubmifiive declarations; anid
they would certainly have availed themfilves of them to
accomplish their own designs with greater facility. Gar-
cilaffo himfclf, though his narrative of the intercourse be-

twcctl

tween the Inca and Spaniards, preceding the rencounter at
Caxamalca, is founded on the supposition of his believing
them to be Viracochas, or divine beings, p. ii. lib. i.
c. 17, &c. yet with his usual inattention and inaccuracy
he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians did not
recolleA the resemblance between them and the god Vira-
cocha, until the fatal difaflers fubfequcnt to the defeat
at Caxamalca, and then only began to call them Vira-
cochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is confirmed by Her-
rera, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 12. In many different parts of
America, if we mnay believe the Spanish writers, their
countrymen were confidered as divine beings who had dc-
fccnded from Heacvn. But in this initancc, as in many
which occur in the intercourse between nations whose
progress in refinement is very unequal, the ideas of those
who used the expreflon were different from the ideas of
those who heard it. For such is the idiom of the Indian
languages, or such is the simplicity of those who speak
them, that when they fee any thing with which they were
formerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know
the origin ; they fa, tha:t it came down from Heaven.
Nuai.:ez. Ram. iii. 327, C.

THE account which I have civ.n of the sentiments

and proceedings of the I)Cruivia.l, aplpe. r. to be more na-
ttnal and confilfent than either of tli- two pireceinr. and
is better uplported by the salts relctcd by the cuntcm-
jilary hiliorians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thoufald Peru-

vians were killod. Sanclo makes the numnber of rhe fl;lii
lix or fevcn tlhouifld. Ram. iii. 74, I). 13 G;arci-
I.llo's account, five thoufaild were ni.:llcdcl. P. ii.
lib. i. c. 25. I''he nunlmbr whicl I have mentioned,

\Vo.. 111. 13 b being

being the medium between the extremes, may probably
be nearest the truth.

NOTE VIII . 39.

OTHING can be a more flriking proof of this, th::X
that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca t,

Cuzco. The diflance betwixt them is fix hundred mile,.
In every place throughout this vast extent of country
they were treated with all the honours which the Peru-
vians paid to their fovercigns, and even to their divinitic'.
Under pretext of amafling what was wanting for the r;n-
fom of the Inca, they demanded the plates of gold wilh
which the walls of the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco wcri.
adorned; and though the priests were unwilling to .;;icn. ti
those sacred ornaments, and the people refused to violate
the shrine of their God, the three Spaniards, with their
own hands, robbed the Temple of part of this valuable
treasure; and such was the reverence of the natives for
their persons, that though they beheld this ac of ficri-
lege with astonishment, they did not attempt to preemat
or disturb the commission of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6.
Sancho ap. Ramus. iii. 375, D.

NO ITE IX. p. 52.
A CCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco, after

iltting apart the king's fifth, was divided among 480

persons. Lach received 4000 pesos. 'IThis amounts to
1,920,00o pesos. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the
general, and other officers, were entitled to a part .ir
greater than that of the private men, the filin total nmul
have risen much beyond what I have mentionecd. Go-
mn;ra, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. fltisly theim-

ielvcs

selves with asserting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco
was of greater value than the ransom of Atahualpa.

NOTE X. p. 54.
T 0 expedition in the New World was conduccd w;th

more persevering courage than that of Alvarado, and

in none were greater hardships endured. Many of the
persons engaged in it were, like their leader, veterans
who ha.d served under Cortes, inured to all the rigour of
American war. Such of my readers as have not an op-
portunit) of perusing the firiking description of their sus-
ferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form some idea of the
nature of their march from the sea-coast to Quito, by
consulting the account which 1). Ant. Ulloa gives of his
own journey in 1730, nearly in the fame route. Voy.
tom. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bouguer, who pro-
ceeded from Puerto Viejo, to Quito, by the fame road
which Alvarado took. He compares his own journey
with that of the Spanifl leader, and by the comparison,
gives a most firiking idea of the boldness and patience of
Alvarado, in forcing his way through ob many obfiacles.
Voyage du Perou, p. 28, &c.

NOTE XI. P. 55.
A CCORDING to -lerrera, there was entered on ac-

count of the king, in gold, 1 55,300 pess, and 54co

marks (each 8 ounces) of filvcr, betides fcvcral vc'fcls
;and ornaments, f(nme of gold, and other- of silver ; on
account of private p'rlIOns, in gold 499,000 pcfos, and
54,000 mnarks of filvcr. Dec. 5. lib. vi. c. 13.

B h 2. NOTE

NOTE XII. p. 65.
T HE Peruvians had rccourfc to other military arts thni

those of the Spaniards. As the cavalry wce: t:.c

chiefobjeca of their terror, thiey cndeavoured to rclle:c
them incapable of acting, by means of a long thong i :'
a 1tone faflcned to each end. This, when thrown by a
skilful hand, twifled about the horse and its ril', ,;::!
entanglcd them so as to obflrudC their motions. Hcrrti:
mentions this as an invention of their own. Dec. 5.
lib. viii. c. 4. But as I have obftrved, vol. ii. p. i^,
this weapon is common among fcveral barbarous trn!.;
towards the extremity of South America; and it is mro:
probable, that the Peruvians had observed the ic:.;tcrity
with which they uscd it in hunting, and on this occlfioo
adopted it thenfelves. The Spaniards were co;-id abtaly
annoyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another init;iilc of li:e
ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention. 1B3 turn-
ing a river out of its channel, they overflowed a xalic.,
in which a body of the enemy was potled lb i:djcnr.-,
that it was with the utmost difficulty the Spaniard-, m tc
their escape. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XIIf. p. 85.
IJERRERA's account of Orellaia's vova.;c :.

most minute, and apparently the rmol a:c, Uilr. I;

was probably taken from the journal of O()rcli-iua hini'.
But the dates are not dliftinfly marked. Iisn ia ;'t
down the Coca, or Naipoo, bc" in early in ''cbruary 154 1
and he arrived at the mouth of the river on thc i6tli -:
i\ugtifT, having spent near ICe-n nontlis in the o)n''.
M. dc la Condamrinc, in the )cear 1743, f.ii!cl i,::
Cuc c;j ta I'ara, a lIttlement of the Puc orltlglc at ti',

*3 n;tlil

mouth of the river, a navigation much longer than that of
Orellana, in less than four months. Voyage, p. 179.
But the two adventurers were very differently provided
for the voyage. This hazardous undertaking, to which
ambition prompted Orcllana, and to which the love of
Icience led M. de la Condaminle, was undertaken in the
year 1769, by Madame CGodin des Odonais, from con-
jugal affection. The narrative of the hardihips which
ihe fufFired, of the dangers to which ihe was exposed,
and of the dilaft-crs which besel her, is one of the most
singular and afic'ti::g itories in any language, exhibiting
in her conduct a ltriking picture of the fortitude which
diftinguiflies the one sex, mingled with the sensibility and
tcnderneft peculiar to the other. Lcttre de IVI. Godin, 1
M. de la Coniidamine.

NOTE XIV. p. 89.
H.ERRERA gives a firiking picture of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen, who had been officcrs of diftinc-

tion under Alinaro, lodged in the fame house, and hav-
inig but one cloak among them, it was worn alternlatclv
by him who had occasion to appear in public, while the
reft, from the want of a decent dress, were obliged to
keep within doors. Their former friends and compa-
nions were to much afraid of giving offencce to Piza lro,
that they durst nor entertain or even cunvcrle with them.
One may conceive wha.t was the condition, :and what the
indignation of menr once accustomcd to power and opu-
lence, when; they felt tl;Leinfilvcs poor and defpilt l, with-
out a roof under which to flcltcr their headls, while they
beheld others, whole mei it anld l(rvic(c were not equal to
theirs, living with ifplcndoiLr ill filimtuous editiccs.
Dec. ,. lib. viii. c. 6.

13 b3 NOTE

NOTE XV. p. 103.
HERRERA, whofc accuracy entitles him tca great cre-

dit, aflerts, that Gonzalo Pizarro pofltefled dlon:lii;

in the neighbourhood of Chuqucfaca de la Plata, wvimh
yielded him an annual revenue greater than that of t!:c
archbishop of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Euro,c.
Dec. 7. lib. vi. c. 3.

NOTE XVI. p. 118.
A LL the Spanish writers describe his march, and( tL;-

diftrefles of both parties very minutely. Zarate

, J-

serves, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in hillory,
either with respect to the length of the retreat or the ar-
dour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his c :np1-
tation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thuulu:l;
miles. Lib. v. c. 16. 26.

NOTE XVII. p. 133.
IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the belt ir-

formed historian of that period, to one million liur
hundred thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XVIII. p. 135.
CARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an ad-

vocate for an accommodation with (Gafca. Findilr

Pizarro incapable of holding that bold courlf which hI
originally fuctlcdJ, lie recomnmended to him a tinmelI
fubiiillion to his fovereigi as the f;fl:ft nimc;sire. Vhcll
the irciidcnllt.' offiers were sirs{ coli:nll iiic;itcl to C.trv.ljll,
' i;y our Lady (slid he, in that ILrain of buff'oncr'y

whL

which was familiar to him) the priefi iffucs gracious bulls.
He gives them both good and cheap, let us not only ac-
cept them, but wear them as rcliques about our necks."
Fernandcz, lib. ii. c. 63.

NOTE XIX. p. 142.
DURING the rebellion of Gonalo Pizarro, seven

hundred men were killed in battle, and three hun-

dcd and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrera,
dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of thcfb were
cut off by Carvajal. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 91. Znrate
makes the number of those put to a violent death five
hundred. Lib. vii. c. I.

NOTE XX. p. 151.
1N my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of

the Mexicans, I have received much information from

a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the year
1553, Philip II. in order that he might dilscover the
mode of levying tribute from his Indian fubjc.ts, that
would be moif beneficijl to the crown, and least oppref-
five to them, addrcflcd a nianJate to all the Courts of Au-
dience in America, enjoining them to answer certain
queries which lie proposed to them, concerning the an-
cient form of government efabliflled among the various
nations of Indians, and the mode in which they paid taxes
to their kings or chiefs. In obedience to this mandate,
Corita, who had rcfidcd nineteen years in America, four-
teen of which he pafled in New Spain, composed the
work of which I have a copy. He acquaints his fovc-
rcitn, that he had made it ;a objcct during his residence

B b 4 il

in America, and in all its provinces which he had ifi;td,
to inquire diligently into the manners and customs of the
natives, that he had conversed for this purpose with many
aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted several of the
Spanish ecclefiafiics, who underflood the Indian languages
mofi perfectly, particularly some of those who landed in
New Spain soon after the conquefR. Corita appears to
be a man of sonec learning, and to have carried on his
inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to which i:.
pretends. Greater credit is due to his testimony fromn
one circumflance. His work was not composcd with a
view to publication, or in support of any particular theor,
but contains simple, though full answers to queries pro-
posed to him officially. Though Herrera does not men-
tion him among the authors whom he had followed as
guides in his history, I should suppose, from several fat;
of which he takes notice, as well as from fevecral exprcf-
sions which he uses, that this memorial of Corita was
not unknown to him.

NOTE XXI. p. 162.
vTHE early Spanish writers were so hafly and iinacu-

rate in eflimating the numbers of people in the pro-

vinces and towns of America, that it is impofliblc to as-
certain that of Mexico itself with any degree of prcciiou).
Cortes describes the extent and populousness of \lc.:ico in
general terms, which imply that it was not in},rior to til'
greatefl cities in Europe. Gomara is more explicit, and
affirms, that there were 60,000 houses, or fan;ilics in
Mexico. Cron. c. 78. Herrcra adopts his opinion
Dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 13; and the generality of writers fol-
low them implicitly without inquiry or (cruple. Accord-
ing to this account, the inhabitants of Mexico niuft

ha;le

have been about 300,000. Torquemada, with his usual
propensity to the m..r-vclluus, allerts, that there were a
hundred and twe nty t:huliand houses or families in Mexi-
co, and conlcqucnltly about fix hundred thousand inhabi-
tants. Lib. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious account
of the Mexican empire, by one of Cortes's officers, the
population is fixed at 60o,oo people. Ramufio, iii. 309,
A. Even by this icc'ur:t, which probably is much
nearer tlc truth than ;rty of the foregoing, Mexico was
a great city.

NOT E XXII. p. 166.
IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that I am indebted

for this curious observation. Palafox, bilhop of Ciu-

dad de la Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and illuflrates it
more fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only language
in which a termination indicating refpelt, ilavas reveren-
tiales y de cortefia, may be affixed to every word. By add-
ing the final lyllable zin or azin to any word, it becomes
a proper exprelfion of veneration in the mouth of an in-
ferior. If, in fpcaking to an equal, the word Father is
to be used, it is 7atl, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One
priest speaking to another, calls him Teopixlque; a pcrfon
of inferior rank calls him Teopixcaizil. The name of the
emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico, was
Montezuma, but his vatflils, from reverence, pronounced
it Montezumnazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Virtudes d,.
Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only reverential
nouns, but reverential verbs. T'he manner in which
there are formed from the verbs in commoln llit, is ex-
plained by D. JoC. Aug. Aldama y CG icv.tr.i ill his Mexl-
can Grammar, N . i88.

N OTE

NOTE XXIII. p. 172.
FROM comparing several pafflges in Corita and Her-

rera, we may collect .;,th romne degree of accuracy,

the various modes in which til- M1exicans contributcd to-
wards the support of government. Some persons of the
first order seem to have been cxemtr'd froIn the paymcnt
of any tribute, and as their only duty t,* tr:e public, were
bound to personal iervice in war, and to t;)llow the barner
of the fovercign with their vafll'ls. 2. T'he immediate
vaflals of the crowni were bound not orly to personal nmili-
tary lfervice, but paid a certain proportion of the produce of
their lands in kind. 3. Those who held offices of honour
or trt!t, paid a certain fha;c of what they received in con-
'equence of holdin;g thcfe. .

4 Each Capzllac, or alff)ci:-

tion, cultivated fomei part cf the common field allotted to
it, for the behoof of the crown, and depositcd the produce
in the royal gr..mariz;. 5. Some part of whatever w.':
brouTht to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth,
or the various productions of their artists and manufia-
turers, was demanded for the public use, and the mer-
chants who paid this were exempted from every other tax.
6. T'he AMayeques, or adnfcriptiglebrt, were bound to cult-
tivate certain diftricAs in every province, which may be
confidered as crown lands, and brought the increase int,,
public fuorehoufes. 'Ihus the fobereign received some
p o;rt of whatever was ulbefil or valuable in the countrn,
whether it was the natural production of the foil, or ac-
quired by the indufiry of the people. X,'hat each contri-
buted towards tihe support of government, ficcms to hl;r
hccii inconlidtcrabl. Corita, in answer to one of thl
qxlurics put to thsli Audience of Mexico by lPh'ilip II. en-
dc':l\vtrs to efiinlate in mioney the value of what c-:ch cii,-
vzn inight be lui.pollcd to pay, a;dl does llot rccko:l it

lllo~

more than three or four reals, about eighteen pence or two
lhillings a head.

NOTE XXIV. p. 172.
CORTES, who seems to have been as much afionifled

with this, as with any inflance of Mexican ingenuity,

gives a particular description of it. Along one of the
causeways, fays he, by which they enter the city, are
conducRed two conduits, composcd of clay tempered
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raised
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a fiream of
excellent water, as large as the body cr a man, into the
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants plen-
tifully. The other is empty, that when it is necessary
to clean, or repair the former, the tlream of water may
be turned into it. As this conduit pafies along two of
the bridges, where there are breaches in the causeway,
through which the salt-water of the lake flows, it is con-
veyed over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox,
then carried from the conduit to the remote quarters of
the city in canoes, and fold to the inhabitants. Relat.
ap. Ramus. 24.1, A.

NO()TE XXV. p. 174.
1N the armoury of the royal palace of iladrid, are shewn

suits of armour, which are called Montezuma's.

They are conipold of thin lacquered copper-plates. In
the opinion of very ;ntelligent judges they are evidently
caflern. T'he forms of the tilver ornaments upon them,
reprteenting dragons, &c. may be confidered as a con-
firnition of thi,;. IThey are infinitely fupcrior in point of
workmailllipi to any effort of American art. The Spa-

ni;ards

ruards probably received them from the Philippine islands
The only unquestionable specimen of Mexican art that
know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine gold
which is said to have belonged to Montezuma. It wei-,i
5 O. 2 dwt. Three drawings of it were exhibited ic
the Society of Antiquaries, June 1o, 1765. A man',
head is represented on this cup. On one fide the full flte,
on the other the profile, on the third the back parts of th:
head. The relievo is said to have been produced bh
punching the inside of the cup, so as to make the rcerc-
fentation of a face on the outside. The features arc rude,
but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Sp.-:iih
workmanship. This cup was purchased by Edward c:;r!
of Orford, while he lby in the harbour of Cadiz with t:i
fleet under his command, and is now in the polL'iion of
his grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted for tils in-
formation to my refpecable and ingenious friend .:.
Barrington.

NOTE XXVI. p. I79.
*T HE learned reader will perceive how much I ha:.

been indebted, in this part of my work, to the

guidance of the bishop of Gloucester, who has traced the
successive flips, by which the human mind advanced :a
this line of ilt p)ogrefs, with much erudition, and frrc.,tt
ingenuity. He is the first, as far as I know, who lurmcin
a rational and consistent theory concerning( the \v:!;i:l
modes of writing prattifed by nations, according tu it"'
various degrees of their improvement. Div. Icg::tu: r'
Moses, iii. 69, &c. Some important obfcrvatioiis ha- c
been added by the learned and intelligent author ol tilt
''raitd de la Formation Mcchaniquc dcs Langucs, tol. J.
295, &c.

As

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious monu-

ments extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will not
be improper to give some account of the means by which
they were preserved from the general wreck of every work
of art in America, and communicated to the Public. For
the most early and complete colleetion of these published
by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of ;hat cu-
rious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio MIcidoza, vice-
roy of New Spain, having deemed those paintings a pro-
per present for Charles V. the ship in which they were
sent to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and they
came into the ponflclon of Thevet, the king's geographer,
who having tra:ielled himself into the New World, and
described one of its provinces, was a cprious observer of
whatever tended to illustrate the manners of the Ame-
ricans. On his death, they were purchased by Hakluyt,
at that time chaplain of the English ambafnador to the
French court; and, being left by him to Purchas, were
publiflhed at the dcfire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry
Spelman. Purchas, iii. o165.

THE fccond specimen of Mexican picltre-writing, was

publiflied by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two copper-
plates. The firfl is a map, or repreflntation of the pro-
grefs of the ancient Mexicans on their firit arrival in the
country, and of the various flations in which they fettled,
before they founded the capital of their empire in the lake
of Mexico. The second is a Chronological Wheel, or
Circle, representing the manner in which they computed
and marked their cycle of fifty-two years. The former
w..s given to him by Dr. Crifloval de Guadalajora, in tl:e
city of Puebla de los Angeles ; the latter he received frAom
])on Carlos de Siguenza y Congorra. IBut as it feemns
now to be a received opinion (founded I know not on
whlit evidence) that Carrcri was iever out of Italy, inid

tlait

that his famous Giro del Mundo is an account of a fiqfitiou
voyage, I have not mentioned there paintings in the text.
They have, however, manifestly the appearance of being
Mexican produetions, and are allowed to be so by Bo-
turini, who was well qualified to determine whether t;:ev,
were genuine or fuppoftitiious. The style of pailtin i
the former is considerably more perfect than any o:!h;
specimen of Mexican design; but as the original is lid to
have been much defaced by time, I fufpeA that it hl: beet
improved by some touches from the hand of an European
artist. Carreri, Churchill, iv. p. 487. The chruno,-
logical wheel is a just delineation of the Mexican mood,,
computing time, as deferibed by Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2.
it seems to resemble one which that learned Jefui; 'Ud
seen; and if it be admitted as a genuine monlumcrrnt, it
proves that the Mexicans had artificial, or arbitrary cha-
raclers, which represented several things besides numA.cr..
Each month is there represented by a symbol cxprcli c
of some work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was di:L,-

vered by another Italian. In 1736, Lorcnzo B30t..inl
Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led by sic-:..1
incidents to fludy the language of the Mexicans, and to
collect the remains of their hifforical monuments. II:
persised nine years in his researches, with the ciithufi.aif
of a projector, and the patience of an antiquary. Il 1746,
he publishcd at Madrid, Idea de una Nuct , i: /l/l,'ia G(ci-
ral de la America Septentrional, containing an aiccounit ut
the result of his inquiries; and he added to it a c.itluguc
of his American Historical Mufcuin, arra;igid ut(ler
thirty-fix different heads. His idea of a New lillory
appears to me the work of a whimsical credulous m.tii.
But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings, trilutc-

l lls,

rolls, calendars, &c. is amazing. Unfortunately a ship,
in which he had sent a considerable part of them to Eu-
rope, was taken by an English privateer in the war before
las; and it is probable that they perished by falling into
the hands of ignorant captors. Boturini himself incurred
the displeasure of the Spanish court, and died in an hofpi-
tal at Madrid. The hitlory, of which the Idea, &c. was
only a profpctaus, was never published. The remainder
of his Museum seems to have been dispersed. Some part
of it came into the poffeflion of the prefcnt archbishop of
Toledo, when he was primate of New Spain, and he
publishcd from it that curious tribute-roll which I have
mentioned.

Tx-E only other collecion of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
By order of their Imperial iM.tjeitics, I have obtained such
a specimen of thef. as [ dc.fired, in eight paintings, made
with so much fidelity, that I am informed the copies could
hardly be distinguished from the originals. According to
a note in this Codex Aexi-anuzs, it appears to have been
a present from Emmanuel King of Portugal to Pope Cle-
ment VII. who died A. D. 1 537. After pasing through
the hands of several illustrious p:iprieors, it fell into thole
of the cardinal of Saxe-Eifenach, who presented it to the
emperor Leopold. These paintings are manifcitly .Mexi-
can, but they are in a style very different from any of the
former. An engraving has been made of one of them, in
order to gratify fitch of my readers, as may deem this an
object worthy of their attention. Were it an objec of
sufficient importance, it might, perhaps, be poflible, by
recourse to the plates of Purchas, and the archbishop of
Toledo, as a key, to form plausible coinjLcutres concern-
ing the meaning of tli p)icture. l\iny of the figures are

6 i;iuiifel ly

manifestly similar. A. A. are targets and darts, almofl
in the fame form with those publilhed by Purchas, p. 10-c,
1071, &c. B. B. are figures of templcs, nearly refemblij,
those in Purchas, p. II o and 11 3, and in Lorenzan.i,
Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths, th:e
figure of which occurs in almost every plate of Pur(h.:
and Lorenzana. E. E. seem to be Mexican capt;;iil
in their war dress, the fantastic ornaments of which rc-
femble the figures in Purchas, p. 11 ro, 11T, 2113. I
should suppose this pieture to be a tribute-roll, as tihci
mode of noting numbers occurs frequently. D. I).
&c. According to Boturini, the mode of computart,,,
by the number of knots, was known to the Mcxicans ai
well as to the Peruvians, p. 85. and the manner in
which the number of units is represented in the ilexic.n
paintings in my ponefflon, ecmins to confirm this oplinil.
They plainly resemble a firing of knots on a cord or
slender rope.

SINCE I published the former Edition, Mr. Wx.:'ii

love, who is fiill pleased to continue his friendly attcnt;, ;
to procure me information, has discovered, in the Libr.iry
of the Escurial, a volume in folio, confilting of foi,t
Iheets of a kind of palteboard, each the size of a conmmo;
theet of writing paper, with great variety of urcouth and
whimsical figures of Mexican painting, in very frclh c,-
lours, and with an explanation in Spanish to rr.of ot
them. The firfi twenty-two flicets are the signs ol tlc
months, days, &c. About the middle of each flc(ct 1ar,
two or more large figures for the month, filrrouiJllcd b)y
the signs of the days. The last eighteen fhccts arc nit
so filled with figures. They seem to be signs of l)eiti-,
and images of various objeós. According to this C;al.i-
dar in the Escurial, the Mexican cear contained 2.86 da:,
divided into 22 months of 13 days. Each day is rcpr'-

Ic. ltd

sented by a different sign, taken from rome natural ob-
jedt, a serpent, a dog, a lizard, a reed, a house, &c.
The signs of days in the Calendar of the Escurial are pre-
cifely the fame with those mentioned by Boturini, Idea,
&c. p. 45. But, if we may give credit to that Author,
the Mexican year contained 360 days, divided into 18
months of 20 days. The order of days in every month
was computed, according to him, first by what he calls
a tridecennary progression of days from one to thirteen, in
the fame manner as in the Calendar of the Escurial, and
then by a/fptenary progression of days from one to seven,
making in all twenty. In this Calendar, not only the
signs which distinguish each day, but the qualities sup-
posed to be peculiar to each month, are marked. There
are certain weaknesles which seem to accompany the hu-
man mind through every stage of its progress in obferva-
tion and science. Slender as was the knowledge of the
Mexicans in Astronomy, it appears to be already con-
neAed with judicial Aitrology. The fortune and cha-,
racier of persons born in each month are luppofed to be
decided by some superior influence predominant at the
time of nativity. Hence it is foretold in the Calendar,
that all who are born in one month will be rich, in an-
other warlike, in a third luxurious, &c. The paftcboard,
or whatever fubflance it may be on which the Calendar
in the Escurial is painted, seems, by IMr. i;Vaddilove's
description of it, to resemble nearly that in the Imperial
Libiary at Vienna. In several particulars, the figures
bear some likcncfs to thole in the plate which I have pub-
lifhed. The figures mnarked D. which induced me to
conjeture, that this painting might be a tribute-roll
similar to there publifled by Purchas and the Archlbilhop
of Toledo, Mr. Waddilove fuiplufes to be signs of days;
and I have such confidence in the accuracy ol iis obler-
vations, as to conclude his opinion to be well founded.

VoL. III. C c It

It appears, from the charaaers in which the explanations
of the figures are written, that this curious monument of

lMcxicnn art has been obtained, soon after the conqucet of
the Empire. It is singular that it should never have beec
mentioned by any Spanish Author.

NOTE XXVII. p. tSr.
T lIE first was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance:

thec fccond the Divider of Men ; the third, the SIhd-

kder of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the L)Drk-Houfl.
Acofla, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 189.
TFHE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more

holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the noft

considerable. But it was nothing more than a mount ot
fulid earth. According to Torquemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the bare, and rose to the
height of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19.

FROM infpeRling various figures of temples in the

paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems to be some
rCafon fotr flripetting that all their temples were con-
llriidcd in the fame manner. See Vol. iii. p. 10o9,
II10. 1113.

NO T E XXIX. p. 19o.
't()'I' oly in 'Tlafcala, and T'epeaca, but even ill

Mexico itdlf, the houlcfs cf the pcople were mere

Jlntl lmilt with turf, or minml, or the branches of treeC.
T'hey vwre extremely low, and flight, and without aiiy
fu'ritrnic but a few e;irllthC. vclS, Is. Like the rudest ln-

<iia,,s,

dians, several families resided under the fame roof, with-
out having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. 2.
lib. vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22. Dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17.
Torquem. lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE XXX. p. i90.

1AM informed by a person who rcfidedl lon in New

Spain, and visitcd alnoft every province of it, that

there is not, in all the cxtent of that vail empire, a)ny 1mo-
nument, or vcltige of any building more ancient than
the conquest, nor of any bridge or highway, except
some remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe to tlhit
gate of Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. ;S.
penes me. The author of another account in ianulufcript
observes, " That at this day theie does not rennl.i, c ..
the smallest vestige of the exiftcnce of any ancient I1
building, public or private, either in Mexico ( T
province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he, i
all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New ..i:
New Biscay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the N...
Kingdom of Leon, and New Santanderl, without hay
ing observed any monument worth notice, except the
ruins near an ancient village in the valley de Ctfis
Grandes, in lat. N. 30o. 46'. longit. 258. 24'. from
the island of Tencriffc, or 460 leagues N. N. W. fiom
Mexico. He describes this minutely, and it appears to
have been a paltry building of turf and fonc, pla;lcred
over with white earth or lime. A miflionarry informed
that gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of an-
other settlement similar to the former, about an htundred
leagues towards N. W. on the banks of the river St.
Pedro. MS. peIws me.

THosB toftlionies derive great credit from one cir-
cuiftalicc, that they were nut given in support of any

C c 2 p)aticttdar

particular system or theory, but as simple answers to que-
ries which I had proposed. It is probable, however,
that when these gentlemen aflert, that no ruins or montt-
ments of any ancient work whatever are now to be dif-
covered in the Mexican Empire, they meant that there
were no such ruins or monuments as conveyed any iIle.t
of grandeur or magnificence, in the works of its a.;cirlut
inhabitants. For it appears from the teflimony of fcveral
Spanish authors, that in Otumba, Tlafcala, Cholula, &c.
forne vestiges of ancient buildings are still vifiblc. Vil.i
Scgnor Theatro Amer. p. 143. 308. 353. D. Fran.
Ant. Lorenzana, formerly archbishop of Mexico, and
now of Toledo, in his introduction to that edition of the
Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he published ac
Mexico, mentions fomc ruins which are still visible in
several of the towns through which Cortes paflcd in his
way to the capital, p. 4. &c. But neither of thcic au-
thors give any description of them, and they seem to be
so very inconsiderable, as to (how only that some build-
ings had once been there. The large mount of earth at
Cholula, which the Spaniards dignified with the nainc ot
temple, still remains, but without any fleps by which to
afccnd, or any facing of stone. It appears now like a
natural mount, covered with grass and flrubs, and pof-
sibly it was never any thing more. Torqucm, iib. in
c. 19. I have received a minute description or the rc-
mains of a temple near Cuernavaca, on the road ftior
Mexico to Acapulco. It is conpofed of large fluncn,
fitted to each other as nicely as those in the buildings ot
the Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the
tound.tion it forms a square of 25 yards; but as it riic.
in height, it diminishes in extent, not gradu:lly,, b:it by
being contracted suddenly at regular difl;nlllt , lo ltat it
mult have rcfembled the figure B in the plate. It tcrnmi-
nated, it is said, in a spire.

7 N r

NOTE XXXI. p. 196.
THE exaggeration of the Spanish Hifforians, with re-

spect to the number of human victims sacrificed in

Mexico, appears to be very great. Accordnga to Go-
mara, there was no year in which twenty thoufind human
, itirms were not offered to the Mexican Divinitie-, and
in some years they amounted to fifty thoulthnd. Cron.
C. 229. T'he ikulls of those unh:lppy persons were ranced
in order in a building ereccted for that purpose, and two
of Cortes's officers who had counted them, informed
Gomara that their number was a hundred and thirty-fix
thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Hcrrera's account is tlill more
incredible, that the number of victims was so great, that
five thousand have been Iacrificed in one day, nay, on
some occasions, no less than twenty thoufOlUd. IDec. iii.
lib. ii. c. 16. Torquemada goes beyond both in extra-
vagance, for he allbrts, that twenty thouland children,
cxclufive of other victims, were flaughtcred annually.
MIon. Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The most refipetCable autho-
rity in favour of fich high numbers is that of Zumurrata,
the first bifliop of Mexico, who, in a letter to the chap-
ter general of his order, A. 1). 1631, allerts that the
rIcxicans ficrificed annually twenty tlioulfitnd vili.ims.
I)a\ila. ''eatro Ecclcf. 126. In oplpolltiion to all thcfe
accounlts, 13. de las Caif:is observes, tliat if there h:id been
liich an annual wafle of the human flpccics, the country
could never have arrivcu at that decree of piopul(uufiefs,
ir which it was remarkable whvcn the Spaniards first
landed there; ;and lic, pfitively aflurts, tha: thle llexicains
never (licrificedi more tn;an lit)y or a luindired pclfons in a
e.ir. See his dil)ute with Sepntl\vc(rd, fulijoined to his
JIrceiflima Relacion, p. o05. (C'ortis does not specify
what lnumber of vietiins w:s licriictd alnnually, bhut B.

C c 3 Liaz

Di:-z del Caftello relates, that an enquiry having been
n.ile,c with rCefi)pc to this, by the Franciscan Monki ,
: ho w're sent into New Spain immediately after the cn!]-
,qucft, it was found that about two thousand five hundred
were sacrificed every year in Mexico. C. 207.

NOTE XXXII. p. 197.

T is hardly ncccflarv to obfcrve, that the Peru .i;i:
Chronology is not only obfcurc, but rcpugna;!t t

conclusions deduced fiom the most accuratc and c.xt:''ii-:

bt- rvations, concerning the time that elapses during c;zc.
rcinii, i:i anv 2iven fiucceflian of princes. Til mldiri
has been found not to exceed twerty )yars. Accordiig
to Acofta and Galicilaflo de la Vega, Huana C:.plc,
who d ed about the year 1527, was the twelfth Ii:;.
The duration of the Peruvian monarchy ought i1't t')
have been reckoned above two hundred and forty v a.,,
but they affirm that it had subsisted four hundred yc:.r.
Acofla, lib. vi. c. 19. Vegs, lib. i. c. 9. By thi
account each reign is extended at a medium tn thi!tv-
three years, inflead of twenty, the number afccrtaiiied bv
Sir Isaac Newton's observations ; but so impelfeEc were
the Peruvian traditions, that though the tutal is boldly
Inarked, the number of years in each reign is unknown.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 205.
M/IANY of the early Spanlif writers aftit, that !tCe

Peruvians offered human facritices. Xcles, p. i(;.

Z.rate, lib. i. c. Ii. Acofla, lib. v, c. 19. Bi't C(i-
cilaflbdelaVega contends, that though this barba:rolilus pir-
tice prevailcd among their uncivilized ancestors, it

\w. t

totally abolished by the Incas, and that no liunil Vi it ili
was ever ofifrced in any tcllmple o' the Sul. '1I',i
, Lki1 -

CI lii'II)

tion, and the plausible reasons with which he confirms
it, arc sufficient to refctc the Spanish writers, whose ac-
counts feemn to be founded entirely upon report, not upon
what the) thenmfelves had obfcrved. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4.
In one of their fcflivals, the Peruvians ofi-rcd cakes of
bread moifiened with blood drawn from the arms, the
eye-brows, and noses of rheir children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6.
This rite appearl to have been derived from their ancient
prat;ice of sacrificing human vicilms.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 21r.
T1Il Spaniards have adopted both those cultoms of the

ancielt Peruvians. They have preserved some of

the aqueduts or canals, made in the days of the Incas,
and have made new ones, by which they water every field
that the) cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, torn. i. 422. 477.
They likewise continue to use guano, or the dung of lea-
fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a description of the al-
most incredible quantity of it in the inall islands near
the coast. Ibid. 481.

NOTE XXXV. p. 213.
T' IE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at Calla

in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-Cannar,

;irc dclfribed by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c. who inlfiecd
thell with great care. M. de Condaminc published a
cur-ious mcnoir concerning the ruins of Atun-Caannar.
Mem. de l'Acaldemic dc Berlin, A. D. 1746, p. 435.
Acoufa del'ribcs the ruins of Cuzco, which hv had exa-
mined. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaflb, in his usual stile
[,ives pompous and confused descriptions of fievcral temples,
alid other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. 1. 21. lib. vi. c. 4.

C c 4 Don

Don -- Zapata, in a large treatise concerning Peru,
which has not hitherto been publishcd, communicates
some information with respect to several monuments of
the ancient Peruvians, which have not been mentioned
by other authors. MS. penes me, Articulo xx. Ulloa
dcfcribes some of the ancient Peruvian fortifications,
which were likewise works of great extent and solidity.
'' om. i. 391. Three circumitances flruck all those ob-
servers: the vafl size of the floncs which the Peruvians
employed in romre of their buildilng,. Acofla measured
one, which was thirty feet loing, eightecn broad, and fix
in thickness; and yet, he adds, that in the fortrcfs at
Cuzco, there were flones considerably larger. It is dif-
ficult to conceive how the Peruvians could move thee,
and raire them to the height even of twelve feet. The
second circumflance is, the imperfe&tion of the Peruvian
art, when applied to working in timber. By the patience
and persever.ance natural to Americans, flones may be
formed into any shape, merely by rubbing one against
another, or by the use of hatchets or other instruments
made of stone ; but with such rude tools, little progress
can be made in carpentry. ''he Peruvians could not
mortize two beams together, or give any degree of union,
or liability to any work compoltd of timber. As they
couldl not form a centre, they were totally unacquainted
with the ultc of arches in buiding, nor can the Sp.irifll
authors conceive how they were able to frame a root for
those ample flruturcs which they raised.

THE third circumfrtance is a (triking proof, which all

the monuments of the Perutvians furnilh , of thcir want
ns i l:,Cillity and invention, accompanied with p.itience
no Ic's allonifhing. None of the tlones cnlploycd in tholc
Works were formed into aniy palrticultr or uniform (h;lla',

whlichl

which could render them fit for building. The Indians
took them as they fell from the mountains, or were raised
out of the quarries. Some were square, obme triangular,
some convex, some concave. Their art and induflry were
employed in joining them together, by forming such hol-
lows in the one, as perfecly corresponded to the projections
or risings in the other. This tedious operation, which
might have been so easily abridged, by adapting the fur-
face of the flones to each other, either by rubbing, or
b) their hatchets of copper, would be deemed incredible,
if it were not put beyond doubt by infpeting the remains
of those buildings. It gives them a very filgular appear-
ance to an European eye. There is no regular layer or
itratum of building, and no one ftonc refcmbles another
in dimensions or form. At the fame time, by the perse-
vering, but ill-direaed induitry of the Indians, are all
joined with that minute nicety which I have mentioned.
Ulloa made this observation concerning the form of the
siones in the fortress of Atun-Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387-
Pineto gives a similar description of the fortress of Cuzco,
the molt perfe't of all the Peruvian works. Zapata MS.
penes me. According to M. de Condamine, there were
regiil:tr strata of building in some parts of Atun-Cannar,
which he remarks as singular, and as a proof of some
progrcfs in improvement.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 217.
THE appearance of those bridges, which bend with

their own weight, wave with the wind, and are con-

fiderably agitated by the motion of every perfln who palies
along them, is very frightful at firfl. But the Spaniards
have found them to be the cafleft mode of palling the tor-
rents in Peru, over which it would be dillicult to throw
niure solid l'ruCturcs either of Itone or timber. 'Ihey

forin

form those hanging bridges so f rong and broad, tht
loaded mules pass alongft them. All the trade of Cuzco it
carried on by means of such a bridge over the river Apu-
rimac. Ulloa, ton. i. 358. A more simple contrivance
was employed in palling smaller fireams: a basket, inl
which the traveller was placed, being suspendcd from a
strong rope firetched across the frlcam, it was pulhcJ ur
drawn from one lide to the other. Ibid.

NO TE XXXVII. p. 228.
M Y information with rcfpeat to those events is taken

from \'.ti-ia breve de la expedicion militar de Sc-

nlora y Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eftado, cn qui
por coiitccuenitia de ello, fe han pucfto anibas pro inicias,
pulliflcd at Mecxico, June 17th, 1771, in ordcr tofatiify
the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnished the vice-
roy with moncy for defraying the cxpenoe of the arma-
ment. The copies of this Noticia are very rare in Ma-
drid; but I have obtained one, which has enabled me to
communicate there curious saCs to the Public. Accord-
ing to this account, there was found in the mine Yco-
rato in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-iwo c.Cllui,
which weighed fixtcen marks four ounces four ocll:i,.l
this was sent to Spain as a prefcnt fit for the king, and ig
now delpofited in tic royal cabinet at MIadrid.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 229.
TIIHE unce'rtaintl' of geographers with reli')c, t(i tli'

point is rein,irickabic, for Cortes fci' msc to h.iv; I

veyed its cnafts with great accuracy. 'l'he airchbiilop (
Toledo(. has puhliflied, from the original, in the I,|ilii'"
ol the I\I.urqui, (el Valle, the dcl.'e,ld:it of Crrt,. ,
il.p d(I.;wnl ill 1541, hy tile pilot I)om)lilgo C';nli",. I
w lc.iih C'.ili ( l!ii.: s13 lii douv, ii .L' a pcnini l l.:. I'tl't
iil::.

(ITQ:

out nearly in the fame direction which is now given to it
in the bcft maps, and the point where Rio Colorado en-
ters the gulf is marked with precision. Hifl. de Neuva
EfpAgna, 327.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 232.
I AM indebted for this sac to M. L'Abbe Ravnal,

torn.iii. i c.3. and upon confultingan intelligentperfon,

who having been long fettled on the Mosquito shore, has
been engaged in the logwood trade, I find that ingenious
author has been well informed. The logwood, cut near
the town of St. Francis of Campcachy, is of much better
quality than that on the other fide of Yucatan, and the
En-glilh trade in the Bay of Honduras is alillof at an end.

NOTE XL. p. 25o.
p Torribio de Bencvente, or Motolilie, has enlume-

rated ten caufLs of the rapid depopulation of i\lexico,

to which he gives the name of the 'I'en Plagues. Many of
there are not peculiar to that province. i. The intro-
duRtion of the small-pox. This disease was first brought
into New Spain in the year 1520 by a negro slave who at-
tcnded Narvaez. Torribio affirms, that one half of the
people in the provinces, visited with this diflcmnper, died.
'To this moi a;lity, occasioned by the finall-pox,'orqueima-
da adds the dteft tiiv t ffeCts of two contagious diflempers
which raged in the years 1545 and 15-6. In the former
S0o,0eo; in the latter, above two millions periflied, accord-
ing to an exiaci account taken by order do the viceroys.
Mon. Ild. i. 642. T'he fmall-pux was not introdruced into
Peru for leveral years after the invalion of the Spani:rds,
but proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia Origen,
Ip. 8 . 2. 'he numbers who were killed, or died of fa-
iniuii il theil w.l with the Spaniarl(, particularly dilring

tile

the fiegc of Mexico. 3. The great famine that followe
after the redutlion of hMexico, as all the people engaged
either on one fide or other, had neglected the cultivatio
of their lands. Something similar to this happened in a'
the other countries conquered by the Spaniards. 4. 'I.-:
grievous talks imposed by the Spaniards upon the p'c;-
belonging to their Repartimientos. 5. The opprenfiv
burden of taxes which they were unable to Spa, and t:,:
which they could hope for no exemption. 6. 'Ihe num-
bers employed in collecting the gold, carried down hy the
torrents from the mountains, who were forced from ti;cr
own habitations, without any provision made for th;ir
subsistence, and fubjclted to all the rigour of cold in t!;(,fc
elevated regions. 7. The immcnfe labour of rcbuillij
Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such precipitate
ardour, as destroyed an incredible number of pcop'.
8. The number of people condemned to fervitudc, ur:L!r
various pretexts, and employed in working the i;\er
mines. These, marked by each proprietor with a !;i(t
iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to the moua-
tains. The nature of the labour to which they were i'lb-
jccted there, the noxious valours of the mincs, the cc1,1-
ness of the climate, and scarcity of so(,d, were so f.:;!!,
that Torribio affirms, the country round lvcr;;l of t'.:
mines, particularly near Gua;xago, was c(overcd ith
dead bodies, the air corrupted with their ltc:c h, .!:d (i;
many vultures, and other vor.icious biirds, hovered ;,ol:'!
for tlieir prey, that the fun was darkndcicl witl thlic si 'i''.
o. Tlhe Spaniards, in the dillercnt cxpc.lftiolos w':it'
they undertook, and by the civil wars which tilCe)' c;rri;
oil, dellroycd mnny of the nativ's, wholm thely tc coni', !
to serve them as 7T'azicms, or c;rriers of burdens. I'hl,
IJal mode of oppreflioi was Lparticuil.Irly rluiniols to t1'
Peruvians. Flroin the imiimber of Indians w v;o p lilhci

i'4

in Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the
caif of the Andes, one-may form some idea of what they
faffered in similar services, and how fast they were wafted
by them. Torribio, MS. Corita in his Breve y Sum-
maria Relacion, illustrates and confirms several of Tor-
ribio's observations, to which he refers. MS. pins mne.

NOTE XLI. p. 251.
EVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. 18.

But the paflion of that great man for system, some-

times rendered him inattentive to research; and from his
capacity to refine, he was apt, in some infiances, to
overlook obvious and just cauies.

NOTE XLII. p. 252.
A STRONG proof of this occurs in the tcflament of

Isabella, where she difcovcrs the most tender con-

cern for the humane and mild usage of the Indians. Those
laudable Sentiments of the queen have been adopted into
the public law of Spain, and fcive as the intrcduition to
the regulations contained under the title of tl-: gosd treat-
n.nt of thd Indians. Rccopil. lib. xi. tit. x.

NOTE XLIII. p. 254.
IN the seventh 7Ttlt of the firil book of the R.opilad;Dn,

which contains the laws concerning the powers and

fun&ions of archbiflhops and biWhops, alinolt ;i third pai t
of them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as
guardians of the Indians, and points out the various rrc-

ihgds in Wbil i it is their duty to interpose, in order to

defend

defend them from oppreflion, either with refpe&t to thei
persons or property. Not only do the laws commit t,
them this honourable and humane office, but they afuall,
exercise it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced from

Spanish authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as he was
not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popish clergy, to
which they were not fully entitled. Survey, p. 142. 192,
&c. Henry Hawks, an Englilh merchant, who resided
five years in New Spain, previous to the year 1572, gives
the fame favourable account of the popish clergy. Hak-
luyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V. not only bishops,
but other ecclefiallics, are impowered to inform and ad-
moniih the civil magistrates, if any Indian is deprived of
his just liberty and rights. Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi.
Icy 14; and thus were conflituted legal protectors of the
Indians. Some of the Spanish ecclesiastics refused to
grant absolution to such of their countrymen as possessed
Encomiendas, and confidered the Indians as slaves, or em-
ployed them in working their mines. Gonz. Davil.
Teatro Eccles. i. 157.

NOTE XLIV. p. 255.
ACCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains

4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of
the largest Indian towns in America, p. 104.

NOTE XLV. p. 255.
IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of the

state of population in those kingdoms of Europe whern
the police is most perfect, and where science has made the

greawft

greatest progress. In Spanish America, where know-
ledge is still in its infancy, and few men have leisure to
engage in refearchcs merely speculative, little attention
has been paid to this curious inquiry. But in the year
1741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys and governors of
the several provinces in America, to make an aacual fur-
vey of the people under their jurildiaion, and to trainfmit
a report concerning their number and occupations. In
confcquence of this order, the Conde de Fuen-Clara,
viceroy of New Spain, appointed 1). Jos. Antonio de
Villa Segnor y Sanchcz, to execute that commiflion ir
New Spain. From the reports of the magistrates in the
several diftrits, as well as from his own obcervationa, and
long acquaintance with moss of the provinces, Villa Segnor
published the result of his inquiries in his teatro fmeri-
cano. His report, however, is imperfc. )

Of the nine

dioceses, into which the Mexican empire has been divided,
he has published an account of five only, viz. the archbi-
fhopric of Mlexico, the bishoprics of Pucbla de los Angeles,
Aechoacan, Oaxaca, and NoXa Galicia. The bishop-
rics of Yucatan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and Guatimala, are
entirely omitted, though the two latter comprehend coun-
tries, in which the Indian race is more numerous than in
any part of New Spain. In his survey of the extensive
diocese of Nova Galicia, the situation of the different
Indian villages is decfribcd, but he specifies the number
of people only in a small part of it. The Indians of that
vast province, in which the Spanish dominion is imper-
tcetly established, are not registered with the fame accu-
racy as in other parts of New Spain. According to Villa
Segnor, the actual state of population in the five dioceses
above mentioned is of Spaniards, negroes, muJattQcs, and
ieftizos, in the diocefs of

Mexico

Fai ilie.

Mexico - - - 105,202
Los Angeles - - - 30,6o0
Mechoacan - - 30,840
Oaxaca - - - ,296
Nova Galicia - - - 6,0

19C,7

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is 953,-54

Indian families in the dioccfe of Mexico I I9,5I
Los Angeles - - -88,24c
Mechoacan - -1

- 3, 1

Oaxaca - - - 44,222
Nova Galicia - - - 6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number i;

1,471,955. XWe may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken
from the Matricula, or regifler, according to which the
tribute paid by them is collected. As four dioccles of
nine are totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia the
numbers are imperfecly recorded, we may conclude, tihat
the number of Indians in the Mexican empire exceeds two
millions.

I'HE account of the number of Spaniards, &c. fccms

not to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa Scg-
nor obfcrvcs in general terms, that fecseral Spiii.lrds,
negroes, and people of a mixed race, reside there, with-
out fpccifying their number. If, therefore, wc nake
allowance for these, and for all who reside in the four
cliocces omitted, the nuimbcr of Spaniaids, an d of tl".l
of a mixed race, may probably amount to a milliolln ;!1:d

hail.

half. In some places, Villa Segnor distinguishes between
Spaniards and the three inferior races of negroes, mtlat-
toes, and mestizos, and marks their number separately.
But he generally blends them together. But from the
proportion observable in those places, where the number
of each is marked, as well as from the account of the fRate
of population in New Spain by other authors, it is manifest
that the number of negroes and persons of a mixed race
far exceeds that of Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought
not to be reckoned above 500,000 to a million of the for-
irer.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the number
of people in Peru, as might enable me to form any con-
jeture equally satisfying with respect to the degree of its
population. I have been informed, that in the year 1761,
the proteIor of the Indians in the viceroyalty of Peru
computed that 612,780 paid tribute to the king. As all
females, and persons under age, are exempted from this
tax in Peru, the total number of Indians ought, by that
account, to be 2,449,120. MS. penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess, concerning the fiate of
population in New Spain and Peru. According to an
account which I have reason to confider as accurate, the
number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to Peru
on each new publication, is 1,171,953; to New Spain
2,649,326. I am informed, that but few Indians pur-
chafl bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the Spanifil
inhabitants, and those of mixed race, so that the number
of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race, will amount
by this mode of computation to at least three millions.

VOL. III. D d THE

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spanish America, may give us some idea of the extent of
population, and correct the inaccurate, but popular no-
tion entertained in Great Britain, concerning the weak
and desolate slate of their colonies. The city of Mexico
contains at least 15o,ooo people. Puebla de los Angeles
contains above 60,000 Spaniards, and people of a irrixcd
race. Villa Segnor, p. 247. Guadalaxara contains
above 30,000, exclusive of Indians. Id. ii. 206. Linia
contains 54,ooo. D. Cofme Bueno Defer. de Peru, i764.
Carthagena contains 25,000. Potofi contains 25,C2%.
Bueno, 1767. Popayan contains above 20,000. Ulloa,
i. 287. Towns of a second class are still more numerous;
The cities in the most thriving settlements of other Euro-
pean nations in America cannot be compared with thcie.

SUCH are the detached accounts of the number of people

in several towns, which I found scattered in alithors
whom I thought worthy of credit. But I ha:'e olb:aicd
an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in ::e
province of Quito, on the accuracy of which T can rc;.;
and I communicate it to the Public, both to r:ratift cu-
riofity, and to rclCtify the miflaken notion which I h.ne
mentioned. St. Francisco dc Quito contains bctwc;a 55
and 6o,coo people of all the different races. eclidce t;
city, there arc in the Corregimiento 29 c.ros oM r I.l ill,
cftablifhcd in the principal villages, cach of wi'.l.: i:
finallcr hamlets depending upon it. The inh;ih:;.'nt "
thcfe are mofily Indians and Mhcftiys. St. J,.lln ,I .'.,1!
has between 6 and 80oo inhabitants, bctifl, .c 27 I-:-
ent villagcs. St. Mipuel de Iharra 7000 citi,.c;n, .l:ii
ten villages. 'lihc deliliiSt of Ilavala bct\w c iS .:: i
20,o c' people. ' he diftrit of 'I

acttim, L l','.. I'1
and 1 ,0oo. The diilridt of Ambato bcccitle S a:;l

1o,ooo, besides 16 depending villages. The city of Rio-
bamba between 16 and 20,000 inhabitants, and 9 de-
pending villages. The diftri& of Chimbo between 6 and
8000. The city of Guyaquil from 16 to 20,000 inha-
bitants, and 14 depending villages. The diftri& of
Atuafi between 5 and 6000o, and 4 depending villages.
The city of Cuenza between 25 and 30,000 inhabitants,
and 9 populous depending villages. The town of Laxa
from 8 to 1o,ooo inhabitants, and i.- depending villages.
This degree of popul:tion, though slender, if we confider
the vast extent of the country, is far beyond what is com-
monly supposed. I havc omitted to mention, in its pro-
per place, that Quito is the only province in Spanish
America that can be denominated a manufacturing coun-
try; hats, cotton fluffs, and coarse woollen cloths, are
made there in luch quantities, as to be sufficient not only
for the consumption of the province, but to furnish a con-
fiderablc article for exportation into other parts of Spanish
America. I know not whether the uncommon industry
of this province flould be confidered as the cause or the
effed of its populoufiefs. But among the ostentatious
inhabitanits of the New World, the paflion for every
thing that comes from Europe is so violent, that I am
informed the manufactures of Quito are so much under-
valued, as to be on the decline.

NOTE XLVI. p. 260.
THESE are eftalblifhed at the following p!aces. St.

I)omingo in the iflaind of Ilifp.lniola, IMexico il

New Spain, I.inna in Peru, P:iama in Ticerra Firin,
Santiago in Guatinrala, Gu;ulalax.ira in New G.licia,
Santa Fc in the New Kingd!on of Gr,lnid;.. L,a Plat;
in the country of Ios Charcas, St. Fr;tucifcio de Q:ito,
St. J:igo de Cliili, H' inos A vrc(.. '1'. (C. !t o1 t}li lic a;rc

1) d 2 ltbj(ctct

fubjeacd several large provinces, and some so far removed
from the cities where the courts are fixed, that they can
derive little benefit from their jurifdiaion. The Spanish
writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of Audience,
but they include that of Manila in the Philippine Islands.

NOTE XLVII. p 268.
ON account of the diflance of Peru and Chili from

Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of

such bulk as wine and oil across the ifihmus of Panama,
the Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to
plant vines and olives. But they are firidly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil to Panama, Guatimala, or
any province in such a situation as to receive it from
Spain. Recop. lib. i. tit. xvii. 1. I5-- 8.

NOTE XLVIII. p. 270.
T HIS computation was made byBenzoni, A. D. i550,

fifty-eight years after the discovery of America. Hilt.

Novi Oibis, lib. iii. c. 21. But as Benzoni wrote with
the spirit of a malcontent, difpol'ed to detract from the
Spaniards in every particular, it is probable that his c;ii-
culation is too low.

NOTE XLIX. p271.
M Y information, with refpe& to the division and tranf-

miflion of property in the Spanish colonies, is im-

pcrfclt. The Spanifli authors do not explain this fully,
and have not perhaps attended sufficiently to the cffcas ct
their own inltitutions and laws. Solorzano de jure Ind.
vol. ii. Ii,1. ii. 1. 16. explains iln Lbme mieaure the ilitro-

dutlion

du&ion of the tenure of Mayorafgo, and mentions some
of its effecs. Villa Segnor takes notice of a singular
consequence of it. He observes, that in fqme of the best
situations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of ground is
unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins of the houses
once ereced upon it; and adds, that as this ground is
held by right of Mayorafgo, and cannot be alienated, that
desolation and those ruins become perpetual. Theatr.
Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

NOTE L. p. 273.
THERE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices

either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there

are many Cedulas which recommend the conferring
places of trust indiscriminately on the natives of Spain
and America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p. 5,
6. But notwithfsanding such repeated recommendations,
preferment in almost every different line is conferred on
native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is pro-
duced by the author last quoted. From the discovery of
America to the year 1637, three hundred and fixty-nine
biihops, or archbishops, have been appointed to the dif-
ferent dioceses in that country, and of all that number
only twelve were Creoles, p. 40. This predilection for
Europeans seems fill to continue. By a royal mandate,
issued in 1776, the chapter of the Cathedral of Mexico
is direced to nominate European ecclcfiaflics of known
merit and abilities, that the King may appoint them to
supply vacant benefices. MS. penes me.

Dd 3 NOTE

NOTE LI. p. 279.
M(ODERATE as this tribute may appear, such is tle

extreme poverty of the Indians in many provi:lc.

of America, that the exacting of it is intolerably oppreffli
Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOTE LIT, p. 280.
IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinai; mer;t

and services of the first conquerors, as well as the fn.tll

revenue arising from the country previous to the dilcoi cry
of the mines of Sacatecas, the encomiendas were gra:ltvi
for three, and sometimes for four lives. Recopil. lib. vi.
tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

NOTE LIII. p. 281.
D Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in mires i aort

noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, tiit

many Mestizos and Indians, who do not belong to a:i,
Ropartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as mincr';
and several of the Indians, when the legal term of thc:i
service expires, continue to work in the mines of'cheice.
Entreten. p. 265. But his opinion concerning thewholc-
fomenefs of this occupation is contrary to the experienicc
of all ages; and whcrever men are allured by high wage,
they will engage in any Ipecies of labour, however fa-
tiguing or pernicious it may be. I). Iern. C.:rill Alc-
mirano relates a curious f;tit incompatible with this opi-
nion. VWherevcr mines arc wrought, Giys he, thl nlul-
ber of Indi;1lis decreases ; but in the proviznce of Ca.nn-
c;achy, whlcie thece are no mines, the number of lndi.Ai

has

has increased more than a third since the conquest of Ame-
rica, though neither the foil nor climate be To favourable
as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert Collect. In another
memorial presented to Philip III. in the year 1609, Cap-
tain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo aflerts, that in every
difiriC of Peru, where the Indians are compelled to la-
bour in the mines, their numbers were reduced to the
half, and in some places to the third, of what it was un-
der the viceroyalty of Don. Fran. Toledo in x581.
Colb. ColleS.

NOTE LIV. p. 28i.
As labour of this kind cannot be prescribed with legal

accuracy, the tasks feemr to be in a great mealure

arbitrary, and like the services exacted by feudal fupeior:s,
in vinca prato ant meffi, from their vasT-!, arc extremely
burdensome, and often wantonly oppressive. Pcgna Iti-
ner. par Parochos de Indios.

NOTE LV. . 282.
T HE turn of service known in Peru by the name of

Aitan, is called Ta;'tda in New Spain. T'ier- it

continues no longer than a week at a time. No perfoi
is called to serve at a greater diltfnce from his habitation
than 24 mliles. Tlis arrn;llgelInt is iles opprcflive to
the Indians than that eltabliihed in Peru. Memorial of
Hern, Carillo Altamirano. Colbert Collcef.

NOT E LVI. p. 284.
THE ftrongcft proof of this may be deduced finom the

1ws thenlfclves. By tile mInltittlde and varietv ,'
regulations to prevcnt abhuics, e iC miy fornm all idc.i ('

D d4 ttlrl

their number. Though the lawshave, wifely, provided
that no Indian shall be obliged to serve in any mine at a
greater distance from his place of residence than thirty
miles; we are informed in a memorial of D. Hernan Ca-
rillo Altamirano presented to the king, that the Indians
of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines at the
diflance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and even two
hundred leagues from their habitation. Colbert Collcl.
Many mines are situated in parts of the country, so bar-
ren, and so distant from the ordinary habitations of the
Indians, that the necessity of procuring labourers to work
there, has obliged the Spanib monarchs to difpcnfe with
their own regulations in several inftanccs, and to permit
the viceroys to compel the people of more remote pro-
vinces to resort to those mines. Efcalona Gazophrl.
Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But in justice to them it should be
observed, that they have been fludious to alleviate this
oppreflion as much as poflible, by enjoining the viceoy;s
to employ every method, in order to induce the Indians
to fettle in some part of the country adjacent to the mines.
Id. Ibid.

NOTE LVII. p. 289.
TORQUEMADA, after a long enumeration, which

has the appearance of accuracy, concludes the num-

ber of monasteries in New Spain to be four hundred.
Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of monafleries
in the city of Mexico alone was, in the year 1745, fifty-
five. Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ullon reckons
up forty convents in Lima; and mentioning thofr for
nuns, he fays, that a small town might be peopled out of
thell, the ,iuniimbr ns perlbns flnt tip there is so grcet.
V'oy. i. 429. l')i;ip III. in a letter to the vicrc' ot
l'tcrt, A. ID. 162':, obfcr'cs, that the number of -cm-

V1,.t.

vents in Lima was so great, that they covered more
ground than all the reft of the city. Solorz. lib. iii.
c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. i6. Torquem. lib. xv. c. 3.
The firfI monaftcry in New Spain was founded A. D.
1525, four years only after the conquest. Torq. lib. xv.
c. 16.

AoRDINGc to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

eflablifhmcnt of the American church in all the Spanish
fcttlcments was, in the year 1649, I patriarch, 6 arch-
bishops, 32 bishops, 3-6 prebends, 2 abbots, 5 royal
chaplains, 840 convents. Teatro Ecclefiaftico de las
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Ires. lVhen the order of Jcfuits
was expelled from all the Spanish dominions, the colleges,
profefrl houfcs, and rcfidencies, which it poffeflcd in the
province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito sixteen, in
the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru seven-
teen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen; in all a
hundred and twelve. Colleccion Genera] de Providencias
hafta acqui tomadas fobre efiranamento, &c. de la Com-
pagnia, part i. p. 19. The number of Jesuits, priefis
and novices in all thefc, amounted to 2245. MS.
pents Ie.

IN the year 1644, the city of Mexico presented a peti-

tion to the king, praying that no new monaftcry might
be founded, and that the revenues of those already efta-
blifhed might be circtmfcribcd, otherwire the religious
houfcs would soon acquire the property of the whole coun-
try. They request likewifc, that the biflhops might be
laid under reflritions in conferring holy orders, as there
were at that time in New Spain above fix thousand
clergymen without any living. Id. p. 16. These abufcs
muff have bccn enormous indeed, when the fiuierflition

of

of American Spaniards was shocked, and induced to re
monfirate againit them.

NOTE LVIII. p. 293.
' HIS description of the manners of the Spanish clery,

I should not have ventured to give, upon the tefti.

mony of proteflant authors alone, as they may be fufpcctkd
of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, w:ho
had a better opportunity than any protestant, to view the
interior state of Spanish America, dcfcribcs the corrup-
tion of the church which he had forsaken, with so much
of the acrimony of a new convert, that I should have dil-
trufled his evidence, though it communicates Come very
curious and firiking facts. But Benzoni mentions the
profligacy of ecclesiastics in America at a very early pe-
riod after their settlement there. Hilt. lib. ii. c. 19, 20.
M. Frezier, an intelligent observer, and zealous for his
own religion, paints the diflblute manners of the Span:inl
ecclesiastics in Peru, particularly the regulars, in stronger
colours than I have employed. Voy. p. 51. 215, &c
M. Gentil confirms this account, Voy. i. 34. Corrcjl
concurs with both, and adds many remarkable circum-
itances. Voy. i. 6i. I55. x16. I have good reason to
believe, that the manners of the regular clergy, particu-
larly in Peru, are still extremely indecent. Acofia him-
self acknowledges that great corruption of manners had
been the conequenrce of permitting monks to f1brlake the
retirement and discipline of the cloister, and to minigle
again with the world, by undertaking the charge of the
Indian parifhcs, De procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv . 13,
&c. He mentions particularly those vices, of which I
have taken notice, and confiders the temptations to theml
as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion of tholio whl'

ho01

hold that the regular clergy should not be employed as
parish priefls. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for
the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among the monks of different orders, when set
free from the refitaint of monastic discipline; and from
the tone of their defence, one may conclude that the
charge brought against them was not destitute of truth.
In the French colonies, the state of the regular clergy is
nearly the fame as in the Spanish settlements, and the
fame consequences have followed. Ml. Biet, superior of
the secular priests in Cayenne, inquires with no less ap-
pearance of piety than of candour, into the causes of this
corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemption of
regulars from the jurifdition and censures of their dio-
cefans; to the temptations to which they are exposed; and
to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p. 320. It is
remarkable that all the authors, who censure the licen-
tioufiefs of the Spanish regulars with the greatest severity,
concur in vindicating the conduct of the Jesuits. Formed
under a discipline more perfet than that of the other mo-
nastic orders, or animated by that concern for the honour
of the society, which takes such full poffefion of every
member, the Jesuits, both in Mexico and Peru, it is al-
lowed, maintained a most irreproachable decency of man.
ners. Frezicr, 223. Gentil, i. 31. The Iame praise
is likewise due to the ilifhops and molt of the dignified
clergy. Frez. ibid.

A voLUsME of the Gazeta de Mexico for the years

1728, 1729, 1730, having been communicated to me, I
find there a striking confirmation of what I have advanced
concerning the liirit of low illiberal fuperflition prevalent
in Spanish America. From the newspapers of any na-
tion, one may learn what are the objects which chiefly

cngrofs

cngrofs its attention, and appear to it most interesting.
The Gazette of Mexico is filled almost .entirely with ac.
counts of religious functions, with descriptions of pro-
ceflions, consecrations of churches, beatifications of faints,
festivals, autos de fe', &c. Civil or commercial affairs,
and even the tranfaaions of Europe, occupy but a small
corner in this magazine of monthly intelligence. From
the titles of new books, which arc regularly inserted, it
appears that two-thirds of them are treatises of fcholailic
theology, or of monkilh devotion.

NOTE LIX. p. 293.
SOLORZANO, after mentioning the corrupt morals

of some of the regular clergy, with that cautious rc-

serve, which became a Spanish layman, in touching on
a fuibje& so delicate; gives his opinion very explicitly,
and with much firmnels againRt committing parochial
charges to monks. He produces the tefiimony of feevral
respectable authors of his country, both divines and
lawyers, in confirmation of his opinion. De Jure Ind.
ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A striking proof of the alarm excited
by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache to exclude the
regulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-
bcrt collection of papers. Several memorials were prc-
sented to the king by the procurators for the monastic
orders, and replies were made to there in name of the
secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous, spirit is
manifcll on both fides, in the conduct of this difputc.

NOTE LX. p. 298.
N oC'' only the native Indians, but the 'Mr/lizsr, or

(hiiIlcll of a Spaniard nd and Indian, were originally
e .lulcd froin the pricflhooi, and rctufed admiflion into

sily

any religious order. But by a lIaw issued Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip II. required the prelates of America to or-
dain such mestizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
should find to be properly qualified, and to permit them
to take the vows in any monastery where they had gone
through a regular noviciate. Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7.
Some regard seems to have been paid to this law in New
Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a reprcfcntation of this
to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a new ediCt
enforcing the observation of it, and profefnig his desire
to have all his fubjets, Indians and meflizos as well as
Spaniards, admitted to the enjoyment of the fame privi-
leges. Such, however, was the aversion of the Spaniards
in America to the Indians, and their race, that this seems
to have produced little effec; for, in the year 1725,
Philip V. was obliged to renew the injunction in a more
peremptory tone. But so unsurmountable are the hatred
and contempt of the Indians among the Peruvian Spa-
niards, that the present king has been conitrained to en-
force the former edits anew by a law, published Sep-
tember 11, 1774. Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

NOTE LXI..p. 32.
U ZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator, seems

to admit, that the quantity of silver which does not

pay duty may be stated thus high. According to Herrera,
there was not above a third of what was cxtracted from
Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii. lib. ii. c. 15.
Solorzano alerts likewise, that the quantity of filv'r
which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater than tiat
which is regularly tamped, after paying the fifth. De
Ind. jure, vol. ii. lib. v. p. 846.

N 0 ' E

NO' t LXII. p. 306.
W HEN the mines Of Potofi were discovered in the

year 1545, the veins were so near the surface, that

the ore was easily extracted, and so rich that it was re.
fined with little trouble and at small expence, merely by
the action of fire. This simple mode of refining by fit-
sion alone continued until the year 1574, when the ufeof
mercury in refining silver, as well as gold, was di:ico-
vered. Those mines having been wrought without inter-
ruption for two centuries, the veins are now funk so'
deep, that the expence of extracting the ore is greatly in-
creased. Besides this, the richness of the ore, contrary
to what happens in moif other mines, has become lets, as
the vein continued to dip, and has diminifhsed to fi:ch a
degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards fhouldl per-
sift in working it. Other rich mines have been fuccel-
fively discovered, but in general the value of the ores has
decreased so much, while the expence of extracting them
has augmented, that the court of Spain, in the year
1736, reduced the duty payable to the king from a f.th
to a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Peru, is extradtcd
from the famous mine of Guancabelica, discovered it: the
year 1563. The crown has reserved the property ot this
mine to itself; and the persons who purchased the quick-
filvcr, paid not only the price of it, but likewili ;afifth,
as a duty to the king. But, in the year 1761, this du:y
on quicksilver was abolished, on account of the incrlcfc
of expence in working mines. Ulloa, Entretcnnimic:tou,
xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. 505. 523. In confequcl:cc of
this abolition of the sith, and tome fubfequcnt a;h:ic-
meints of price, which became neceflary on account of ;ie
increasing expence of working mines, quickflvcr,, wlhiii
was folimcily fold at eighty pesos the quintal, is now (c-

li\ E rd

livered by the king at the rate of sixty pesos. Campo-
manes Educ. Popul. ii. 132, Note. The duty on gold
is reduced to a twentieth, or five per cent. Any of my
readers who are desirous of being acquainted with the
mode in wiich ie Spaniards condu& the working of
their mines, and the refinement of the ore, will find an
accurate description of the ancient method by Acofla.
Lib. iv. c. i-13. And of their recent more improve-
ments in the metallurgic art, by Gamboa Comment. a las
ordenajlz. de minas, c. 22.

NOTE LXIII. p. 309.
MVANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced slate

of induflry in Spain, at the beginning of the sixteenth

century. The number of cities in Spain was confider-
able, and they were peopled far beyond the proportion
that was common in other parts of Europe. The causes
of this I have explained, Hist. of Cha. V. i. X58.
Wherever cities are populous, that species of industry
which is peculiar to them increases, artificers and manu-
facaurers abound. The effe& of the American trade in
giving activity to these is manifest, from a singular fad.
In the year 1545, while Spain continued to depend on its
own industry, for the supply of its colonies, so much
work was bespoke from the manufaaurers, that it was
supposcd they could hardly finish it in less than fix years.
Campom. i. 406. Such a demand mulff have put much
indufiry in motion, and have excited extraordinary efforts.
Accordingly, we are informed, that in the beginning us
Philip II.'s reign, the city of Seville alone, where the
trade with America centered, gave emplo)yment to no
fiwcr than 16,000 looms in silk or woollen woi k, and that
above 130,000 persons had occupation in cnrrying on these

minl ut'adtures.

manufacurcs. Campom. ii. 472. But so rapid and
pernicious was the operation of the causes which I ihall
enumerate, that before Philip III. ended his reign, the
looms in Seville were reduced to 400. Uztariz, c. 7.

SINCE the publication of the firit edition, I have the

fatisfaition to find my ideas concerning the early com-
mercial intcrcourfe between Spain and her colonies conl-
firmed and illustrated by D. Bernardo Ward, of the Junta
de Comercio at Madrid, in his Proyeflo Economico, PIrt
ii. c. i. " Under the reigns of Charles V. and Philip II."
fays he, " the manufadures of Spain and of the Iowv
Countries fubljc to her dominion were in a molt flou-
rifhing state. Those of France and England wece in
their infancy. The republic of the United Provinces did
not then exii. No European power but Spain had colo-
nies of any value in the New World. Spain could sup-
ply her fettlcments there with the productions of her own
foil, the fabrics wrought by the hands of her own artisans,
and all she received in return for these belonged to herfcli
alone. Then the exclusion of foreign manufactures was
proper, becaufc it might be rendered effectual. Then
Spain might lay heavy duties upon goods exported to
America, or imported from it, and might impose what
rcftraints fle deemed proper upon a commerce entirely
in her own hands. But when time and fuccefive revolu-
tions had occasionel an alteration in all those cir-
cumfiances, when the manufactures of Spain began
to decline, and the demands of America were supplied by
foreign fabrics, the original maxims and regulations ot
Spain should have been accommodated to the change in
her fituatio. IThe policy that was wile at one period,
became absurd in the other."

NOTE

NOTE LXIV. p. 318.
N 0 bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of treasure

is examined. Both are received on the credit of the

persons to whom they belong; and only one instance of
fraud is recorded, during the long period in which trade
was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-
bello in the year 1654, was found to be adulterated, and
to be mingled with a fifth part of base metal. The
Spanish merchants with their usual integrity sustained the
whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners, by whom
they were employed. The fraud was detected, and the
treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the author of it, was
publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de Manus. &c. liv. ii.
p. 102.

NOTE LXV. p. 323.
MANY firiking proofs occur of the fearcity of money

in Spain. Of all the immense fums which have

been imported from America, the amount of which I
Shall afterwards have occasion to mention, Moncada as-
ferts that there did not remain in Spain, in 1619, above
two hundred millions of pesos, one half in coined money,
the other in plate and jewels. Rcflaur. de Efpagna,
Disc. iii. c. r. Uztariz, who puhlifhed his valuable
work in 1724, contends, that in money, plate, and
Jewels, there did not remain a hundred million. Theor.
&C. c. 3. Campomanes, on the authority of a remon-
ftrance from the community of m(rchants in Toledo to
Philip IlI. relates, as a certain proof how scarce cash
had become, that persons who lent money, received a
third part of the iumn which they advanced as intcrcft
and premium. Educ. l'opJl. i. 417.
VOL. III. 1 e NO TE

NOTE LXVI. p. 326.
r HE account of the mode in which the factors of the

South Sea Company conduced the trade in the fair

of Porto-belle, which was opened to them by the Affiento,
I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y Herrera, prefi-
dent of the court of Audience in Quito, and governor of
that province. Don Dionyfio was a perfun of such a re-
fpeRable character for probity and discernment, that his
testimony, in any point, would be of much weight; but
greater credit is due to it in this cafe, as he was an eye-
witness of the tranfaations which he relates, and was often
employed in detecting and authenticating the frauds which
he describes. It is probable, however, that his repre-
fentation being composed at the commencement of the
war which broke out between Great Britain and Spain,
in the year 1739, may, in Come inflances, discover a por-
tion of the acrimonious spirit, natural at that juncture.
His detail of sacs is curious; and even English authors
confrm it in some degree, by admitting both that various
frauds were praclifed in the transactions of the annual
ship, and that the contraband trade from Jamaica, and
other Britif colonies, was become enormously great.
But for the credit of the English nation it may be ob-
servcd, that those fraudulent operations are not to be con-
fidered as deeds of the company, but as the diflonourable
arts of their factors and agents. The company itiElf
fulllainedl a considerable loss by the Afliento trade. MuIy
of its servants acquired iilnnnfe fortunes. Anderfuil
Chronol. dedu&t. ii. 388.

N OTL

NOTE LXVII. p. 333.
SEVERAL facts with refpce to the institution, the

progress, and the effets, of this company, are cu-

rious, and but little known to Englifli readers. Though
the province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four
hundred miles along the coaff, and is one of the most
fertile in America; it was so much neglecaed by the
Spaniards, that during the twenty years prior to the efta-
blifhment of the company, only five ships failed from
Spain to that province ; and during 16 yecrs, from 1706
to 1722, not a single ship arrived from the Caraccas in
Spain. Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas, p. 28.
During this period Spain must have been fuipplied almost
entirely with the large quantity of cacao, which it con-
filmes, by foreigners. Before the erection of the com-
pany, neither tobacco nor hides were imported from
Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. 117. But since the com-
mercial operations of the company began in the year 173r,
the importation of cacao into Spain has increased ama-
zingly. During thirty years subsequent to 1701, the num-
ber of Fanegas of cacao (each a hundred and ten pounds)
imported from Caraccas, was 643,215. During eighteen
years fiibfequent to 1731, the number of Fanegas im-
ported was 869,247 ; and if we suppose the importation
to he continued in the fame proportion during the re-
mainder of thirty years, it will amount to 1,448,746 [a-
negas, which is an increafc of 805,531 Fai:egas. Id.
p. I48. During eight years fubfequcnt to 1756, there
has been imported into Spain by the Company, 88,482
arrobas (each twenty-five pounds) of tobacco; anid hidue
to the number of 177,35.-. Id. 161. Since the pub-
lication of the Noticias de Campania, in 1765, its trade
seens to be on the increase. During five years fubfcquent

E e 2 to

to 1769, it has imported 17), 156 Fanegas of cacao into
Spain, 36,208 arrobas of tobacco, 75,456 hides, and
221,432 pesos in specie. Camponmanes, li. 162. The
last article is a proof of the growing wealth of the colony.
It receives cash from Mexico in return for the cacao,
with which it supplics that province, and this it remits to
Spain, or lays out in purchasing Europtan roods. 1]ut,
betides this, the moit explicit evidence is produced, that
the quantity of cacao raised in the p rovince is double to
what it yielded in 1731; the nun.btr of its livc .ock is
more than treble, and its inhabitants much aumii.entcd.
The revenue of the bishop, which ariifs wholly from
tythes, has increased from eight to twenty thouflind pcfos.
Notic. p. 69. In consequence of the augmentation of
the quantity of cacao imported into Spain, its price has
decrcafed from eighty pesos for the fanega to fort). Id.
6i. Since the publication of the firfl edition, I have
learned that Guyana, including all the extensive pro-
vinces situated on the banks of the Orinoco, the ifandi
of Trinidad and ivargarita are added to the ccuntrrics
with which the company of Caraccas had liberty of trade
by their former charters. Real Cedula, Nov. 19, 1776.
But I have likewise been informed, that the institution of
this company has not been attended with all the bh.cficil
effctds which I have afcnrbed to it. In many of its opera-
tions the illiberal and oppreflive spirit of monopoly iS
conlfiicuous. But in order to .xplaiin this, it would be
iiccilh.ry to enter into niinute details, which arc nut
fiuited to the nature of this work.

N O TE LXVIII. p. 340.

I-IIS sirs experimlent made by Spain of openin, a frce
trade with :lay of her colonie, has prodl' - 1l cf 'c
so rcimarkabll , as to merit fulim farthcr illullr;:atic. ''h

2 tlltWIl'

towns to which this liberty has been granted, are Cadiz
and Seville, ;or the province of Andalusia ; Alicant and
Carrhagena, for Valencia and AlJurcia ; 1l:rcelona, for
Catilo:iia oind Arragon ; S.anltander, for Caflile; Co-
rugna, foi, (Jalicia; and CGjon, for Asturias. Append.
ii. a la cluc. popul. p. 41. hlice arc cither the ports of
chief trade in tlicir relipcilive diltritts, or tl,ofc molt con-
veniently situated for the exportation of their rclpecive
produeiions. T'he following facts give a view of the in-
crease of tr:de in the fcttlements to which the new regu-
lations e.xtend. Prior to the allowance ol frce trade, the
duties collectcd iri the cuiom-houfe at the I iv.anulah
were computed to be 1o0,2o8 pcl's annually. Duriig
the five years prccediilg 1774, they rose ::t a imediuIn to
308,coo pesos a year. in Yucatan, the duties have ril'ci
from 8,ooo to 15,000. In Hilpaniol., from 2,5 0 to
5,600. In Porto-Rico, from 1,200 to 7,000. Ihe
total value of goods imported from C2uba into Spain, was
reckoned, in 1774, to be 1,500,000 pcfos. Educ.
Popul. i. 450, &c.

NOT E LXIX. p. 346.
THE two Treatises of Don PeIdro Rodriguez Cam-

pons.lhms, J'F1l aJ l ,1l coi-ija y SuOprens (.ill oftice in

rank aid power nearly finiiliar to that of Aitti rinLy (cene-
ral in I:;gla:d), and l)ii--tor of the loy.il Acadcemy of
Hiflory, the one iinitled 1 1ilcutifo l(,lie cl

c lt;ninto dec la

Indu!i:ta Popul:'; the other, l)iliurd) (;lirec la ldIuca-
cioi, Iopi ,l r (Ie l;s Atltl. inos y il ih(i;eiit, ; the i,,lnicr
publishcd ill 1774, 1and til' I.tt- r in 1775,

t .;ii a

l ik-

ing l)lt ul' 1t ;. is. i Al o)f )'

e very ,.t . if liporti;cc

with rcfpl)2t to intl .r police, t;x;tiutl, a';ricllturc,
ii lUaSihu;c'c', .snd tritlic, do ;;t'tic ;:-, v,-11 .r. lo)eil;, is

k: e 3 cx. ,itinll

examined in the courfc of these works; and there are not
many authors, even in the nations mofi eminent for com-
mercial knowledge, who have carried on their inquirits
with a more thorough knowledge of those various fubjees,
and a more perfect freedom from vulgar and national pre-
judices, or who have united more happily the calm rc-
searches of philosophy, with the ardent zeal of a public-
spirited citizen. Thcfe books are in high eflimation
among the Spaniards, and it is a decisive evidence of the
progress of their own ideas, that they are capable of relhll
ijg an author whose sentiments are so liberal.

NOTE LXX. p. 351.
T HIE galeon employed in that trade, inflcad of the c

hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, R.cci..

lib. xlv. 1. I5. is commonly from twelve hundred to tixu
thousand tons burden. The flip from Acapulco, t..kil
by Lord Anson, inflcad of the 50o,ooo pc-os pcrilnitt(
by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, befidcs unicul:: i
silver equal in value to 4.,6 1 pcis more. A)[ii',
Voyage, 384.

NOTE LXXI. p. 353.
TTIE price paid for the bull varies according to the

rank of different persons. Thoic in the lowelf orlc(r,

who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or one
fhillin g; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and thofc in
public office, or who hold cncomicndas, sixteen i.:1l.
Solorz. de juc Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. Accorlirin,
to Chilton, an English mercha.nt who resided long in thf
Spanifhl fettlcments, the bull of Cruzlado bore al highhcr
price in the year 1570, being then fold for four re;il' !
ni~ lowvcf. l.ickluvt, iii. 461. 'h11e I; l l.'cls t,
ii.:'.

varied at different periods. That exalted for the bulls
issued in the last Predicacion, will appear from the cnfuing
table,which will give some idea of the proportional num-
bers of the different clafns of citizens in New Spain and
Peru.

There were iflued for New Spain,
Bulls at io pesos cach - - -

at 2 pebs each - - 22,601
at i peso each - - 164,220
at 2 reals each - - 2,462,50

2,649,325

For Peru,

at 16 pcfos 4' reais each 3
at 3 pcfbs, 3 reals each 14.,2o2
at I peso, 5; real - 78,82z
at 4 reals - 410,325
at 3 rcls - - 668,61i

:,17x,053

NOTE LXXII. . 354.
A S Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this in-

formation, was accomptant-gncneral in one of the

moif considerable departments of the royal revenue, and
by that means had acccfs to proper information, his tefli-
mony with rcfpec to this point merits great credit. No
such accurate detail of the Spanilh revenues in any part
of America, has hitherto been published in the lviilii'h
language, and the particulars of it nlay appear curious alnd
itertciting to sone of my readers.

e c 4 Fit '

FROM the bull of Cruzada, publiihed every two years,
there arifs an annual revenue in pesos 150,cso

From the duty on filvcr - 7,cco
From the duty on gold - 6o,c:o
From tax on cards - 70,c:o
From tax on Pulque, a drink uscd by the

Indians - - - 16l,cco

From tax on flamped paper - 41,cco
From ditto on ice - 5,522
From ditto on leather - - 2,5:0
From ditto on gunpowder - 71,553
From ditto on salt - 32, Co
From ditto on coppcr of i\cechocan - i,Cc
From ditto on alum - - 6,5'
From ditto on Juego de los gallos - 21,1CO
From the half of ecclcfiaftical annats - 49,o03
From royal ninth of bifhopricks, &c. 68,8cD
From the tribute of Indians - 650,CC0
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods 721,S85
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house 373,3J3
From the mint - - 357,5

3,552,68o

THIS rum amounts to 819,161l. Sterling; and if 1e

add to it the profit accruing from tlhe fle of 5000 (uilntils
of quickfilvcr, imported from the mines of Alhn:dc:, in
Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues from the
Averia, and some other t;ies which Villa Segnor dlots not
ctlimate, the public rv\cienue in New Spail may vicll be
reckoned above a million pNtunits ficrling molly). 'I hc:t.
Mex. vol. i. p. 38, &c. According to Villha Scgnr,
the total produce of the MIexicanl milnes, :ln;llillts ;It it
mediirm to cight millions of p:'ss in filvcr annually, ald
to 5912 marks of gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branclic:, of

tice

the revenue have been explained in the course of the his-
tory; some, which there was no occasion of mcntioning,
require a particular illuir.a:ion. The right to the ti'hes
in the New World, is vested ill the crown of Spain, by
a bull of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to
be applidx in the following manner: One fotr.tii is..llottcd
to the bihop of the diocese, anoth:er fourth to the dearn and
chapter, and other officcrs of the cathedral. The re-
maining half is divided into nine equ:!l parts. Two of
these, under the denomination of los ,'s NAcvenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and constitute a branch of the
royal revenue. The other seven parts are applied to the
maintenance of the parochial cler y, thlc building and
support of churches, and other pious ulcs. Rccopil.
lihi. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. AvcndanoThlfaur. Indic.
vol. i. p. 184.

THE Alcavala is a duty levied by an excite on the sale

of goods. In Spaiin, it amouIts to ten per cent. In
America, to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
lib. vi. c. S. Avcndano, vol. i. 180.

THE Almajorifafgo, or custom paid in America on

goods imported :.nd exported, mny r. mount on an average
to fifteen per cent. Rccopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. x.
Avendano, vol. i. 188.

THE Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to

guard the flips filing to and from Anmerica, was ifirfl
imnpoled when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expedition to tle South Sea. It amounts
to two per cent. (n the value (of ;,oods. Avend(ano, vol. i.
'. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Lcy. 43, 44.

I iAVE

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail of

the several branches of revenue in Peru, later than the
year 1614. From a curious manufcripr, containing a
ltate of that vice-royalty in all its departments, presentcd
to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran. Lopez Ca.
ravantes, accomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it
appears, that the public revenue, as nearly as I can com-
pute the value of the money in which Caravantes fit.lt
his accounts, that the revenue collected, amounted in
ducats at 4s. itd., to - - 2,372,768

Expences of government - 1,242.92

Net free revenue x,129,7;6

The total in fierling money - £. 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this com-

putation, such as the duty on stamped paper, leather, cc-
clefiaftical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru man 1,.
well supposcd equal to that of Mexico.

TN computing the expence of government in Nce.

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a flandard. 'l'hci the
annual eftablilhment for defraying the charge of adiniii-
firation, exceeds one half of the revenue collcqtcd, and!
there is no reason for supposing it to be lcfs in New
Spain.

I HAVF obtainCed a calcuLition of the total amount of
the public revenue of Spain fiom America and the Philip

pines,

pines, which, as the reader will perceive from the two
latl articles, is more recent than any of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas (Cuf-

toms), &c. in pesos fuertes 2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - 3,000,000
Bull of Cruzada - 1,ocC,coo
Tribute of the Indians 2,000,000
By sale of quicksilver - - 300,000
Paper exported on the king's account,

and fold in the royal warchoufes - 300,000
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other small

duties - ,000,00
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one

real de la Plata for each mark - 300,000
From the trade of Acapulco, and the

coafling trade from province to province 500,000

Afliento of negroes - - - 200,000
From the trade of Mabth, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized by the
Jesuits - - - 500,000
From othcr revenues formerly belonging

to that order - - 400,000

Total 12,000,000

Total in flerling money I. 2,700,000
Dedu& half, as the expcnce of admini-

firation, and there remains net siee
revenue - £. 1,35,000oo

NOTE

N 01 E LXXIII. p. 354.
AN author, long conversant in commercial speculation,

has computed, th;tt from the mines of New ?S:tin

alone, the king receives a.inu.;lly, .s his litih, thIC lin
of two r.illions of our money. IHarris Cullect. of V'v.,:.
p. 164. According to this calculit:on, the tot.i! lpodu.-
of the mines nmuil be tni millions tcerli ig; a i.in lo,.-
orbitant, and lo little corrljonding w:ith ;i!l accoi .'s !
the anilual importation from Amenc.ic, ttiat the ;. ..
tion on which it is founlded muriur evid;tl) L: eri. , i..
According to Campi.manire, tile tot:a! pro, i ',1 ,i ic '.-
ric.n mines may le coitrlpUie at tli :y m:i!i;i. ' ' :,
which, at four lli:ii-,s iiid flxpenlc a peso, .,- . t
7,425,0oo00. ferlin,, the king's Iitthl of w.;ici (:i :h t
were regul.rly paid) would be 1,435,cool. 'i :' i-
this fum the x)ncnce o; adminii. r.ititn: is. to be dcduc.cJ,
which is very confderanble, as appears from the priccclJi
note. Educ. Popular, vol. ii. p. 131. note.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 355.
ACCORDING to Ncrn. de Ulloa, all forei n gno.!

exported fro:n Srpain to America pay duIties of \..!.';i

kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per cent. A:
moll of the goods with which Spa:n fil)piic.. hlr c(.l.ii.
are foreign ; such a tax upon a trade I( extuniiive mr'''!
yield a conliderable revenue. Retablil. de d./Ilnut. : dl
Commerce d'Efp, . 1 . 150l. e ilicLputes tthe vaill].'
goods exported aniiulily si iln'.pi;lai to A \lericia, ti ic
about two millions and a half llej]illg, p. 97.

NO '1:

NOTE LXXV. p. 357.
THE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by

a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the

Manila trade as well as that to Spain, gained annually a
million of ducats. In one year he remitted a million of
ducats to Spain, in order to purchase from the Conde
Olivares, and his creatures, a prolongation of his go-
vernment, p. 6I. He was successful in his suit, and
continued in office from 1624 to 1635, double the usual
time.

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi, xii.

SHO ,T ACCOUNT

o
What is contained in the LETTER fcnt t

the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. x;,
xii.
T HIS letter is dated July 6th, 1519. Corte;

in his second dispatch takes notice that i:
was sent off on the i6th of Juiy.

THE great object of the persons who wrote t'

letter, is to justify their own condu6C in eltablin-
ing a colony independent on the jurilfdicion of Vc.
latquez. With this view they endeavoured to dr
trad from his merit, in fitting out the two for-
mer armaments under Cordava and Grijalva, re
presenting there as equipped by the adventurers
who engaged in the expedition, not by the gover-
nor. They labour likewise to depreciate the icr-
vices of Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exal;
the merit of their own exploits.

TrE Y contend, that the sole object of Velafqutez

was to trade or barter with the natives, not to at-
tempt the conquell of New Spain, or the clli-
blillincnt of a c(loiny there. This is frequcri't'

mentioncJ
t

mentioned by B. Diaz del Cafltillo, c .

9. 4r, 42,

&c. But if Vclafquez had not conquest and
settlement in view, there seems to have been no
reason for equipping such a considerable arma-
ment.

THEY assert, that Cortes defrayed the greatest

part of the expence of fitting out the armament.
But this does not agree with the account of his
fender fortune given by Gomara, Cron. c. 7. and
B. Diaz, c. 20. or what I have mentioned Note
lxxi. vol. ii.

THEY take notice, that though considerable

numbers were wounded in their different encoun-
ters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them
died, and all recovered in a fliort time. This
seems to confirm what I have observed vol. ii.
p. 263, concerning the imperfection of the offcn-
five weapons of the Americans.

THEY give some account of the manners and

inititutions of the Mexicans. It is very Ihort, and
as they had resided but a ihort time in the country,
and had but little intercourse with the natives, it
is both defective and inaccurate. They describe
minutely, and with great horror, the human fa-
crifices offered by the Mexicans to their deities,
and affirm that Ibme of their number were eye-
witncffes of thole barb.;.e;.., rites.

THEY

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue anm

description of the presents sent to the emperor
That published by Gomara, Cron. c. 29. fecmt
to have been copied from it, and Pet. Martyr de
scribes many of the articles in his treatilc De In.
fulis nuper inventis, p. 354, &c.

.^s
Ji* ^*^j

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Page.

A

BrBYssrNIA, an embassy £ent to that country by

' John' II. king of Portugal, i. 69.
Acapulco, the nature of the trade carried on from thence

to Manila, iii. 350. Amount of the treasure on board
the (hip taken by Lord Anson, 422.
Aco/fa, his method of accounting for the different degrees

of heat, in the old and new continents, ii. 401.
Adair, his account of the revergeful temper of the native

Americans, ii. 417.
Adanf2n, his justification of Hanno's account of the

Atrican seas, i. 307.
Africa, the weflern coast of, first explored by order of

John I. king of Portugal, i. Sr. Is discovered from
Cape Non, to Bojador, 52. Cape Bojador doubled,
57. The countries southward of the River Senegal
discovered, 64. Cape of Good Hope seen by Bartho-
lomew Diaz, 69. Causes of the extreme heat of the
climate there, ii. 9. Ignorance of the ancient afiro-
nomers concerning, i. 307.
Agriculture, the state of, among the native Americans,

ii. 1oI. Two principal causes of the defe&s of, o16.
Aguado is rent to HiSpaniola, as a commiffloner to infpe&

the conduatof Columbus, i. 16t.
Aguilar, Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity

among the Indians at Cozumel, by Fernando Cortcs,
ii. 227.
Albuquerque, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the

Indi.ans of Ilifpaniola, i. 263.
Alcavala, in the Spanish customs, the term explained,

iii. 425.
VOL. III. F f AlexanCdr

Alexandtr tAh Great, his political character, i. 17. His

motive in founding the city of Alexandria, 18. His
discoveries in India, 19, 20.
Alxander VI. Pope, graats toFerdinand and Ifabclla of

Caltile, the right of all their wefern discoveries, i.
140. Sends miflionaries with Columbus on his fccond
voyage, 14 .
Almogro, Diego de, his birth and characer, iii. 4,

Aflociates with Pizarro and de Luque, in a voyage of
discovery, ibid. His unfucceCsful attempts, 6. Is
negleeed by Pizarro in his Spanifi negociation, 16.
Is reconciled to him, 17. Brings reinforcements to
Pizarro at Peru, 3q. Beginning ofdiffinfions between
him and Pizarro, 56. Invades Chili, 60. Is created
governor of Chili, and marches to Cuzco, 66. Seizes
Cuzco, out of the bands of Pizarro, 67. Defeats
Alvarado, and takes him prisoner, 69. Is deceived
by the artful negociations of FtMeic Pizarro, 70. Is
defeated by the Pizarros, 74. Is taken' prisoner,
75. Is tried and coniemiad, 77. Is put to death,
78. Almagro, the Ton, affords refuge to his father's followers

at Lima, iii. 88. His cham&er, 89. Heads a con.
fpiracy againf Francis Piharro, ibid. Pizarro affafli-
Dated, go. Is acknowledged as his fucceflor, 92.
His precarious fitution, 93. Is defeated by Vaca
de Castro, 96.' Is betrayed and executed, 97.
lImajorifafge, in the Spanish American cuitoms, the
amount of, iii. 425.
Alvarado, Alonzo, is frnt from Lima, by Francis Pi-

zarro, with a body of Spaniards to relieve his brothers
at Cuzco, iii. 68. Is taken prisoner by Almagro, 69.
His escape, 71.
Alvarado, Pedro de, is left by Cortes to command at

Mexico, while he marched against Narvacz, ii. 311.
He is besieged by the Mexicans, 319. His imrnrudent
conduct, 320. His expedition to Quito in 'cru, iii.
53. Amaezns, a community of, said to exist in South Ame-

rica, by Francis Orllana, iii. 86.
America, the conlinellt of, discovered by Chriflopl'er

Columbus, i. 171. How it obtained this name, 186.

I lFerdillnd

Perdinand of Cafile nominates two governments in,
235. The pfopoitlons offered to the natives, 236.
II1 reception of Ojeda and Nicuefla among them, 237.
The South Sea discovered by Balboa, 25a. Rio de
Plata discovered, z61. The natives of, injuriously
-treated by the Spaniards, 287. The vast extent of,
ii. 2. The grand objects it prefewted to view, 3.
The circumstances of, favourable for commerce and
civilization,. 4. The-.imates of, 6, 7. Various
causes of the peculiarity of its climates, 8. Its rude
,and uncukivated slate when- first discovered, .13. Its
animals, 16.: Its-infects and reptiles, 18. Bids, 19.
General account of is foil, to. Inquiry into the firfl
population ofI 2. .Could not be peopled by civilized
nations, 29. The northern extremity qs, contiguous
to Afu, 33. Probably peopled by Afiatice, 4t. Con-
dition and ,haraaer to the native inhabitants inquired
into, 43. WNcaiso ore rude than ,the natives of any
other known puts .*r the arth, 44. The Peruvians
and Mexicans exceptrd,I ,4r The first discoverers in-
capable of a judicious speculative examination, 47.
The various fyfitma of philosophers refpe.ting the
natives, 49. Methotobfertvcd in the present review of
their bodily conftitmtion-and-circumfltances, 52. - The
venereal difeare derived- ftrom. this part of the world,
76. . Why so thinly jnhatite4b. x a. The country
depopulated by coontinual wats,; 149. Cause of the
extreme coldncfs toward the southern extremity of,
406. The natural uncultivated ltjte of the country
described, 4c8. Bitneo of large extinS fpecics of
animals discovered under ground near the banks ot the
Ohio, 409. Wby Europran animals degenerate ihlic,
410. Supposed to have undergone a convullive Icp.-
ration from Asia, 414. Caufiis ,f the dcpoitiar:(,n
of, traced, iii. 248. This dcpopul.tioni not thc rcui'i
of any intentional fyfitcn of policy, 251. Nor the re-
fult of religion, 253. Number of 1 idian intti cs fiill
remaining in Mexico and Peru, 255. All thi S[anifil
dominions there, fubjerEed to two viceruys, 258. lis
third viceroyalty lately ctil.linli]d, 2;9. Sec Arexico,
Peru, Coti I, I'wzarto, &c.

F f2 Altiiazi,

Animricans, native, in Spanilh America, their bolily

conltitution and complexion, ii. 53. Their ftrennth
and abilities, 54. 'Their insensibility with regard
to their women, 56. No deformities in their
frame, 62. 'his circumfiance accounted for, 6j.
Uniformity of their colour, 65. A peculiar race
of, defcriued, 68. The Efquimaux, 70. Pat-go-
nians, 71. The exiflcnce of Paragonian giants yet
emrainiuig to be decided, 77. Trheir dileales, 74.
Ttie vcncie..l difeale, peculiarly theirs, 75. 'Ih
powers and quliities of their minfs, 76. Are only
folicirous to fuppiy immediate wants, 78. T he art
of computation, fcircely known to them, 79. Have
no abftraSt ideas, 81. 'lhe North Americans much
more intelligent than those of the South, 83. Their
aversion to labour, bS. Their social itare, 87. I)o-
meflic union, 88. T'he women, 89. Their women
not prolific, 02. Their parental affection and fiilm
duty, c,4. 'I heir modes of fobfiltence, 97. Fifiing,
98. Hunting, 99. Agriculture, iox. The various
objec'ts of their culture, oz2. Two principal cau!cs
or the defecs of their agriculture, ic6. 'I heir want
of tame animals, ibid. Their want of useful mttals,
c19. Their political inftituions, til. Were diviJcd
into finall independent communities, ibid. Unac-
quainted with the idea of property, 113. Their hci,
sense of equality and independence, 1 5 . Their ieais
of subordination imperfea, 116. To what tribhc
these descriptions apply. i i8. Some exceptions, 2c.
Florida, 121. I he Natchez, ibid. The islands, 122.
In Bogota, 123. Inquiry into the causes of these iire-
gulariies, 124. Their art of war, 128. 'Their no-
tives to hoflility, 129. Causes of their ferocity, 130.
Perpetuity of their awniiofiliics, 132. Their nulods ( f
conducting war, 133. Are not defcitute of courn:e
and fortitude, 1i 5. Incapable of military diilk-
pline, 137. 1 heir treatment of prifiicrs, 1 ,.
'I heir furtitude undtr torture, 140. Never cat huri.ii
fltlh but to eraitfy revenge, 143. How the South
An'ericans treated their priloncis, 144. ''heir nu:i-
tary cduc.!tlui, 145. Strange method of c,.ufirlg a
captain, an.iirg the Indians on the banks of tlhe Oli-

nuco,

noco, t46. Their numbers wafted by continual wais,
149. Their tribes now recruit their numbers by
adopting prisoners, s50. Are never formi.'able in war,
to more polirhed nations, 151. Their arts, drcfs,
and ornaments, 152, 153. Their habitations, 156.
Their arms, 159. Their domestic utensils, 161.
Confirudion of their canoes, 162. .The liflleffnei;
with which they apply to labour, 163. Their reli-
ginn, x65. Some trines altogether dflitute of any,
168. Remarkable diverlity i., rheir icliious notions,
172. Their ideas of the i;nmorra'ity of the foul, 175.
'I'heir modcs of burial, 177. \\hy thlir phlticians
prete!d to be conjurors, 1-q. ''hcil love of dancing,
iS3. Their immoderate salit)ll for ganmirg, s6. Ale
extremely addi-tled to drunkeilucfs, 187. iut the:r
aged and incurable to death. 192. General eftilnate
of their character, 193. Thleir intllcqlual powers,
104. 'I'heir political talents, 195. Powers of assec-
tion, 197. Hartlnels of heart, 198. Their ifenfei-
b;lity, 199. Taciturnity, 201. 'heir cunning, 202.
Their viitues, 204. 'T'heir spirit of independence,
ibid. Fortitude, ibil. Attachment to their commu-
nity, 2o5. Their satisfaCtion with their own condi-
tion, 20b. General caution with relpeal to this in-
quiry, 209. Two diltinguiflable claflSs of, 211.
Exceptions as to their charater, 213. Their cha-
radtkeiitic features delcribed, 416. Intiances of their
persevering speed, 417. An antipathy inditftrioufly
encouraged between them and the negroes in America,
by the Spaniards, i;i. 276. Their preicnt condition,
278. -How t.,xeJ, 279. Stated f,_rviccs demalided
from them, 280. Mode of exatiiig ihefe fcrvices,
281. How goveined, i2;2. PIrortectr ot the Itilians,
his functin, ibi,l. Realoils xvhy lo Illall a progrfcls is
niade in their con'verlion, 295.
,/ncrigro Vefpuicci publiflies the fiftI written account of

the New World, and hence gve name to America,
i. iS ,. 11 s claim as a dlfcovcrrr cx:lilin<il, 330.
tit, ,oe m, a c'nlale c aziqtc of iiljipaiioula, her bale and
crull ufail< Iy th(e Snpai.mlds, i. 221.
/lidcs, Iiicii(do:ihs heilght ;anl c::teit of that range ol

ni iuntains, u. 3. Tlheir l hlii comparcl with other

1" I' 3
J (iluntainls,

mountains, 399. Gonzio Pizarr6's remarkhle expe-
ditign over, ii. 82. "
Ahimalr, large, rery few founl in America at its silt

discovery, ii. z6.
jntitHts, cause of the imperfhion of the art of havigation

among them, i. 5. Their geographical knowledge ex.
tremely confined, 305, 30b, 307, 308, 309, 310.'
Arabians peculiarly attached to the study of geography,

i. 34.
Argonauts, the expedition of, why so famous among'the

Greeks, i. 14. 15.
Arithmectic, or computation, the art of, hardly known' to

the native Americans, ii. 79.
Afcolina, father, his extraordinary mtffioh td the prince of

the Tartars, i. 40.

Ariati; discoveries made by the Ruflruts, ii.'33.
Ajfenio trade, the nature of, explained; iii.' 375. The

frauds in, and how put an e'nd'?o,;j26,' 37. '
Atahualpa, is left by his father Huafrr Isis fucceflbr in

the kingdom of Quito, iii. 25. Defeats his brother
Huafcar, and usurps the empire ofPeru, ¥26. Se'rds
presents to Pizarro, 29. Visits Pizarro, 33. Is per-
fidioufly seized by him, 35. 'greesi' th'Plzarob ona
ransom, 38. Is refused bis libiety, 42.; sis b'havibur
during his confinement, 45, 'A form of trial 'eftfowed
on him, 45. Is put to death,' 48. Comp'arifonrof au-
thorities relating to his tran(facrons witkh and treat-
ment by, Pizarro, '366.
Audience of New Spain' board of, eflablifed by the Em-

peror Charles V. Ii. 393. Coirts of; tleir jurifdiEtion,
iii. a6o. :
/,vria, a Spanish tax for convoy to and from America,

when si if imposed, iii. 425. lts rate, ibid.

.Azores, thole ifldnds dilcovered by ihe Portuguese, i. 62.
Bal oa, Varco Nugnez de, fettles a colony at Santa

Maria, in the gilph of Darien, i. 238. Receives in-
telligence of the rich country of Peru, 246. His cha-
rater, 248. Marches acrols the isthmus, 250. )Di-

covcrs

corers the Southern Ocean, 251. Returns, 252. Is
superseded in his command by the appointment of Pe-
drarias Davila, 255. ti fined by Pedrarias lor former
tranfaaions, ibid. Is appointed lieutenant-governor of
the countries on the Suuth. Sea, .and,marrics Pedra-
rias's daughter, 15g. Is crelecd and put to death by
Pedrarias, 260. - .

Bark, Jeluits, a produ£cion peculiar to Peru, iii. 306.
Bartrt, his description of the construction of Indian

bouses, ii. 441.
Baham, Martin, the honour of having discovered Ame-

rica falfcly ascribed to hbi by some German authors,
i. 322. Account of him and his family, 323.
B#bring and Tfchirikow, Ruffian navigators, thought to

have discovered the north-west extremity of America
from the eastward, ii. 36. Uncertainty of their
accounts, 44.4
Balteazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces the king-

dom of Quito, iiL 52. Is deprived of his command
by Pizarro, 83.
Btiamin the Jew of Tudela, his extraordinary travels,

i. 39.
Bernalrs, infance of the bravery of the Caribbees men-

tioned by him, ii. 449. '
Bttheeurt, John de, /a Normrnn ,baron, conquers and

puffleles the Canary Inandtl, i. 47.
Birds, an account o[tuhoc, naturel to America, ii. 19.

The flight of, often tfretch to anirmmefe diflance fron
land, i. 316, 317.
Bogota in America, Come. account oT the iniabitalls of,

ii. 123. Causes of their tame fubmiflion to the Spa-
niardE, 124... Thiij religious, doctrines and fites,
175.S
Byjador, cape, the first dilcovery of, i. 52. Is doubled

by the Portuguese discoveries, 57.

Boffu, his account of the American war-fong, ii. 438.
Bivadilla, Francis de, is lent to Hispaniola to inquire

into the condua of Columbus, i. a19. Scnd, Co-
lumbus home in irons, 192. Is degraded, 1q5. 200.
Boeggainville, his defence ot the Periplip of Hllnno, i.

306.

F f 4 B£o:,utr,

Bouguer, M. his charaEter of the native Peruvians, it

422.
Brasil, the coaRf of, discovered by Alvarez Cabral, j.

187. Remarks on the climate of, ii. 404.

Bridges, Peruvian, described, iii. 393, 394.
Buenos Ayres, in South America, some account of th.t

province, iii. 237.
Bulls, papal, of no force in Spanish America, before ex-

amined and approved by the royal council of the Indie;,
iii. 286. See Cruzado.
Burial of the dead, American mode of, ii. 177.

C
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander, discovers the

coast of Bralil, i. 187.
Cacoa, the best in quality, produced in the Spanish Ame-

rican colonies, iii. 307. The preparation of chocoltte
from, derived from the Mexicans, 33x.
Cadiz, the galeons and flota, removed thither from Se-

ville, iii. 317.
California, the peninsula of, discovered by Fernanda

CorteS, ii. 394. 'l'he true state of this country lol):
unknown, iii. 228. Wh'y depreciated by the Jcfu::n,
229. Favourable account of, given by Don Juofcp!
Galvcz, 230.

C(l/rnians, the characer of, by P. Venegas, ii. 425.
Caimpeacly, difco:cred by Cordova, who is repulled b)

the natives, i. 2.1.
Canpo: .anJs, Don Pedro Rodriguez, charaacr of his

pobtical and comnieicial writings, iii. 4.9. His zc-
count of the produce of the Spanith American mirns,
420.
Can,.y iflaids crcctd into a kingdom by pope C0-

nient VI. i. -17. Are conquered by John de D1thcel-
coiut, ,hi,'.
(7'.:li/'dla, 1.o pcop!e ever found to eat human nfll tor

fuhbiltilccc, thotiul: csten for revenge, ii. 142. 4S3.
(;:7n,0s, An;crican, t::e countru6tion of, dvfcrlibcd, I.

$C2.

t',,,;,:,'.e:

Caratras, eflabliffiment of the company trading to that

coatt, iii. 331. Growth of the trade, 415.
Caribbee islands, discovered by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 142.
Caribbets, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 213. Their

chara&cer by M. de Chanvalon, 474. Probable con-
jeaure as to the diflintion in character between them
and the natives of the larger islands, 450.
Carpini, his extraordinary mitiion to the prince of the

Tartars, i. 40.
Carthagena, the narbour of, the safest and best fortified

of any in all the Spanilh American dominions, iii.
241.
Carthaginians, slate of commerce and navigation among,

i. Io. 'The famous voyages of Hanno and Himilco,

11.
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Castro's

viaory over young Almagro, iii. 96. Encourages
Gonzalo Pizarro to assume the government of Peru,
115. Advises Pizarro to afTume the sovereignty of
the country, 120. Is seized by Gafca and executed,
137.
Caflillo, Bernal Diaz del, characer of his Hiftoria

Verdadera de la Conquifla de la Nueva Efpagna, ii.
452.
Centeno, Diego, revolts from Gonzalo Pizarro to the

viceroy of Peru, iii. 1 17. Is defeated by Carvajal, and
secretes himself in a cave, i 19. Sallies out and seizes
Cuzco, 1 2. Is reduced by Pizarro, 133. Is em-
ployed by Gafca to make discoveries in the regions
about the river Plata, 143
Chanvalon, M. de, his character of the native Caribbees,

ii. 424.
Chapetoints, in the Spanish American colonies, who thus

distinguishcd, iii. 271.
Charles 111. king of Sp.in, eflablifles packet-boats be-

tween Spain and the cronies, iii. 334. Allows free
trade to the windward ifl,lndi, 336. Grants the colo-
nies a free trade with each other, 339
Charles V. emperor, fends Roderigo de Figucroa to His-

paniola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatment of
the liudiais, i. 277. Citufls tnis fubjce to be debated

before

before him, 283. Equips a squadron at the solicitation
of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 375. Religtq his claim on
the Molucea to the Portuguese, 381. App lnts
Cortes governor of New Spain, 384, Rewards hIim
on coming home, 392. Eftabbifhes a board called the
Audience ot New Spain, 393.- is consultations ol
American affairs, iii. 97. Establishes new regulations,
103.
Phi/i, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 60. How fubjeled

by the Spaniards, 232. Excellence of its climate and
foil, 233. Cause of its being negleaed, 234. Prospect
of its improvement, 235.
Cl:quitas, political state of that people, from Fcrnandez,

ii 434.
Chocolate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans, iii.

3'1.
Cho/ula, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes there, with some

account of the town, ii. 271. A conspiracy against
Cortes discovered, and the inhabitants deiroyed,
274.
i'cero, inflance of his ignorance jn gepgraphy, i. 31 1.
Cinaloa, political Itate of the people there, ii. 434. Their

mode of living, 442. Are deffitute of all religion,
445. Extraordinary large grain of gold found there,
iii. 394.
Cineuzlla, in the province of Sonora, late discoveries of

rich mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 228. Pro-
bable eflrC.ts of tlhefe di coveries, ibid.
C/l.ment VI. pope, ereEts the Canary islands into a king-

dom, i. 47.
Climates, influenced by a variety of causes, ii. 7. Their

opcration on mnankind, 210. Inquiry into the caufeof
the differcnt degrees of heat in, 401.
Co.:in,al, an impontant production, alrnof peculiar to

New Spain, iii. 306.
Cold, extraordiliary predominance of, in the climate of

America, ii. 7. Caufcs of this peculiarity, 8.
Ca,':nies, Spanish American, view of the policy and trjde

<tf, iii. 247. Depopulation the firRf effect of them,
ib:d. Causes of this depopulation, 248. The finall-
po(x very fat;l to, 250. ;eneral idea of the Spanifl
policy in, 256. Early intirpofition of the regal autilo-

rity

tity'in, 257. An exclusive trade the first obje' iqn
265. Compared with those of ancient',Greece atn
Rome, 266. The great reflriaions they.4are subjed
to, 268. Slow progress of their popuhtion from Eu-
rope, 269. Are discouraged by the ftatc of property
there, 270. And by the nature of their ecclefiattical
policy, 272. The various classes of people in, ibid.
Ecclefiaflical conflitution of, 285. Form and endow-
ments of the church there, 287. Pernicious eff-6ts of
monastic institutions there, 288. JChara&er of the
eccleliaftis there, 289. Producions of, 299. The
mines, 300. Those of Potofi aj;d Sacotccas, 301.
The spirit with which they are worle,. ;2. Fatal
effeAts of his aid'yr, 304.. Other corimodnitires that
compose the coninrerce of, 306. Amazing mcnea:e .f
horned cattle there, 307. Adv.intae-e which Spain
formerly derived from trhm, 309. Why the fame d-
vantages are not still 'receved, 3o1. Guarda C'!ias
employed to check the cnhtraband trrde in, 327. 'he
use of regifRer ships introduced, 328. And ;:aleons
laid aside. 329 Company of the C.tra<cacs ni{tlt.td,
331'. Establishment of rg.l.ir packec-b,:.:A tn, 334.
Free trade permited between them, 339. . .tv gu-
.tiribns in the government of, 340. Reformation of
the courts of jultice, 34.. New dilit:bution ns .o-
vernments, ibid. A fohrth. viceroyalty tfltbllit it,
34'. Attempts to reform domestic policy, 344. Their
trade with the Philippine islands, 34 . Recnl ,:. de-
rived from, by Spain, 3'2. Expenct of adiminifti.ni:on
there, 355. Stae of population in, 399, 400. 'Ihe
number ot monafterles there, 408. Sec Mexice, Pr',u,
&:c.
Co'umbus, Bartholomew, is sent by his brother Chriflo-

pher to negociate with Henry VII. king ot Lng,alnt,
i. t6. T'he misfoitunes cf his voyvae, 90. Fol-
lows his brother to Hi'paniola, 152. Is veileli with the
adminifiration of affairs iht re by his hinther on his re.
turn to Spain, 162. Founds the town of St. I)omuino,
'73-
Columbus, Christopher, birth and ilucation of, i. 73.

His early voyages, 74. Marries and lcwles ai ffb>n,
75. His geographical refcttions, 78. Cuncevcb the

idc .

idea of making discoveries to the weflward, 80. O(ff
his services to the Genoese senate, 83. Caufc ot h
overtures being rejeced in Portugal, 85. Appl1es
the courts of Cathile and England, 86. His pio;,,,,:
how treated by the Spanilh geographers, 88. Is p.
troniled by Juan Pcrez, 91. His proposals ag,,
rejeaed, 93. Is invited by Isabella, and engagtd,
the Spanilh service, 97. Preparations for his vova;,-
99. The amount of his equipment, too. Sail 'l::

i

ipain, 102. His vigilant attention to all (ircu.
fiances during his voyage, o04. Apprehension, o, I ,
crew, 107. Ilis address in quieting their caba!s, i:.
Indications of their approaching land, ij o. An ii;
.ifcovcred, il . He lands, 13. His interview v .i:
the natives, ibid. i14. Names the island San i::..
dore, 116. Profccutes his discoverics fouthwarJ, :.
Discovers, and lands on, the illand of Cuba, i-,
Discovers Hispaniola, 119. Suffers Ihipwreck, but,r
saved by the Indians, 123. Builds a foit, 12b. R:.
turns to Europe, 129. I!ls expedient to prclervc tr.
memory of his difcoveiies during a florm, 131. A-
rives at the Azores, 132. .Arrives at Lifb.n, ii

.

His reception in Spain, 133. His audience with Fc-
dinand and Ifabdlla, 135. His equipment for a fecci:J
voyage, 138. Discovers the Caribbee islands, i:.
Finds his colony on Hispaniola defroyed, 143. 13ui s
a city, which he c.lls IfabIlla, 145. Vilits the inte-
rior parts of the country, 117. His men dilconten!tt
and factious, 149, i50. Discovers the iflandi ot f-
maica, 151. I ects his brother Bartholomew at Ifibc!!:,
152. I he natives ill ulId by his men, and hegin I
he alarmerd, 153, 154. He defeats the Indlians, 157.
}£xa3ts tribute tronm them, 1 58. Returns to ';iii :
juflity his corduict, r163. Is furiiillih d wilh a m(.
regul.ir plan for (o0o0iZad;10, 165. hlis third \'o1.',
169. I)ifcovcrs the iflndl ofl I'rinidad, 170. Il)lctrO
the continent of Ainei ai-, ib'i, . State of Ililjp;i:i;
on his .irriv.l, 173. C(o.Ip)Ofes the mutiny ot Ro'd Y
anll his adh rents, \i'tr. Is (dilirtllcd by tle at.ail: i
hth.a iour of l.is niii, IXS. C'omll, ints carlilcl l,
Sp.iini aaili(t hini, i89, J')o. Is 1iut hlr.re i:n .'
i(9 .. CIcars his c*0ndiuct, but iD not iellured to h'

9Illt;101i '
9

authority, 195. His solicitations negleced, oo00.
Forms new schemes of discovery, 20o. Engages in a
fourth voyage, 202. His treatment at Hispaniola,
203. Searches after a patiage to the Indian oceair,
205. Is shipwrecked on the coift of Jamaica, 207.
His artifice to secure the friendship of the Indians, 210.
Is delivered, and arrives at Hispaniola, 214. Returns
to Spain, 215. His death, 2ti. His right to the ori-
ginal discovery of America defended, 321.
Columbus, Don Diego, sues out his claims to his father's

privileges, i. 231. Marries and goes over to Hifpa-
niola, 232. Eftublifhes a pearl filhery at Cubaguj,
233. Projecs the ccnqueft of Cuba, 241. His mca-
fures thwarted by Ferdinand, 262. Returns to Spain,
263.
Ccmmrnrce, the era from which its commencement is to

be dated, i. 3. Motives to an intercourse among
distant nations, 4. Still flouri(hed in the ealtern em-
pire after the subversion of the western, 32. Revival
of, in Europe, 34.
Compafi, mariner's, navigation extended more by the

invention of, than by all the efforts of preceding ages,
i. 44. By whom invented, 45.

Condamine, M. his account of the country at the foot of

the Andes, in South America, ii. 408. His remarks
on the characer of the native Americans, 423.
Congo, the kingdom of, discovered by the Portuguese,

i. 65.

C'nnfiaitinople, the conficquence of removing the feat of

the Roman empire to, i. 30. Continued a commer-
cial city after the extinction of the weittrn empire, 32.
Became the chief rmaitof Italy, 35.
Cordova, Francisco Hernandez, diicovcrs Yucatan, i.

293. Is repulsed at Campeachy, and returns to Cuba,
295.

Carota, Alonzo, his observations en the contraband trade

of the Spanish colonies, iii. 347. Charater of his
American memoirs, 375.
Cortes, Fernando, his birth, education, and characer,

it. 217. Is by Vel.quez appointed (ominandcr of the
armament fitted out by him agaiilt New Spain, 218.
Velalquez becomes jealous of hinj, 221. Velalqucz

lends

tinds orders to deprive himof his commission, and la
him under an arreit, 222. Is protcdted by his troops
224. The amount of his forces, 225. Reduces th
Indians at Tabasco, 227. Arrives.at St. Juan de
Ulua, 228-. His interview with two Mexican con.
manders, 230. Sends prefcnts to Montezuma, 233.
Receives otherx in return, 234. His schemes, 240.
· Ifiabi)ahes a form of civil government, 244. Resigns
his oommilion under Velasquez, and afumes the corn.
mand in the king's name, 247. His friendship courted
bT the Zempoallans, 248.1 Butilds a fort, 25i. Con.
cudes a 'formal alliance with several caziques, ibid.
Difcovera a conspiracy among his men, and destroys
his ships, 255: Advances into the country, 258. Is
opposed by the,Tlafcalans, i6dria. Concludes a peace
with themr 267.. His ranih aea,. 269. Proceeds to
Cholula, 271. ,Difcoveri a,conrfpiracy »agaijflt him
here, and deftcoys theminhabitatts, o274.. Approaches
in fight of the capital city of Mexico, 275.- -His fir
interview with Montezuma, 277. His anxiety at his
situation in the city of Mexico,. 284. Seizes Monte.
zuma, 288. Orders him to be fettered, 292. Reasons
of his condut, ibid. Prevails on Montezuma to own
bimfelf a vassal to. the Spanih crown, 296. Amount
and division of his treasure, 298. Enrages the Mexi.
cans, by his imprudent zeal, 302. An armament sent
by Velasquez to supersede him, 306. His deliberations
on this event, 3c9. Advances to meet Narvaez, 313.
Defeats Narvaez, and takes him prisoner, 317.: Gains
over the Spanish soldiers to his interest, 318. Returns
to Mexico, 321. His improper conduct on his arrival,
322. Js resolutely attacked by the Mexicans, 32j.
rAttacks them in turn without success, 324. Death of
Montezuma, 326. His extraordinary cfcape fiom
death, 328. Abandons the city of Mexico, 329. 11
attacked by the Mexicans, 330. His great l.-flis in
the encounter, 331. Difliculties of his retieat, 333.
Battle of Otumba, 335. Defeats the Mexicans, 337.
Alutinous Ipirit of his troops, 340. Rcduces the i c-
peacans, 342. Is flrengthencd by several reinlorcc-
ments, 344. Retuins to Mexico, 345. Eflab'llhcU
his head-quarters at Tczcucv, 348. Reduces or co,lI-

liartc

liates the surrounding country, 349. Cabals anong
his troops, 351. His prudence in fupprefling them,
352. 'Builds and launches a fleet of brigantines on the
lake, 355. Besieges Mexico, 357. Makes a grand
assault to take the city by storm, but is repulsed, 362.
Evades the Mvexican prophecy, 365. Takes Guati-
tnozin prisoner, 369. Gains pofflflion of the city,
370. And of the whole empire, 373. Defeats an-
other attempt to supersede him in hia command, 382.
Is appointed governor of New Spain, 384. His
schemes and arrangements, ibid. Cruel treatment of
the natives, 385. His conducl fubjcced to inquiry,
390. Retuins to Spain tojuflify hinifelf, ibid. Is re-
warded by the emperor..Charles V. 392. Goes back
to Mexico with limited powers, 393. Discovers Ca-
lifornia, 394. Returns to Spain, and dies, 395. In-
quiry into the nature of his letters to the emperor
Charles V. 451. Authors who wrote of his conquefi
of NewSpain, 452.

Camrcilof the Indies, its power» iii. 263.
Cralrs, in the Spaniib American colonies, charaaer of,

iii. 274.
Craglan, colonel George, his account of the discovery of

the bones of large extint species of animals in North
America, ii. 409.

C/fads to the Holy Land, the great political advan-

tages derived from, by the European nations, i. 37,
38..
CrIuzde, bulls of, published regulaily every two years in

the Spanifl colonies, iii. 353. Prices of, and amount
of the sale at the lalt publication, 422.
Cuba, the island of, discovered by Christopher Columbus,

i. i?. Is failed round by Ocampo, 230. The con-
quest of, undertaken by Diego Velasquez, 241. Cruel
treatment of the cazique Haruey, aad his repartee to a
friar, 241, 242. Columbus's cnthufiaflic description
of a harbour in, 317. The tobacco produced there,
the finest in all America, iii. 307.

Cubagua, a pearl fishery eRfablifhed there, i. 233.
Cumana, the natives of, revenge their ill treatment by the

Spaniards, i. 287. The country dgfolited by Diego
Ocampo, 290.

Curzc,

C*zas, the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded hy

Manco Capac, iii. 22. Is fcized by Pizarro, 52. Is
besieged by the Peruvians, 64. Is surprised by Alma-
gro, 68. Is recovered and pillaged by the Pizarros, 76.
Was the only city in all Peru, 220.

D
Dancing, the love of, a favourite paflion among the Amc.

ricans, ii. 183.
Darien, the iflhmus of, described, i. 247. The incrcasC

of settlement there, obftruted by the noxiouulies of
the climate, iii. 239.
De Solis, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata,

i. 261.
De Solis, Antonio, characer of his Hiftoria de Ia Con-

quifta de Mexico, ii. 453.
D'Efquilache, prince, viceroy of Peru, his vigorous mca-

fures for restraining the excesses of the regular clergy
there, iii. 293. Rendered ineffectual, 294.
Diaz, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of Good Hpr,

i. 69.
Difaoveries, the difference between those made by lan\,

and those by sea, flated, i. 310.
Dodwell, his objetions to the Periplus of Hanno exploded,

i. 305.
Domingo, St. on the island of Hispaniola, founded by B13r-

tholomew Columbus, i. 173.
Dominicans, those in Hispaniola publicly rcmonflnr;:

against the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 2t4.
See Las Ca/as.
Drunkenness, itrong propensity of the Americans to i!!-

dulge in, i. 186.

E
Earth, the globe of, how divided into zones by the nn-

tients, i. 28.
Egyptians, ancient, slate of commerce and niavigat:;o

among them, i. 5. ,

1' DKriwdi,

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so called,

made by Francis Orellana, iii. 96.

Elephant, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 410.
Efurial, curious calendar discovered in the Library there

by Mr. Waddilove, iii. 384. Description of that va-
luable monument of Mexican art, 385.
Efquimaux Indians, resemblances between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders, ii. 40. Some account
of, 144. 443.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an exclufrve

right to all the countries they mhould discover, from
Cape Non to the continent of India, i. 61.
Europe, how affeced by the difmcmberment of the Ro-

man Empire by the barbarous nations, i. 32. Revival
of commerce and navigation in, 34. Political advan-
tages derived from the crusades, 37.

F
Ferdinand king of Caflile. See Columbus and Ifabria.

Turns his attention at length to the regulation of
American affairs, i. 225. Don Diego de Columbus
sues out his father's claims against him, 231. Erecs
two governments on the continent of America, 235.
Sends a fleet to Darien, and supersedes Balboa, 254.
Appoints Balboa lieutenant-governor of the countries
on the South Sea, 258. Sends Dias de Solis to difqover
a western paflage to the Moluccas, 261. Thwarts the
measures of Diego Columbus, 262. His decree con-
cerning the treatment of the Indians, 266.
Fernandez, Don Diego, charaAer of his Hiftoria del

Peru, iii. 362.
Aernandez, P. his description of the political slate of the

Chiquitos, ii. 434.
Figueroa, Roderigo de, is appointed chief judge of His-

paniola, with a commiflion to examine into the treat.
ment of the Indian natives, i. 277. Makes an ex-
periment to determine the capacity of the Indians, 289.
Florida, difcovcred by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 243. The

chiels there hereditary, ii. 117. Account of, Irom Al-
varo Nugnez Cabcca de Vaca, ii. 428.

VOL. II. G g F7ota,

IBtJ, Spaiailh, fonie icc6uht o6, iii. 31t.
Fon/tra, bifop of BPdajos, minil'et for Indian affairs,

obfiru'as the plans of colonization and discovery
oriMid by Colun bus, i. 159. 168. Patronizes the
epeidition of Alonzo de Ojeda, 183.

G
'Gatoers, Spanish, the nature and purpore of these vessels,

iii. 317. Arrangement of their voyage, 318.
Ga/tvr, Don Joseph, sent to discover the true slate of

California, iii. 230.
G'ama, Vasco de, his voyage for discovery, i. 179.

Doubles th'e Cape of Good Hope, 180. Anchors be-
fore the city Mclinda, ibid. Arrives at Calccut in
Malabar, 181.
Gaming, firange propensity of the Americans to, ii.

186.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the position

of that Fiver, i. 309.
Gafia, Pedro de la, sent to Tcro as president of the Court

of Audien'ce in Lima, iii. 1'25. His charatcer and
fddderarion, ibid. The poWers he (vas vefled with,
'126. Arrives at Panama, 128. Acquires pofeffion
'of Panfria with the fleet and fordes there, 130. Ad-
Vances toswards Cuzco, 135. Piz'arro' troops desert
'o himn, 136. His 'modera't ue fe of 'te viaory, 137.
bevifes emoloyme't for his soldiers, 143. His divi-
'sion of the courntry among tis followers, S44. The
discontents it occasions, 145. Restores order and go-
vernrlriet, L;t6. His reception at hlis return to Spain,
147-

Gimitrus, riflance of his igrtorance in geography, i. 31r.
Geography, the knowledge of, extremely confined among

the andcnts, i. 26. Became a favourite fiudy among
the Ateabians, 34.
Glbnts, rbe accounts of, in our early travellers, uncon-

flrmned 'by recent discoveries, i. 43. ii. 419, 420.

Ciioa, Vlavio, the inventor of the mariner's comipafs, i.
'okbt, its division into zones by the ancients, i. 28.

N (,ld d,

Gold, why the first metal with which man was acquaint-

ed, iii. 234. Extraordinary large grain of, found in
the mines at Cinaloa, 394.
Gomara, character of his Cronica de la Nueva Efpagna,

ii. 452.
Good Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholomew Diaz,

i. 69.
Government, no visible form of, among the native Ame-

ricans, ii. 117. Exceptions, 120.
Gran Chaco, account of the method of making war

among the natives of, from Lozano, ii. 436.
Granada, new kingdom of, in America, by whom ra-

duced to the Spanish dominion, iii. 244. Its climate
and produce, 245. A viceroy lately established there,
259.
Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and discovery

among them, i. 14. Their commercial intercourse
with other nations very limited, 16, 17.

Greenland, its vicinity to North America, ii. 39.
Grijalva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of

dicovery, L 297. Discovers and gives name to New
Spain, 298. His reasons for not planting a colony
in his newly discovered lands, 300.
Guarda Costas, employed by Spain to check illicit trade

in the American colonies, iii. 327.
Guatimala, the indigo there superior to any in America,

iii. 307.
Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma,

succeeds Quetlavaca in the kingdom of Mexico, ii.
347. Repulses the attacks of the Spaniards, in Rorm-
ing the city of Mexico, 362. Is taken prilnher by
Cones, 369. Is tortured to discover his treafurc, 37a.
Is hanged, 387.
Guiana, Dutch, cause of the exceflive fertility of the foil

there, ii. 413.

H
Hanno, his Periplus defended, with an account of his

voyage, i. 305.
Hatu,y, a cazique of Cula, his cruel treatment, and

memorable rcpartcc to a Franciscan friar, i. 241.

G g 2 atavklfwertlh'

HUawtetworth's voyages, account of New Holland, and

the inhabitants from, ii. 492.
Heat, the different degrees of, in the old and new

continents, accounted for, ii. 401. Estimated,
412.
Henry, Prince of Portugal, his chara&er and fludies,

i. 53. Expeditions formed by his order, 55. Applies
for a papal grant of his new discoverics, 59. His
death, 63.
Herrada, Juan de, alffainates Francis Pizarro, iii. 90.

Dies, 95.
Herrera, the best hiflorian of the conquest of New

Spain, ii. 454. His account of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 372.
Hispaniola, the island of, dicfovered by Chriltopher

Columbus, i. 119. His tranfaaions with the na-
tives, 120. A colony left there by Columbus, ilid.
The colony defiroyed, 143. Columbus builds a
city called Isabella, 145. The natives ill-used,
and begin to be alarmed, 153. Are defeated by
the Spaniards, 157. Tribute exaced from them,
158. They scheme to flarve the Spaniards, 16c.
St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
173. Columbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla,
192. Nicholas de Ovando appointed governor, t96.
Summary view of the conduct of the Spaniards to-
wards the natives of, 2.19. Unhappy fate of Ana-
coana, 221. Greai produce from the mines there,
224. The inhabitants diminilb, 227. The Spa-
niards recruit them by trepanning the natives of the
Lucayo, 228. Arrival of Don Diego de Columbus,
232. The natives of, almost extirpated by flavcry,
240, 263. Controversy concerning the treatment
of them, 264. Columbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives of, 318.
Curious inflance of superstition in the Spaniflh plantirs
there, ii. 411.
llolgurin, Pedro Alvarez, ercets the royal flandard in

Pert, in opposition to the younger Almagro, iii. 95.
Vaca de Catiro arrives and aflumcs the commanld,
96.

4 1 i';L r,

/wmnr, bis account ps the navigation of the ancient

Greeks, i. 14.
Honduras, the value of that country, owing to its p:o-

duction of the logwood tree, iii. 230.
Horned cattle, amazing increase of them in Spaniih Ame-

rica, iii. 307.
Horfrs, aftonilhment and miflakes of the Mexicans at the

fill fight of them, ii. 460. Expedient of the Peru-
vians to rcnder them incapable of acion, iii. 372.
Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, his charaCter and family,

iii. 25.
Huafcar Capac, Inca of Peru, dirputes his brother Ata-

hualpa's fuccelfion to Quito, iii. 26. Is defeated and
taken prironer by Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits theaffifl-
ance of Pizarro against his brother, 28. Is put to
deatl by order of Atdhualpa, 39.

I

7amaica discovered by Chriflopher Columbus, i. rSr.
ferome, St. three monks of that order sent by cardinal

Ximenes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of
the Indians, i. 270. Their conduct under this com-
mission, 273. Are recalled, 277.
Jcfuits, acquire an absolute dominion over California,

iii. 229. Their motives for depreciating the country,
ibid.
7euws, ancient, slate of commerce and navigation among

them, i. 9.
lucas of Pleu, received origin of their empire, iii. 23.

199. Their empire founded both in religion and po-
licy, 201. See Piru.
Iitdi, the motives of Alexander the Great, in his expe-

dition to, i. 18. The commerce with, how carried
on in ancient times, 23, 24. And when arts began
to revive in Europe, 35. The firlf voyage made
round the Cape of Good -lope, 179.

Indians in Spanish America. See Anericans.
Indies, Welt, why Columbus's dilcovctics were so namcJ,

i. 138,

G g 3 Innccrt;:

Innotnt IV. pope, his extraordinary mission to the prince

of the Tartars, i. 39, 40.
Jnqgufition, court of, when and by whom first introduced

into Portugal, i. 314.
JInflts and reptiles, why ro numerous and noxious in

America, ii. 18.
Yobn I. king of Portugal, the firfl who sent Phips to ex-

plore the wefRern coafis of Africa, i. 50. His son
prince Henry engages in these attempts, 53.
yobn II. king of Portugal, patronires all attempts towards

difcovcrics, i. 65. Sends an embassy to Abyflinia, 69.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus, 85.
Iran, the reason why savage nations were unacquainted

with this metal, ii. Icg, iio.
Isabella, queen (f Castile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalt of Chrifiopher Columbus, i. 92. Is again ap-
plied to by Quintanilla and Santangel, 95. Is pre-
vailed on to equip him, 96. Dies, 215. Her real
motives for encouraging discoveries in America, iii.
251.
Ijubella, the city of, in Hispaniola, built by ChriRopher

Collumbus, i. 145.
It/ly, the first country in Europe, where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire,
i. 35. The commercial spirit of, active and enter-
p ifipg, 36.

L
Ladrone islands, discovercd by Ferdinand Magellan, ii.

378.

L;,ke;, amazing size ofthofe in North America, ii. 4.
.ast Cajas, Bartholomew, returns from Hispaniola to so-

licit the cause of the enslavcd Indians at the court of
S)pain, i. 269. Is sent back with powers by cardinal
Ximcnes, 271. Returns dissatisfied, 272. 276. Pro-
cures a new commiiflon to be rent over on this subje.t,
277. Recommends the scheme of supplying the colo-
nies with negroes, 279. Undertakes a new colony,
28p. His conference with the bishop of Darien be-

forc

fore the emperor Charles V. 285. Goea to America
to carry his schemes into execution, 2$6. Circum-
flances unfavourable to him, 2ó8. His final mifcar-
riage, 289. Revives his reprefcntations in favour of
the Indians, at the desire of the emperor, iii. tot.
Compotes a treatise ?n ;he deftruaion of America, 102.
Leon, Pedro Cieza de, character of his Chronica dcl

Peru, iii. 362.
Lery, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

Toupinambos, ii. 439.

Lima, the city of, in Peru, founded by Pizarro, iii. sQ.
Logwood, the commodity that gives importance to the

provinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 231. Policy
of the Spaniards to defeat the English trade in, ibid.
Lou.', St. king of France, his cmbafiy to the chan of

the Tartars, i. 41.
Lozano, his accourn of the method of making war among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 436.
Lutqu:, Hernando de, a priest, arociaces with Pizarro in

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 4.

M

Madeira, the island of, firfl discovered, i. 56.
Madc, prince of North Wales, flory of his voyage and

discovery of North America examined, i. 24..
Magellan, Ferdinand. his account of the gigantic size of

the Patagonians, ii. 71. '] he exiitence of this gigantic
race yet to be decided, 72. 49, 420. His introducion
to the court of Callile, 374. Is equipped with a fjua-
dron for a vovage of dilcovery, 375. Sails through
the famous firait that bears his flame, 377. Discovers
the Ladronc and Philippine islands, 378. Is killed,
ibid.
Magut4, its property of attracting iron known to the an-

cients, but not its polar inclination, i. 5. Extraordi-
nary advantages resulting from this discovery, 4+.
Malo, St. account of its commerce with SpaniLh Ame-

rica, iii. 324.
Manco Capac, founder of the Peruvian empire, account

ofi iii, 22, 23. J00.

G g 4 nsannsrii

MaYpdevtiUz Sir John, his eastern travels, whith a cha-

raaer of his writings, i. 43.
Manila, the colony of, eftablifoed by Philip II. of Spain,

iii. 349. Trade between, and South America, ibid.
Mankind, their disposition and manners formed by their

situation, ii. 25. Hence resemblances to be traced ip
very distant places without communication, 26. Have
uniformly attained the greatset perfection of their na-
ture in temperate regions, 210.
Marca Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in

the East, i. 41.
Martfi, Gabriel his account of the country between the

Illinois and iachilimakinac, ii. 493.

Marina, Donna, a Mexican slave, her history, ii. 229.
Marinus, Tyrius, his erroneous position ofChina, i. 315.
MAartyr, Peter, his sentiments on the first discovery of

America, i. 327.
M_/lizos, in the Spanifl American colonies, diftinaion

between them and Mulattoes, iii. 275.
Metals, useful, the original natives of Ametica totally

unacquainted with, ii. o19.
.llexicans, their account of their own origin, compared

with later discoveries, ii. 41. Descriptions of their
historical pictures, iii. 381. Various exaggerated ac-
counts of the number of human vitims sacrificed by
them, 389. Their language furnished with refpeaful
terminations for all its words, 377. How they con-
tributed to the support of government, 378.
.Mexico, arrival of Fernando Cortes on the coat of, ii.

229. His interview with two Mexican officers, 230.
Information sent to Montezuma, with fomne Spanifl
presents, 233. Montezuma fends presents to Cortes,
with orders not to approach his capital, 234. State
of the empire at that time, 235. The Zempoallans
court the fiiendlhip of Cortes, 248. Several caziques
enter into alliance with Cortes, 251. Character of
the natives of Tlafcala, 258. The Tlafcalans re-
duced to sue for peace, 266. Arrival of Cortes at the
capital city, 277. The city described, 281. Monte-
z:uma acknowledges himself a vaffdl to the Spanifli
crown, 296. Amount of the treasure colleaed by
,ortcs, 298. Reasons of gold being found in flrch

f,,'.ill

(mall quantities, 299. The Mexicans enraged by the
imprudent zeal of Cortes, 302. Attack Alvarado
during the absence of Cortes, 319. Their resolute
attack on Cortes when he returned, 323. Death
of Montezuma, 327. The city abandoned by Cortes,
329. Battle of Otumba, 335. The Tepeacans re-
duced, 342. Preparations of *he Mexicans against
the return of Cortes, 345. Cortes besieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, 358. The Spaniards re-
pulsed in forming the city, 362. Guatimozin taken
prisoner, 369. Cortes appointed governor, 384. His
ichemes and arrangements, ibid. Inhuman treatment
of the natives, 385. Reception of the new regulations
there, iii. Ic5. A retrol'pecl into the form of go-
vernment, policy, and arts in, 151. Our information
concerning, very imperfet, 154. Orig-in of the mo-
narchy, 156. Number and greatness of the cities, 161.
Mechanical profeflions there diflinguifhed from each
other, 162. Diftintion of rank;, 163. Political in-
ftitutions, 166. Power and fplelidur of their mo-
narchs, 170. Order of government, iLid. Provision
for the support of it, 171. Police of, 172. Their
arts, 173. Their paintings, 175. 'Their method of
computing time, 179. Their wars continual and fe-
rocious, t80. Their funeral rites, 182. Imperfec-
tion of their agriculture, ibid. Doubts concerning the
extent of the empire, 183. Little intercourse among
its several provinces, 185. Ignorance of money, S86.
State of their cities, 188. 'Temples and other public
buildings, ibid. 18). Rcligion of, 1- 4. Causes of
the depopulation of this country, 248. The (finall-
pox very fatal there, z5o. Number of Indian native.;
remaining there, 255. Lilt and character of thofu
authors who wrote accounts of the conquelt of, li. 452.
Description of the aqueduct for the supply oft the ca)i
tal city. iii. 379. See Colonies.
Micha,'/, St. the gulph of, in the South Sea, dii;ovcrt '

and named Balboa, i. z2 . T'he coloiy of, cfi.ii,llh'.,i
by Pizarro, iii. 21.

Migrations of mankind, why fiht made by land, i. r.
Mind, human, the rffouts of it pioportioned to tlh wan'

of the body, ii. 8-.

.', . .* i

,1inl of South America, the great inducement to popu.

lation, iii. 226. Some account of, 300. Their pro-
duce, 301. The (pirit with which they are worked,
302. ratal effcets of this ardor, 304. Evidence of
the pernicious effcets of labouring in them, 406. Of
Mexico, total produce of, to the Spanilh revenue,
426, 427, 428.
J/,ucca Islands, the Spanilh claims on, fold by the Em-

peror Charles V. to the Portuguese, ii. 38s.
,Jonaj/ic inflitutions, the pernicious effecs of, in the

Spani/h American colonies, iii. 288. Number of con-
vents there, 408.
Menfivons, the periodical course of, when discovercd by

navigators, I. 24.
Ifont./fito, a Dominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub.
licly remonstrates against the cruel treatment of the
Indians, i. 264.
4jfatrzuma, the first intelligence received by the Spa-

riards of this prince, i. 299. Receives intelligence
of the arrival of 'ernando Cortes in his dominions, ii.
232. His presents to Cortes, 234. Forbids him to
approach his capital, 235. State of his empire at this
time, ibid. His charaaer, 236. His perplexity at the
arrival of the Spaniards, ibid. His timid negociations
with Cores, 237. His scheme for destroying Cortes
at Cholula discovered, 273. His irresolute condu&t,
277. His sirs interview with Cortes, ibid. Is seized
by Corte:, and confined to the Spanish quarters, 289.
Is fettered, 292. Acknowledges himself a vassal to the
Spanish crown, 296. Remains inflexible with regard
to religion, 301. Circumitances of his death, 327.
Account of a gold cup of his, in England, iii. 380.
Mulattoes, in the Spanilh American colonies, explanation

of thii diftinAiun, iii. 275.

N
NArvaerz, Pamphilo, is rent by Velasquez with an arma-

menl to Mexico, to supersede Cortes, ii. 307. 'rakes
pvfl.flion of Zempoalla, 3t4. Is defeated and taken

prii'oicr

prironer by Cortes, 317. How he carried on hi4 cor.
refpondence with Montezuma, 466.
Aatcbez, an American nation, their political inflitutions,
ii. 121, I22. Causes of their tame submission to the
Spaniards, 126. Their religious dotrines, 173.
Navigation, the arts of, very slowly improved by man-

kind, i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial
intercourse, 3. Imperfeions of, among the an-
cients, 5. More improved by the invention of the
mariner's compass, than by all the efforts of preceding
ages, 44. The first naval dilcoveries undertaken by
Portugal, 48.

N1groes, their peculiar situation under the Spanish domi-

nion in America, iii. 276.

NIwfeoudladd, its situation described, ii. 400.
Niw Holland, some account of the country and inhabit-

ants, it. 430.

New Spain, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i. 297, 298. See Mexico.

Nigno, Alonfo, his voyage to America, i. 185.
Norwegians might in ancient times have migrated to,

and colonized America, ii. 41.

Nugnez Vela, Blaico, appointed viceroy of Peru, to en.

force the new regulations, iii. o15. His character,
Ilo. Commits Vaca de Cafiro to prison, xit. Dif-
fenfions between him and the court of audience, 113.
Is confined, 114. Recovers his liberty, si6. Re-
fumes his command, ibid. Is pursued by Gonzalo
Pizarro, 118. Is defeated and killed by Pizarro, I i9.

0

Ocampo, Diego, sent with a squadron from Hispaniola to

delolate the country of Cumana, i. 288. 290.
Ocanspo, Sebaflian de, first fails round Cuba, and disco-

vers it to be an island, i. 230.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate the intercourfc be-

tween distant countries, continued long a formidable
barrier, i. 2. See Cmpafs and Navigation.

Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition to the WeVft In-

dies, i. 184. His second voyage, 197. Obtains a
government on the continent, 235.

Ohlntdo.

Olmned, Father Bartholomew de, checks the raflh zeal o

Cortes at Tlafcala in Mexico, ii. 270. Is sent b
Cortre to negociate with Narvaez, 310.
Ortilana, Francis, is appointed to the command of a bark

built by Gonzalo PizJrro, and deserts him, iii. 84
Sails down the Maragnon, 85 Returns to Spain with
a report of wonderful discoveries, 86. Herrera's aco
count ot his voyage, 372.
Orgoanez commands Almagro's party againfl the Pizarros,

and is ueteated and killed by them, iii. 75.
Orinoc, the great river of, dill ( vted by Christopher Co.

lun'bub, i. !70 The an:azi,_) plenty of filhing, ii.
427. Strange mrthvd ot chufing a captain among the
Indian trib? - he Iauks of, 146.
Otaheite, the in'.. aits of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water. ii. 4q4.
O:umba, battle ot, between Cortes and the Mexicans, ii.

335.
Ovando, Nicholas de, is sent governor to Hispaniola, i.

197. His prudent regulations, 199. Refuses admitl
sion to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 203. His
ungenerous behaviour to'Columbus, on his shipwreck,
208. i22. Receives him at length, and fends him
home, 214. Engages-in a war with the Indians, 218.
His cruel treatment of them, 220. Encourages culti-
vation and manufactures, 225. His method of trepan-
nping the natives of the Lucayos, 228. Is recalled,
232.

P

Parific ocean, why, and by whom To named, ii. 377.
Packit boats, first cflablithment of, between Spain and

her American colonies, iii. 334

Panama is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 260.
Parn-nindas, the first who divided the earth by zones, i

312. Patagonians, fiome account of, ii. 71. The reality o.

their gigantic size yet to be decided, 72. 419, 490.
,'iraias Dlavila is sent with a fleet to supersede lalboa
in hii govcrnmclnt of Sianta Maria on the ifthnus ot

Dari'i:,

Darien, i. 255. Treats Balboa ill, 256. Rapacious
conduct of his men, 257. Is reconciled to Balboa,
and gives him his daughter, 258. Puts Balboa to
death, 260. Removes his settlement from Santa Maria
to Panama, ibid.
Penguin, the name of that bird not derived from the

Welch language, i. 325.
Perez, Juan, patroniles Columbus at the court of Car-

tile, i. 91. His solemn invocation for the fucccfs of
Columbus's voyage, 101.
Periplus of Hanno, the authenticity of that work justified,

i. 306.
Peru, the first intelligence concerning this country, re-

ceived by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. 246. 252. The
coast of, firfi dilcovered by Pizarro, iii. 12. Pizarro's
second arrival, 18. His hofftile proceedings against
the natives, 19. The colony of St. Michael elia-
bliihed, 2 . State of the empire at the time of this inva-
sion, ibid. The kingdom divided between Huafcar and
Atahualpa, 25. Atahualpa usurps the government, 27.
Huafcar solicits assisTance from Pizarro, 28. Atahualpa
visits Pizarro, 33. Is seized by Pizarro, 36. Agreement
for his ransom, 38. Is refused his liberty, 42. Is cruelly
put to death, 48. Confusion of the empire on this event,
49. Quito reduced by Berralcazar, 52. The city of
Lima founded by Pizarro, 59. Chili invaded by Alma-
gro, 6o. Infurredcion of the Peruvians, 61. Almagro
put to death by Pizarro, 78. Pizarro divides the coun-
try among his followers, 8r. Progress of the Spaniih
arms there, 82. Francis Pizarro aflhflinated, 90. Re-
ception of the new regulations there, 107. The vice-
roy confined by the court of audience, 114. The
viceroy defeated and killed by Gonzalo Pizarro, 118.
Arrival of Pedro de la Gafca, 128. Reduction and
death of Gonzalo Pizarro, 137. The civil wars
there not carried on with mercenary soldiers, 138.
But nevertheless gratified with immense rewards, 140.
Their profusion and luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their
contefis, 141. Their want of faith, 142. Instances,
143. Division of, by Gaica, among his followers,
144. A retrofpet into the original government, arts,
and manners of the natives, I11. The high anti-

quity

quity they pretend to, 197. Their records, g98,
Origin of their civil policy, 199. This founded in
religion, 201. The authority of the Incas absolute
and unlimited, ibid. All crimes were punified ca-
pitally, 203. Mild genius of their religion, 204. Its
influence on their civil policy, 205. And on their
military fyflem, 206. Peculiar state of property there,
207. Diflncsion of ranks, 208. State of arts, 209.
Improved tate of agriculture, 210. Their buildings,
212. Their public roads, 214. Their bridges, 216.
Their mode of refining silver ore, 217. Works of
elegance, 219. Their civilization, nevertheless, but
imperfeat, 220. Cuzco the only place that had the
appearance of a city, ibid. No perseet reparation of
profeflions, 221. Little commercial intercourse, ibid.
Their unwarlike;fpirit, 222. Eat theirfleit and fish raw,
224. Brief account of other provinces under the vice-
roy of New Spain, 225. Causes of the depopulation of
this country, 248. The small-pox very fatal there,
50o. Writers who gave accounts of the conquest
of, 361. Their method of building, 391. State of
the revenue derived from, by the crown of Spain, 424.
See Coloaias.
tPter 1. czar of Ruflia, his extensive views in prosecuting
Asiatic discoveries, ii. 33.
Phnicians, ancient, tate of commerce and navigation

among them, i. 7. Their trade, how conduced, 305.
Phtiip II. of Spain, his turbulent disposition aided by his

American treasures, iii. 311. Efabli(hes the colony of
Manila, 349.
Philip III. exhaufis his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

iii. 31 1.
Philippine islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii.

378. A colony eftablilhed there by Philip II. of

pain, ii. 349. Trade between, and America, ibid.
Physic, the art of, in America, why conneced with di-

vination. ii. 179.
Pinto, Chevalier, his description of the charalacriflic

features of the native Americans, ii. 4 6.
Pinzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a veffil under Co-

lumbus in his firlt voyage of discovery, i. too. Sails
to America on a private adventure with four ships,
soi. Difcovcrs Yucatan, 230.

Pizart,

P;zarra Ferdinand, is besieged in Cuzco by the Peru-

vians, iii. 65. Is surprised there by Almagro, 68.
Escapes with Alvarado, 71. Defends his brother at
the court of Spain, 79. Is committed to prison, 8i.
Pizarao, FYanciico, attends Balboa, in his settlement on

the iflhmus of Darien, i. 239. Marches under him
across the iflhmus, where they discover the South Sea,
250. His birth, education, and characer, ii,. 3.
Aflociates with Almagro and De Luque, in a voyage
of discovery, 4. [;s ill success, 6. Is recalled, and
deserted by mofl of his followers, 9. Remains on the
island of Gorgona for supplies, 1 . Discovers the
colat of Peru, ibid. Returns to Panama, 12. Goes
to Spain to solicit reinforcements, 14. Procurrs the
supreme command for himself, 15. Is affifled with
money by Cortes, 16. Lands again in Peru, 18. His
hostile proceedings against the natives, 19. Efta-
blifhes the colony of St. Michael, 21. State of the
Peruvian empire at this time, ibid. Cause of his easy
penetration into the country, 27. Is applied to by
Huafcar for aflifance against his vicorious brother Ata-
hualpa, 28. State of his forces, ibid. Arrives at Caxa-
malca, 31. Is visited by the Inca, 33. His perfidious
seizure of him, 36. Agrees to Atahualpa's offer for
his ransom, 38. Divilion of their plunder, 40. Re-
fuses Atahualpa his liberty, 42. His ignorance ex-
posed to Atahualpa, 46. Bellows a form of trial on
the Inca, ibid. Puts him to death, 48. Advances to
Cuzco, 50. Honours conferred on lIim by the Spa-
nifh court, 55. Beginning of diflenfions bttween him
and Almagro, 56. His civil regulations, 58. Founds
the city of Lima, 59. Inlurreftion of the Peruvians,
6l. Cuzco seized by Almagro, 68. Deludes Alma-
gro by negociations, 70. Defeats Almagro, and takes
him prisoner, 75. Puts Almngro to death, 78. D)i-
vidrs the country among his followers, 81. The im-
politic partiality of his allotments, ibid. NMakes hiis
brother Gonzalo governor of Quito, 83. Is aflfiliait-
ed by Juan de Helrada, 9i.
Pizarr', Gonzalo, is made governor of Quito, hy his

brother Francis, iii. 83. Iis expedition over the An-
des, ibid. Is deserted by Orcllaiia, 84. His diflrcls

o1i

on this event, 87. His difaflrous return to Quite,
88. Is encouraged by the people to oppose Nugncz
Vela, the new viceroy, i 1. Assumes the government
of Peru, i 5. Marches against the viceroy, 117.
Defeats and kills him, 118, 119. Is advised by Car-
vajal to afrume the sovereignty of the country, 120.
Chufes to negociate with the court of Spain, 122.
Consultations of the court on his conduct, 123. His
violent resolutions on the arrival of Pedro de la Gafca,
129. Resolves to oppose him by violence, 131.
Marches to reduce Centeno at Cuzco, 132. Defeats
him, 133. Is deferred by his troops on the approach
of Gafca, 136. Surrenders and is executed, 137.
His adherents men of no principle, 142.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Sulis, i. 261. I:;

amazing width, ii. 400.
Pliny, the naturalist, instance of his ignorance in geogra-

phy, i. 312.
Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. 242. Ro-

mantic motive of his voyage, 243.

Population of the earth, flow progress of, i. r.
Posto Bello, discovered and named by Chriitopher Co-

lumbus, i. 206.
Parto Rico, is fettled and fubjeaed by Juan Ponce de

Leon, i. 229.

Porto Santo, the firfl discovery of, i. 55.
Portugal, when and by whom the court of inquisition

was first introduced into, i. 314.
Pottuguefe, a view of the circumstances that induced

them to undertake the discovery of unknown coun-
tries, i. 48. 51. First African discoveries of, 52.
Madeira difcovcrcd, 56. They double Cape Bojador,
57. Obtain a papal grant of all the countries they
should difcovcr, 6r. Cape Verd Islands, and the
Azores difcovcred, 62. Voyage to te East Indics by
Vaflo de Gama, 179.
Polof/, the rich silver mines there, how discovered, iii.

30o. The mines of, grcatly cxhauftcd and scarcely
worth working, 414.
Pri/oners of war, how treated by the native Americans,

ii. 138.

Pre<rt},

Praptrty, the idea of, unknown to the native Americans,

ii. 113. Notions of the Brafilians concerning, 432.
Praott7or of the Indians, in Spanimh America, his func-

tion, iii. 283.
Ptoleny, the philoropher, his geographical descriptions

more ample and exact than thole of his predccellors,
i. 30. His geography translated by the Arabians, 34.
His erroneous pofitiot of the Ganges, 309.

Q.

utetlavaca, brother of Montezuma, succeeds him as king
of Mexico, ii. 345. Conduats in perlon the fierce
attacks which obliged Cortes to abandon his capital,
346. Dies of the fnall-pox, 347.
eQuvada, Bilhop of Darien, his conference with Las Ca-
fas on the treatment of the Indians, in the presence of
the Emperor Charles V. i. 284.
Quicksilver, the property of the famous mines of, at Gua-

nacabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain, iii. 414.
The price of, why reduced, ibid.
Quinquina, or Jesuits bark, a produclion peculiar to Peru,

iii. 306.
Quipos, or historic cords of the Peruvians, some account

of, iii. 198.
Quito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac, Inca

of Peru, iii. 25. Is left to his son Atahualpa, ibid.
Atahualpa's general revolts after his death, o5. Is re-
duced by the Spaniards under Benalcazar, 5?. Be-
nalcazar deprived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made gover-
nor, 83.

R
Ramufio, his defence of Hanno's account of the coafl of

Africa, i. 307.
Regifler ships, for what purpole introduced in the trade

between Spain and her colonies, iii. 328. Superl.lde
the ule of the galeons, 329.
Re.'igion of the native Americans, an inquiry into, ii.

165.

VOL. 1I1. l h R11 lv,

Ribas, his account of the political slate of the people of

Cinaloa, ii. 442. Of their want of religion, 445.
Rio d la Pata, and Tucuman, account of those provinces,

iii. 236.

Rivers, the amazing size of those in America, ii. 4.
Robijon, prolelfor, his remarks on the temperature of va-

rious climates, ii. 4cI.
Roldan, Francis, is left chief juflice in Hispaniola, by

Christopher Columbus, i. 162. Becomes ringleader
of a mutiny, 173. Submits, 177.
Ronmans, their progress in navigation and discovery, i.

22. Their military spirit averse to mechanical arts
and commerce, ib. Navigation and trade favoured
in the provinces under their government, 23. Their
extensive discoverics by land, 25. Their empire and
the sciences destroyed together, 31.
Rrubruqui., father, his embafly from France to the Chan

of the Tartars, i. 41.
Ruffiani, Asiatic discoveries made by them, ii. 33. Un-

ceitainty of, 414.

S
Sacotecas, the rich silver mines there, when discovered,

iii. 'o 1.
San Salvador, discovered and named by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 116.
Sabnco, Don Pedro, account of his History of the conqucef

of Peru, iii. 361.
Sa';doval, the fliocking barbarities executed by, in Mexi-

co, ii. 386.
Sandl.val, Francisco Tello dc, is sent by the emperor

Charles V. to Mexico, as vifitador of America, iii.
ioS. His noderation and prudence, o16.

Savane life, a general etimate of, ii. 194.
S,alps, motive tif the native Americans for taking them

from their enemies, ii. 437.
Srtravo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains during his

viceroyalty in America, iii. 429.
Seville, extraordinaia incrcafe of its manufacturcs bLillhe

Amlerican trade, iii. 415. Its trade greatly reduced,
416. ']he Aicrican trade removed to Cadiz, 317.

Silvir

Silver ore, method of refining it praaifed by the native

Peruvians, iii. 218.
Ssnora, late discoveries of rich mines made there by the

Spaniards, iii. 217.

Ssl, American ideas of the immortality of, ii. 175
Ssutb Sea, first discovered by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,

i. 251.
Stain, general idea of the policy of, with regard to the

American colonies, iii. 256. Early interposition cf
the regal authority in the colonies, 257. All the
American dominions of, fubjeeted to two viceroys,
258. A third vicero.alty lately ellablifhed, 259. The
(clnioies of, compared with those of Greece and Rome,
266. Advartages she derived from her colonies, 309.
Why she does not fliil derive the fame, 310. Rapid
decline of trade, 312. This decline increased by the
mode of regulating the intcrcourfe with America, 315.
Employs guarda toflas to check illicit trade, 327.
The use of regifler fbips introducei, 328. Eflallifh-
nent of the company of Ca'acc.is, 3 i. Enlargement
of commercial ideas there, 333. itce trade permitted
to several provinces, 336. Revenue derived from
America, 352. Specification, 424.
Spaniards, their curious form of taking pofi.lion of new-

difcov.red countries, i. 332.
Strabo, a citation from, proving the great geographical

ignorancc of the antienti, i. 3C8. H115 own want of
geographical knowlcd(ge, 313.
Superj/ittion always corinntted with a (dfire of penctrating

into the secrets of lu;uiity, ii. 178.

T
Tapia, Chrifloval de, is sent from Spain to .\lxico, to

fiuperlede Corles in his comnianJ, but s.,i, iU ri.e at-
temlit, ii. 382.

7'tarij, the poflibility of their migrating to Amcri'c, ii.
7?ltila, in lexico, chir:'cttr of the natives of, ii 258.

()ppole the pfi.1ge of the SpiiaidiJ, 260. A'c re-
duced tu sue fjr pclcc, 266.

I1 h 2 !a (ob ,

Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured of'any in all

America, iii. 307.
Toupinambos, account of their ferocious courage from Le-

ry, ii. 439.
Trade, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iii.

336. Increase of the Spaniih cufloms from this mea-
sure, 420, 421.
Trade winds, the periodical course of, when discovered

by navigators, i 23.

7Trevellrs, ancient, ciiaraFer or their writing%, i. 43.
Trinidad-l, the island o, dilc:overed by ChrflRopher Co-

lumbus on his third vuy:i,,e, i. 170.
Tucuman, and Rio de Ia Plata, account of those provinces,

iii. 236.

Tyre, the commerce of that city, how conducted, i. 305.
Tyth.s of Spanish America, how applied by the court of

Spain, iii. 425.

V
Yaca de Caofro, Chrifloval, is sent from Spain to regulate

the governiment of Peru, iii. o8. Arrives at Quito,
94. Aflluies the supreme authority, ibid. Defeats
young Almagro, 96. The severity of his proceedings,
97. Prevents an insurreCtion concerted to oppose the
new regulations, o09. Is imprisoned by the new vice-
roy, 1I .
Filutrde, father Vincent, his curious harangue to Ata-

hualpa, Inca of Peru, iii. 34.. Gives his fanaion to
the trial .nd condemnation of Atahualpa, 47.
J'g-', (;.ircil.io de la, charaFter of his commentary on

the Spanilh writers concerning Peru, iii. 363.

lgetab!ei, their natural tcnduecy to fertilize the foil

whcre they grw, li. 21, 22.

Il/j/qridz, l.t.eo de, conquers the island of Cuba, i. 241.

292. I ls )prclariattons fir invading New Spain, ii.
215. lIis difliculty in chufing a comniander for the
expedition, 216. Appoints F'ernando Cortes, 217.
llis lmoives to (his choice, 219. Hecolmes fullicious
of t.',rtcs, 220. O)idecs Cortes to be deprived of his

ncmnimillion, and arrelted, 221, 222. Sends an arnia-
minnt to Mcxico alter Cortes, 304.

Itncgtiii

Vtnagas, P. his charater of the native Californians, ii.

425.
Vtnergal disease, originally brought from America, ii.

76. Appears to be wearing out, ibid. Its firlt rapid
progress, ii. 420.

Vtntzuela, hiflory of that settlement, iii. 242.
i'nice, its origin as a maritime state, i. 37. Travels of

Marco Polo, 41.

Verd, islands discovertd by the Portuguese, i. 62.
Vicero)'s, all the Spanish dominions in America fuhjecaed

to two, iii. 258. A third lately cianblilh d, 259.
Their powers, ibid. A fourth eflabhli;ea, 342
yilla Segnor, his account of the itate ot populati. in New

Spain, iii. 400. His detail of tne Spaiilli Atie: ican
revenue, 424.
Villefagna, Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foi ents a

mutiny among his troops, ii. 351. Is ui covered by
Cortes, and hanged, 352.
Ulloa, Don Antonio de, his description of the charaRer-

ifiic features of the native Americans, ii. 416. lis
reason for the Americans not being so fenfiule of pain
as the reft of mankind, 439. His account of the goods
exported from Spain to America, with the duty on them,
iii. 424.
Iolcanos, remarkable number of, in the northern parts

of the globe discovered by the Ruffians, ii. 415.
Iaffer, Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of diminu-

tive Americans, ii. 68. Compared with similar pro-
ductions in Africa, 69.
1/ar-fong of the native Americans, the Sentiments and

terms of, ii. 437.
lIomen, the condition of, among the native Americans,

ii. 89. Are not prolific, 92. Are not pcrmitted to
join in their drunken feasts, 191. Nor to wear orna-
ments, 441.

X
Xcrrtz, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro, the earliert

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 361,

7 Xiwr'ntsl,

Xlmemns, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of

the Indians in the Spanish colonies, i. 270. Patronircs
the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 375.

Y
2uctaan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon ani

D)iis de Solis, i. 230. Defcrihcd, 35. From whence
that province derives its va!ur, il. 230. Policy of
the court of Spain with rctpef to, 231.
Zarate, IDon Augufline, character of his History of the

conq,.cft of Peru, iii. 362.
Zonei, the earth how c'ivided into. by the geograph) of

the antirnts, i. 28. Bv whom first fu divid:d, 312.
ZumNraraga, Juan de, filfl Lfhop of AMexicn, the 'c-

1lroyer of all the ancient records of the MIexican ein-
pire, iii. X56.

ND4

OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.

# Just Published, New Editions of the following BOOKS:

ytfl PubUlJed,

New Editions of the following B O O K S:

I. The History of Scotland, during the Reigns

of Queen Mary and of King 7ames VI. till his
Acceflion to the Crown of England; with a
Review of the Scotti/h HiRlory, previous to that
Period; and an Appendix containing Original
Papers: 2 Vols. 4to. By William Robertson, D. D.
the 5th Edition. il. Ios.

*,* Another Edition, 2 Vols. 8vo. i2s.

2. The History of the Reign of the Emperor

Charles V. with a View of the Progress of Society
in Europe, from the Subversion of the Roman
Empire to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Centu-
ry. By iilliam Robertjon, D. D. Embellifled
with 4 Plates, elegantly engraved: 3 Vols. 4to.
31. 3S.

,* Another Edition, 4 Vols. 8vo. 1l. 4s.

2. The -liftory of Almerica, Vols. I. and II. 4to.

By the fame Author. Illultrated with Maps.
2l. 2S.
