~S"~C~h~~· .1/5·
.rcl~n/~~/u

THE
HISTORY OF THE REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH A VIEW OF THE
tprogrei0 of wor:iet in europe,

FKROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO TUE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

DY

WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
LATE PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OP EDINBURGII, AND

HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HiS MAJESTY SO. SCOTLANC;

TENTH EDITION,
IN FOURB VOLUvMES,

VOL. IlL
..nbe.ihibed .withfour elegant Engraving:,

GLASGOW,
p nt be1 ant for Capmura an ,,r,.

-OWC-
I&cc»

# BOOK V.

HISTORY OF THE REIGN .

. -* * i-

OF TR - '
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.

THE account of te cruel manner in which the pope had
been treated, filled all Europe with afitoilihmeat or horror.
To fee a Christian emperor, who by pofeffing that dignity
ought to have been the proteor and advocate of the holy
fee, lay violent hands on him who represented Chri- eon
earth, antd detain his sacred erfon in a rigorous captivity
was confidered as an impiety that merited the feGreft ven-
geanee, and which called for the immediate interposition of
every dutiful fen of the Church. Francis and Hery, a.
lanned at the progress of the Imperial armrin Italy, had even
before the taking of Rome, entered into a coser alliance;
and, in order to give some check to the emperor's ambition,
had agreed to make a vigorous diversion in the Low Count
tries. The force of every motive which had inluenced
them at that time was now increased; and to these were ar.
ded the desire of refcing the pope out of the emperor's
hands, a meafume no Iets politic than it appeared to be piou..
This, however, rendered it necessary to abandon their hotilk
intentions against the Low Couatries and to make Italy
the feat of war, as it wa by vigorous operations there they
might contribute most effe&ually towards deliveing Romc
and setting Clement at liberty. Francis being now sensible
that, in his fyfte with regard to t.h a-E s of Italy, the

spirit of refnement bad carried him too sari and that, by
an excels of remifnefs, he had allowed Charles to attain ad-
vantage which he might easily have prevented; was eager
to make reparation for an error, of which he was not often
guilty, by an aativty more futable to his temper. Henry
thought his interposition necefary, in order to hinder the
emperor from becoming master of all Italy, and acquiring
by that means such fupeiority of power, as would enable
him for the future to dietate without controul to the other
princes of Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis had taken care
to secure by flattery and presents, the certain methods of
gaining his favour, negleced nothing that could infenfe his
master against the emperor. Besides all these public coufi-
derations, Henry was influenced by one of a more private
nature; having begun about this time to form his great
scheme of divorcing Catherine of Aragon, towards the exe-
cution of which he knew that the iandion of papal authori-
ty would be neceflary, he was desirous to acquire as much
merit as possible with Clement, by appearing to be the chief
initrument of his deliverance.

The negotiation, between princes thus disposed, was not

tedious. Wolfey himself conduced it, on the part of his
fovereig, with unbounded powers, Francis treated with
him in person at Amiens [July i l , where the cardinal ap-
peared, and was received- with ryal magnificence. A mar-
rage between the duke of Orleans and the princess Mary
was agreed to as the basis of the confederacy; it was refolv-
ed that Italy flonM be the theatre of war, the frength of
the army which f1ould tale the field, as-well as the contin-
gent of troops or of money, which each prince should fur-
niih, were fettled; and if the emperor did not accept of the
proposals which they were jointly to make him, they bound
themselves immediately to d~lare war, and to begin hoftiUi
ties [Aug. 18]. Henry, who took every efolutiod with
impetuosity, entered so eagerly into this new alliance, that,
in order to give Francis the strongest proof of bis fricndhi

m
S~

and refpte, he formally renounced the anclent claim of the
English monarchs to the crown of France, which had tng
·been the pride and ruin of the lation; as a full coipeafa-
tion for which .he accepted a pension of fifty thouiftd
crowns, to be paid annually to- himfeif and lis fucceffirsbt.

The pope, being unable to fulfil the conditions of hii'-ca

pitulation, Rfill remained a prisoner 'u , the f£veire caft6y'
of Alar9on. The Florent;ies no fdoner helad'bcf whrattlad
happened at Rome, than they ran to artis-in a tiumttuous
manner.; expelled the cardinal di Cortona, who governed
;theirci;ty in the pope's name; defaced the arms of the Me-
dici; broke in pieces the Wateus of'Leo and Clement; and
declaring thenfelves a free state, re-establishcd their anciest
popular government. The Venetians, taking advantage of
the calamity of their ally the pope, seized Ravenna, and o-
ther places belonging t the chuncb, under pretext of keep.
ing them in depofite. The dukes of Urbino and Fermra
laid hold likewise on part of the spoils 'a the uaBfrtiate'
pontiff, whom they confidered as irretrievably ruined t.

Lanno'-, ol. the other hand, laboured to derive some so-

lid benefit from that unfarefeeat venat which gave such
splendour and superiority to his master's arms. For this
purpose lie marched to Rome, together with Moncada, and
the marquis del Guafte, at the liead of all the troops which
they could assemble in the kingdom of Naples. The arrival
of this reinforcement brought new calamities on the un-
1happy citieens of Rome; for the koldiers envying the
wealth of their companions, imitated their licence, and with
the utmoet rapacity gathered the gleanings, which had e-
fcaped the avarice of the Spaniards and Germans. There
was not now any army in Italy capable of making head a-

ainft the ITperiaiits; amlbnothing more was requisite to
reduce Bologna, and the other towns in the tcCefiaftical
state, than to have appeated before them. But the soldien

Hbert 83, &8 c . Rym. Soed xiv. 203.

tGaic.l. xviii. 453.
Vol. IlI. B

having been o long accustomed, under Bourbon, to an en-
tire relaxation of difcipine, and having taiRed the sweets of
living at discretion in a greatcity, ahnoft without the con-
trol of a superior, wre become so impatient of military-fub-
ordination, and so averse to service, that they refused to leave
Rome, unlfs all their rrean were paid; a condition which
they knew to be - iipoflbk. At the fame time, they de-
dcred, that they would not obey any other person than the
prince of Orange, whom the army had chorea general. Lan-
noy, finding that it was no longer fare for him to remain a-
mong licentious troops, who despised his dignity, and hat-
ed his person, returned to Naples; soon after the marquis
dl-Guafto and Moncada thought it prudent to quit-Rome
for the tme rafon. The prince of Orange, a general only
in name, and by themoft precarious of all tenures, the good.

l of -oldiers, whom success and licence had rendered ca-

picin s, was obliged to. pay- Iore attention to' their -hu-
mours, than they did to his

h omm adis.- Thus the. empe-,

ror, intead of reapingany of the advantages which he might
have expeced from the reducion of Rome, had the morti-
fication to fee the most formidable body of troops that he
had ever brought into the field, continue in a Rate of inac-
tivity, from which it was impoflible to rouse them*.

This gave the king of France and the Venetians leisure

to form new schemes, and to enter into new engagements
for delivering the pope, and preferving.the liberties of Italy.
The newly restored republic of Florence very imprudently-
joined with them, and Lautrec, ofwhofe abilities the Italians
entertained a much more favourable opinion than his own
matter, was, in order to gratify them, appointed generalif-
fimo of the league. It was with the utmost reluctance he
undertook that office, being unwilling to expose himself a
second time to the difficulties and disgraces, which the negli.
gence of the king, or the malice of his favourites, might
bring upon him. The best troops in France marched un.

Guic. L xvili. 454.

der his command; and the king of England, though he had
not yet declared war against the emperor, advanced a con.'
fiderable fum towards carrying on the expedition. Lau-
trec's first operations were prudent, vigorous and successful.
By the assistance of Andrew Doria, the ablest sea officer of
that age, he rendered himself master of Genoa, and re eftab-
lifhed in that republic the fafion of the Fregofi, together
with the dominion of France. He obliged Alexandria to
surrender after a short siege, and reduced all the country on
that fide of the Tefino. He took Pavia, which had so long
refilled the arms of his sovereign, by- assault, and plundered
it with that cruelty, which the memory of the fatal disaster
that had befallen the French nation before its walls natural-
ly inspired. All the Milanese, which Antonio de Leyva
defended with a small body of troops, kept together, and,
supported by his own addrcfs and induRry, must have soon
submitted to his power, if he had continued to bend the
force of his arms against that country. But Lautrec durfi
not complete a conquest which would have been so honoura-
ble to himself, and offuch advantage to the league. Fran.
cis knew his confederates to be more desirous of circumfcrib-
ing the Imperial power in Italy, than of acquiring new ter-
ritories for him; and was afraid, that if Sforza were once
re-eftabliflied in Milan, they would second but coldly the
attack which he intended to make on the kingdom of Naples.
For this reason he inftru&ed Lautrec not to puih his opera-
tions with too much vigour in Lombardy; and happily the
importunities of the pope, and the solicitations of the Flo-
rentines, the one for relief, and the other for protection,
were so urgent as to furnish him with a decent pretext for
marching forward, without yielding to the intreaties of the
Venetians and Sforza, who infited on his laying siege to
Milan*.

While Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome, the em-
OGuic. I. xvii. 46X. Bellay, o7, &.c. Mauroc. Hiit. Venet.
li). ii. 2jS

B a

pror had time to delberate concerning the disposal of the
pope's person, who still remained a prisoner in the cattle of
St. Anglo. Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion,
with which be usually cdearoured to cover his aitions,
Charles, in many ifances, appears to have been but little
under the influence of religious considerations, aMd had fre-
quently, on this occasion, expressed an inclination to tranf-
port the pope into Spain, that he might inculge his ambi-
tion with the fpcltade of the two most illustrious perfonagea
;n Europe successively prisoners in his court. Bat the fear
of giving new offence to all Chriltendom, -id of filling his
own fubjeas with horror, obliged him to forego that satis-
faction*. The progrefs-of the confederates made it nos
necefiry, either to set the- pope at liberty, or to remove
him to some place of confinement more secure than the caf-
tie of St. Angelo. Many considerations induced him to,
prefer the former, particularly his want of the money, re-

uifite as well for recruiting his army, as for paying off the
raft arrears due to it. In order to obtain this, he had as-
fembled the Cortes of Cafile at Valladolid about the begin-
ning of the year, and having laid before them the state o£
his affairs, and represented the neceflity of making great:
preparations to resist the enemies, whom envy at the fuccef&
which had crowned his arms would unite against him, he de-
manded a large supply in the most prefling terms [Feb.:
ii]; but the Cortes, as the nation was already exhausted
by extraordinary donatives, refused to load it with any new
burden, and in spite of all his endeavours to gain or to in,
timidate the members, persisted in this refolationt. No re-
source, therefore, remained, but the extorting from Clement
by way of ransom, a fum sufficient for discharging what was
due to his troops, without which it was vain to mention to
them their leaving Rome.

Nor was the pope inaftive on his part, or his intrigues un-
successful towards hastening such a treaty. By flattery, and

* Guic. L xviii. 45. Sandov. i. p. 814.

the appearance of unbounded confideac~ he i4'g~ed 4hc.
resentment of cardinal Colonna, and wroughtbupodi4hp vani-
ty, which made him desirous of liewinggthse 'orldothat as'
his power had at firit depreffcd.thepope, it Ciald now raise
him-to his former dignity. By favours and promises he"
gained Morone, wlo, by one of those whimsical revolutions
which occur so often in his life,: and which so Rrongly-dif-
play his charater, had new recovered -lJi credit and, autho-
rity with the Imperialists. The address and influence of two
such men easily removed all the obltacles which retarded an
accommodation, and brought the treaty -for Clement'. liber.
ty to a conclusion, upon condition bhard indeed, but not
more severe than a prince in his fituatien had reaimonto ex-
pec. He was obliged to advance, in ready money, an hun.
dred thousand crowns for the use of the army% to pay the.
fame fum. at the distance of a fortnight; and. actthe end, of.
three months, an hundred and fifty thousand mere. He er'c
gaged not to take part in the war againt Charlke either in
Lombardy or in Naples; he granted. him a bull ofcruzado,
and the tenth of ecclefiAitical revenues in Spain; and he not
only gave hostages, but put the emperor in possession of fe.
veral towns, as a security for the performance of thfe ar.
ticles*. Having raised the first moiety by a falleafecclefi-:
afical dignities and benefices, and other expedients equally
uncanonical, a day was fixed for delivering him from impri-<
fonment [Dec. 6]. But Clement, imiRatiant to be free, as-
ter a tedious confinement of fix months, as well as full o
the suspicion and difruft natural to the unfoitunate, wa.asJ
much afraid that the Imperialfts might Rill throw in ob.
ltacles to put off his deliverance, that he disguised himself,
on the night preceding the day when he was to be set free,-
in the habit of a merchant, and Alargon .having remitted
somewhat of his vigilance upon the conclusion of the trea4
ty, he made his escape ndifcovered. He arrived before
next morning at Orvietto, without any attendants but a-sian

* Guic. 1. xviii 467, &c.

B3

gle officer; and from thence wrote a letter of thanks to Lau-
tree, as the chief instrument of procuring liim libertyt.

During these tranlsaions, the ambassadors of France and

England repaired to Spain, in consequence of the treaty
which Wolfey had concluded with the French king. The
emperor, unwilling to draw on himself the united forces of
the two monarchs, discovered an inclination to relax sole-
what the rigour of the treaty of Madrid, to which, hither-
to, he had adhered inflexibly. He offered to accept of the
two millions of crowns, which Francis had proposed to pay
as an equivalent for the dutchy of Burgundy, and to set his
sons at liberty, on condition that he would recal his army
out of Italy, and restore Genoa, together with the other
conquests which he had made in that country. With re-
gard to Sforza, he inifted that his fate hfould be determin-
edby the judges appointed to inquire into his crimes. These
propositions being made to Henry, he transmitted them to.
his ally the French king, whom it more nearly concerned to
examine and to answer them; and if Francis had been flir-
cerely solicitous, either to conclude peace or preserve cone
fiftency in his own condu&, he ought infiantly to have clof-
ed with overtures which differed but little from the propo-
fitionswhich he himfelfhad formerlymadet. Buthisviews
were now much changed; his alliance with Henry, Lautrec's
progrefiin Italy, and the superiority of his army there above
that of the emperor, hardly left him room to doubt of the
success of his enterprise againf Naples. Fall of those fan-
guinc hopes, he was at no loss to find pretexts for rejeting
or evading what the emperor had proposed. Under the ap-
pearance of sympathy with Sforza, for whose interests he
had not hitherto dicfovered much solicitude, he again de-
manded the full and unconditional re-establishment of that
unfortunate prince in his dominions. Under colour of its
being imprudent to rely on the emperor's sincerity, he insist-

t Guic . . xviii. 467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc. Hit.
Venet lib. ii. za. 4 Recueil des Traitcz, i. 249.

ed that his sons Ihould be set at liberty before tihe- rench
troops left Italy, or surrendered Genoa. The unreasonables.
ness of these demands, as well as the reproachful insinuation
with which they were accompanied, irritated Charles to such
a. degree, that he could hardly liften to them with patiencet
and repenting of his moderation, which had made so little
impreflion on his enemies, declared that he would not de-
part in the fmaIleft article from the conditions which he
had now offered. Upon this the French and English am-
baffadors (for Henry had been drawn unaccountably to conr
cur with Francis in these trange propositions) demanded
and obtained their audience of leaved.

Next day [Jan. 22, Z528,] two heralds who had accom-

panied the ambassadors on purpose, though they had hither-
to concealed their character, having assumed the ensigns of
their office, appeared in the emperor's court, and being ad-
mitted into his presence, they, in the name of their refpec-.
tive matters, and with all the folemnities cuflomaay on fucl
occasions, denounced war against him. Charles received both
with a dignity fuitabe to his own rank, but spoke to eaeh
in a tone adapted to the sentiments which he entertained of
their refpetive sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of the
English monarch with a firmness tempered by some degree
of decency and refpef. His reply to the French king a-
bounded with that acrimony of expression, which personal
rival(hip, exasperated by the memory of many injuries in-
fli&ed as well as suffered, naturally suggests. He desired
the French herald to acquaint his sovereign, that he would
henceforth confider him not only as a base violator of public
faith, but as a stranger to the honour and integrity becom-
ing a gentleman. Francis, too high-fpirited to bear such an
imputation, had recourse to an uncommon expedient in order
to vindicate his charater. He instantly sent back the herald
with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the emperor the lie
inform, challenged him to single combat, requiring him to

t Rym. xiv. zoo. Herbert SS. Guic. 1. xviii. 471.

name the time and place of the encounter, and the weapons
with which he chose to fight. Charles, as he was not infe-
rior to his rival in spirit or bravery; readily accepted the
challenge; but, after several meflages concerning the ar-
rangement of all the circumstances relative to the combat,
accompanied with mutual reproaches, bordering on the modi
indecent scurrility, all thoughts of this duel, more becom-
ing the heroes of romance than the two greatest monarchs
of their age, were entirely laid aside*.

The example ofttwo personages so illufrious drew such

general attention, and carried with it so much authority,-
that it had considerable influence in producing an important>
change in manners all over Europe. Dues, as has plready
been observed, had long been permitted by the laws of all the-
European nations, and forming a part oftbeirjurifprudence,.
were authorised by the magistrate, on many occafionw the
most proper method of terminating questions with regard to.
property, or of deciding those which refpe&ed crimes. But
iogle combats being confidered as solemn appeals to the omni-
science and justice ofthe Supreme Being, they were allowed&
only in public cause according to the prescription of law, andt
carriedon in a judicialform. Men accuftomedto this manner
of decisions in a court ofjuftice, were naturally led to apply it-
to personal and private quarrels. Duels, which at first could
be appointed by the civil judge alone, were fought without-
the interposition of his authority, and in cafes to which the,
laws did not extend. The tranfiaion between Charles andc
Francis fir4gly countenanced this pratice. Upon, every-
affront, or injury, which seemed to touch his .onour, a,
gentleman thought himself entitled to draw his sword,. and to-
call on his aduerfary to give him fatisfa&ion. Such an o-
pinion becoming prevalent among men of fierce courage, of
high spirit, and of rude manners, when offence was often-
given, and revenge was always prompt, produced most fatal

Recuti dcs Traitc, a. Mem. deBellay, 103, &c. Sandv.
EHit 837.

confequedces. Much of the belt blood in Christendom was
fed; many useful lives were sacrificed; and, at some periods,
war itself bad hardly been more deftru&ive than these private
contests of honour. So powerful, however, is the domini.
on offafhiotn,that neither the terror of penal laws, nor reve-
rence for religion, have been able entirely to aboliRt a prac-
tice unknown among the ancients, and not justifiable by any
principle of reason; tho'gh at the fame time, it must be ad-
i mitted, that to this absurd custom, we'muRf ascribe in some
degree the extraordinary gentlesefs anA complaisance of
modern manners, and that rcfpe&ful attention of one man
to another, which, at prefeut, render the social intercourses.
of life far more agreeable and decent, than among the molt
civilized nations of antiquity.

While the two monarchs seemed so eager to terminatt

their quarrel by a personal combat, Lautrec continued hia
operations, which promised to be more decisive. His armyt
which was now increased to thirty five thotfand men, ad-
vanced by great marches towards Naples rSeb.3. The
terror of their approach, as well as the remonstrances and
the entreaties of theprince of Orange, prevailed at-laft or
the Imperial troops, though with difficuky, to quit Rome,
of which they had kept possession during ten months. But
of that fiourilhing army which had entered the city, scarce-
ly one half remained; the reft, cut off by the plagie, ok waft-
ed by diseases, the effe&s of their ina&tivity, intemperance,
and debauchery, fell vicims to their own crimes*. Iau-
trec made the greatest efforts to attack them in their retreat
towards the Neapoitan territories, which would hate finish-
ed the war at one blow. But the prudence. of their leaders
disappointed all his measures, and conducted them with lit-
tle loss to Naples. The people of that kingdom, extremely
impatient to shake offthe Spanish yoke, received the French
with open arms, wherever they appeared to take poffcffion
and Gaeta and Naples excepted, hardly any place of imn

* Guic. 1. xviii. 478.

portance remained in the hands of the Imperialists. The
preservation of the former was owing to the strength of its
fortifications, that of the latter to the presence of the Impe.
rial army. Lautrec, however, fat down before Naples; but
finding it vain to think of reducing a city by force while
defended by a whole army, he was obliged to employ the
flower, but less dangerous method .of blockade; and having
taken mealfres which appeared to him effetual, he conr
fidently assured his master, that famine would- oon compel
the besieged to capitulate. These hopes were firongly con-
irmed by the defeat of a vigorous attempt made by the e-
nemy in order to recover the command of the sea. The
gllies of Andrew Doria, under the command of his-nephew
Phlippino, guarded the mouth of the harbour. Moncada,
whohad succeeded Lannoy in the viceroyalty, rigged out a
number of gallies superior to Doria's, manned them with a
chofeu body of Spanim veterans, and going on board himself,
together with the marquis del Guafto, attacked Philippino
before the arrival of the Venetian and French fleets. But
the Genoef admiral, by his superior kill in naval opera.
tions, easily triumphed over the valour and number of the
Spaniards. The viceroy was killed, most of his fleet de.
troyed, and Guafto, with many officers of diftin&ion, be-
ing taken prisoners, were put on board the captive gallies,
and sent by Philippino as trophies of his victory to his
uncle*.

Notwithfianding this flattering profpef of success, many

circumftanccs concurred to fruitrate Lautrec's expecations.
Clement, though he always acknowledged his being indebt.
ed to Francis for the recovery of his liberty) and often com.
plained of the cruel treatment which he had met with from
the emperor, was not influenced at this junture by prin.
iples of gratitude, nor, which is more extraordinary, was he
swayed by thedefire of revenge. His pasl misfortunes ren.
dered him more cautious than ever, and his recolleaion, of

Gui. 1. xix. 487. P. Ieuter. lib. x. c. a. p. 33..

tie errors which he had committed, increased the natural ir.
resolution of his mind. While he amused Francis with pro-
mises, he secre.tly negotiated with Charles; and being soli-
citous, above all things, to re-establish his family in Florence
with its ancient authority, which he could not expet from
Francis, who had entered into ftrii alliance with the new re.
public, he leaned rather to the fide of his enemy than to that
of his benefaaor, and gave Lautrec no assistance towards
carrying on his operations. The Venetians, viewing with
ealoufy the progress of the French arms, were intent only,
upon recovering such maritime towns in.the Neapolitan do-
minions as were to be possessed by their republic, while they
were altogether careless about the reducion of Naples,- onX
which the success of the common cause depended*. -The
king of England, instead of being able, as had been project-
ed, to embarrass the emperor by attacking his territories in
he Low Countries, found his fubje&ts so averse to an: Ume,
effary war, which would have ruined .the trade of the na .
tion, that in order to filence.their clamours and put a ltop
o the infurre&ions ready to breakut among. them, he was
compelled to conclude a truce for eight months 7with. the

vernefs of the Netherlands t. - Francis.himfelf, with the
ame unpardonable inattention of- which he had formerly
een guilty, and for which he had -uffered f ffeerely, ne.
gle&ed to make proper remittances to Lautrec for

- the sup.

ort of his army§.
These unexpected events retarded the rogrefs'of the
rench, discouraging both the generalsaad his troopa; ,but
he revolt of Andrew Doria proved a fatal blow, to all their
neafures. That gallant officer, the citizen of a republie
nd trained up from his infancy- in the sea service, retained
he spirit of independence natural to the former, together
ith the plain liberal manners peculiar to the latter. - .
A stranger to the~arts of fubmiflion and flattery necefary
* Guic. i. xix.4gr. t Herert, 90. Rymetr 14. 18.

~- - G§ Guic. L xviii 478.

in courts, but concious at the fme time of his own meri
and importance, he always offered his advice with feedom,
and often preferred his complaints and m ninftrances with
boldes. The French minister, unaccustomed to such liber-
ies, detenmiaed to rain a man who treated them with so little
deference; and though Francis timfelf had a julf sease of
Dcria's services, as well as an high esteem for his charader,
the courtiers, by continually rcprefecting him a a man
haughty, inracsable, and more solicitous to aggrandize him-
fef, than to promote the interest of France, gradually
undermined the foundations of his credit, and filled the king's
mind with suspicion and diitrut From thence proceeded
several affronts and indignities put upon Doria. -is ap-
pointments were not regularly paid; his advice, even in naval
iffais, was often flighted; an attempt was made to seize the
prisoners taken by his nephew in the sea fght off Naples;
all which-he~ore with abundance of iR humour. But anin-
jury offred to his country tranfprted him'beyond all bounds
of patience The French began t fortify Savona, to clear
itsharbour, and removingthither omea branches of trade car-
ried on at Genoa, plainly shewed that they intended to ren-
der that ~ow, which had been fa lng the oeje& of iealoufy
and hatred to the Genoese, their rival in wealth and com-
nere. Doria, animated with a patriotic zeal for the ho.
nour and interest of his count remonfrated againfl this in
the highest tone, not without threts, if the measure were
not intantly abandoned. This bold aotion, aggravated by
the maliceof the courticrs and placed in the most odious
light, irritated Fraacis to such a degree, that he command.
ed Barbefieux, whem be appointed admiral of the Levant,
to fai direly to Genoa with the French lSeet, to arrest Do
ria, and ta feie his gallies. This rah order, the execution
of which could haw been fecred okly by the mot profound
secrecy, was concealed with fa litte care, that Doria gol
timely intelligence of it, and retired with all his galUes to-
place cf fiaty. Guafo, his prisoner, who had long oh,

served and fomented his growing-d'icontent, and had often al.
lured him by magnificent promises to enter into the emperor's
service, laid hold on this favourable oppdrtunity. While
his indignation and resentment were at their height, he pre-
vailed on him to dispatch one of his officers to -the Imperial
court with his overtures and demands. The negotiation
was not long; Charles fully sensible of the importance of
such an acquisition, granted him whatever terms he requiredc.
Doria sent back his commillion, together with the collar of
St. Michael, to Francis, and hoifling the Imperial colours,
failed with all his gallies towards Naples, not to block up
the harbour of that unhappy city, 's he had formerly en-
gaged, but to bring them protecion and'deliverance.

His.arrival opened the commnunication -with the sea, and

restored plenty in Naples, which was now reduced to the las
extremity; and the French having loft their superiority at
sea, were soon reduced to great itraits for want of provi.
sions. The prince of Orange, who'fucceeded the viceroy
in the command of the Imperial army, ihewed himfdf by
his pruent condu& worthy of that honour which hii good
fortune and the death of his generals had twice-acquired
him. Beloved by the troops, who remembering the prof.
perity which they had enjoyed under his command, served
him with the utmost alacrity, he let flip no opportunity of
harafling the enemy, and by continual alarms or sallies fa-
tigued and weakened them. As an addition to all these
nisfortunes, the diseases common in that country during the
sultry months, began to break out among the French troops..
The prisoners communicated to them the pefiilence which
the Imperial army had brought to- Naplesromn Rome, and
it raged with filch violence, that few, itether oficers or fol-
diers, escaped the infecion. Of the whale army, not four
thousand men, a number hardly sufficient to defend the
camp, were capable of doing dutyt; and being now be-

* Jovii ift. lib. xxxvi. p. 31, &c. Sigonii Vita Doria, p.
1139. Bellay, 114, &c. t Belay, 117, &c.

Vol. III. C

fieged in their turn, they fuffared all the mferies froam
which the Imperialifs were delivered Lautrec, after
firuggling long with so many disappointments and calami,
tics, which preyed on his mind at the fame time that the
peftience wafted his body, died fAuguft 15, lamenting
the negligence of his sovereign, and the infidelity of his al;
lis, to which so many brave men had fallen viimsS. - By
his death, and the indisposition of the other generals the
command devolved on the marquis de Saluces, an officer al.
together unequal to such a trutL. He,.with troops no Wef
dispirited than reduced, retreated in disorder to Averfa;
which town being invested by the prince of Orange, Saluces
was under the eccffity of consenting, that -he himself Ihould
Temain a prifner of ar, that his troops lhould lay down
their arms and colours, give up their baggage, and march
mnder a guard to the frontiers of France. By this ignomi-
nious capitulation, th wretched remains of the French army
swe saved; and the emperor, by his own perseverance and
the good condum of his generals, acquired once more the
sup iornty Italy*.

The lob of Genoa followed immediately upon the ruin

of the army in Napl To deliver his country from the
dominion of foeigers was Doria's bigheft ambition, and
had been his principl inducement to quit the service of
France, and enter into that of the emperor.. A.molt fa-
vourable opportunity for executing this honourable enter-
prie now prnted itself. The city of Genoa, affliced by
the petilence, was almof deserted by its inhabitants; the
French garrison, being neither regularly paid nor recruited
was reduced to an inconsiderable number; Doria's emiffiric
found that such of the citizens as remained, being weary a4
like of the French and Imperial yoke, the rigour of which
they had alternatdy felt, were ready to welcome him P
their deliverer, and to second all his measures Things

P. Heater. Rerum Auflr. ib. . c. s. 3r.
Bcllay, 17, fc. Jo vii His . nI.xvi.

-4

Genoa; on his approach the French- gallies retired; a finall
body of men which he landed fnrprifed one of the gates of
Genoa in the night-time; Trivulci, the French:-gbvrernor
with his feeble garrion, shut himself up- in the citadel, and
iDoria took pofteffon of the town without bloodshed or re-
fifance [September 12]. Want of provisions quickly ob-
liged Trivulci to-capitulate; the people, eager to abolish
such an odious monument of their servitude, ran together
with a tumultuous violence, and levelled the citadel with the
ground.

It was now in Doria's power to have rendered himself

the sovereign of his country, which he had so happily de-
livered from oppression. The fame of his former acions,
the success of hit present attempt, the attachment-of his
friend;, the gratitude of his countrymen, together with the
support of the emperor, all conspired to facilitate his attain.
ing the supreme authority, and invited'him to lay hold of it.
But with a magnanimity of which ther re ar fw eamples,
'he sacrificed all thoughts of aggrandizing himself to the vir-
tuous faitsfa&ion of efabliflhing liberty in his-:countit, the
highest obje& at which ambition can aim. Haviag afleml-
bled the whole body of the people in the couft before his
alace, he assured them, that the happiness of feeing theai
once more in possession of freedom was to him a fall reward

r all his services; that, more delighted with the name of
itizen than of sovereign, he claimed no pre-eminence or
ower above his equals; but remitted entirely to them the
ight of fettling what form of government they would now
hufe to be establishcd among them. The people lifened
ohim with tears of admiration and of joy. Twelve per-
ns were eleted to new model the constitution of the rc-
ublic. The influence of Doria's virtue and example comr
unicated itself to his countrymen; -the factions which had
ng torn and ruined the state seemed to be forgotten; pur.
ent precautions were taken to prevent their reviving; and

C

the fame form of government which has subsisted with little
variation since that time in Genoa was eftablilhed with univr.
al appaufe. Doria lived to a great age, beloved, refpe&ed,
and honoured by his countrymen; and adhering uniformly
to his profefions of moderation, without arrogating any
thing unbecoming a private citizen, he preserved a great a-
kfendant over the councils of the republic, which owed its
being to his generosity. The authority which he possessed
was more flattering, as well as more fatisfa&ory, than that
derived from sovereignty; a dominion founded in love and
in gratitude; and upheld by veneration for his virtues, not
by the dread of his power. His memory is fill reverenced
by the Genoef, and he- is diftinguithed in their public
monments, and celebrated in the works of their historians,
by the mot honourable of all appellations, THE FA.
THER OF HIS COUNTRY, AND THE RESTOR.
ER OF ITS LIBERTY*.

1529.] Francis in order to recover the reputation of his

arms, discredited by so many losses, made new efforts in the
Milanee. But the count of St. Pol, a rash and unexperi.
enced officer, to whom he gave the command, was no match
for Antonio de Leyva, the ablest of the Imperial generals.
He, by his superior kill in war, checked with a handful of
men, the brilk, but ill-concerted motions of the French; and
though so infim himself that he was carried conitantly in
a litter, he surpassed them, when occasion required, no less
in aaivity than in prudence. By an unexpected march.e
surprised, defeated, and took prisoner the count of St. Pol,
ruining the French army in the Milanese as entirely as the
prince of Orange had ruined that which bdfieged Naplest.

Amidst these vigorous operations in the field, each party

discovered an impatient desire of peace, and continual nego-
tiations were carried on for that purpose. The French king,

* Guir. L xix. p. 498. Sigonii Vita Doriz, p. X146. Jovii His.
lib. xxvi.p. 36, &c.

tGuic.. 1.ix. 50o. P. Heuter. Rer. Aufr. lib. . c. 3. p. 233.
aemn.de Bellay, la.

discouraged' and almost exhausted, by so many unfucceEiful
enterprises, was reduced now to think of obtaining the re-
lease of his sons by concessions, not by the terror of his.
arms. The pope hoped to recover by a treaty whatever he-
had loft in the war. The emperor, notwithtanding the ad-
vantages which he had gained, hadc many reasons to make
him wish for an accommodation. Solyman; having over-run
Hungary, was ready to break in upon the Austrian territow
sice with the whole force of the East. The reformation
gaining ground daily in Geaay, the princes who favoured
it had entered into a confedemrcy which Charles thought
dangerous to tie tranquillity of the empire. The Span-
iaxds murmured at a war of fuck unusual length, the weight
of which reifed chiefly on- themn , he variety and extent of
the emperor's operions- far exceeded what hi& revenues
could fupportp his feceds hitherto had been owing chiefly
to his own, good fortune and to the abilities of his generals
nor could he flatter hiamfid that tfiey, with troops 4efitute
of every thing necefay, would alwas triumpk over enemies
lill. ina condition. to renew their attacksr AlApparties,.ow-
ever, were at eqal pains to concea.or to diffemibletheir real
sentiments. The emperori that his inability to carry n the
war might not be fufpted, iniftiRcom.high.ta~ in the
tqne of a conqueroa The pope-, solicitous not to lose his;
present allies before he-came to any agreement.with. Charles,
continued to make a thoufand'poteftations.of fidelity to the
former, while.he privately negotiated with the latter.. Fran-
cis,. afraid that his oonfederates might prevent him by treat-
ing for themselves with the emperor, had recourse to iany
dilionourabl arificea,,in. order totum.their attention. from,
the measures which. he was taking to adjuit all differences
with his rival.

In this situation of affairs, when all the contending pow.

ers wished for peace,.but durst not venture too hastily on the
teps necessary for attaining it, two ladies undertook to pro-
cure this bleflihg fd much. desired by all Europe [May].

C' 1;

These were Margaret of Austria, dutchefs-dowager of Sa-
voy, the emperor's aunt, and Louise, Francis's mother.
They agreed on an interview at Cambray, and being lodged
in two adjoining houfea, between which a communication
was opened, met together without ceremony or observation,
and held daily conferences, to which no person whatever was
idmitted. As both were profoundly killed in business, tho-
roughly acquainted with the secrets of their refpe&ive courts,
and possessed with perfec confidence in each other, they
ion made great progress towards a fnal acoommodation,
and the ambafifdors of all the confederates waited in anxi-
ous fufpcnfe to know their fate, the- determination of which
was entirely in the hands of thole illunrious negotiatorst.

But whatever diligence they Iued to haften forward a

geeral peace, the pope had the addre and industry to get
the tart of his allies, by concluding at Barcelona a particu-
lar treaty for hisef [June 20.] The emperor, impatient
to visit Italy in his way to Germany, and desirous of re-
efthab~lg trnqulliy in the one country, before he at-
tempted to coampa the disorders which abounded in the o-
ther, foudit nmcefary to secure at leaf one alliance among
the Itlian tates, on which he might depend. That with
Clement, who courted it with unwearied importunity,.feem-
ed more proper than any other. Charles being extremely
olicitous to make some reparation for the insults which he
had offered to the sacred charater of the pope, and to re.
deem pat offences by new merit, granted Clement, notwith
sanding all his misfortunes, trms more favourable than he
could have expeed after a continued series of success. A.
mong other articles, he engaged to restore all the territorie
belonging to the eceefiaftical Rate; to reestablish the do
minion of the Medici in Florence; to give hisnaturaldaugh
ter in marriage to Alexander the head of that family; anm
to put it in the pope's power to decide concerning the fan

t P. Heuter. Rer. u. iAtr .

h . x. c. 133. Mem. de Bcl!ay, i
2Zt.

of Sforza, and the possession of the Milanese. In return for
there ample concessions, Clement gave the emperor the in-
vetiture of Naples without the reserve of any tribute, but
the present of a white heed, in acknowledgment of his so-
vereignty; absolved all who had been concerned in assault.
ing and plundering Rome, and permitted Charles and his
brother Ferdinand to levy the fourth of the ecclesiastical re.
venues throughout their dominionst.

The account of this tranfa6dion quickened the negotia-

tions at Cambray, and brought Margaret and Louise to an.
immediate agreement fAug. 5J. The treaty of Madrid
served as the basis of that which they concluded; the latter
being intended to mitigate the rigour of the formner. The
chief articles were, That the emperor should not, for the pre-
sent, demand the restitution of Burgundy, referviog how-
ever, in full force, his rights and pretensions to that dutchy;
That Francis lhould pay two millions of crowns as the ran-
fom of his sons, and, before they were set at liberty, /hould
restore such towns as he still held in the Milanese; That he
should resign his pretensions to the sovereignty of Slanders
and of Artois; That he should renounce all his pretensions
to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every other place beyond the
Alps;, That he mhould immediately consummate the marriage
concluded between him and the emperor's fitler Eleonora§.

Thus Francis, chiefly from his impatience to procure li-

berty to his sons, sacrificed every thing which had at first
prompted him to take arms, or which had induced him, by
continuing hostilities during nine fuccefive campaigns, to
protrat the war to a length hardly known in Europe be-
fore the eftablifhnent of handing armies, and the imposition
of exorbitant taxes, became universal- The emperor, by
this treaty, was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy; he
delivered his territories in the Netherlands from an unplea-
aint badge of fubjeaion; and after having baffled his rival
t Guic. 1. xix. 22. § P. Heuter Rer. Aufir. lib x. c. 3. p.
234. Sandov. Hist. dell Emper. Car. V. ii. 28.

in the field he prefcribd to him the conditions of peace
The different condua and spirit with which the two mo-
narch carried on the operations of war, led naturally to
such an issue of it. Charles, inclined by temper, as well a
obliged by his situation, concerted al his schemes with cau.
tion, porfued them with pcrfcverance, and obfcrving circum.
ances and events with attention, let none f~pe that could
be improved to advantage. Franci, more enterprising than
feady, undrtoolk geat designs with warmth, but often ex.
ecuted them.with remiffif; and divted by his pleafu'e,
or deceived by his favourites, he loft on several occasions the
moit proming opportunities of fuccfs. Nor had the cha-
rater of the two rivals themfdes greatein~unce on the
operations of war, than the oppoite qualities of the generals:
whom they empl )yd. Among the Imperialifs, valour tem
pered with prudence; fertility of invention aided by experi-
ence; diseciament to penetrate the defigos of their enemies;
a proiet gacity in conducting their own measures; in a
wid, all the talents, which form great commanders and en.
fire vior, were conspicuous. Among the Frnch,. these
qalities w either wanting, orthbve~ reerfe of them a-
boundeA nor could they ~baof ane man (unless we except

autrec, who was always unfortuate).that equalled the me-
,rit oLPeferaa, a .Guafto, the price of Orange, apd
ethe leades, whom CharlIe had to fct in. opposition to
them .Bourbon, MoQonxDtria, who b ther.abities-an
comal& might have been capable of balanc;g the uperio.
rity which the Tmpatifts bad acquird,.

: .w i4dued; to
abandon the ferviccef France,by. the carclefnefof the king,

and the

ric .

ital blows. gien to France during the prqgre of the wai
proceeded from the dcfpair and refeatmen. of these thrce
persons.

The hard conditions to. which Francis was obliged to sub

mit were not the moRt affiding circumstances to him in thz
treaty of Cambray. He & his reputation and. the confi

dence of all Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary for adjusting
their interests, or afraid that whatever he claimed for them
mutt have been purchased by farther concessions on his own
part, he gave them up in a body; and without the leat pro-
ivifion in their behalf, left the Venetians, the Florentines, the
duke of Ferrara, together with such of the Neapolitan b.
rons as had joined his army, to the mercy of the emperor.
They exclaimed loudly against this base and perfidious aq-
tion, of which Francis himself was so much ahanmed, that
in order to avoid the pain of hearing from their ambassadors
the xeproaches which he justly merited; it was some time
before he would consent to allow them an audience. Charle,
on the other hand, was attentive to the interefl of every pa
son who had adhered to him, the rights of some of his SI
mith fubjets, who had estates or pretexfions in France, were
secured; one article was itferted, obligin Fr4ncis to rgftor
the blood and memory of the cotable Bq4rbon; and to
grant his heirs the poffiefion of his lands which had bee
forfeited; another, by which indemniticatio ws 'itpulated
for those French gentlemen who had accompanied ourlbo
n his exile' . This conduCt laudable in itself, and placed
in the molt ftrikig light by a comparifoi with that of
Francis, gained Charles as much eteem as the success of his
arms had acquired him glory.

Francis did not treat the king of England with the fame
egleA as his other allies. He communicated to him a the
eps of his negotiation at Cambray, and luckily found that
monarch in a situation which left him no choice, but to
pprove implicitly of his measures, and to concur with them.
enry had been soliciting the pope for some time, in or-
er to obtain a divorce from Catharine of Aragoo his queen,
everal motives combined in prompting the king to urge
is suit. As he was powerfully influenced at some seasons
§ Guic. 1. xlx.P. S. . P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. x. c. 4. p.
25.

by religios Considerations, he entertained many fenrples co
ccning the legitimacy of his marriage with his brother's wi.
dow; his affeaions had lqng been ctranged from the queem~
who was older than himself, and had lo al the .chrm which
{be polfled in the earlier par of helife; he waspaffienatel
derous of having male ifue: Wofey artfuy- ortified hi
frpk, and encourged is hopes, that he might widen the
breach between him and the empseor, Catharne's nephew,
and, what was more forcibleprhap .i its operation than all
tefe united, the king lad conceived a violent love for the
celebrated Ann Boeyn, a young lady of g~rt beauty, an
of greater accoaliment., whom, as he feund it impossible
to gain her on other terms, he determined to raise to the
hrone. The papal authority had often been intepoed t
gt divores for reasons less fpeeiow than thife which
Henry produced. When the matter was first proposed to
Clement during his impribfonent in the castle of St. Angelo)

his hopes of reoering libery depended entirely on tbe

king of England, and his ally of- France, be expressed the
warmest neination to gratify him.. But no sooner was he
et free, than he difcoeed other fetiments -Charles, who
fpoufed the protecioa of his aunt with ea inflamed by re.
fentment, alarmed the pope on thq one hand with- threatS
which made adeep impffia onhi timid mind; and allur
ed him on the other with those prmaif in favour of his fai
mily, which he afterwards accomplished. Upon the prof.
pea of these, Clement t only forgot all hisobligationsoto
Henry, but ventured toendanger the interest of the Romish
reigion in England, and run the rifque of alienating that
kingdom for ever fiom the obedience of the papal fee. As
ter amusing Henry during two years, with all the subtleties
and chicane which the court of Rome can so dexterouly
employ to protraf or defeat any cause; after displaying
the whole extent of his ambiguous and decitful policy, the
intricacies of which tbe English historians, jo whom it pro-
prly belongs, have found it no easy matter to trace and un.

ael; he, at aft, recalled the powersof the elegates, whom
e had appointed to judge in the point, avocated the cause
o Rome, leaving the king no other hope of obtaining a di-
rce, but from the personal decision of thepope hiimfelf.
a Clement was now in flrit alliance with the emperor,
o had ]porchafed his fiendihip by the exorbitant concef-
ns which' have been mentioned, Henry-defpaired of pro-
ring any sentence from the fonnrer but what was di&ated
y the latter. His honour, however, and passions concurrecd

preventing, him- frm relinquishing his scheme of a' di'

oree, which :he determined to:accomplilh'y other mneains,
nd.at ny rate; and the continuance of'Francis's friendfip'
eing.neceffary to counterbalance the emperor's power, he,
order to- ecure that, not only offered .no remonstrances a-
ainf.the total neglet of their allies, in the treaty of Cam,.'
y, but made Francis the present of a large fum, as a bro-
erly contribution towards the payment of the 'ransom 'fir
is sons §.

Soon after the treaty of peace was concluded, tie emperr'
nded in Italy with a numerous train of the Spanifli nobility

a considerable body of troops [Aug. 123]. He left the
overumeat of Spain, during his abfencc, to the emiprefi fa.
lla. By his long relidence.in that couitrj; he had ac-
ired such thorough knowledge of- the. chaliaEr of the
ople, that he could pe~tl1y'accommodate the inmaims of
s government to-their geniR. ' He edild 'even aflume, uip-
some occasions, fuchbpopular- mr ahn~ s as gained wonder-
1y upon the Spaniards. A trikibg idutii c of his difpo.
ion to gratify them had occured atfew daps before he er-
rked for Italy: he was to make his public ehnti Into the tt-
of Barcelona;, and some doubts siaiing -aifdn among the
habitants, whether they ihould' reeive himn dsemperor, or
count of Barcelona; Charles infantly decided in favour
the latter, declaring that he' wa more'priid'of that an-
at title, than of his Imperial crown, Soothed with this"

S Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. Ita.

flattering expression of his regaid, the citizens welcomed hi
with acclamations ofjoy, and the tates of the prmovie fIot¢
aegiance tohis foa Phlis as her of the aountt f B*rffrtl
lona. A finlar oath had been taken In al) the lingdoif- d
Spain, with equal fatisfaftion*. .

The emperor appeared in Italy with the pomp and pot

of a conqueror. Atnbaffadors from all the prines uad
Ptates of that country attended hit court, 'waitiug to ~eceik
his decision with regard to their Tate. 'At Geboa,-wher
he frft landed, he was received with the acclamatrons due ti
the protetor of their liberties. Having honoured D6ori
with many marks of diftinftion, and bestowed on the reptl
blic several new privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, thi
place fixed upon for his interview with the pope [Nov. 5$]
He affeced to unite in his public entry into that- city th(
ilate and majesty that suited an emperor, with the humilitr
becoming an obedient son of the church; and while at thi
head of twenty thousand veteran soldiers, able to give law ti
all Italy, he kneeled down to kifs the feet of that very popl
whom he had so lately detained a prisoner.. The Italians
after suffering so much from the ferocity and licentioufnel
of his armies, and after having been Iong accustomed to sot
in their imagination a piEture of Chatles, which bore form
resemblance to that of the barbarous monarchs of the Goti
or Huns, who had formerly alldtid their country with 1!
calamities, were surprised to fee a prine' of a graceful al
pearance, afable and courteous in his deportment, of reg
lar manners, and of exemplary attention :to all the offices
religiont. They were 1till more aftonilhed when he fettle
all the concerns of the princes and Rates which now depeni
-d on him, with a degree of moderation and equity mut
beyond what they had expeEted.

Charles himself, when he set out from Spain, far from ii
tending to give any such extraordinary proof of his felf-dec

*Sandov.ii. p.$o. Ferrer. i. x16.
t Sandov. Hit. dell Emp. Carl. V. iL. 50. 53, &c.

1, f to laveben resolve to avail himflf to the utmof
fthe fupriori y which he had acquired in Italy. But va-
ious ccumtances concurred in pointing out the necessity of
wSruiwg a very different course. The pogrefs of the Turk
ih flta, who, after over-running Hungary, had penetrated
to Autria,[Sept 3] and laid siege toVienna with an army
an hundred and fifty thousad men, loudly called uponhim,
to coe his whole foce to oppoe that torrent; and thogh
t valour of the Germans, the pr~dent condut of Ferdinand*
toge wither w the treachery of the vizier, CO, . x6] fooa
bliged Solyman to abandon that enterpife with difgracc
and loss, the religious disorders till growing in Germany
rendered the presence of the emperor highly necefary theret-
The Florentines, instead of giving their consent to the re.
eltablilhment of the Medici, which, by the treaty of Barce.
lona, the emperor had bound himself to procure, were pre-
paring to defend their liberty by force of arms; the prepa.
rations for his journey had involved him in unusual expences;
and on this, as well as many other occasions, the multiplici-
ty of his affairs, together with the naronefs of his reve-
,nues, obliged him to contra& the schemes which his bound-
less ambition was apt to form, and to forego prele.t and cer-
tain advantages, that he might guard against more remote but
unavoidable danger. Charles, from all thee considerations,
finding it neceffiry to afiume an air of moderation, atled his
part witha good grace. He admitted Sforza into his pre-
fence, and not only gave him a full pardon of all pall offences,
but granted him the invefliture of the dutchy, together
with his niece the king of Denmark's daughter in marriage.
He allowed the duke of Ferrar to keep poliG.on of all
his dominions, adjusting the points in dfpute between him
and the pope with an impartiality not very i~g'eable to the
latter. He came to a final accommodation with theVenetians,
upon the reasonable condition of their restoring whatever
they had usurped during the late war, either in the Neapolitan

t Sleidan, tax. Guic. 1. xx. 55o.
Vol. III. D

or papal teritories. In return for so many coeelffios, li<
exated considerable fums from each of the powers with whom
be treated, which they paid without reluAance, and whltc
afforded him the means of proceeding oi his journey towaid
Cermany with a magnificence suitable to his dignity§.

·I 5 30.3 These treaties, which restored tranquillity to Italy

after a tedious war, the calamities of which had chiefly asset.
tA that country, were pnublihhe at Bologna with great folem.
ity on the firt day of the year one thousand five hundred and
~hity, amidt the universal acelanations of the people, ap-
plauding the emperor, to whose moderation and generosity
they ascribed the blessings of peace which they had so long de.
fred. The Florentines alone did not partake of this general
joy. Animated with a zeal for liberty more laudable than
prudent, they determined to oppose the restoration of the
Medici. The Imperial army had already entered their terri.
tories, and formed the siege of their capital. But though
deserted by an their allies, and left without any hope of fuc.
cour, they defended themselves many months with an obfti-
nate valour worthy of Ibetter success; and even when they
-urrendered, they obtained a.capitulation which gave them
hopes f feeuring some remains of their liberty. But the
emperor, from ts lefire to gratify the pope, frufirated all
their expeations, and abolilhed their ancient form of govern-
ment, rnfet Alexanderdi Medicito the fame absolute domi'
nion over at tate, which his family have retained to the pre-
eent times. Plhibert de Chalone, prince of Orange, the Impe-
sial general, waskilled during this siege. His eftateand titles
descended to his fiter Claude de Chalons, who was married
so Rene, count of Naflau, and lhe transmitted to her pofte.
rity of te house of Nassau the title of princes of Orange,
which, by their superior talents and valour, they have rcn;
dered C illustrious*.

Sandov. ii 55, &c.
Guic. 1 . p. 341, &c. P. euter. Rer.Ar. A ib. ii c. 4. p.

.After thb.publication of the peace at Bologna, and the
ceremony of his coronation as king of Lombardy and em-
peror of the Romans [Feb. 22 and 24], which the pope
performed with the accuitomed formalities, nothing detain-
ed Charles in Italyt-; and he began to prepare for his journey
to Germany. His presence became every day more necessary
in that country, and was solicited with equal importunity
by the catholics and by the favourers of the new doctrines.
During that long interval of tranquillity, which the absence
of the emperor, the contests between him and the pope, and
his attention to the war with France, afforded them, the
latter had gained much ground. Molt of the princes who
had embraced Luther's opinions, had not only established
in their territories that form of worihip which he approved,
but had entirely suppressed the rites of the Romiih church.
Many of the free cities had imitated their condu.; Almost
one half the Germanic body had revolted from the papal fee,
and its authority, even in those provinces which had not hi-
therto shaken off the yoke, was considerably weakened,
partly by the example of revolt in the neighbouring states,
partly by the secret progress of the reformed doftrine even in
those countries where it was not openly embraced. What.
ever fatisfaaion the emperor, while he was at open en-
mity with the fee of Rome, might have felt in those events
which tended to mortify and embarrass the pope, he could
not help perceiving now, that the religious divisions in Ger-
many would, in the end, prove extremely hurtful to the
Imperial authority. The weakness of former emperors had
suffered the great vasals of the empire to make such ftc-
cefsful encroachments upon their power and prerogatives
that during the whole course of a war, which had often re-
quired the exertion of his utmost strength, Charles hardly
drew any effectual aid from Germany, and found that mag-
nificent titles or obfelete pretensions were almost the only

t H1. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici coronatione Car. Y. ap. Scard.

D

fntaem w

i dh he had gained by hway;g she Imperial

. eptre. He became fully enfible, that f he did not~*
cover in feme degree the prerogtive which his-p edcefIb
lad lost.d acquire the authority, as well as posss the
ame, of head ofthe empire, his high dignity would contii.
bate mre to obibd than to promote his ambitiolu
s1hemes. Nothing, he law, was more essential towards at.
taming this, than to fuppref opinions which might forto
new bods of confederay among the princes of the ecp/~
md unite them by ties roager and more facrre than any
olitical coaneaio. Nothiag seemed to lad more ce~
tainly to the accompliftment of his design, than to emplo
zeal for the eiabtiled religioD, of which he was the natural
protecor, as the inlrument of extending his civil autbho
rity.

Accordingly, a profpet no sooner opened of coming te

a accommodation with the pope, than, by the emperorR ap,
pointment, a diet of the empire was held at Spires [March
35, 15293, i oer to tke into co~idraion the fate of
religion The decree of the diet a led there in the
year one tboo~nd fire hundred and twenty-fix, which wat
aloft equialent to a toleraio f Lther's opinions, had
give great eEfnce to the rnf of Chriftendm. The
greatft delicacy of addss, howevr, was requisite in pro
ce~ding to ary deciion mare roigm The mind of mes
kept in perpetual agitation by a cootroverfy coied on,
during twee ye is, without inteniffio of debate, or a.
batement of zeal, were nw ionamed ta an high degree.
They were accuamed to imotations, and iaw the boMefl
of them fucceMf~ Having not only abolilhed old rites
but substituted nw fom in their place, they were infl
enced as much by attachment to the Lyfta which they had
embraced, as by aversion to that which they had abandoned.
Luther himself, of a fpiit not to be worn out by the
length and obstinacy of the combat, or to become remifa
upon success, continued the attack with as much xigout

as he had begun it. His disciples, of whom many equalled
him in zeal, and some surpassed him in learning, were no
less capable than their master to condunt the controversy
in the.propereft manner. Many of the laity, Some even of
the princes trained up amidit these inceffaot disputations, and
in the habit ofliftening to the arguments of the contending
parties, who alternately appealed to them as judges, came to
be profoundly skilled in all the questions which were agitated
and, upon occasion, could shew themselves not inexpert in
any of the arts with which these theological encounters
were managed. It was obvious from all these circumstances,
that any violent decision of the diet must have immediately
precipitated matters into confusion, and have kindled in
Germany the flames of a religious war. All, therefore, that
the archduke, and the other commiflioners appointed by the
emperor, demanded of the diet, was, to enjoin those Rates
of the empire which had hitherto obeyed the decree issued
against Luther at Worms, in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty four, to persevere in the observation of
it, and to prohibit the other fates from attempting any far.
ther innovation in religion, particularly from abolilhing the
mass, before the meeting of a general council. After much
dispute, a decree to that effe& was approved of by a major.
ty of voices*.

The eletor of Saxony, the marqis as Brandenburgr

the landgrave of Hefle, the dukes of Lunenburgh, the
prince of Anhalt, together with the deputies of fourteen
Imperial or free cities-, entered a solemn protest againit
this decree, as unjust and impious fApil. 19]. On that
account they were diftinguilhed by the name of PRO-
TESTANTS §, an appellation which bath Lace become
better known, and more honourable, by its being applied

Sleid. Hist. i7.

t The fourteen cities were Straburgh, Nuremburg, lIm, Cow-

sance, Rcutlingen, Windfheim, Meinengen, Lindaw, Kemptet,
lIailbron, Ifna, Weiffemburgh, (Nordlingen, and St. Gal.

Sleid. Hist. 1J9. F. Paul. Hill. p. 4; . hSekt. ii. ^,.

n <

'.imcinaia~y to alt the fess, of whatem dm lenatiom

which have r lted from the Roman fe. Ne t foist

/it this ddcamtio of ther di~&t from te daee of the
adet, the prottats feat admdo into Italy, t.aktythei
gnesacee be the emperor, fm which they met wit
'he moRt difeouagig-teceptioa. Charles wa at that time
in dose unioa with the pope, and solicitous to attaed.hi
inolably to his intreft. Duaing their long refdence at
Bologoa, th held an cos tio coernng the mo

t

fe&tual means of extirpating the herefies which had sprung
up in Germany. Clement, whose catious and timid mind
the proposal of a general council filled with honror, even be
-ond what popes, the coniant enemies of such af'Te~bi
nfually feel, employed every argument to difiuade th em-
peor from contenting to that measure. He represented
general councils as fastdos, ungovernable, prefamptuou"
formidable to cml authority, and too flow in their opera
tions to remedy disorder which required an immediate cure.
-Experience, he said, had now taught both the emperor and
himself, that &rbearane and lenity, intead of soothing the
-pirit of innovatios had rendred it more enterprising and
pefmptuoa~ it was eceffary, therose, to have recourl
to the rigoro methodb which fui a de~ra cafe requin
ed; Leo's fenteoce of excoamumcation, togetkr with tli
decree of the diet at Worms, Iolu he earied into eecu.
tion, and it was incumbent on the emperor to employ hi
whole power, order- to oves~w those, n whm the t
verece due eiter to ecdefiafic or civil authority had a
longer any iuee. Charles, whole iews. were y dig
Jrct firr the pope^s, and who became da-ly moe ~afikb
how ohs~ e d deep-rooted the ev was, thought of m
conciing the pmotcft~- mb tea cfs ~les lt, ad conGdeo
ed the convocation of a council as no inmpropedr ient si
that purpole; but promised, if gentl~ arts failed of fuccfR
that then he would exert bimelf with rigour to reduce to

hobedinee of the holy fee thoke ft~ubb m, eb of she
tholit-faith'. . .

. .: . .

-&ac were the fentimecot with ,whi4 e mpoa r set o.t
Germany, having already appointed a diet of tbempire
be held at Augsburg [March 22, 1530o].. In hisjauo
ey towards the city, he had many opportunities of obfEe.
ng the disposition of the Germans with regard to the point.
n controversy, and found their minds every where so much

itated and inflamed, as convinced him, that nothing tend*
ng to severity or rigour ought to be attempted, until all >
er measures proved ineffe&tuaL He made his public entry
nto Auglburg with extraordinary pomp [June -15, and
und there such a full afembly of the members of the diet,
as was suitable both to the importance of the affairs which

ere to come under their consideration, and to the honour
f an emperor, who, after a long absence, returned to them
rowned with reputation and fuccef. His presence fema
o have communicated to all parties an unuful spirit of
moderation and desire of peace.. The da of Saxony
would not permit Luther to accompany him to the diet, let
he lhould offend the emperor by bringing into his prefene
a person excommunicated by the pope, ad who had becm
the author of all thofo diffnfions which it now appeared i
difficult to compose. At the emperor's efire, all the pro.
teftant princes sorbad the divines who accompanied them to
preach in public during their refidece at Augsburg. For
the fame reason they employed Mebda&hn, the ma of the
greatef learning, as well as of the mot pacific and gentle
spirit among the rfmers, to draw up a confmei of their
faith, expressed in terms as little offensive to the Rman
catholics, as a regard for truth would- pnit. MClait on,
who seldom suffered the racour of controrerfy to nve-
Som his style, even in writings purely polemical, execut-
ed a talk so agreeable to his natural disposition with great

hS Paul. xlviy Seck. L

4 . t.

i HitL confcE d'Auxc
bourgh, par D. Chytrcus, 4to. Antw. 373. p. 6.

modcratn aid address. The creed which he composed,
known by the name of the Conffio o.f Jlwburg , from the
place where it was presented, was read publicly in the diet.
Some popilh divines were appointed to examine it; -they
roghtI in their aimadverfians; a dispute ensued between
them and Mehndthon, seconded by some of his brethren;
but though Melanohon softened some articles, made con.
cefions with regard to others, and put the least exception.
able feanc upon all; though the emperor himself laboured
with great carncfnef~ to reconcile the contending partieas
so many marks of diftinoion were now established, and such
insuperable barriers placed between the two churches, that
all hopes. of bringing about a coalition seemed utterly defpe.
rtef.

From the divines, among whom his endeavours had been

so unfuccefful, Charles turned to the princes their patrons.
Nor did he find them, how desirous soever of accommoda.
tion, or willing to oblige the emperor, more disposed than
-the former to renounce their opinions. At that time, zeal
for reigion took pofleffion of the minds of men, to a degree
which can scarcely be conceived by those that live in an age
when the passions excited by the first manifetation of truth.
and the sirs recovery of lberty, have in a great measure ceased
to operate. This zeal was then of such Areugth as to over.
come attachment to their political interest, which is common,
ly the predominant motive among princes. The ele&or
of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse, and other chiefs of the
protefants, though olicited separately by the emperor, and
allured by the promise or profpec of those advantages which
it was known they were most solicitous to attain, refused,
with a fortitude highly worthy of imitation, to abandon what
they deemed the caufc of God, for the fakeof any earthly

Seckend.ib. i. 159, ac. Abr. Sculteti Annales'Evangeli

p. Hec. Yon der Hard. ~ si. itr. R sorn. Lips. a7s7. foL p.
jg9.

cquifition #. .Every scheme in order to gain or disunite the
rotefant party proving abortive, nothing now remained for
he emperor but to take some vigorous meaure toward
lerting the dotrines and authority of the etablii~
hurch. These, Campeggi , the papal nuscio, had alway
ecommended as the only proper and effetual comUfe of deal
g with such obstinate heretics. In conplianee with hi
pinions and remonitiances, the diet issued a decree [Now
9], condemning most of the peculiar tenets hed by the
roteftants; forbidding any perfo to protest or toleate
uch as taught them; enjoining a ftrift obfernce of the
stablilhed rites; and prohibiting any further innovation n
ier evere penalties. Al orders of men were reqdred to
si with their persons and fortunes in caryig this decre
to execution; and such as refused to obey it were declaed
capable of acting as judges, or of appearing as parties in
he Imperial chamber, the supreme court of judicature in the
mpire. To all which wai fa~joned a promise, that an ap-
lication should be made to the pope, equiing him to ca
general council within si months, in order to teaintate *
ontroverfie by its foverdgn deions *.
The severity of this decree, which wa ees~dered o pe-
ude to the most violent pefecution, alaned the ptotctant
nd convinced them that the emperor was efolved o thei
ftRrudion. The dread of those alamitie which werere.
y to fall on the church, opprfd the f le spirit of Me.
abhon; and, as if the caue had alrey been pea
e gave himself up to mdanc~ho and lametation. But
uther, who during the meeting of the-diet had aen vuo~
d to confirm and animate hia party by feCeral tratife
hich he addrCed to them, was not difeencerted or 6d
ayed at the profpec of this new danger. He comforted
lelanthon, and his other desponding difciles and exhort.
the princes not to abandon those truths which they bha

5 Sleid. 13-. Scultet. Annal. Xa8

Sleid. I3.-

.od

lately asserted wth such laudable boldnefst. His exhorta
tions made the deeper impression upon them, as they were
greatly alarmed at that time by the account of a combina.
tion among the popish princes of the empire for the mainte.
wance of the established religion, to which Charles hirnfel
had acceded U. This convinced them that it was necessary
to Rand on their guard; and that their own safety, as well
as the success of their cause, depended on union. Filled
with this dread of the adverse party, and with these senti-
ments concerning the conduc proper for themselves, they
assembled at Smalkalde. There they concluded a league of
mutual defence against all aggressors§, [Dec. 22a by which
they formed the protefant fates of the empire into one re.
gular body, and beginning already to confider themselves as
such, they resolved to apply to the kings of France and Eng.
land, and to implore them to patronize and affit their new
confederacy.

An affair not conneced with religion furnifled them with

a pretence for courting the aid of foreign princes. Charles,
whose ambitious views enlarged in proportion to the increae
of his power and. grandeur, had formed a scheme of conti.
uning the Imperial crown in his family, by procuring his
brother Ferdinand to be elted kig of the Romans. The
present junture was favourable for the execution of that de.
ógn. The emperors arms badbeen every where vitorious;
he had given law to-adl Europe at the late peace; no rival
now remained in a condition to balance or to controul him;
and the dedors, dazzled with the splendour of his success,
or overawed by the greatness of his power, durit scarcely
dispute the will of a prince, whose solicitations carried with
them the authority of commands. Nor did he want planu
Able reasons to enforce the measure. The affairs of his 0.
ther kingdoms, he (aid, obliged him to be often absent from
';ermany; the growing disorders occasioned by the controa

JSeck. ii. 8. Sid. 140. eck. ii, oo. iii. I.

5 Seid. Hil 14z,

rfies about religion, as well as the formidable neighbour-
od of the Turks, who continually threatened to break iu
th their desolating armies into the heart of the empire, re-
uired the onftant presence of a prince endowed with pru.
nce capable of composing the former, and with power as
e1 as valour sufficient to repel the latter. His brother
rdinand pofleffed these qualities in an eminent degree;
residing long in Germany, he had acquired a thorough
nodledge of its constitution and manners; having beea
efent almolf from the first rife of the religious difen.
ns, he knew what remedies were most proper, what the
ermans could bear, and how to apply them; as his own
minions lay on the Turkimh frontier, he was the natural
fender of Germany againit the invasions of the infidels, be-

prompted by interelt no less than he would be bound in
ty to oppose them.
These arguments made little.imprefion on the protestants.
xperience taught them, that nothing had contributed more
the undisturbed progress of their opinions, than the in.
egnum after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
ares, and the slackness of the reins of government which
efe occasioned. Conscious of the advantages which their
ue had derived from this relaxation of government, they
re unwilling to render it more vigorous, by giving them-
ves a new and a fixed mailer. They perceived clearly the
ent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed at rendering the
peral crown hereditary in his family, and would of course
ablifh in the empire an abfolate dominion, to which elec.,
e princes could not have aspired with equal facility. They.
ermined therefore to oppose the ele&tion of Ferdinand,
h the utmolt vigour, and to rouse their countrymen, by'
ir exaniple and exhortations, to withstand this encroach-,
nt on their liberties. The elekor of Saxony, according-
not only refused to be present at the ele&oral college,
ich the emperor summoned to meet at Cologne [January
153 l, but ilftruled his eldeR son to appear there, and

to protet agant the &ion as informal, ilega, contrary
to the article of the golden bu, and subversive of the iL
berties of the pr t te other letors, whom Charbl
had been at great pain to gain, without regarding either
his absence or protest, chose Ferdinand king of the Roman~
who, a few days after wa crowned at Aix-la-Chape~ .

When the protestants, who were afembled a second time

at Smalkalde, recewed an account of this tranfasion, and
heard, at the facetim that profecutioo were coummnce d
in te lmperal chamber, againt some of their number, oc
accnt of teir relgious pinciple, they thought it neccf.
jiy, not only to renew their former confederacy, but i
mediately to dispatch their abafdrs into France and
Engaad [Feb. 393. Francis had observcd, with al tbe
jalsufy of a rial, the reputation which the emperor had
acquired by his seeming disinterestedness and moderation i
ettling the asira of Italy; and beheld with great conce
the fueefsnl ftep which he had taken towards prptu
ing and extending his authority in Germany by the delei
of a king of the Romans. Nothing, however, would hal
been more impolitic than to precipitate his kingdom into
new wr when exhauted by extraordiary efforts, and d
coragd by ill fuccef, before it had got time to recruit
frength, or to forget pat miSDrtunes As no p oca
bad been given by the emperor, and hardly a pretext for
rupture had been afforded him, he could not violate a tre
of peace which he himedf had so lately solicited, with0
forfeiting the teem of all Europe, and being detested as
pince void of pobity and honour. He observed,
great joy, powerful aions beginning to form in the
pire; he listened with the utroft eage~ ess to the
plaits of the prteftant princes; and without seeming
countenace their religious opinions, determined seeretly
cherih thfe sparks of political discord which might be

t Sid. 141. Seek. iiL i. P. Rcutcr Rcr. Auftr. lib. x. c.
*.140.

rwards kindled into a flame. For this purpose, he sent
William de Bellay, one of the ablest negotiators in France,
to Germany, who visiting the courts of the malecontent
rinces, and heightening their ill humour by variousarti,
ncluded an alliance between them and his master*, which
ough concealed at that time, and productive of no im.
ediate effets, laid the foundation of an union fatal on
ny occasions to Charles's ambitious projecs; and mhewed
e discontented princes of Germany, where, for the future,
ey might find a prote&or no less able than willing to *m-
:rtake heir defence against the encroachments'of the e-n.
eror.
The king of England, highly incensed againfl Charles,
complaisance to whom the pope had long retarded, and
w openly opposed his divorce, was no less disposed than
rancis to strengthen a league which might be rendered so
midable to the emperor. But his favourite proje& ds
e divorce led him into such a labyrinth of schemes and ne-
tiations, and he was, at the fame time, so intent on a-
lifhing the papal jurifdition in England, that he had no
sure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to reft satisfied
th giving general promises, together with a small supply
money, to the confederates of Smalkaldet.'
Meanwhile, many circumstances convinced Charles that
is was not a juncure when the extirpation of heresy was
be attempted by violence and rigour; that in compliance
th the pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded with
prudent precipitation; and that it was more his interef to
nfolidate Germany into one united and vigorous body,
an to divide and enfeeble it by a civil war.' The protest-
ts, who were considerable as well by their nuinbers as by
eir.zeal, had acquired additional weight ahd importance
their joining in that confederacy into which the rah steps
en at Auglburg had forced them. Having now disco.

Bellay, 9zg, a. 130, b. Seck. iii. 14.

V Herbert, 152, 154.
Vol. III. I~

to protft agint the de&ion a informal, illegal, contrary
to the artice of the golden bul, and subversive of the li.
berties of the empire. But the other eleors, whom Charle
had been at great pain to gain, without regarding either
his abence or protest, chore Ferdinnd king of the Roman~a
who, a few days after was crowned at Aix-hl-Cbapdcf.

When the protetats, who were afembled a second time

at Salkalde, received an account of this tranfaftion, and
erd, at the sime te, that proecutions were commenced,
in te mperial camber, agaift fame of their number, on
account oftheir regious priciple they thought it necef.
fy, met only to new their fomer confederacy, but im.
mediately to dispatch their ambafads into France and
Engand [Feb. 293. Fanch had observed, with all the
j~alcfy of a rial, the reputation wich the emperor had
acquired by his seeming disinterestedness and moderation in
fettng the a~i of Italy; and beheld with great concern
the fuceeft ftep which e had taken towards prpetuat
ing and extending his authority in Germany by the election
of a king of the Romans. Nothing, however, would have
been more impoltic than to precipitate his kingdom into a
new w when exhaaed by extraordinary forts, and dif
couraged by ll fuccef, before it had got time to recruit its
trength, or to foget pas mifrtunes. As no provocation
had bees given by the emperor, and hardly a pretext for a
rnptre had been afforded him, he could not violate a treaty
f peace which he himfdf had so lately solicited, without
forfeiting the eler of all Europe, and being detested as a
price void of probity and honour. He observed, with
reat joy, powerful faions beginning to form in the em-
pire; he lifeed with the utmnoft agernefs to the com,
plaints of the protftant princes; and without feming to
conntenne their eligious opinions, determined feeretly to
cherifl thoe sparks of political discord which might be as

t Sleid. 14 Seek. ii . P. lHeuter er. Auftr. lib. x. c. 6
P. 14

erwards kindled into a flame. For this purpose, he sent
Villiam de Bellay, one of the ablest negotiators in France,
ito Germany, who visiting the courts of the malecontent
rinces, and heightening their ill humour by variousarts,
oncluded an alliance between them and his master*, which
hough concealed at that time, and produtive of no in.
nediate effets, laid the foundation of an union fatal oh
nany occasions to Charles's ambitious proje&s; and shewed
he discontented princes of Germany, where, for the future,
hey might find a protecor no less able than willing to un-
lertake their defence against the encroachments'of the em-

leror.

The king of England, highly inccnfed against Charle,
complaisance to whom the pope had long retarded, and
ow openly opposed his divorce, was no less difpoied thai
'rancis to strengthen a league which might be rendered so
)rmidable to the emperor. But his favourite project of
rie divorce led him into such a labyrinth of shemes and ne-
iotiations, and he was, at the fame time, so intent on a-
iolifhing the papal jurifdidi'on in England, that he had no
eifure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to rft satisfied

tith giving general promises, together with a small supply
n money, to the confederates of Smalkaldet.

Meanwhile, many circumstances convinced Charles that
his was not a juncure when the extirpation of heresy was
o be attempted by violence and rigour; that in compliance
vith the pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded with
mprudent precipitation; and that it was more his interest to
:onfolidate Germany into one united and vigorous body,
han to divide and enfeeble it by a civil war. The protefti
ts, who were considerable as well by their numbers as by
eir.zeal, had acquired additional weight ahd importance
y their joining in that confederacy into which the raih steps
ken at Auglburg had forced them. Having now disco.

* Bellay, 19, a. I3o0 b. Seck. iii. 4.

t Herbert, 152, 154.
Vol. III. E

ere.d their own strength, they despised the decisions of the
Imperial chamber; and being secure of foreign protection,
ere ready to set the head of the empire at defiance. At
thfme time the peace with 'France was precarious, the
ricendllip of an irresolute and interested pontiff was not to be
!died on; and Solyman, in order to repair the discredit and

job which his arms had iuftaiaedin the former campaign, wa
prepaing to et Aufiria with more numerous forces. 0a
all thde accunts especially the las, a speedy accommoda.
tion with the malecontent princes became necessary, not only
for the accomplihment of his future fcbemes, but for enfur.
ing his present safety. Negotiations were, accordingly,
carried on by his diretion with the -eleor of Saxony and
his associates; after many delays, occasioned by their jea.
onfy of the emperor, and of each other, after innumerable
difficlties, arising from the inflexible nature of redigious
tenets, which cannot admit of being altered, modified, or re.
linquisled in the fame manner as points of political interet,
terms of pacification were agreed upon at Nuremberg [July
233, and ratified solemnly in the diet at Ratilbon [Aug. 3].
In this treaty it was fipulated, That universal peace be
dftabli~ed in Germany, until the meeting of a general coun-
cl, the convocation of which within fix months the emperor
jhall endearour to procure; That no person shall be molest.
ed on account of religion; That a stop flall be put to al
processs begun by the Imperial chamber againif protestants,
and the sentences already pafl to their detriment shall be de
clard void. On their part, the proteitants engaged to anif
the emperor with all their forces in refilting the invasion of
the Turks t. Thus, by their fimnefs in adhering to their
principles, by the unanimity with which they urged all their
claims, and by their dexterity in availing themselves of the
emperor's situation, the protestants obtained terms which a.
mounted almno to a toleration of their religion; all the
concessions were made by Charles, none by them; even thf

t Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, to. iv. part ii 87 89.

favourite point of their approving his brother' elecion 'w
not mentioned; and the protestants of Germany, who hi&
hitherto been viewed only as a religious fed, came hencs-
forth to be confidered as a political body of no small cneL-
quence *,

i 533 .] The intelligence which Charles received of Sofy--
man's having entered Hungary at the head of three hundred
thousand men, brought the deliberations of the diet at Ratit-
bon to a period: the contingent both of troops and money,
which each prince was to furnish towards the defence of the
empire, having been already fettled. The protestants, as a
testimony of their gratitude to the emperor, exerted them-
selves with extraordinary zeal, and brought into the field
forces which exceeded in number the quota- imposed onr
.them; the catholics imitating their example, one of the'
greatest and best appointed armies that had ever been levied
in Germany, assembled near Vienna. Beingjoined by a bo-
dy of Spanish and Italian veterans under the marquis del
Guafto; by rome heavy-armed cavalry from the Low Coun-
tries; and by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in Bo-
hemia, Austria, and his other territories, it amounted ina
all to ninety thousand disciplined foot, and thirty thousand'
horse, besides a prodigious swarm of irregulars. Of this
vati army, worthy the first prince in Christendom, the em-
peror took the command in person; and mankind waited
in suspense the issue of a decisive battle- between the two
greatest monarchs in'the world. But each of them dread-
ing the other's power and good fortune, they both con-
du&ed their operations with such excessive caution, that a
campaign, for which, such immense preparations had been-
made, ended without any memorable event- [September and.
O&tober]. Solyman, finding it impoflible to gain ground.
upon an enemy always attentive and on his guard, marched

Sleid. 149, &c. Seek i. ll 9.

E

backtoConftantinople towards the endof atumnt. It h
remrkable, that in such a martial age, when every gentle.
man was a soldier, and every prince a general, this was the
6frf time that Charles, who had already carried on such ex.
tensive wars, and gained so many victories, appeared at the
bead of his troops. In this first essay of his arms, to have
opposed such a leader as Solyman was no small honour; -to
have obliged him to retreat, merited very considerable praise.

About the beginning of this campaign, the eleAor of Sax.

ony died [Aug. 16], and was succeeded by his son John Fre-
derick. The reformation rather gained than lot by that e-
vent; the new elector, no less attached than his predeceflobr
to the opinions of Luther, occupied the iRation which they
had held at the head of the protestant party, and defended,
with the boldness and zeal of youth, that cause which they
had softered and reared with the caution of more advanced
age.

Immediately after the retreat of the Turks, Charles, im-

patient to revisit Spain, set out on his way thither, for Italy.
As he was extremely desirous of an interview with the pope
they met a second time at Bologna, with the fame external
demonstrations of refpe& and friendship, but with little of
that confidence which had subsisted between them during
their late negotiations there. Clement was much difatisfied
with the emperor's proceedings at Augsburg; his concef-
sions with regard to the speedy convocation of a council
having more than cancelled all the merit of the severe de-
cree against the docrines of the reformers. The toleration
granted to the protetants at Ra'tibon, and the more expli-
cit promise concerning a council, with which it was accom.
panied, had irritated him fti farther. Charles, however,
partly from conviction that the meeting of a council would
be attended with salutary effeAs, and partly from his desire
to please the Germans, having solicited the pope by his am-

t Jovii Hil. lib. xxx. p. ioo, &c. Barrc Hilt. de l'Empire, .
$-347.

baffadors to call that assembly without delay, and now urg.
ing the fame thing in person, Clement was greatly embar-
raffed what reply he mhould make to a request which it waw
indecent to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He endeavour.
ed at first to divert Charles from the measure; but, finding
him inflexible, he had recourse to artifices, which he knew
would.delay, if not entirely defeat, the caling of that assem-
bly. Under the plausible pretext of its being previously ne.
ceffary to fettle, with all parties concerned, the place of the
council's meeting; the manner of its proceedings .the right
of the persons who should be admitted to-votel and the
authority of their decisions; he dispatched a nuncio, accom-
panied by an ambassador from the emperor,.to the eletor.
of Saxony as head of the protestants. With regard to-
each of there articles, inextricable difficulties andcotefts a-.
rose. The protestants demanded a council to be held it
Germany; the pope insisted that it should meet in Italy;
they contended that all points in dispute ihould be deter-
mined by the words of holy scripture alone; he confidered not
only the decrees of the church, but the opinions of fathers
and docors, as of equal authority; they required a free
council, in which the divines, commiiffoned, by different
churches, should be allowed a voice; he aimed at modelling-
the council in such a manner as would render it entirely de-
pendent on his pleasure. Above all, the protestants-
thought it unreasonable that they should bin.dthezmfelves to-
submit to the decrees of- a council, before they knew on,
what principles these decrees were to be founded, by what
persons they were to be pronounced, and what forms'of pro-
ceeding they would observe. The pope maintained it to be
altogether unnecessary to call a council,. if thoftwho de-
manded it did not previously declare their resolution to ac-
quiefce in its decrees. In order to adjust such a. variety o£
points, many expedients were prppofed, and the negotiations
spun out to such a length, as effe&ually answered Clement's
purpose of putting off the meeting of a councils without;

E3

drawing on himflf the whole infamy of obftruding a mea.
fore which all Europe deemed so essential to the good of
the church *.

Together with this negotiation about calling a coun.

ci, the emperor carried on another, which he had still
more at heart, for securing the peace established in Italy.
As Francis had renounced his pretensions in that country
with great rclafanc, Charles made no doubt but that he
would lay hold on the firt -retext afforded him, or embrace
the first opportunity which presented itself, of recovering
what he had loft. It became necessary on this account to
take measures for assembling an army able to oppose him.
As his treasury, drained by a long war, could not fupply-the
fums requisite for keeping such a body constantly on foot,
he attempted to throw that burden on his allies, and to pro.
vide for the safety of his own dominions at their expence, by
proposing that the Italian fates should enter into a league
of defence againt all invaders; that, on the first appearance
of danger, an army lhould be railed and maintained at the
common charge; and that Antonio de Leyva should be ap-
pointed the generalissimo. Nor was the proposal unaccept.
able to Clement, though for a reason very different from that
which induced the emperor to make it. He hoped by this
expedient, to deliver Italy from the German and Spanilh ve-
terans, which had so long filled all the powers in that coun-
try with terror, and till kept them in fubjedion to the Im-
perial yoke. A league was accordingly concluded; [Feb. 24,
15333 all the Italian fates, the Venetians excepted, acced-
ed to it; the fum, which each of the oontrating parties
should furnish towards maintaining the army was fixed; the
emperor agreed to withdraw the troops which gave so much
umbrage to his allies, and which he was unable any longer
to support. Having disbanded part of them, and removed
the reft to Sicily and Spain, he embarked on board Doria'a
gallies, and arrived at Barcelona [April 22] §.

*F. Paul, HlL 61. Seckend. l. 73.
5§ Guic. L xx. 55. Fe-rerc ix. 249,

Notwithitanding all his precautions for securing the peace

of Germany, and maintaining that fytem which he had e-
fiablilhed in Italy, the emperor became every day more and
more apprehensive that both would be ioon disturbed by the
intrigues or arms of the French king. His app~ehenfiojn
were well founded, as nothing but the desperate situation of
his affairs could have brought Francis to give his consent to a
treaty so dishonourable and disadvantageous as that of Cam.
bray: he, at the very time of ratifying it had formed a refo.
lution to observe it no longer than necessity compelled him,
and took a solemn protest, though with the molt profound
secrecy, against several articles in the treaty, particularly that
whereby he renounced all pretensions to the dutchy of Milan,
as unjust, injurious to his heirs, and invalid. One of the
crown lawyers, by his command, entered a protest to the
fame purpose, and with the like secrecy, when the ratifica-
tion of the treaty was registered in the parliament of Parist.
Francis seems to have thought that, by employing an arti-
fice unworthy of a king, deftru&ive of public faith, and of
the mutual confidence on which all tranfations between na-
tions are founded, he was released from any obligation to
perform the most solemn promises, or to adhere to the most
sacred engagements. From the moment he concluded the
peace of Cambray, he wished and watched for an opportuni-
ty of violating it with safety. He endeavoured for that rea-
son to firengthen his alliance with the king of England,
whose friendship he cultivated with the greatest afliduity.
He put the military force of his own kingdom on a better
and more refpe&able footing than ever. He artfully so-
mented the jealousy and discontent of the German princes.

But above all, Francis laboured to break the ~tri& confe-

deracy which subsisted between Charles and Clement; and
he had soon the fatisfaAion to observe the appearances of
disgust and alienation arising in the mind of that suspicious
and interested pontiff, which gave him hopes that their union

t Du Mont. Corps Diplom. to. iv. part ii. p. 5j.

would not be lasting. As the emperor's decision in favour
of the duke of Ferrara had greatly irritated the pope, Fran.
ci aggravated the injustice of that proceeding, and flattered
Clement that the papal fee would find in him a more impar.
tial and no les powerful protea or. As the importunity with
which Charles demanded a council was extremely offensive
to the pope, Francis artfully created obstacles to prevent it,
and attempted to divert the erman princes, his allies, from
infifing so obtinately on that point t. As the emperor
had gaied such an ascendant over Clement by contributing
to aggrandize his family, Francis endeavoured to allure him
by the fame irrefiiible bait, propoling a marriage between
his second son Henry duke of Orleans, and Catharine, the
daughter of the pope's cousin Laurence di Medici. On the
first overture of this match, the emperor could not persuade
himself that Francis really intended to debase the royal blood
of France, by an alliance with Catharine, whose ancestors
had been so lately private citizens and merchants in Florence,
and believed that he meant only to flatter or amuse the am-
biious pontiff. He thought it neceffiry, however, to efface
the impression which such a dazzling offer might have made,
by promising to break off- the marriage which had been a-
greed on between his own neice the king of Denmark's
daughter, and the duke of Milan, and to fubfitute Catharine
in her place. But the French ambafaldor producing unex.
pe&edly full powers to conclude the marriage treaty with
the duke of Orans, this expedient had no effect. Clement
was so highly pleased with an honour which added such
nfltre and dignity to the house of Medici, that he offered to
grant Catharine the investiture of considerable territories in
Italy, by way of portion; hefeemed ready to support Fran-
cis in prosecuting his ancient claims in that country, and
consented to a personal interview with that monarch j.

tBe.Hay, x4&c Seck.ii. 48. F. Paul, 63.

t Giu. .L xx.55, S53. Belay, 138.

Charles was at the utmost pains to prevent a meeting, in

which nothing was likely to pass but what would be of de-
triment to him; nor could he bear, after he had twice con.
descended to visit the pope in his own territories, that Cle,
ment should bestow such a mark of diftinfion on. his rival,
as to venture on a voyage by sea, at an unfavourable efafon,
in order to pay court to Francis in the French dominions.
But the pope's eagerness to accomplish the match overcame
all the scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which would
probably have influenced him on any other occasion. The
interview, notwithstanding several artifices of the emperor to
prevent it, took place at Marfilles with extraordinary pomp,
and demonstrations of confidence on both fides [Otober];
and the marriage, which the ambition and abilities of Ca-
tharine rendered in the sequel as pernicious to France, as it
was then thought dilhonourable, was consummated. But
whatever schemes may have been secretly concerted by the
pope and Francis in favour of the duke of Orleans, to whom
his father proposed to make over all his rights in Italy; so
careful were they to avoid giving any cause of offence to the
emperor, that no treaty was concluded between them §; and
even in the marriage-articles, Catharine renounced all claims
and pretensions in Italy, except to the dutchy of Urbino*.

But at the very time when he was carrying on these ne-

gotiations, and forming this connection with-Francis, which
gave so great umbrage to the emperor, such was the artifice
and duplicity. of Clement's character, that he suffered the lat-
ter to direa all his proceedings with regard to-the king of
England, and was-no less attentive to gratify him in that
particular, than if the moll cordial union had fill subsisted
between them. Henry's suit for a divorce had now conti-
nued near fix years; during all which period the pope nego-
tiated, promised, retraced, and concluded nothing. .After
bearing repeated delays and disappointments longer than
could have been expetled from a prince of such a choleric
5 Guic. 1. xx. j55. * Du Mont Corps Diplom. iv. p. iiL 1o.

and impetuous temper, the patience of Henry was at tat si
much exhaufled, that he applied to another tribunal for that
decree which he had solicited in vain at Rome. Cranmer,
archbifop of Canterbury, by a sentence founded on the au.
thority of universities, dotors, and rabbies, who had been
consulted with refpet to the point, annulled the king's mar-
riage with Catharine; her daughter was declared illegitimate;
and Anne Boleyne acknowledged as queen of England. At
the fame time Henry began not only to neglect and to threat.
en the pope, whom he had hitherto courted, but to make
innovations in the church, of which he had formerly been
such a zealous defender. Clement, who bad already seen so
many provinces and kingdoms revolt from the holy fee, be-
came apprehenfie at lat that England might imitate their
example, and partly from his solicitude to prevent that fatal
blow, partly in compliance with the French king's folicita.
tiom detamined to give Henry such fatisfaaion as might Aitl
retain him within the bosom of the church [March 23.] But
the violence of the cardinal, devoted to the emperor, did not
alow the pope leure for executing this prudent resolution,
and hried him, with a precipitation fatal to the Roman
fe, to ifune a bull rescinding Cranmer's ftence, confirming
Henry's marage with Catharie, and declaring him excom-
municated, if, within a time speced, he did not abandon
the wife he bhad taken, and return to her whom he had de.
fated. En~ ged at this unexpeed decree, Henry kept no
longer any measures with the court of Rome; his subje&s
seconded his resentment and indignation; an a& of parlia.
meat was pased, abolising the papal power and jurifdition
in England; by another, the king was declared supreme
bead of the church, and all the authority of which the popes
were deprived was veted in him. That vat fabric of eccle-
fiaftical dominion which had been raised with such art, and
of which the foundations seemed to have been laid so deep,
being no longer supported by the veneration of the people,
was overturned in a moment. Henry himself, with the sa-

price peculiar to his characer, continued to defend the doc-
trines of the Romilh church as fiercely as he attacked its
jurisdiction. He alternately persecuted the proteRants for
rejeaing the former, and the Catholics for acknowledging
the latter. But his subje&s, being once permitted to enter
into new paths, did not chufe to flop short at the precise
point prescribed by him. Having been encouraged by
his example to break some of their fetters, they were so
impatient to shake off what fill remainedt, that, in the fol-
lowing reign, with the applause of the greater part of the na-
tion, a total separation was made from the church of Rome
in articles of do&rine, as well as in matters of discipline and
jurifdi&ion.

A liort delay might have saved the fee of Rome from all

the unhappy consequences of Clement's rashness. Soon as.
ter his sentence againif Henry, he fell -into a languishing
difemper, which gradually waiting his constitution, put an
end to his pontificate [Sept. 25,] the most unfortunate,
both during its continuance, and by its ffeEts, that the
church had known for many ages. The very day on which
the cardinals entered the conclave [O&. 13,) they raised to
the papal throne Alexander Farnee, dean of the sacred col-
lege, and the oldest member of that body, who assumed the
name of Paul II1. The account of his promotion was re-
ceived with extraordinary acclamations of joy by the people
of Rome, highly pleated, after an interval of more than an
hundred years, to fee the crown of St. Peter placed on the
head of a Roman citizen. Persons more capable of judg-
ing, formed a favourable presage of his administration; from
the experience which he had acquired under four pontifi-
cates, as well as the chara&er of prudence and moderation
which he had uniformly maintained in a station of great e-
minence, and during an a&ive period that required both ta-
leats and address§.

tHerbert. Burn. Hist. of Reform.
g, Guic. l. Sxx. 56. F. Paul, 64.

Europe, it is probable, owed the continuance of its peace

to the death of Clement; for although no traces remain in
hiflory of any league concluded between him and Francis,
it is fcarcdy to be doubted but that he would have second.
ed the operations of the French arms in Italy, that he might
have gratified his ambition by feeing one of his family pof.
fefied of the supreme power in Florence, and another in Mi
lan. But upon the elecon of Paul III. who had hitherto
adhered uniformly to the Imperial interest, Francis found it
necef~ry to suspend his operations for some time, and to put
off the commencement of hostilities againit the emperor, on
which, before the death of Clement, he had been fully deter.
mined

While Francis waited for an opportunity to renew a war

which had hitherto proved so fatal to himself and his sub.
je&s, a tranfaion of a vry singular nature was carried on
in Germany. Among many beneficial and salutary effect
of which the reformation was the immediate cause, it was
attended, as must be the cafe in all ations and events
wherein men are concerned, with some consequences of an
opposite nature. When the human mind is roused by grand
objets, and agitated by frong passions, its operations ac-
quire such force, that they are apt to become irregular and
extravagant. Uponany greatrevolution in religion, such irre-
gularities abound most, at that particular period, when men,
having thrown off the authority of their ancient principles, do
not yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the obligation of
those new tenets which they have embraced. The mind
in that situation, pulhing forward with the boldnel which
prompted it to rejct eftablihed opinions,.and not guided
by a clear knowledge of the system substituted in their
place, disdains all restraint, and runs into wild notions, which
often lead to scandalous or immoral condu&. Thus, in the
first ages of the Christian church, many of the new converti
having renounced their ancient systems of religious faith,
and being but imperfe~ y acquainted with the doctrines and

precepts of Christianity, broached the moR extravagant o-
pinions, equally subversive of piety and virtue; all which er-
rors disappeared or were exploded when the knowledge of
religion increased, and came to be more generally diffused.
In like manner, soon after Luther's appearance, the rash-
ness or ignorance of some of his disciples led them to pub-.
lifh tenets no less absurd than pernicious, which being pro-
posed to men extremely illiterate, but fond of novelty, and.
at a time when their minds were occupied chiefly with re-.
ligious speculations, gained too easy credit and authority a-
mong them. To these causes muff be imputed the extrava-
gances of Muncer, in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty five, as well as the rapid progress which his opi-
nions made among the peasants; but though the infurreftion
excited by that fanatic was soon suppressed, several of his
followers lurked in different places, and endeavoured pri-
vately to propagate his opinions.

In those provinces of Upper Germany, which had already

been so cruelly wafted by their enthusiastic rage, the magif-
trates watched their motions with such severe attention, that
many of them found it necessary to retire into other coun-
tries, some were punished, others driven into exile, and their
errors were entirely rooted out. But in the Netherlands
and Westphalia, where the pernicious tendency of their oti-
nions was more unknown, and. guarded against with less
care, they got admittance into several towns, and spread the
infection of their principles. The most remarkable of their
religious tenets related to the sacrament of baptifm,.which
as they contended, ought to be administered only to persons
grown up to years of understanding, and should be performed
not by sprinkling them with water, but by dipping them in
it: for this reason they condemned the baptism of infants,
and rebaptifing all whom they admitted into their society,
the fee came to be diftinguiihed by the name of Anabap.
tilts. To this peculiar notion concerning baptism, which
has the appearance of being founded on the pratice of the
Vol. III. F

church in the apostolic age, and contains nothing inconfift.
eat with the peace and order of human society, they added
other principles of a most enthusiastic as well as dangerous
nature. They maintained that, among Christians who had
the precepts of the gospel to dire&, and the spirit of God
to guide them, the office of magitracy was not only unne-
cdoary, but an unlawful encroachment on their spiritual li.
berty; that the diftineions occasioned by birth, or rank, or
wealth, being contrary to the spirit of the gospel, which
confider s all men as equal, ihould be entirely abolihed; that
all Christians, throwing their pofleffions into one common
ifock, hould live together in that fate of equality which
becomes members of the fame family; that as neither the
la of nature, nor the precepts of the New Testament, had
imposed any reftaints upon men with regard to the number
of wives which they might marry, they ihould use that it.
berty which God himself had granted to the patriarchs.

Such opinions, propagated and maintained with enthufi.

aftic zeal and boddnef, were not long without:producing thi'
iolent efects natural to them. Two Anabaptist prophets,
John Matthias, a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccold, or
Beiiker, a journeyman taylor of Leyden, pofeffed with the
rage of making proselytes, fixed their residence at Munster,
an Imperial cty in Westphalia, of the first rank, under the
fovereiguty of its bithop, but governed by its own senate and
consuls. As neither of there fanatics wanted the talents re.
quifite in desperate enterprises, great resolution, the appearl
ance of sanity, bold pretensions to inspiration, and a confi.
dent and plausible manner of discoursing, they soon gained
many converts. Among these were Rothman, who had
firt preached the protestant dotrine in Munster, and Cnip-
perdoling, a citizen of good birth and considerable eminebce.
Emboldened by the countenance of such disciples, they 0-
penty taught their opinions; and not satisfied with that li-
berty, they made several attempts, though without fucceft,
to become masters of the town, in order to get their tencts

eRtablifhed by public authority. At lat, having fecrely
called in their associates from the neighbouring country,
they suddenly took possession of the arsenal and senate house
in the night time, and running through the freets with drawn
swords, and horrible howlings, cried out alternately, * Re-
pent and be baptised," and " Depart ye ungodly." The
senators, the canons, the nobility, together with themore
fober citizens, whether papists or protestants, terrified at
their threats and outcries, fled in confusion, and left the ci-
ty under the dominion of a frantic multitude, confiting
chiefly of firangers [February]. Nothing now remaining
to overawe or control them, they Let about modelling the
government according-to their own wild ideas: and though
at first they Ihewed so much reverence for the ancient cona
fiitution, as to elea senators of their own fee, and to ap-
point Cnipperdoling and another proselyte consuls, this was
nothing more than form; for all their proceedings were di-
reded by Matthiaswho, in the ftyleand with the authority
of a prophet, uttered his. emmandas, which it was inita~t
death to disobey. Having- begun with: encouraging the
multitude to pillage the churehes, and deface their orna~
ments; he enjoined them to destroy all booko except th
bible, as useless or impious;. he ordered the efates of fuaci as
fed tobe confiscated, and fold to theinhabitant ofthia-adja--
cent country;, he commanded every manto. bring forth hi.
gold and silver, and other precious cffeas, and to lay themr
at his feet; the wealth amafled by these. means,. h deipoit-
ed in a public treasury, and named deacons to difpenfc
it for the common use of all. The members of this com-
monwealth being thus brought to a perfe&c eyality, he
commanded all of them to eat at tables pycpa~d in pu-
blic, and even prefcn'bed the dilhe& which were to be
erved up each day. Having finished his plan of rei
formation, his next care wa to provide for the defence of
the city; and he took measures for that purpose with a pru-
dence which favoured nothing of fanaticism. He colleaed&

F

large magaines of every kind; he repaired and extended the
fortifications, obliging every person without diftin&ion to
work in his turn; he formed such as were capable of bear.
ing arms into regular bodies, and endeavoured to add the
itabilty of discipline to the impetuosity of enthnfiafm. He
sent emifiaries to the Anabaptists in the Low-Countries,
inviting them to aflemble at Munster, which he dignified
-with the name of Mount Sion, that from thence they might
set out to reduce all the nations of the earth under their do-
minion. He himself was unwearied in attending to every
thing neceeary for the security or increase of the set; ani.
mating his disciples by his own example to decline no la.
hour, as well as to submit to every hard(hip; and their oe
thuiaftic passions being kept from subsiding by a perpetual
fuccefllon of exhortations, revelations, and prophecies, they
seemed ready to undertake or to susser any thing in main.
tenance of their opinions

While they were thus employed, the biflop of Munster

having assembled a considerable army, advanced to besiege
the town. On his approach, Matthias sallied out at the
head of some chosen troops, attacked one quarter of his
camp, forced it, and after great faughter returned to the
city loaded with glory and spoiL Intoxicated with this
success, he appeared nest day brandishing a spear, and de-
clared, that, in imitation of Gideon, he would go forth
w-ith a handful of men and finite the host of the ungodly.
lThirty persons, whom he named, followed him withoAt hefita'
Lion in this wild enterprise [May,] and, rufling on the ene-
;-y with frantic courage, were cut off to a man. The death oi
their prophet occasioned at first great confaernation among
his disciples; but Buccold by the fame gifts and pretenfionI
w hich had gained Matthias credit, soon revived their fpiriti
and hopes to such a degree, that he succeeded the deceaf
ed prophet in the fame absolute direction of all their affairs
As he did not possess that enterprising courage which diftin
guiihed his predecessor, he satisfied himfedf with carrying oa

a defensive war; and, without attempting to annoy the ene.
my by -allies, he waited for the succours he expeted from
the Low.Countries, the arrival of which was often foretold
and promised by their prophets. But though leds daring:
in ation than Matthias, he was a wilder enthusiast, and
of more unbounded.ambition. Soon after the death.of his
predecessor, havingi by obscure visions and, prophecies, pre.
pared the multitude for some extraordinary. event, he frip-
ped himself niked, and,. marching through.the. ireets,. pro-
claimed with a loud voice,. That the. kingdom of Sion-
was at hand;- that whatever vws.higheft oanearth should be
brought low, and whatever was lowefiLhould be exalted.*'
In order to fulfil this,; he commanded the churches, as ts.
most lofty buildings. in. the city, to, be- leelle with the
ground;, he degraded the renators chofen.by Matthias, and
depriving Cnipperdoling of the confullhip, the highelt office
in the commonwealth, appointed him- to execute the lowest
and most infamous, that of common hangman, to which,
strange transition the other agreed, not only without mur-
muring, but.with.the.utmoftjpy;. and such wasttb.defpotic:
rigour of Bbcosd's adminiftftion, that he was.called ak
most every day to.perform fbme duty or other.of.ibi.writch.
ed fun&ion.. In.pla~eof the deposed senators, he named.
twelve judges, according to the numer of tites'iu Ifrmel,.
to preside in all affairs; retaining to hihielf the.-fame autho-
rity which. Moses.. anciently. ppofld. as legiflato. of. that
people.

Not fatisfied,.however, wifthpewer or titles, whic.,were.

not supreme,. a prophet, whom he had gained and tutored,;
having. caled the multitude together, .declared.it:tobea the
will o£ God, thatJohn Bocohld should be king of.Sion, and:.
fit on the throne ocDavid. Joha-kneeling down,;acceptedi
of the heavenly. call [June 241, which he.folemnly protested
had beea revealed likewise tohimfeldf,ad was immediatly ac-
kiowledged as monarchby the deluded multitude. Froqm
that moment,he alumed.all tbe state and pomp of royalty.

EI

He wore a crown of gold, and was clad in the richest and
most fumptuou garments. A bible was carred on his one
hand, a naked sword on the other. A great body of guards
accompanied him when-he appeared in public. He coined
money samped with his own image, and appointed the great
officers of his household and kingdom, among whom Cnip
perdoling was nominated governor of the city, as a reward
for his former submission.

Having now attained the height of power, Boccold began

to discover passions, which he had hitherto refirained or in-
dulged only in secret. As the excefies of enthusiasm have
been obferned in every age to lead to fenfuat gratifications,
the fame constitution that is frf'eptibc of the former, be-
ing remarkably prone to the latter, he inftruded the pro.
phets and teachers to harangue the people for several days
concerning the lawfulners, and even necelity, of taking more
wives than one, which they asserted to be one of the privir
-iges granted by God tp the faints. When their ears were once
accustomed to this licentious do&rine, and their pafflons infla.
med with the profpe: of such unbounded indulgence,he him-
celffet them an example of sing what he called their Chrifti
an libert, by marrying at once three wives, among which the
widow of Matthias, a woman of singular beauty, was one.
As he was allured by beauty, or the love of variety, he gra-
Juallv added to the number of his wives, until they amounted
to fourteen, though the widow of Matthias was the only
one dignified with the title of Queen, or who shared with
him the splendour and ornaments of roldiy. After the ex,
ample of their prophet, the multitude gave themfeves upto
the most licentious and uncontrouled gratification of their
detes. No man remained satisfied with a single wife. Not
to use their Christian liberty was deemed a crime. Persons
were appointed to search the houses for young women grown
top to maturity, whom they instantly compelled to marry.
Together with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its infepar-
able attendant, was introduced, and became a new source of

corruption. Every excefe was commited, of which the pal.
sions of men are capable, when restrained neithet by the au.
thority of laws nor the sense of decency *; and by a mon-
firous and almost incredible conjuncion, voluptuoufnefs was
engrafted on religion, and dissolute riot accompanied the au.
ferities of fanatical devotion.

Meanwhile the German princes were highly-offended at

,the insult offered to their dignity by Bocceld's prefumptu-
ous usurpation of royal honours; and the proffigate manners
of his followers, which were a reproahto the Chritian name,
filled men of all professions with horror. Luther, who had
testified against this fanatical spirit on its firt appearance,
now deeply lamented its progrefi, and having exposed the
delusion with great strength of argument, as well as acrimo.
ny of tyle, called loudly onall the states of Germany to put
a stop to a phrenzy no less pernicious to society, than fatal
to religion. The emperor, occupied with other cares and
projecs, bad not leisure to attend to sech a distant objec;
but the princes of the empire aflembled by the king of the
Romans, voted a supply of men and money to the bilbopof
Munster, who being unable to keep a sufficient army on foot,
had converted the siege of the town into a blockade [xS35].
The forces raised in consequence of this resolution, were put
under the command of an officer of expenence, who ap-
proaching the town towards the end of spring, in the year
'535, preffd it more closely than formerly; but found the

* Propheta & coscionatorum autoritate juxta et exemplo, tota
vrbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque f£minas difcurium eft.
Nee intra paucos dies, in tanta hominum turba fere ulla reperta
eit supra annum decimum quartum qua fluprum pfia non fuerit.
Lamb. Hortenf. p. 303V. Vul viris quinas effe uxores, pluribus
senas, nonnullis feptenas & oonas. Puellas supra duodecimum
aetatis annum fRatim amare. Id. 3o05. Nemo una contentus suit,
neque cuiquam extra effsetas & viris immaturas continenti elre li-
cut. Id. 307. Tacebo hic, ut fit fuus honor auribus, quanta
barbarie et malitia ufi funt in puellis vitiandis nondum aptis ma-
trimonio, id quod mihi neque ex vano, neque ex vulgi lennoni.
bus hauftum eft, fed ex ea vetula, cui cura fie vitiatarum dcmwaa
data suit, auditum. Job. Corvinus,3x6.

ftification so rong, and so diligently guarded, that e
durst not attempt an assault. It was now about fifteea
months fice the anabaptist had effabliaed their dominia
in Muster; they had during that time undergone prodigi
ous fatigue in working on the fortifiation, and performing
military duty. Notwithstanding the prudent attention of
their king to provide for their fubfience, and his frugal a
well as regular economy in their public meals, they began
to feel the approach of famine [May]y Seeral. small b*
dies of their brethren, who were advancing totheir-affifiancg
fnom the Low-Countries had beta intercepted and cut to
pieces; and while all Gennany was eady to combie againi
the they had no profpet of fucour. But such was th
afendantl which Bocold bad acquire oea the multitude.
and f powrful the fascination of endufi , that their
hopes were as fnguine as ever, and they hearkened with inr
plcit credlity t the tifom and- predifions of their pro.
h, who affurd them that the-Almighty.would speedily
inapofe in orderto delr the citf. The faith, howeve4.
of fme few, lhaken by the violence and length of their sus.
sings, began-to fail; but being fufpeted of aninclination
to furedr to the enemy, they.were punied with immedi.
ate death, a guilty o impiety in difitru~ g the power of
God. Oneof the kings wiveshaving uttered certain words
which implied some doubt concerning hi divine.miffion, he
infantly called the whole number together, and command,
ing the blasphemer, as he called her, to kneel. down, cut off.
her head with his own hands; and so far-were the reft from
expressing any horror at this cArc deed, that they joined
him in dancing with a fraatic joy. around the bleeding body
of their companion.

By this time [June J,], the besieged endured the utmofl

rigour of famine; but they chose rather to susser hardships,
the recital of which is shocking to humanity, than to liltea
to the terms of capitulation offered them by the bishop. At
las, a defcrter, whom they had taken into their fervicc, be-

ing either less intoxicated with the fumes of enthusiasm, or
unable any longer to bear such diftreis, made his escape to
the enemy. He informed their general of a weak part in
the fortifications which he had observed, and assuring him
that the beleged, exhausted with hunger and fatigue, kept
watch there with little care; he offered to lead a party thi-
ther in the night. The proposal was accepted, and. a cho.
fen body of troops appointed for the service; who, scaling
the walls unperceived, seized one of the gates, and admit-
ted-the reft of the army. The anabaptists, though furprif-
ed, defended themselves in the market-place with valour,
heightened by despair; but being overpowered by numbers,
and surrounded on every hand, most of them were lain, and
the remainder taken prisoners [June 2]4. Among the last
were the king and Cnipperdoling. The king, loaded with
chains, was carried from city to city as a fpeftacle to.gratify
the curiosity of the people, and was exposed to all their in-
fults. His spirit, however, was not broken or humbled by
this fad reverse of his condition; and he adhered with un-
shaken firmness to the distinguishing tenets of his feL. As-
ter this, he was brought back to Munler, the scene of his
royalty and crimes, and put to death with the most exqui-
site as well as lingering tortures, all which he bore with afto-
niihing fortitude. This extraordinary man, who had been
able to acquire such amazing dominion over the minds of
his followers, and to excite commotions so dangerous to so.
ciety, was only twenty-fix years of age*.

Together with its monarch, the kingdom of the anabap.

tifts came to an end. Their principles having taken deep
root in the Low-Countries, the party still fubfiits there,
under the name of Mcnnonites but by a very singular revolu-

* Sleid. x9o, &c. Tumultuum anabaptlfarum liber unus. Ant.

Lamberto -ortenfo au&tore ap. Scrdium,.vol. i. p. 198, &c.
De Miferabili Monafterienfium Obfidione, &c. &c. libellus Anto.
nii Corvini ap. Scar. 313. Annales Anabaptificia Jobh Henrico
Ottio, 4to. Bafieae, 1671. Cor. Heevtbachius Hit. Anab. edit,
1637, p. 140,

tion, this seA, so mutinous and sanguinary at its first origil
hath become altogether innocent and pacific. Holding it un.
lawful to wage war, or to accept of civil offices, they devote
themselves entirely to theduties of private citizens, and by thei
indufry and charity endeavour to make reparation to himan'
society for the violence committed by their founders t. A
fiall number of this fed, which is fettled in England, retains
its peculiar tenet concerning baptism, but without any dan.
gerous mixture of enthusiasm.

The mutiny of the anabaptifs though it drew general

attention, did not so entirely engross the princes of Germa.
ny, as not to allow leirure for other tranfa&ions. The at
liance between the French king and the confederates at
Smakalde, began about this time to produce great effe&.

lric, duke of Wurtcmberg, having been expelled his do.
minion in the year one thousnd five hundred and nineteen,
on account of his violent and oppressive adminifiration, the
houe of Anuria had got poff~n of his dutchy. That
pince having now by i long exile atoned for the errors ia
hi condut, which were the cffie rather of inexperience
than of a tyrannical disposition, was become the obje&t of

n l compassion The landgrave of Hesse, in particular,

his near relatio, warmly espoused his intreft, and used nma
ny efforts to recover for him his ancient inheritance. But
the king of the Romans obftinatcly refused to relinqui/h a
val~uale cquifitin which his family had made with so much
ease. The landgrave unableto compel him, applied to thg
king of France, his new ally. Francis, eager to embrace
any opportunity of difteng the house of Aufria, and de-
irous of wrctng from it a territory which gave it footing
and influence in a part of Germany at a distance from its or
ther dominions, encouraged the landgrave to take arms, and
fecretl supplied him with a-large fum of money. This
he employed to raise troops; and marching with great cx-
pdition towards Wurtemberg, attacked, defeated, and dif-

t BayleDion.art. a^~ ca

perfed a considerable body of Austrians, entrusted with the
defence of the country. All the duke's fubjets hastened,
with emulation, to receive their native prince, and re-invest-
ed him with that authority which is till enjoyed by his de-
[cendents. At the fame time the exercise of the protestant
religion was eftablilhed in his dominions:.

Ferdinand, how sensible soever of this unexpe&ed blow,

not daring to attack a prince whom all the protestant pow-
ers'in Germany were ready to support, judged it expedient
to conclude a treaty with him, by which, in the most ample
form, he recognised his title to the dutchy. The success
of the landgrave's operations, in behalf of the duke of Wur-
temberg, having convinced Ferdinand that a rupture with
a league, so formidable as that of Smalkalde, was to be a-
voided with the utmost care, he entered likewise into a ne-
gotiation with the ele&or of Saxony, the head of that u-
nion, and by some concessions in favour of the protestant reli.
gion, and others of advantage to the elector himself, he pre-
vailed on him, together with his confederates, to acknow-
ledge his title as king of the Romans. At the fame time,.
in order to prevent any such precipitate or irregular ele&tion,
in times to come, it was agreed that no person should here-
after be promoted to that dignity without the unanimous
consent -of the ele&ors; and the emperor soon after confirm-
ed this ftipulationt. -

These ats of indulgence towards the protestants, and.
the close union into which the king of the Romans seemed
to be entering with the princes of that party, gave great of-
fence at Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from
a resolution of his predecessor, never to consent to the cal-
ling of a general council, and had promised, in the firt con-
fiftory held after his eletion, that he would convoke that
aftembly so much desired by all Christendom, wvas no less en-
raged than Clement at the innovations in Germany, and no

t Slid. x7.. Bellay, 159, &c.
Sleid. 173. Corps Diplom. ton. iv. p. a. 119.

les averse to any scheme for reforming either the doCrine.
of the church, or the abuses in the court of Rome: but hav.
ing beena witness of the universal cenfire which Clement
had incurred by his obflinacy with regard to there points,
he hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the seeming alacri.
ty with which he proposed a council; flattering himself,
however, that such difficulties would arise concerning the
time and place of meeting, the persons who had a right to
be present, and the order of their proceedings, as would es.
fehually defeat the intention of those who demanded that
assembly, without expofinghimfelf to any imputation for re.
fusing to call it. With this view he dispatched nuncios to
the several courts, in order to make known his intentio,.
and that he had fixed on Mantua as a proper place in which
to hold the council Such difficulties as the pope had fore.
seen, immediately presented themselves in a great number.
The French king did not approve of the place which Paul
had chosen, as the papal and imperial influence would ne-
ceflrily be too great in a town situated in that part of Italy.
The king of England not only concurred with Francis in
urging that objetion, but refused, besides, to acknowledge
any council called in the name and by the authority of the
pope. The German proteflants having met together at
Smalkalde [Dec. I 2], insisted on their original demand of
a council to be held in Germany, and pleading the empe.
rot's promise, as wel as the agreement at Ratisbon to that
effet, declared that they would not confider an assembly held
at Mantua as a legal or free representative of the church. By
this diversity of featiments and views, such a field for in
trigue and negotiation opened, as made it easy for the pope
to assume the merit of being eager to assemble a council,
while at the fame time he could put off its meeting at plea.
sure. The proteflants on the other hand, fufpecing his de-
signs, and sensible of the importance which they derived
from their union, renewed for ten years the league of Smal-
kalde, which now became tronger and more formidable by

the accession of several new members*.

During these tranfa&ions in Germany, the emperor un.

dertook his famous enterprise against the piratical fiates in
Africa. That part of the African continent lying along
the coast of the Mediterranean sea, which anciently formed
the kingdoms of Mauritania and Maffylia, together with
the republic of Carthage, and which is now known by the
general name of Barbary, had undergone many revolutions.
Subdued by the Romans, it became a province of their em,
pire. When it was conquered afterwards by the Vandals,
they ere&ed a kingdom there. That being overturned by
Bellifarius, the country became subjet to the Greek em-
perors, and continued to be so until it was over-run, to-
wards the end of the seventh century, by the rapid and ir-'
relitible arms of the Arabians. It rema.iied for some time
a part of that vaif empire which the caliphs governed with
absolute authority. Its immense distance, however, from
the feat of government, encouraged the descendents of those
leaders who had subdued the country; or the chiefs of the
Moors, its ancient inhabitants, to throw off the yoke, and
to aflert their independence. The caliphs, who derived
teir authority from a spirit of enthusiasm, more fitted
for making conquests than for preserving them, were o-
bliged to connive at a&s of rebellion which they could not
prevent; and Barbary was divided into several king-
doms, of which Morocco, Algiers, and Tunis were the moit
considerable. The inhabitants of these kingdoms were a

This league was concluded December, one thousand five

hundred and thirty-five, but not extended or signed in form till
September in the following year. The princes who acceded to
it were, John ekctor of Saxony, Ernest duke of Brunswick, Phi-
lip landgrave of Hesse, Ulric duke of Wurtemberg, Barnim and
Philip dukes of Pomerania, John, George, and Joachim, princes
of Anhalt, Gebbard and Albert counts of Mansfield, William
count of Naflau. The cities Strafburg, Nuremberg, Conflance,
UIm, Magdeburg, Bremen, Reutlingen, Hailbron, Memmengen,
Lindaw, Campen, Ifna, Bibrac, Windfheim, Augiburg, Franctort,
Efling, Brunswick, Gollar, Hanover, Gottingen, Eimbeck, Ham-
burg, Minden.
Vol. III. G

mixed race, Arabs, negroes from the foutliern provinces,
and Moors, either natives of Africa, or who had been ex.
pelled out of Spain; all zealous professors of the Mahome.
tan religion, and inflamed against Christianity with a bigot.
ted hatred proportional to their ignorance and barbarous
manners.

Among these people, no less daring, inconstant, and

'treacherous, than the ancient inhabitants of the fame coun.
ty described by the Roman hiltorians, frequent seditions
broke out, and many changes in government took place.
These, as they asseted only the internal state of a country
extremely barbarous, are but little known, and deserve to be
so: but about the beginning of the sixteenth century, t
sudden revolution happened, which, by rendering the tfates
of Barbary formidable to the Europeans, hath made their
history worthy of more attention. This revolution was
brought about by. persons born in a rank of life which en-
titled them to act no such illuflrious part. Horuc and
Hayradin, the sons of a potter in the Isle of Lesbos, prompt.
ed by a restless and enterprising spirit, forsook their father's
trade, ran to sea, and joined a crew of pirates. They soon
diftinguilfed themselves by their valour and a&tivity, and
becoming masters of a small brigantine, carried on their
infamous trade with such condut and success, that they as.
fembled a fleet of twelve galleys, besides many vessels of
smaller force. Of this fleet, Horuc, the elder brother, cal-
led Barbarofl, from the red colour of his beard, was admi.
ral, and Hayradin second in; command, but with almost e-
qual authority. They called themselves the friends of the
sea, and the enemies of all who fail upon it; and their
names soon became terrible from the Straits of the Darda.
nels to those of Gibraltar. Together with their fame and
power, their ambitious views extended, and while afting as
corsairs, they adopted the ideas, and acquired the talents of
conquerors. They often carried the prizes which they took
on the coasts of Spain and Italy into the ports of Bar~ry,

and enriching the inhabitants by the sale of their booty, and
the thoughtless prodigality of their crews, were welcome
guells in every place at which they touched. The con-
venient situation oftheef harbours, lying so near the greatest
commercial Rates at that time in Christendom, made the
brothers wish for an eftabliflment in that. country. An
opportunity of accomplishing this quickly presented itself
which they did not susser to pass unimproved. Eutemi,
king of Algiers, having attempted several times, without
success, to take a fort which the Spanish governors of Oran
had built not far from his capital, was so ill-advifed as to
apply for aid to BarbarofTa, whose valour the Africans con-
fidered as irresistible. The ative corsair gladly accepted
of the invitation, and leaving his brother Hiyradia with
the fleet C15I6,] aiarched at the head of five thousand.
men to Algiers, were he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the town; and as he
perceived that the Moors neither fufpeEted him of-any bad
intentions, nor were capable with their light-armed troops of
oppofiag his disciplined veterans, he secretly mrdered the
monarch whom he had come to aflift, and pro;lainid him;
self king of Algiers in his fead. The authority which.
he had thus boldly usurped, he endeavoured to eftablilh by
arts suited to the genius of the people whom lie had' to go-
vern; by liberality without bounds to those who favoured.
his promotion, and by cruelty no lefa unbounded towards all
whom he bad any reason to diftrut. Not satisfied with the
throne which he had acquired, he attacked the neighbour-
ing king of Tremecen, and having vanquilhed him in battle,
added his dominions to those of Algiers. At the fame
time he continued to infest the coast of Spain and Italy with
fleets which resembled the armaments of a great monarch,
rather than the light squadrons of a corsair. Their fre_-
qient and cruel devafations obliged Charles, about the be-
ginning of his reign [1518,] to furnish the marquis de-
Comarces governor of Oran, with troops sufficient to attack

G

him. That officer, affifed by the dethroned king of Trene.
cen, executed the commission with such spirit, that Barba.
rosa's troops being beat in several encounters, he himself wa
ihut up in Tremecen. After defending it to the last extre.
mity, he was overtaken in attempting to make his escape,
and lain while he fought with an oblinate valour, worthy
his former fame and exploits.

His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the name of

Babarofa, assumed the sceptre of Algiers with the fame
ambition and abilities, but with better fortune. His reign
being undisturbed by the arms of the Spaniards, which had
full occupation in the wars among the European powers, he
regulated with admirable prudence the interior police of his
kingdom, carried on his naval operations with great vigour,
and extended his conquest on the continent of Africa. But
perceiving that the Moors and Arabs submitted to his go.
venmmet with the umunot relutance, and being afraid that
his continual depredations would, one day, draw upon him
the arms of the Chritians, he put his dominions under the
protetion of the Grand Seignior, and received from him a
body of Turkil soldiers sufficient for his security againt
his domefic as well as his foreign enemies. At last, the
fame of his exploits daily increasing, Solyman offered him
the command of the Turkili fleet, as the only person whos
valour and fldll in naval affairs entitled him to command a-
gainft Andrew Doria, the greatest fea-officer of that age.
Proud of this diRinlion, Barbarossa repaired to Conflanti.
tiople, and with a wonderful versatility of mind, mingling
the arts of a courtier with the boldness of a corsair, gained
the entire confidence both of the sultan and his vizier. To
them he communicated a scheme which he had formed of
making himself maiter of Tunis, the most flouribhing king-
dom, at that time, on the coast of Africa; and this being
approved of by them, he obtained whatever he demanded
for carrying it into execution.

His hopes of success in this undertaking were founded on

the intestine divisions in the kingdom of Tunis. Mahmed,
the last king of that country, having thirty-four sons by
different wives, appointed Muley-Hafcen, one of the young-
eft among them, to be his successor. That weak prince, who-
owed this preference, not to his own merit, but to the a-
fcendant which his mother had acquired: over a monareli'
doating with age, first poisoned Mahmed his father in order
to prevent him from altering his destination with refpet to-
the succession; and then, with the Barbarous policy which.
prevails wherever polygamy is permitted, and.the right off
ficeefion is not precisely fixed, he put to death all his bro-
thers whom he could'get into his power. Alrafchid; orne
of the eldest, was so fortunate as to escape his rage;' andt
finding a retreat- among the wandering Arabs,. made several
attempts, by the assistance of some of their chiefs, to recover
he throne, which of right belonged to him. But these
proving unsuccessful, and the Arabs, from their natural le-
vity, being ready to deliver him up to his merciless brother,
he fled to Algiers,. the only place of refuge remaining, and
implored the protection. of Barbaroffai who, discerning at
once all the advantages which might be gained'by fapport-
ing his title, received him with every poflible demonstration
of friendflip and refpet. Being ready, at that time,, to.
ftt fail for Constantinople, he easily persuaded Alrafchid,
liole eagerness to obtain a crown disposed him to believe
or undertake any thing, to accompany him thither, promif-
ing him effetual afiitance from Solyman, whom he repre-
fnted to be the mofi generous, as well as most powerful mo-
narch in the world. But no sooner were they arrived at
Confiantinople, than the treacherous corfatr, regardless of
!t his promises to him, opened to the sultan a plan for con-
qucring Tunis, and annexing it to the Turkish enspire, by
making use of the name of this exiled prince, and co-operat-
ing with the party in the-kingdom which was ready to de-
cl;re in his favour. Solyman approved, with too much fa-
ci!ty, of this perfisious proposal, extremely 'fultible to the

G3

character of its author, but altogether unworthy of a great
prince. A powerful fleet and numerous army were soon a.
fembled; at the fight of which the credulous Alrafchid flat.
tered himself that he lhould soon enter his capital in triumph,

But just as this unhappy prince was going to embark, he

was arreftd by order of the sultan, {hut up in the seraglio,
and was never heard of more.- Barbarofia failed with a
fleet of two hundred and fifty vessels towards Africa. As.
ter ravaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror through
every part of that country, he appeared before Tunis; and
landing his men, gave out that he came to assert the right
of Alrafchid, whom he pretended to have left sick aboard
the admiral galley. The fort of Goktta, which commands
the-bay, soon fell into his hands, partly by his own addrefe,
partly by the treachery of its commander; and the inhabit.
ants of Tunis, weary of Muley-Hafcen's government, too
arms, and declared for Arafehid with such zeal and unanimi.
ty as obliged the former tofy So precipitately, that he led
al his treafnes behind-him. The gates were immediately
set opea to Barbarofla, as the restorer of their lawful fowe
reign. But when Alrafehid himself did not appear, and
when instead of his name, that of Solyman alone was hear
among the acclamations of the Turkilh soldiers marching in.
to the town, the people of Tunis began to. fufpef the corl
fairs treachery. Their suspicions being soon converted in.
to certainty, they ran to arms with the utmost fury, and
fnrounded the citadel, into which Babaroffa had led hi
troops. But having forefeea such a revolution, he was not
unprepared for it; he immediately turned againif them the
artillery on the ramparts, and by one brisk discharge, di$
perfcd the numerous but undireted afailints, and forced
them to aclkowlege Solyman as their sovereign, and to sub.
mit to himself a his viceroy.

His sirs care was to put the kingdom, of which he had

thus got poteMion, in a proper posture of defence. HI
ftreagthencd the citadel which commands the town an

fortifying the Goletta in a regular manner, at vail expence
made it the principal flation for his fleet, and his great ar-
fenal for military as well as naval stores. Being now pof.
sessed of such extensive territories, he carried on his depreda-
tions againit the Christian Hates to a greater extent, and with
more deftru&ive violence than ever. Daily complaints of
the outrages committed by his cruisers were brought to the
emperor by his fubjeas, both in Spain and Italy. All
Christendom seemed to expe& from him, as its greatest and
inot fortunate prince, that he would put an end to this new
and odious species of oppreflion. At the fame time Muley-
Hafcen, the exiled king of Tunis, finding none of the Ma-
hometan princes in Africa willing or able to assist him in re-
covering his throne, applied to Charles [April z , 15351,
as the only perfoa who could assert his rights in opposition
to such a formidable usurper. The emperor, equally defir-
ous of delivering his dominions from the dangerous neigh.
bourhood of Barbarossa; of appearing as the protecor of an
unfortunate prince; and of acquiring the glory annexed in
that age to every expedition against the Mahometans, readily
concluded a treaty with Muley-Hafcen, and began to pre-
pare for invading Tunis. Having made trial of his own a-
bilities for war in the late campaign in Hungary, he was
now become so fond of the military characer, that he de.
termined to command on this occasion in peifon. The un-
ited strength of his dominions was called out upon an en-
terprize in which the emperor was about to hazard his glo-
ry, and which drew the attention of all Europe. A Flem-
ift fleet carried from the ports of the Low-Country a body
of German infantry*; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took
on board the veteran bands of Italians and Spaniards, which
had distinguished themselves by. o many vi&ories over the
Vrench; the emperor himtelf embarked at Barcelona with the
flower of the Spanish nobility,and wasjoined by a considerable
squadron from Portugal, under the command of the Infant

*Herai Annales Brahant i. 599.

Don Lewis, the empress's brother; Andrew Doria condut.
ed his own gallies, the best appointed at that time in Europe,
and commanded by the mos fikilful officers; the pope fur-
nilhed all the afiftance in his power towards such a pious-
enterprize; and the order of Malta, the perpetual enemies
of the Infidels, equipped a squadron, which, though fma,l
was formidable by the valour of the knights who served orb
board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia was the general
place of rendezvous. Doria was appointed high-admiral of
the fleet; the command of the l-nd forces under the empe.
ror was given to the marquis de Guafto.

On the sixteenth of July, the fleet, confifling of near five

hundred vefdes, having on board above thirty thousand regu-
lar troops, set fail from Cagliari, and after a prosperous navi.
gation landed within fight of Tunis. Barbarofla having re-
ceived early intelligence of the emperor's immense artnament,
and fufpeding its destination, prepared with equal prudence
and vigour for the defence of his new conquest. He called
in all his corsairs from their different Rations; he drew frond
Algiers what forces could be spared; he dispatched meffeen
ers to all the African princes, Moors as well as Arabs, andt
by rep;denting Muley-Hafcen as an infamous apostate,
prompted by ambition and revenge, not only to become the
aflal of a Christian prince, but to conspire with him to ex
tirpate the Mahomedan faith, he inflamed those ignorant and
bigotted chiefs to such a degree, that they took arms as in a
common cause. Twenty thousand horse, together with a
great body of foot, soon assembled at Tunis; and by a pro-
per distribution of presents among them from time to time,
Barbarossa kept the ardour which had brought them toge-
ther from subsiding. But as he was too well acquainted
with the enemy whom he had to oppose, to think that these
light troops could resist the heavy.armed cavalry and veteran
infantry which composed the Imperial army, his chief confi-
dence was in the strength of the Guletta, and in his body of
Turkish soldiers, who were armed and disciplined after the

European faflhion. Six thousand of these, under the com-
mand of Sinan, a renegado Jew, the braved and most expe-
rienced of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort, which the
emperor immediately inveRed. As Charles had the com.
mand of the sea, his camp was so plentifully supplied not on-
ly with the necessaries, but with all the luxuries of life, that
Muley-Hafcen, who had not been accustomed to fee war
carried on with such order and magnificence, was filled with
admiration of the emperor's power. His troops, animated
by his presence, and confidering it as meritorious to hbed
their blood in such a pious cause, contended with each other
for the posts of honour and danger. Three separate attacks
were concerted, and the Germans, Spaniards, and Italians,
having one of these committed to each of them, phed them
forward with the eager courage which national emulato im-
spires. Sinan displayed resolution and ikill becoming the
confidence which his malfer had put in him; the garrison
performed the hard service on which they were ordered with
great fortitude. But though he interrupted the besiegers
by frequent sallies, though the Moors and Arabs alarmed
the camp with their continual incursions; the breaches soon
became so considerable towards the land, while the fleet bat-
tered those parts of the fortifications which it could approach
with no less fury and success, that an assault being given on
all fides at once, the place was taken by storm [July 25.]
Sinan, with the remains of his garrison, retired after an ob-
ftlnate refinance, over a {hallow part of the bay towards the
city. By the redu&tion of the Goletta, the emperor be-
came matler of Barbarossa's fleet, consisting of eighty seven
gallies and galliots, together with his arsenal, and three hun-
dred cannon, mostly brass, which were planted on the ram-
parts; a prodigious number in that age, and a remarkable
proof of the strength of the fort, as well as of the greatness
of the corsair's power. The emperor marched into the Go-
letta, through the breach, and turning to Muley-Hafcen who
attended him, (" Here," fays he, cc is a gate open to you,

by which you Ihall return to take possession of your domi.
nions.'

Barbarofla, though he felt the full weight of the blow

which he had received, did not, however, lose courage, or a.
bandon the defence of Tunis. But as the walls were of great
extent, and extremely weak; as he could not dependon the si-
delity of the inhabitants, nor hope that the Moors and Arabs
would sustain the hardphips of a siege, he boldly determined to
advance with his army, which amounted to fifty thoufanA
Aten*, towards the Imperial camp, andto decide the fate of hit
kingdomby theiffue of a battle. This resolution hecommuni.
atedto his principal officers, and representing to them the f.
tal confeqnences which might follow, if ten thoufandChriftian
laes, whom he had Ihut up in the citadel, should attempt to
mutiny during the abSence of the atmy, he proposed, as a
necelry precaution for the public security, to massacre them
without mercy before he began his march. They all atp
proved warmly of his intention to fight; but inured as they.
were, in their piratical depredations, to scenes of bloodied
and cruelty, the barbarity of his proposal concerning the
hlaves ied them with horror; and Barbarossa, rather from
the dread of irritating them, than swayed by motives of hu.
manity, contented to spare the lives of the saves.

By this time the emperor had begun to advance towards

Tunis; and tholgh his troops suffered inconceivable hard-
ihips in their march, over burning sands, destitute of water,
and exposed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they soon
came up with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs, em-
boldened by their vast superiority in number, immediately
ruihed on to the attack with loud shouts, but their undifcipelu-
ed courage could not long stand the Ihock of regular battali-
ons; and though Barbarolfa, with admirable presence of mind,
and by exposing his own person to the greatest dangers, endea-
voured to rally them, the rout became so general, that he
himelf, was hurried along with them in their flight back to

Epiltres de Princes, par Rucelli, p. II6, &c.

the city. There he found every thing in the utmost con-
fusion; some of the inhabitants flying with their families
and effe&s; others, ready to set open their gates to the con.
queror; the Turkilh soldiers preparing to retreat; and the
citadel, *hich in such circumstances might have afforded
him some refuge, already in the possession of the Chriftan
captives. These unhappy men, rendered desperate by
their situation, had laid hold on the opportunity which Bar-
baroffa dreaded. As soon as his army was at some distance
from the town, they gained two of their keepers, by whose
affitance knocking off their fetters, and bursting open their
prisons, they overpowered the Turkiih garrison, and turned
the artillery of the fort against their former mafiers. Bar-
baroffa, disappointed and enraged, exclaiming Sometimes a-
gainft the false compassion of his officers, and Sometimes
condemning his own imprudent compliance with their opi-
nion, fled precipitately to Bona.

Meanwhile Charles, satisfied with the easy and almost

bloodless victory which he had gained, and advancing flow.
ly with the precaution necessary in an enemy's country, did
not yet know the whole extent of his own good fortune.
But at last, a messenger dispatched by the slaves acquainted
him with the success of their noble effort for the recovery
of their liberty; and at the fame time deputies arrived from
the town, in order to present him the keys of their gates,
and to implore his protection from military violence. While
he was deliberating concerning the proper measures for this
purpose, the soldiers, fearing that they should be deprived
of the booty which they had expected, rushed suddenly, and
without orders into the town, and began to kill and plun.
der without diftintion. It was then too late to restrain
their cruelty, their avarice, or licentiousness. All the out-
rages of which soldiers are capable in the fury of a storm,
all the excesses of which men can be guilty when their pas-
sons are heightened by the contempt and hatred which dif-
frence in manners and religion inspire, were committed.

Above thirty thousand of the innocent inhabitants perilihed
en that unhappy day, and ten thousand were carried
away as laves. Muley-Hatcen took poffrfion of a throne
surrounded with carnage, abhorred by his fubjets on
whom he had brought such calamities, and pitied even by
those whose rashness had been the occasion of them. The
emperor lamented the fatal accident which had tained the
lustre of his vistory; and amidf such a fceneof horror there
was but one fpeiacle that afforded him any fatisfa&ion.
Ten thouiand ChrifRian slaves, among whom were several
persons of d:i'nction, met him as he entered the town; and
falling upon their knees, thanked and blessed him as their
deliverer.

At the fame time that Charles accomplished his promise

to the Moorish king, of re-eftablilhing him in his dominions,
he did not negle&t what was necessary for bridling the power
of the African corsairs, for the security of his own fubjeEs,
and for the interest of the Spanif crown. In order to gain
these ends, he concluded a treaty with Muley-Hafcen on the
following conditions: that he should hold the kingdom of
Tunis in fee of the crown of Spain, and do homage to the
emperor as his liege lord; that all the Christian slaves now
within his dominions, of whatever nation, should be set at
liberty without ransom; that no subjea of the emperor's
should for the future be detained in servitude; that no Tur-
kish corsair fould be admitted into the ports of his dotni.
nions; that free trade, together with the public exercise of
the Christian religion, lhould be allowed to the emperor's
subje&s; that the emperor should not only retain the Go.
letta, but that all the other sea ports in the kingdom which
were fortified hould be put into his hands; that Muley.Haf.
cen (hould pay annually twelve thousand crowns for the fubl
fitence of the Spanilh garrison in the Goletta; that he
lhould enter into no alliance with any of the emperor's enc
mies, and should present to him every year, as an acknow.
kdgment of his vafalage, fix Moorilh horses, and as main

hawkst. Having thus fettled the affairs of Africa; chaf-
tifed the insolence of the corsairs; secured a safe retreat for
the ships of his fubjeAs, and a proper itation to his own fleets,
on that coaf from which he was most infested by piratical
depredations; Charles embarked again for Europe [Aug.
17], the tempestuous weather, and sickness among his troops,
not permitting him to pursue Barbarofa *.

By this expedition, the merit of which seems to have been

estimated in that age, rather by the apparent generosity of
the undertaking, the magnificence with which it was con-
du&ed, and the success which crowned it, than by the im-
portance of the consequences that attended it, the emperor
attained a greater height of glory, than at any other peri-
od of his reign. Twenty thousand slaves whom he freed
from bondage, either by his arms, or by his treaty with
Muley-Hafcen §, each of whom he clothed` and. furnilhed
with the means of returning to their refpe&ive countries,
spread over all Europe the fame of their benefactor's muni-
ficence, extolling his power and abilities with the exagger-
ation flowing from gratitude and admiration. In compari.
son with him,, the other monarchs in Europe made an in-
considerable figure. They seemed to be falicitous about
nothing but their private and particular interests; while
Charles, with an elevation of sentiment which became the
first prince in Christendom, appeared to be concerned for the
honour of the Chriltian name, and attentive to the public
security and welfare.

t Du Mont Corps Diplomat. ii. va8. Summonte Hist. di Napoli,
iv. 89.

Joh. Etropii Diarium Expedition. Tunetana, ap Scard. v. ii.

p 30, &c. Jovii Hiftor. lib. xxxiv. xS3, &c. Sandov. ii. IS4, &c.
Vertot Hit. de Cheval de Malthe. Epiftres des Princes, par Ruf-
celli, traduites par Belleforeft, p. 119, 10o, &c. Anton. Pontii
Confentini Hilt. Belli adv. Barbar. ap. Matthaei Analedt.

5 Summonte Hilu de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.
Vol. III.

# BOOK VI.

BOOK ¥I.

UNFOiTUNATELY for the reputation of Francis L among
his contemporaries, his condut, at this junture, appeared
a perfect contrast to that of his rival, as he laid hold on the
opportunity afforded him, by the emperor's having turned
his whole force again/t the common enemy of Christendom,
to revive his pretensions in Italy, and to plunge Europe into
a new war. The treaty of Cambray, as has been observed,
did not remove the causes of enmity between the two -con.
tending princes; it covered up, but did not extinguilh the
flames of discord. Francis in particular, who waited with
impatience for a proper occasion of recovering the reputa.
tion as well asthe territories which he had loft, continuedto
carry on his negotiations in different courts against the em.
peror, taking the utmost pains to heighten the jealousy
which many princes entertained of his power or designs
and to inspire the reft with the fame suspicion and fear: a.
mong other, he applied to Francis Sforza, who, though
indebted to Charles for the poffefflon of the dutchy of Mi.
lan, had received iton such hard conditions, as rendere
him not only a vaflal of the empire, but a tributary depend.
ant upon the emperor. The honour of having married the
emperotes niece, did not reconcile him to this ignominio
state if fubje&ion, which became so intolerable even to
Sforza, though a weak and poor.fpirited prince, that he lift-
ened with eagerness to the first proposals Francis made
ofrefcning him from the yoke. These proposals were con.
veyed to him by Maraviglia, or Merveille, as he is called by
the French historians, a Milanese gentleman residing at Pa.
ris; and soon after, in order to carry on the negotiation
with greater advantage, Merveille was sent to Milan, on prc
tence ofvifiting his relations,b ut with secret credentials fros
Francis as his envoy. In this characer he was received b)

Sforza. But notwithstanding his care to keep that circum-
fiance concealed, Charles fufpeing, or having received in-
formation of it, remonstrated and threatened in such an
high tone, that the duke and his ministers, equally intimi-
dated, gave the world immediately a most infamous proof of
their servile fear of offending the emperor. As Merveille
had neither the prudence nor the temper which the funtion
wherein he was employed required, they artfully decoyed
him into a quarrel, in which he happened to kill his antago-
nilt, one of the duke's domefics, and having instantly seized
him, they ordered him to be tried for that crime, and to be
beheaded [Dec. 1533.] 'Francis, no less astonished at this
violation of a characer held sacred among the molt uncivi.
lized nations, than enraged at the insult offered to the dig-
nity of his crown, threatened Sforza with the effecs of his
indignation, and complained to the emperor, whom he con-.
fidered as the real author of that unexampled outrage. But
receiving no fatisfaftion from either, he appealed to all the
princes of Europe, and thought himself now entitled to take
vengeance for an injury, which it would have been indecent
and pusillanimous to let pass with impunity.

Being thus furnished with a pretext for beginning a war,

on which he had already resolved, he multiplied his efforts
in order to draw in other princes to take part in the quarrel.
But all his measures for this purpose were disconcerted by
unforefcen events. After having sacrificed thehonour of the
royal family of France by the marriage of his son with Ca-
therine of Medici, in order to gain Clement, the death of
that pontiff had deprived him of all the advantages which
le expe&ed to derive from his friendship. Paul, his fuccef-
for, though attached by inclination to the Imperial interest,
seemed determined to maintain the neutrality suitable to his
charater as the common father of the contending princes.
The king of England, occupied with domestic cares and
projeds, declined, for once, engaging in the affairs of the
Continent, and refused to assist Francis, unless lie would imi.

IH z

tate his example, in throwing off the papal supremacy.
These disappointments led him to solicit, with greater ear.
neftnefs, the aid of the protestant princes associated by the
league of Smalkalde. That he might the more easily ac.
quire their confidence, he endeavoured to accommodate him.
self to their predominant passion, zeal for their religious te.
nets. He affected a wonderful moderation with regard to the
points in dispute; he permitted Bellay, his envoy in Germa.
ny, to explain his sentiments concerning some of the most
important articles, in terms not far different from those used
by the protestants*: he even condescended to invite Me.
lanAhon, whose gentle manners and pacific spirit distinguish.
ed him among the reformers, to visit Paris, that by his as.
iftance he might concert the moot proper measures for re-
cpnciling the contending fe&s which so unhappily divided
the churcht. These concessions must be confidered rather
as arts of policy, than the result of convition; for whatever
impression the new opinions in religion had made on his
fiters, the queen of Navarre and dutchess of Ferrara, the
gaiety of Francis's own temper, and his love of pleasure,
allowed him little leisure to examine theological controver-
fies.

But soon after he loft all the fruits of this disingenuous

artifice, by a ftep very inconsistent with his declarations to
the German princes. This ftep, however, the prejudices of
the age, and the religious sentiments of his own fubjecs,
rendered it necessary for him to take. His close union
with the king of England, an excommunicated heretic; his
frequent negotiations with the German proteflants; but
above all, his giving public audience to an envoy from ful.
tan Solyman, had excited violent suspicions concerning the
sincerity of his attachment to religion. To have attacked
the emperor, who, on all- occalTons, made high pretensions

Freheri Script. Rer. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid. Hilt. i78i

- C. Veckendr t. iboi i.

ai.
t Cuamerarii Vita Ph. MelancUthonis, 12°. Hag. 1655. p. 12.

to zeal in defence of the catholic faith, and at the veryjunc-
ture when he was preparing for his expedition against Bar-
baroffa, which was then confidered as a pious enterprise,
could not have failed to confirm such unfavourable senti-
ments with regard to Francis, and called on him to vindi-
cate himself by some extraordinary demonstration of his
reverence for the eftabliffhed docrines of the church. The
indiscreet zeal of some of his subje&s, who had imbibed the
protestant opinions, furnilhed him with such an occasion as
he desired. They had affixed to the gates of the Louvre,
and other public places, papers containing indecent reflec-
tions on the do&rines and rites of the popifli church. Six
of the persons concerned in this rash acion were discovered
and seized. The king, in order to avert the judgments
which it was supposed their blasphemies might draw down
upon the nation, appointed a solemn _proceflioa. The holy
sacrament was carried through the city in greatpomp; Fran-
cis walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch .in hia
hand; the princes of the blood supported the canopy o-
ver it; the nobles marched in order behind. In the pre.
fence of this numerous assembly, the king, accustomed tcr
express himself on every subjec in strong and animated,
language, declared, that if one of his hands were infeked&
with heresy, he would cut it off with the other, and would
not spare even his own children, if found guilty of that
crime. As a dreadful proof of his being in earnest, the fix
unhappy persons were publicly burnt before the proceflioa
was finilhed, with circumRfanees of the-moft lhockirg barba.
rity attending theif execution*.

The princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled with resent-
ment and indignation at the cruelty with which their breth-
ren were treated, could not conceive Francis to be incere.
when he offered to protect in Germany those very tenets,
which he persecuted with such rigour in his own dominions;
fl that all Bellay's art and eloquence in vindicating his ma1;

Bclcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Sleid. Hist. 175,i;&

II 3

ter, or apologising for his conduct, made but little impref.
sion upon them. They confidered likewise, that the empe.
ror, who hitherto had never employed violence against the
doarines of the reformers, nor even given them much mo.
leftation in their progress, was now bound by the agreement
at Ratilbon, not to disturb such as had embraced the new
opinions; and the protestants wifely regarded this as a more
certain and immediate security, than the precarious and dif.
tant hopes with which Francis endeavoured to allure them.
Bfides, the manner in which he had behaved to his allies
at the peace of Cambray, was too recent to be forgotten, and
did not encourage others to rely much on his friendship or
generosity. Upon all these accounts, the proteflant princes
refused to assist the French king in any hostile attempt a-
gainft the emperor. The eletor of Saxony, the most zeal.
ous among them, in order to avoid giving-any umbrage to
Charles, would not permit MelanAhon to visit the court of
France, although that reformer, flattered perhaps by the in.
vitation of so great a monarch, or hoping that his presence
there might be. of signal advantage to the protestant cause,
discovered a strong inclination to undertake the journeyS.

But though none of the many princes who envied or dread-

ed the power of Charles, would second Francis's efforts in
order to reduce and circumscribe it, he nevertheless, com.
manded his army to-advance towards the frontiers of Italy.
As his sole pretext for taking arms was that he might chaf.
:lfe the duke of Milan for his insolent and cruel breach of
the law of nations, it might have been expeced that the
whole weight of his vengeance was to have fallen on his ter-
ritories. But on a sudden, and at their very commence-
ment, the operations of war took another dire&ion. Charles
duke of Savoy, one of the least acive and able princes of
the line from which he descended, had married Beatrix of
Portugal, the filter of the empress. By her great talents,
she soon acquired an absolute ascendant over her hufland;

Camerarii Vita Melan. X14,&c. 415. Seckend. lib. iii. 07.

and proud of her affinity to the emperor, or allured by the
magnificent- promises with which he flattered her ambition,
Ihe formed an union between the duke and the Imperial
court, extremely inconsistent with that neutrality, which
wife policy as well as the situation of his dominions had hi.
therto induced him to observe in all the quarrels between the
contending monarchs. Francis was abundantly sensible of
the distress to which he might be exposed, if, when he en-
tered Italy, he should leave behind him the territories of a
prince, devoted so obsequiously to the emperor, that he had
sent his eldest son to be educated in the court of Spain, as
a kind of hostage for his fidelity. Clement the Seventh,
who had represented this danger in a strong light during his
interview with Francis at Marseilles, fuggefled to him, at
the fame time, the proper method of guarding against it,
having advised him to begin his operations against the Mi-
lanefe, by taking poffefion of Savoy and Piedmont, as the
only certain way of securing a communication with his own
dominions. Francis, highly irritated at the duke on ma-
ny accounts, particularly for having supplied the constable
Bourbon with the money that enabled him to levy the body
of troops which ruined the French army in the fatal battle
of Pavia, was not unwilling to let him now feel both how
deeply he resented, and how severely he could punish these
injuries. Nor did he want several pretexts which gave some
colour of equity to the violence he intended. The territo-
ries of France and Savoy lying contiguous to each other,
and intermingled in many places, various disputes, unavoid.
able in such a situation, subsisted between the two sovereigns
concerning the limits of their refpeAive property; and be-
fides, Francis, in right of his mother, Louise of Savoy, had
large claims upon the duke her brother, for her share in their
father's succession. Being unwilling, however, to begin ho.
ftilities without some cause of quarrel more specious than
these pretensions, many of which were obsolete, and others
dubious, he demanded permiflion to march through Pied.

mont in his way to the Milanese, hoping that the duke, from
an excess of attachment to the Imperial interest, might re.
fuse this requet, and thus give a greater appearance of jus.
tice to all his operations againit him. But, if we may be.
live the historians of Savoy, who appear tobe better inform.
ed with regard to this particular than thofle of France, the
duke readily, and with a good grace, granted what it was
not in his power to deny, promising free passage to the
French troops as was desired; so that Francis, as the only
method now left of justifying the measures which he deter.
mined to take, was obliged to inift for full fatisfa&ion with
regard to every thing that either the crown of France or his
mother Louise could demand of the house of Savoy*. Such
an evaive answer, as might have been expected, being made
to this requisition, the French army under the admiral Bi.
ron poured at once into the duke's territories at different
places. The countries of Breffe and Bugey, united at that
time to Savoy, were over-run in a moment. Moit of the
towns in the dutchy of Savoy opened their gates at the ap.
proach of the enemy; a few which attempted to make re-
fiftance were easily taken; and before the end of the cam-
paign the duke saw himself stripped of all his dominions, but
the province of Piedmont, in which there were not many
places in a condition to be defended.

To complete the duke's misfortunes, the city of Geneva,

the sovereignty of which he claimed, and in some degree
possessed, threw off his yoke, and its revolt drew along with
it the loss of the adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that
time, an Imperial city, and though under the dire& domi-
nion of its own bilhops, and the remote sovereignty of the
dukes of Savoy, the form of its internal -constitution was
purely republican, being governed by syndics and a council
chosen by the citizens. From these diftin& and often claih-
ing jurifdiAions, two opposite parties took their rife, and

Hiftoire Genealogique de Savoye, par Guichenon, i tom. foL
Lyon. 166. i. 639, &c.

had long subsisted in the state; the one, composed of the
advocates for the privileges of the community, assumed the
name of Eignotz, or confederates in defence of liberty; and
branded the other, which supported the episcopal or ducal
prerogatives, with the name of Mammelules, or slaves. At
length [I532], the protestant opinions beginning to spread
among the citizens, inspired such as embraced them with
that bold enterprising spirit which always accompanied or
was naturally produced by them in their first operations.
As both the duke and bishop were from interef, from pre-
judice, and from political considerations, violent enemies of
the reformation, all the new converts joined with warmth
the party of the Eignotz; and zeal for religion, mingling
with the love of liberty, added strength to that generous
palfion. The rage and animosity of two factions, {hut up
within the fame walls, occasioned frequent infurre&ions,
which terminating mostly to the advantage of the friends of
liberty, they daily became more powerful.

The duke and biihop, forgetting their ancient contefte

about jurifdi&ion, had united against their common enemies,
and each attacked them with his proper weapons. The bi-
Ihop excommunicated the people of Geneva as guilty of a
double crime; of impiety, in apoitatifing from the etablifhed
religion; and of sacrilege, in invading the rights of his fee.
The duke attacked them as rebels againit their lawful prince,
and attempted to render himself master of the city, firit by
surprise, and then by open force [1534]. The citizens,
despising the thunder of the bishop's censures, boldly assert-
ed their independence againit the duke; and partly by their
valour, partly by the powerful assistance which they received
from the canton of Berne, together with some small sup-
plies both of men and money, secretly furnished by the king
of France, they defeated all his attempts. Not satisfied
with having repulsed him, or with remaining always upon the
defensive themselves, they now took advantage of the duke's
inability to refiit them, while overwhelmed by the armies of

France, and seized several castles and places of strength which
he possessed in the neighbourhood of Geneva; thus dliver.
ing the city from those odious monuments of its former sub.
jecion, and rendering the public liberty more secure for the
future. At the fame time the canton of Berne invaded and
conquered the Pays de Vaud, to which it had some preten.
sions. The canton of Friburgh, though zealously attached
to the catholic religion, and having no subjed of contet
with the duke, laid hold on part of the spoils of that unfor.
tunate prince. A great portion of these conquelts or ufur.
pations being fill retained by the two cantons, add confider.
ably to their power, and have become the most valuable part
of their territories. Geneva, notwithftandiig many schemes
and enterprises of the dukes of Savoy to re-eftablilh their
dominion over it, ftll keeps pofflefon of its independence;
and in consequence of that blffing, has attained a degree of
cofideration, wealth, and elegance, which it could not o.
therwife have reachedt.

Amidst such a succession of diafrous events, the duke of

Savoy had no other resource but the emperor's protetion,
which, upon his return from Tunis, he demanded with the

oft earnest importunity; and as his misfortunes were occa
sioned chiefly by his attachment to the Imperial interef, he
had a jua tide to immediate af~dance, Charles, however,
was not in a condition to support him with that vigour and
dispatch which the exigency of his affirs called for. MoA
of the troops employed in the African expedition, having
been raised for that service alone, were disbanded as loon as
it was finithed; the veteran forces under Antonio de Leyva
were hardly sufficient for the defence of the Milanese; and
the emperor's treasury was entirely drained by his extraor-
dinary efforts against the Infidels.

But the death of Frncis Sforza [Od. 24], occasioned,

t Hist. de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon, iz°. Utr. x685, p 99.

Hilt. de la Reformation de Suisse, par Rouchat. Gen. 1728. tom.
-iv. p. 94, &c. tom. v. p. is6, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 81.

according to some historians, by the terror of a French in-
vafion, which had twice been fatal to his family, afforded
the emperor full leisure to prepare for afion. By this un-
expected event, the nature of the war, and the causes of
discord, were totally changed. Francis's first pretext for
taking arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the insult offer-
ed to the dignity of his crown, was at once cut off; but
as that prince died without ifue, all Francis's rights to the
dutchy of Milan, which he had yielded only to Sforza and
his posterity, returned back to him in full force. As the
recovery of the Milanese was the favourite obje& of that
monarch, he instantly renewed his claim to it; and if he had
supported his pretensions by ordering the powerful army
quartered in Savoy to advance without losing a moment
towards Milan, he could hardly have failed to secure
the important point of poffeflion. But Francis who be-
came less enterprising as he advanced in years, and who was
overawed at some times into an excess of caution by the re-
membrance of his past misfortunes, endeavoured to e-
ftablifl his rights by negotiation, not by arms; and from
a timid moderation, fatal in all great affairs, negleAed
to improve the favourable opportunity which presented
itself. Charles was more decisive in his operations, and in
quality of sovereign, took possession of the dutchy, as a va-
cant fief of the empire. While Francis endeavoured to ex-
plain and assert his title to it by arguments and memorials,
or employed various arts in order to reconcile the Italian
powers to the thoughts of his regaining footing in Italy,
his rival was silently taking effe&ual feps to prevent it.
The emperor, however was very careful not to discover too
early any intention of this kind; but seeming to admit the
equity of Francis's claim, he appeared solicitous only about
giving him poffeflion in such a manner as might not disturb
the peace of Europe, or overturn the balance of power in
Italy, which the politicians of that country were so desirous
of preserving. By this artifice he deceived Francis, and

gained so much confidence with the reft of Eulr that
alioft without incurring any suspicion, he invole the
affair in new dificulties, and protra&cd the negotiatio.
at pleafire. Sometimes he proposed to grant the inveftitei
of Milan to the duke of Orleans, Francis's fecondig so mo.
time to the duke of Angouleme, his third foi.; m' the
views and inclinations of the French court varined#Brans.
fored his choice alternately from the onet-tthei itherj
such profound and well-conduced diffimlticn,-thut-lxi.
ther Francis nor his ministers seem to have- penetrtied, hi
eal intention; and all military operations- weft entirely.fu.i

- pended, as if nothing had remained but to enter quietly into
possession of what they demanded.

536.] During the interval ofleifure gained in this man.

ner, Charles, on his return from Tunis, assembled the ftata
both of Sicily and Naples, and as they thought themselves
greatly honoured by the prefence-of their sovereign, and
were no less pleased with the apparent disinterestedness of
his expedition into Africa, than -dazzled by the fuccee
which had attended his arms, he prevailed on them to vote
him such liberal subsidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops, to levy a
body of Germans, and to take every other proper precaution
for executing or fupportiag the measures on which he had
determined. Bellay, the French envoy in Germany, having
d~covered the intention of railing troops in that county,
notwithbfanding all the pretexts employed in order to con.
ceal it, first alarmed his master with this evident proof of the
emperor's infincerityy.

But Francis was so posseid at that time with the rage of

negotiation, in all the artifices and refinements'of which his
rival far surpassed him, that instead of beginning his military
operations' and pulhing them with vigour, or seizing the
Milanef before the Imperial army was assembled; he satis
fed himself with making new offers to the emperor, in or.

· Mem. de Belay, I9g.

der to procure the investiture by his voluntary deed. - Hii
offers were, indeed, so liberal and advantageous, that if ever
Charles had intended to grant his demand, he could not have
rejected them with decency. He dexterously eluded them
by declaring that until be consulted the pope in perlon, he.
could not take his final resolution with regard to a point
which so nearly concerned the peace of Italy. By this e-
vafion he gained some farther time for ripening the fchenies
which he had in view.

The emperor at lad advanced towards Rome, and made his

public entry into that city with extraordinary potnp; [Apiil
6] but it being found necessary to remove the ruins of anan..
cient temple of peace, in. order to widen one of.the ftreetb,
through which the cavalcade had to pass, all .the hiftoriana
take notice of this trivial circumftance,.and they are fond to
interpret- it as an omen of the bloody war that folloued.
Charles, it is certain, had by this time bani(hed all thoughts
of peace; and at last threw off the mask, with which he, ha4
so long covered his designs from the court of France, by a
declaration of his sentiments no less singular thanexplicit.
The French ambalFadors having: in their master's name den
manded a definitive reply to his propositions concerning the
invcftiture of Milan, Charles promised to. give it next day
in presence of the pope and cardinals aflembled in full con.
*fiftory. -These being accordingly met, and all the foreign
ambassadors invited to attend, the emperor food up! and ad-
drefling himself to the pope, expatiated for some time on
the sincerity of his own wiihes for the peace of Christendom,
as well as his abhorrence of war, the. miseries of which he
enumerated at great length, with studied and elaborate ora.
tory; he complained that all his endeavours to preserve the
tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been defeated by the
restless and unjust ambition of the French king; that even
during his minority le had propss of .te unfriendly and
hostile intentions of that mpnarch; that,.afterwards,, he ha
openly attempted to wrest from him ;tte Imperial crown

Vol III. 1

which beonged to him by a title no les just than natural
that he had net invaded his kingdom of Navarre; that not
atiesd with this, he had attacked his territories, as well a
tbof of his allies, both in Italy and the Low-Countries;
hat when the Ralo of the Imperial troops, rendered irre.
óftlAe by the proteion of the Almighty, had checked hi.
pIgred, rined his armies, and seized his person, he con.
tinned to purfae by deceit what he had undertaken with in.
jotice; that he had violated every article in the treaty of
Madrid to which he owed his liberty, and as soon as he re.
traed to his dominions took measures for rekindling the

ar which that pacification had happily extinguished; that
when new maisfrtuaes cmpdled him to sue again for peace
a Cambra, he coacluded and observed it with equal infin.
.eritTy that oon after he had formed dangerous connexions
with sheretical princes in Germany, and incited them to
di&i the tranquillity of the empire; that now he had
&,eBa t1e duke of Savoy, a prince married to a sifter of the
qnpre, and joined in dose alliance with Spain, out of the
gRater part of his territories: that after injuries so often re.
peated, and amidst so many ources of discord, all hope of
amity or concord became desperate; and though he him.
fef was fll willing to grant the investiture of Milan to one
of the princes of France, there was little probability of that

ent taking place as Francis, on the one hand, would not

content to what was necefary for securing the tranquillity
of E~u nor on the other, could he think it reason-
able or feae to gie a rival the unconditional possession of all
that he demanded. "Let us not however," added he,
M continue wantonly to lied the blood of our innocent sub-
jes; let us decide the quarrd man to man, with what arms
he pleass to ch , ia our shirts, on an illand, a bridge, or
Sboard a galley moored in a river; let the dutchy of Bur.
gnuadybe put in depoft o his part, and that of Milan on
1i these lhl be the prize of the conquror; and after
that, let the nited faeces of Germany, Spain and France

be employed to humble the power of the Turk, and to ex-
tirpate heresy out of Christendom. But if be, by declining
this method of terninating our differences, renders ar it.
evitable, nothing hall divert me from prosecuting it to fuckl
extremity, as (hall reduce one of us to be the poorest gentler
man in his own dominions. Nor do I fear that it will be
on me this misfortune hall fall; I enter upon action with
the fairest profpe& of success; the justness of my cause, the
union of my fubjets, the number and valour of my troops,
the experience and fidelity of my generals, al combine tow
ensure it. Of all these advantages, the king of France if
deltitute; and were my resources no more certain, and my
hopes of vitory no better founded than his, I would instant-
ly throw myself at his feet, and with folded handg, ad &
rope about my neck, implore his mercy ."

This long harangue the emperor delivered with an eleat-

ed voice, a haughty tone,,and the greatest vehemence of ex-
preflion and geflure. The French ambaadors, who did
not fully comprehend his meaning, as he fpahe In the Span-
ifh tongue, were totally disconcerted, and at a loss how they
fIould answer fch an unexpe~&d invetive; when one of
them began to vindicate his maiter's conduct, Charles inter-
posed abruptly, and would not permit him to proceed;
The pope, without entering into any particular detail, satis-
fled himself with a lhort but pathetic recommendation of
peace, together with an offer of employing, his incere en-
deavours in order to procure that blessing to Chrifteadom;.
and the assembly broke up in the greatest aftoni~ ent at-
the extraordinary scene which had been. exhibited.- In no-
part of his conduat, indeed, did Charles everdeviate so wide..
ly from his. general characer., InRtcad.of tha*prudent re--
collesion, that compofed.and regular-deportment to ftric6'-
ly attentive to decorum,. and fto admirably adapted to con-
ceal his own paffions,.fori which he was at.all other times-
conspicuous, he appears on this occasion before one of th-.

' BelayD 9, Sandov. Hifor. del Emper. u ii.6. -

La.

most auguf assemblies in Europe, boasting of his own pow.
er and exploits with insolence; inveighing against his enemy
with indecency; and challenging him to combat with an of.
tentatious valour, more becoming a champion in romance,
than the ft monarch in Christendom. Butthe well known
and powerful operation of continued prosperity, as well as
of exaggerated praise, even upon the firmest minds, sufficient.
ly account for this seening inconsistency. After having
compelled Solyman to retreat, and having stripped Barba.
rofl of a kingdom, Charles began to confider his arms as
invincible. He had been entertained, ever since his return
from Africa, with repeated scenes of triumphs and public:
rejoicings; the orators and poets of Italy, the most elegant
at that time in Europe, had exhausted their genius in pane.
gyric on his conduct and merit, to which the astrologers
added magnificent promises of a more splendid fortune fAll
in aRoe. Intoxicated with all there, he forgat his usual re.
serve and moderation, and was unable to retRrain this extra;
vagant sally of vanity, which became the more remarkable,
by being both so uncommon and so public.

He himself seems to have been immediately sensible of the

impropriety of his behaviour; and when the French ambaf-
Jfdors demanded next day a more clear explanation of what
he had said concerning the combat, he told them that they
were not to confider his proposal as'a formal challenge to
their master, but as an expedient for preventing bloodihed;
he endeavoured to soften several expressions in his discourse;
and spoke in terms full of refpe& towards Francis. But
though this flight apology was far from being sufficient to
remove the offence which had been given, Francis, by an
unaccountable infatuation, continued to negotiate, as if it
had Ail been poflible to bring their differences to a period
by an amicable compofitiont. Charles, finding him fd eager
to run into the snare, favoured the deception, and, by (eem.

t Memr. de Bellay, tos,cec.

ing to liften to his proposals, gained farther time to prepare
for the execution of his own defigs; .

At last, the Imperial army assembled on the frontiers of-

the Milanese, to the amount of forty thousand foot and tea l
thousand horse,. while that of France encamped nearVereel -
li in Piedinont, being greatly inferior in number, and.weak--
ened by.thc- departure of a body of Swiss, whomu Charles art-
fully-pTrfuaded the popish cantons to recali-that.thymnight
not serve again& the duke of Savoy, their ancient ally.- The
French general not daring to rifquo a tattleretired as soon
as the Imperialists advanced. The emperor put-himfef at:
the head of his forces [May66l],wbicthte:martuisddcGu- -
aflo, the duke of Alva, and Ferdinan'd&d Gonzaga command:'-
ed under him, .though'the faeo.me' diretion of .the whole
was committed "toAntonio de Leyva, whose abilities and '
experience juiUr entitled him to that diftinflion. Charles
soon discovered his -intention not toeonfine his operations to-
the recovery- of Piedmont and Savoy, :batto puh fdrward'
and invade the southern provinces of France- This scheme -
he had long meditated, .and had long bn taking :mcAures.;
for executing it with. ficdvigour as mig~t ensure fuccefe.-
He had remitted large- fumn to-his sifter, the governess of-
the LowCountries, and to his brother, the king of the Ro--
mans5 inftrut&iig them-to.levy all.the forcesin -their poweri,
in order-to form two separate bodiesctheonc to enter Faace
on the fide .of Pioardy, the other on the fide of Champagne:
while he with the main army, fell' upon the opposite fron-
tier of the kingdom.- T'rifting .to .thef .vafl.preparations,,
he thought it impossible that -Francis -could refilt so. many-
unexpe&ed ;attacks on .such different quarteo; and,'egan .
his ecterprife with fuch:confidence of its.-haplpy-iffi , that-
he desired Jovius the hifforian, -to make a large provifipn of
paper sufficient' to record the .vitories-which he.was going
to obtain.. .

His ministers and generals- instead -of entertaining the
fame sanguine hopes,- reprefented..tp-.him -in ;the ftirngeft

I,3

term the danger of leading his troops so far from his own
territories, to such a distance from his magazines, and into
provinces which did not yield sufficient fubfificnce for their
own inhabitants. They entreated him to confider the in.
exhauibble resources of France in maintaining a defensive
war, and the aftie zeal with which a gallant nobility would
Serve a prince whom they loved, in repelling the enemies of
their country; they recalled to his remembrance the fatal
micariage of Bourbon and Pescara, when they ventured
upon the fame enterprise under circumstances which seemed
as certainly to promise success; the marquis del Guafto in
particular fell on his knees, and conjured him to abandon
the undertaking as desperate. 'But many-circumftances corn.
bined in leading Charles to disregard all their remonstrances
He could seldom be brought, on any occasion, to depart
from a resolution which he had once taken; he was too apt
to under-rate and despise the talents of his rival the king of
France, because they differed so widely from his own; he
was blinded by the presumption which accompanies profpe-
rity; and relied, perhaps, in some degree, on the prophecies
which predi&ed the increafeof his own grandeur.. He not
only adhered obfinately to his own plan, but determined to
adiw~ towards France without waiting for the redu&ion of
any part oflcdmont, except such towns as were absolutely
=effary f preferring his communication with the Milan

ede.
'- The marmqu de Saluces, to whom Francis had entrusted
the command of a small body of troops left for the defence
of Piedmont, rendered this more easy than Charles had any
reaon to expet. That nobleman, educated in the court of
France, distinguished by continual marks of the king's fa-
your, and honoured so lately with a charge of such import-
ance, suddenly, and without any provocation or pretext of
disgust revolted from his benefactor. His motives to this
treacherous a&ion were as childish as the deed itself was
base. Being strongly pofteffed with a fupertitious faith is

divination and astrology, he believed with fullaffurance, that
the fatal period of the French nation was at hand; that on
its ruins the emperor would establish an universal monarchy;
that therefore he ought tofollow the dictates of prudence,
in attaching himself to his rising fortune, and could incur no
blame for deserting a prince whom Heaven had devoted to
deftru&iont. His treason became still more odious, by his
employing that very authority, with which Francis had in-
veited him, in order to open the kingdom to his enemies.
Whatever measures were proposed or undertaken by the of-
ficers .under his command for the defence of their conquests,
he rejeced or defeated. Whatever properly belonged to
himself, as commander in chief, to provide or perform for
that purpose, he totally negle&ted. In this manner, he ren-
dered towns even of the greatest consequence, untenable,
by leaving them destitute either of provisions, ammunition,
artillery, or a sufficient garrifofi; and the Imperialists must
have reduced Piedmont in as Ibort a time as was neceflary to
march through it, if Montpezat, the governor of Foflano,
had not, by an extraordinary effort of courage and military
condu&t, detained them almost a month before that incon-
fiderable place.

By this meritorious and seasonable service, he gained his

mailer sufficient time for assembling his forces, and for con-
certing a system of defence againit a danger which he now
saw to be inevitable. Francis fixed on the only proper and
effecual plan for defeating the invasion of a powerful ene-
my; and his prudence in chufing this plan, as well as his
perseverance in executing it, deserve the greater praise, as it
was equally contrary to his own natural temper, and to the
genius of the French nation. Ie determined to remain al-
together upon the defensive; never to hazard a battle, or
even a great ikirmilh without certainty of success; to fortify
his camps in a regular manner; to throw garrisons only into
towns of great strength; to deprive the enemy of fubflftence,

t Bellay, %a2, a. 246, b.

by laing wafe the country before them and to save the
whole kingdom, by facificing one of its provinces The
execution of this plan he -comitted entielyF to the marechal
Motmrency, who was-the-author of it; a man wonderfully
Bfitdby nature for such a trust haughty, severe, confident
in hia wn abilitie,. and despising those of other men; in.
capable of being diverted from any resolution by remon.
frnccs or entreaties; and, in- prosecuting any feheme, rem
galfis alike of love orof pity.

Mbntmorncy. made choice of a-frong camp, under the

walb of Avignon, at the confluence of the Rhone and the
Duranc, one of which plentifuly supplied his troops withi
all necefaries from the inland provinces, and the other.co,
vred his camp on that fide where it.was most pobable die
enemy would approach, He labored with unweariedi i
duiry to render-the fortifications of this cap iinpregnable,
and adembled there a coafiderable army, though greatly in-
feior to that of the enemy;: while the king with another
body of-troops encamped at Valence higher up.the Rhone.
MarfeiHe and Aries were the only towns he thought it ne
cefary to defend; the former, in order to retain.the com-
mand of the sea;- the latter, as the barrier of the province of

anguedoc; and each of thef.-he furnihe: with numerous
garimns of his bed troops, commanded byoffer on whose.
fidity and valour he could rely. The inhabitants of the.
other towns, as wel as of the open country, were compel1
led to abandon their hounes, and were condufted. to. the
mountain or to the camp at Avignon, or to the inland
provinces. The fortifications of such places as might have
afforded hclter or defence to the enemy, were thrown down
Corn, forage, and provisions of every kind, were carried a-
way or destroyed; all the mills and ovens were ruiued, and
the wells filled up or rendered usel. The devastation ex-
tended from the Alps to Marfeiles, and from the sea to the
confines of Dauphine; nor does history afford any intance

among civilized nations, in which this cruel expedient for
the public safety was employed with the fame rigour.

At length, the emperor arrived with the van of his army

on the frontiers of Provence, and was fRill so possessed with
confidence of success, that, during a few days when he was
obliged to halt until the reft of his troops came up, he be-
gan to divide his future conquests among his officers; and,
as a new incitement to serve him with zeal, gave them liberal
promises of offices, lands, and honours in France*. The
face of desolation, however, which presented itself to him,
when he entered the country, began to damp his hopes, and
convinced him that a monarch, who, in order to distress an
enemy, had voluntarily ruined one of his richest provinces,
would defend the reft with desperate obtinacy. Nor was
it long before he became sensible that Francis's pla..af de-
fence was-s prudent as it appeared to be extraordinary.
His fleet, on which Charles chiefly depended for subsistence,
was prevented for some time by contrary winds, and other ac-
cidents to which naval operations are subjea, from approach-
ing the French coast; even after its arrival, it afforded
at bedt a precarious and scanty supply to such a nume-
rous body of troopss; nothing was to be found in the
country itself for their support; nor could they draw any
considerable aid from the dominions' of the duke of Savoy,
cxhaufted already by maintaining two great armies. The
emperor was no less embarrassed how to employ, than how
to subsist his forces; for though he was now in poffeflion of
almofl an entire province, he could not be said to-have the
command of it, while he held only defencelefl towns; and
while the French, besides their camp, at Avignon, continu--
ed matiers of Marseilles and Aries. - At first he thought of
attacking their camp, and of terminating the war by one
decisive blow; but ikilful officers who were appointed to
view it, declared the attempt to be utterly impraAicable.
He then gave orders to invest Marseilles and Aries, hoping

Bellay, 266, a. t Sandov. ii. 231.

that the French would quit their advantageous post in orde.
to reliee them; but Montmorency adhering firmly to hi
plan, remained immoveable at Avignon, and the Imperial.
jss met with such a warm reception from the garrisons of
both towns, that they rdinquiicd their enterprises with
lots and disgrace. As a last ffort,-the emperor advanced
oae more towards Avignon, though with an army harr.
fed by the perpetual incursion of small parties of the
French light troops, weakened by diseases, and dispirited by
difafte, which seemed the more intolerable, becanfe the
were unexpeed.

During these operations, Moatmorcncy found himself e.

poed to greater danger fiom his own troops than from the
nemy; and their ineonfiderate lour went near to hae pre
cpitt:ed the kingdom into those calamities which be wi
luch id~fTy and caution bad endeavoured to id.e Uo
accu ed to beld an enemy ravaging their country *
m , withou! t ceintmo; impatient of tfch long itatt~mtt U
_cquainted with the flow and remote, but certain effet of

mtmoqrn c'fs ffyftem of defence; the French wiihed fora

attle with no les ardour than the Imperalibs. They con
idc d the coduft of their general as a disgrace to thei
cotry. His cation they imputed to timidity; his ci
cmfpeoto want of spirit; and the coofancy with whi]&
he pursed his plan, to obfinacy or pride. Thef recce
tions, whifpdrd at firt among the soldiers and fubakensk
were adopted, by degrees, by officers of higher rank; sad
as many of them envied Montaorency's favour with the
king, and more were itatisfied with his hh difguftng
manner, the discontent soon became great in his camp,
which was fiBed with general murmurings, and almost opea
complaints againtf his measures. Montmorency, on whom
the sentiments of his own troops made as little impression
as the insults of the enemy, adhered steadily to his fyftecm
though, in order to reconcie the army to his maxims, no
lss contrary to the genius of thp nation, than to the ideasof

war among undisciplined troops, he assumed an unufial affa-
bility in his deportment, and often explained, with great
condescension, the motives of his conduf, tb advantages
which had already resulted from it, and the certain success
with which it would be attended. At last, Francis joined
his army at Avignon, which, having received several rein-
forcements, he now confidered as of strength sufficient to
face the enemy. As he had put no finall constraint upon
himself, in contenting that his troops lhould remain so long
upon the defensive, it can hardly be doubted but that his
fondness for what was daring and splendid, added to the
impatience both of officers and soldiers, would at lif have_
over-ruled Montmorency's salutary caution*.

Happily the retreat of the enemy delivered the kingdom
from the danger which any rah resolution might have oc-
cafioned. The emperor, after spending two inglorious
months in Provence, without having performed any thing
suitable to his vast preparations, or that could justify the
confidence with which he had boasted of his own power,
found that, betides Antonio de Leyva, and other officers of
diftin&ion, he had loft one half of his troops by diseases or
by famine; and that the reft were in no condition to ftrug.
gle any longer with calamities, by which so many of their
companions had perished. Necessity, therefores extorted
from him orders to retire; and though he was some time in
motion before the French fufpeaed his intention, a body of
ight troops, afifted by crowds of peasants, eager to be re-
venged on those who had brought such desolation on their
country, hung -upon the rear of the Imperialists, and by
eizng every favourable opportunity of attacking them,
threw them often into confusion. The road by which they
fed, for they pursued their march with such disorder and
recipitation that it scarcely deserves the name of a retreat,
were strewed with arms or baggage, which in their hurry
ad trepidation they had abandoned, and covered with the

* Mem. de Bellay, 69, &c. 3x1, &c.

Sick, the wounded, and the dead; insomuch that Martin
Bdlay, an eye-witness of their calamities, endeavours to
give his readers ome idea of them,by comparing their miferiet
to those which the Jews suffered from the victorious and .de.

airucive arms of the Romans t. If Montmorency, at this

critical moment, had advanced with all his forces, nothing
could have saved the whole Imperial army from utter ruin.'
But that general, by tanding so long and so obftinatdy
on the defensive, had become cautious to excess; his mind,
tenacious of any bent it had once taken, could not assume
a contrary one as suddenly as the change of circumstances re.
quired; and he still continued to repeat his favourite max.
ims, that it was more prudent to allow the lion to escape
than to drive him to despair, and that a bridge of gold
should be made for a retreating enemy.

The emperor having condu&ed the ihattered remains of

his troops to the frontiers of Milan, and appointed the mar.
quis del Guafto to succeed Leyva in the government of that.
dutchy, let out for Genoa. As he could not bear to exporf
himself to the scorn of the Italians, after such a fad reverse
of fortune; and did not chute, under his present circu-.
fiances, to revisit those cities through which he had so lately
passed in triumph for one conquest, and in certain expeba.
tion of another, he embarked direcly for Spaint [Noveam
ber].

Nor was the progress of his arms on the opposite frontier

of France such as to alleviate, in any degree, the loftes which
he had sustained in Provence. Bellay, by his address and
intrigues, had prevailed on so many of the German prince
to withdraw the contingent of troops which they had fur
nilhed to the king of the Romans, that he was obliged to lal
aide all thoughts of his intended irruption into Champagne.
Though a powerful army levied in the Low-Countries ea
tered Picardy, which they found but feebly guarded, whb

$ MAm. de Bellay, 316. Sandov. Hist. del Emper. ii. s5a.

t Jovii fifior. lib. xxxv. p. T?4, &c.

the flrength of the kingdom was drawn towards the foutb;
yet the nobility, taking arms with their usual alacrity, sup-
plied by their spirit the defe&s of the kting's preparations,
and defended Peronne, and other towns which were attack-
ed, with such vigour, as obliged the enemy to retire, without
making any conquest of importance*.

Thus Francis, by the prudence of his own measures, and

by the union and valour of his fabje&s, rendered abortive
those vast efforts in which his rival had almost exhausted his
whole force. As this humbled the emperor's arrogance no
less than it checked his power, he was mortified more fen.
sibly on this occafioa than on any other, during the course
of the long contests between him and the French monarch.
One circumstance alone embittered the joy with which the
success of the campaign inspired Francis. That was the
death of the dauphin, his eldest son, a prince of great hopes,
and extremely beloved by the people on account of his re-
semblance to his father. This happening suddenly, was
imputed to poison, not only by the vulgar, fond of afcrib.
ing the death of illustrious personages to extraordinary cau.-
es, but by the king and his ministers. The count de
Montecuculi, an Italian nobleman, cupbearer to the dauphin,
being seized on suspicion, and put to the torture, openly
charged the Imperial generals, Gonzaga and Leyva, with
having instigated him to the commission of that crime; he
even threw out iome indire& and obscure accusations againit
the emperor himself. At a time when all France was exaf-
perated to the utmoit against Charles, this uncertain and ex-
torted charge was confidered as an inconteftible proof of
guilt; while the confidence with which both he and his
officers asserted their own innocence, together with the in-
dignation, as well as horror, which they expressed on their
being supposed capable of such a detestable action, were
little attended to, and less regarded f. It is evident, how-

Mem. de BellaY, 318 -e.
tvo. de Bellay, 8.
Vol. III. E

ever, that the emperor could have no inducement to perp.
trate such a crime, as Francis was ftl in the vigour of lii
himself, and had two aons, besides the dauphin, grown up
almost to the age of manhood. That single consideration,
without mentioning. the emperors general character, unbles
milhed by the imputation of any Wed resembling this in a-
trocity, is more than sufficient to counterbalance the weight
of a dubious testimony uttered during the anguilh of to'
Rtre *. According to the most unprejudiced hiltorians, the
dauphin's death was occasioned by his having drunk too
freely of cold water after overheating himself at tennis; and
this account, as it is the mot simple, is likewise the mods
credible. But if his days were cut short by poison, it is not
improbable that the emperor conjetured rightly, when he
affirmed that it had been administered by the direCtion of
Catharine of Medici, in order to secure the crown to the
duke of Orleans, her huband *. The advantages reulting
to her by the dauphin's death were obvious as well as great;
nor did her boundless and daring ambition ever recoil from
any a&ion necek-ry towards attaining the objets which lh
had in view.

1537.] Next year opened with a tranfadton very uncom

mon, but so incapable of producing any effe&, that it wouli
not deserve to be mentioned, if it were not a triking proo
of the perfoal animosity which mingled itself in all the hofti
lities between Charles and Francis, and which often betray
ed them into such indecercies towards each other, as lessea
cd th: dignity of both. Francis, accompanied by the peer
and princes of the blood, haying taken his feat in the par
liament of Paris with the usual folemnities, the advocate
general appeared; and after accusing Charles of Aufti
(for so he affe&ed to call the emperor) of having violate
the treaty of Cambray, by which he was absolved from tb
homage due to the crown of France for the countries

t Sandov. ift del Emper. ii. a31.
Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 75.

Artois and Slanders' insisted that this treaty being now
void, he was fill to be confidered as a vaifal of the crown;
and by coufequence had been guilty of rebellion in taking
arms against his sovereign; and therefore he demanded that
Charles should. be summoned to appear in person, or by his
counsel, before the parliament of Paris, his legal judges, to
answer for this crime. The request was granted; 'a herald
repaired to the frontiers of Picardy, and summoned him with
the accustomed formalities to appear againit a day prefixed.
That term being expired, and no person appearing in his
name, the parliament gave judgment, 4"That Charles of
Auilria had forfeited by rebellion and contumacy those
fiefs; declared Slanders and Artois to be re-united to the
crown of France!" and ordered their decree for this p urpofe
to be published by found of trumpet on the frontiers of
these provinces t.

Soon after this vain display of his resentment, rather than
of his power, Francis marched towards the Low-Countries
[March,] as if he had. intended to execute the sentence
which his parliament had pronounced, and to fcize those ter-
ritories which it had awarded to him. As the queen of
Hungary, to whom her brother the emperor had commit-
ted the government of that part of his dominions, was not
prepared for so early a campaign, he at firi made some pro-
grefs, and took several towns of importance. But being o.
bliged soon to leave his army, in order to superintend the o-
perations of war, the Flemings, having assembled a nume-
rous army, not only recovered most of the places which they
had loft, but began to make conquests in their turn. At
las they invested Terouenne, and the duke of Orleans, now
dauphin, by the death of his brother, and Montmorency,
whom Francis had honoured with the conRfable's sword, as
the reward of his great services. during the forher cam-
paign, determined to hazard a battle in order to relieve it.

t Lettres et Memoires d'Etat, par Ribier, % tom. Blois, x66.
twm. i p. i.

K 2

Wl'e they were advancing for this purpose, and within a
few miles of the enemy, they were ftopt fhrt by the arrival
ofan herald from the queen of Hungary, acquainting him
that a fufpefion of arms was now agreed upon.

This unexpeaed event was owing to the zealous endear.

ams of the two fGers, the queens of France and of Hunga.
ry, who had long laboured to reconcile the contending mon.
archs. The war in the Netherlands had laidwade the fron.
ti provinces of both countries, without any real advantage
to iter. The French and Flemings equally regretted the
intera tion of their commerce; which was beneficial to both.
Chales as we as Franci, who had each firained to the ut.
most, in order to fopport the vast operations of the former
campaign, found that they eould not now keep armies i
oot in this quarter, without weakening their operations in
Piedmont, where both wilhed to pufl the war with the great.
eft vigour. All these circumfances facilitated the negoia
tions of the two ~eens; a trace was concluded Jily O] I
to continue in frce for ten m~nths, but it extended o fa?
ther than the Low-Countries*.

In Piedmont the war was fill pr~Ecuted with great mi-

mofity; and though neither Carles nor Francis could -mse
the powerful efforts to which this animosity prompted thin,
they continued to exert themselves like combatants, whose
rancou~ remains after their strength is exhaafted. Tewn
were alternately loft and retaken; .kirmifes were fought
every day; and much-blood was Ihed, without any ation
that gave a decided superiority to either fide. At last the
two queens determined not to leave unfinifned the god
work which they had begun, prevailed, by their importurate
solicitations, the one on her brother, the other on he
hulband, to content also to a truce in Piedmont for-thrt
months. The conditions of k were, that each mould keq
pofflffion of what was in his handss and after leaving gain
sons in the towns, ihould withdraw his army out Ofthi

Memoires de Ribier, J6.

province; and that plenipotentiariesfhould be appointed to-
adjust all matters in dispute by a final treaty*.

The powerful motives which inclined both princes to this.

accommodation, have been often mentioned. The expences.
es the war had far exceeded the fums which their revenues.
were capable of supplying; nor durf they venture upon any
great addition to the impositions then eftablimfed, as fubje&fA
had not yet learnt to bearwith patience the.immenfe burdens.
to which they have become accustomed in modem times.
The emperor in particular, though he had contraced debts.
which. in that age appeared prodigioust, had it not in his
power to pay the large arrears long due to his army. At.
the fame time he hadno. profpet of deriving any aid in mo-
ney or men either from the pope or Venetians, though he-
had employed protnfes and threats, alternately, in order to,
procure it. But he found the former not only fixed in his
resolution of adhering, fleadily to the neutrality which he-
had alway. declared to be suitable to his charater, but pas--
fionately desirous- of bringing about a peace- He perceived
that the latter were still intent on.their ancient obje&t of hold.-
ing the balance even *btween the rivals,,and solicitous not
to throw too great a weight into either,fcale..

What made a- deeper impression. on: Charlesthan all.

these was the dread of the Turkih arms;, which,, by hi*a
league with. Soly.man, Francis.. had drawn upon himi.
Though F.rancis, without the affitance of atfingle ally, had!
a war to maintain againfl an enemy greatly superior in pow.
er to hinfelf,,yet; so. great was the horror of. Chrifians,, in.
that age, at any union with.infidelk, whichthey confidered'
not only as.difhonourable but profane,.that it was long be-
fore he could be brought to.avail himself of the obvious ad-
vantages resulting from. such a- confederacy.. Necessity at;
lat surmounted his delicacy and: scruples. Towards the
clofe-of.the preceding year .La Forelt a secret agent atthe-
Ottoman Porte, had concluded a treaty with the sultan,,

" Memoircs de R.tier, 62. t Ribicr, . 294,.

K3.

whereby Solyman engaged to invade the kingdom of Naples,
during the next campaign, and to attack the king of the
Romans in Hungary with a powerful army, while Francd
undertook to enter the Mianee at.the fame time with a
proper force. Solman had punually performed what
was incumbent on him. Barbarossa with a great fleet ap.
peared on the coast of Naples, filled that kingdom, from
which all the troops had been drawn towards Piedmont,
with eonternation, landed without resistance near Taranto,
obliged Catro, a place of some ftengh, to surrender, plun-
dered the adjacent country, and was taking measures for
securing and extending his conquests, when the unexpeted
arrival of Doria, together with the pope's gallies, andr a
squadron of the Venetian fleet, made it prudent for him to
retire. In Hungary the progress of the Turks was morn
formidable. Mahmet, their general, after gaining fevera
findl advantages, defeated the Germans in a great battle at
Effek on the Drave*. Happily for Christendom, it was
not in Frnci's power, to execute with equal exatnefs what
he had ftiputed; nor could he assemble at this junaure an
army Arong enough to penetrate into the Milanese. By
this he faled in recovering poffefion of that dutchy; ad
Italy was not only saved from the calamities of a new war,
but from feeling-the desolating rage of the Turki& ars,
as an addition to al that it had suffered. As the emperr
knew that he could not long resist the effots of two such
powerfl confederates, nor could expe~ that the fame for-
tunate aecidents would concur a second time to delive
Naples, and to prferve the Milanese; as he foresaw that the
talian tates would not only -tax him loudly with infatiabk
ambition, but might even turn their arms againi him, if he
should be so regardles of their danger as obfinately to prO
trat the war, he thought it necessary, both for his safe
and reputation, to give his consent to a truce. Nor wm

Ilfuanufih Hist. Hung. hb. xli.p. 139.

t Jovii Hist lb. xxxv. p. 183.

Francis willing to fusain all the blame of obitruting the re-
eftablifiment of tranquillity, or to expose himself on that ac,
count to the dangerof being deserted by the Swifa and other
foreigners in his service. He even began to apprehend that
his own fubjeas would serve him coldly, if by .contribut.
ing to aggrandize the power of the Infidels, which it was
his duty, and had been the ambition of his anceRors to dew
press, he continued to aa in direa opposition to all the
principles which ought to influence a monarch diftinguilhed
by the title of Most Christian King. He chose, for all
there reasons, rather to run the ril of difobliging his new
ally the sultan, than, by an unseasonable adherence to the
treaty with him, to forfeit what was ofgrater consequence.

But though both parties consented to a.truce, the pleni.

potentiaries found insuperable difieulties in fettling the arti-
cles of a definitive treaty. Each of the monarchs, with the
arrogance of a conqueror, aimed at givingJaw to the other;
and neither would so far acknowledge his inferiority, as to
sacrifice any point of honour, or to relinquih any matter of
right; so that the plenipotentiaries spent the time in log
and fruitless negotiations, and separated after agreeing to
prolong the truce for a few months.

1538.] The pope, however, did not despair ofaccom.

plifhing a point in which the peaipotentiiries had failed,
and took upon himself the sole -burden of negotiating a
peace. To form a confederacy capable of defending Christ
endoai from the formidable inroads of the Turkilh arms,
and to concert effetual measures for the extirpation of the
Lutheran heresy, were two great objets which Paul had
much at heart, and be confidered the union of the emperor
with the king of France as an essential preliminary to both.
To be the instrument of reconciling there contending mo-
narchs, whom his predecessors by their interested and inde-
cent intrigues had so often embroiled, was a circumstance
which could not fail of throwing distinguished lustre on
his character and administration. Nor was he without

hopes that, while he pursued this laudable end, he might fe
cure advantages to his own family, the aggrandizing of
which he did not neglet, though he aimed at it with a dle
audacious ambition than was common among the popes of
that century. Influenced by thee considerations, he pro.
posed an interview between the two monarchs at Nice, and
offered to repair thither in person, that he might at as me
diator in composing all their differences. When a pontiff
*of a venerable charaaer, and of a very advanced age, was
willng, from his zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues
osso long a journey, neither Charles or Francis cduld with de.
ccc decline the interview. But though both came to the
place of rendezvous, so great was the difficulty of adjuting th.
ceremonial, or fnch the remains of distrust and.rancour on each
fide, that they refused to fee one another, and every thing
was tranfaaed by the intervention of the pope, who visited
them alternately. With all his zeal and ingenuity he could
ot find out a method of removing the obfacles which prevent.
ed a final accommodation, prticularly those arising from the
pofeffion of the Milanele; nor was all the weight of his
authority fficient to overcome the obitinate perseverance
of either monarch in aferting his own: claims.. Atlaft, that
he might not seem to have laboured altogether without es.
sea, he prevailed on them to. sign a, truce for ten yan
[June 183, upon the fame copdition with the former, that
each lhould retain what was now in his poffeflion, and is
the mean time Ihould fend ambassadors to Rome, to discuss
their pretensions at leisure*.

Thus ended a war of no-long continuance, but very e-

tensive in its operations. and in which both.parties.excrtet
their utmost frength. Though. Francis failed in the obh
je&t which he had principally in, view, the recovery of the
Milanese, he acquired, nevertheless, great reputation by the

Recueil des Traitez, ii. o. Rclatione del Nicolo Tiepolo

de I'Abocamnto di Nizza chcz Du. a.n t Corps Diplomat. par
i.p. 174.

wisdom of his measures as well as the success of his arms in
repelling a formidable invasion; and by keeping possession
of one half of the duke of Savoy's dominions, he added no
inconsiderable acceflion of trength to his kingdom. Where.
as Charles, repulsed and baffled, after having boasted so ar-
rogantly of vitory, purchased an inglorious truce, by facri.
sicing an ally who had rafily confided too much in his
friendship and power. The unfortunate duke murmured,
complained, and remonstrated against a treaty so much to
his disadvantage, but in vain; he bad no means ofredrefs, and
was obliged to submit. Of all.his dominions, Nice, with its
dependencies, was the only corner of which he himfClf kept
possession.. He law the reft divided between a powerful in.
vader and the ally to whose protecion he had truted, while
he remained a fad monument of the imprudence of weak
princes, who by taking part in the quarrel of mighty neigh-
bours, between whom they happen to be situated, are cruih.
ed and overwhelmed in the shock.

A few days after figniog the treaty of truce, the empe-
ror set fail for Barcelona, but was driven by contrary winds
to the iland of St. Margaret on the coast of Provence.
When Francis, who happened to be not far difat, heard
of this, be confidered it as an office of civility to invite 1hi
to take Ihelter in his dominions, and proposed a personal in-
terview with him at Aigues-mortes. The emperor, who
would not be outdone by his rival in complaisance, instantly
repaired thither. As soon as he cast anchor in the road,
Francis without waiting to fattle any point of ceremony,
but relying implicitly on the emperor's honour for his Recu-
rity, visited him on board his galley, and was received and
entertained with the warmest demonstrations of esteem and
affeaion. Next day the emperor repaid the confidence
which the king had placed in him. He landed at Aigues-
mortes with as little precaution, and met with a reception
equally cordial. He remained on hore during the night,
and in both visits the two monarchs vied with each other iu

cXpreffions of refpea and friendlhip*. After twcnty Y7
of open hostilities, or of seret enmity; after so many.injo.
ries reciprocally infided or endured; after having formall
gien the lie, and challenged one another to fihgle combat
after the emperor had inveighed so publicly againit Francis
as a prince void of honour or integrity; and after Franis
had accused him of being acceffiry to the murder of his eld.
eft son; such an interview appears altogether singular and
even unnatural But the history of these monarchs abounds
with such furprifng transitions. From implacable hatred
they appeared to pass, in a moment, to the most cordial re-
concilement; from suspicion and diftruit, to perse& confi.
dence; and from praising all the dark arts of a deceitful po.
licy, they could aflume, of a sudden, the liberal and open
manners of two gallant gentlemen.

The pope, befdes the glory of having restored peace to

Europe, gained, according to his expecation, a point of
great consequence to his family, by prevailing on the empe.
ror to betroth Margaret of Autria, his natural daughter, for.
amery the wife of Alexander di Medici, to bis grandson Oc.
tavio Farnese, and in consideration of this marriage, to be
flow several honours and territories upon his future fon-in.
law. A very tragical event, which happened about the bo
ginning of the year 1537, had deprived Margaret of her fir
hulband. That young prince, whom the emperor's parti
lity had raised to the supreme power in Florence, upon the
ruins of the public liberty, neglected entirely the cares of go-
vernment, and abandoned himsef to the most dissolute de-
bauchery. Lorenzo di Medici his nearest kinfnma was not
only the companion but direaor of his pleasures, and em-
ploying all the powers of a cultivated and inventive geniw
in this dilhonourable miniAry, added such elegance as well u
variety to vice, as gained him an absolute ascendant over tbe

* Sandov. HiS voL iL 238. Relation de l'Entrevue de CharL

V. & Fran. L par M de la Rivoire. Hil de Langued. par D. D.
DC Vic & Vaittc, tom. v. PreCUas p. 93,

mind of Alexander. But while Lorenzo seemed to be funk
in luxury, and affeaed such an appearance of indolence and
effeminacy, that he would not wear a sword, and trembled
at the fight of blood, he concealed under that disguise a
dark, designing, audacious fpirnt. Prompted either by the
love of liberty, or allured by the hope of attaining the fu-
preme power, he determined to affalinate Alexander his be.
nefa&or and friend. Though he long revolved this design
in his mind, his referred and suspicious temper prevented
him from communicating it to any person whatever; and
continuing to live with Alexander in their usual familiarity,
he, one night, under pretence of having secured him an as.
fignation with a lady ofhigh rank whom he had often soli.
cited, drew that unwary prince into a secret apartment of
his house, and there stabbed him, while he lay carelessly on
a couch expecting the arrival of the lady whose company he
had been promised. But no sooner was the deed done, than
tanding aftonilbed, and ftrnck with horror at its atrocity,
he forgot, in a moment, all the motives which had induced
him to commit it. Instead of rousing the people to recover
their liberty by publishing the death of the tyrant, infead
of taking any Rep towards opening his own way to the dig- .
nity now vacant, he locked the door of the apartment, and,
like a man bereaved of reason and presence of mind, fled with
the utmost precipitation out of the Florentine territories.
It was late next morning before the fate of the unfortunate'
prince-was known, as his attendants, acculfomed to his irre-
galarites, never entered his apartment early. Immediately
the chief persons in the Rate assembled. Being induced
partly by the zeal of cardinal Cibo for the house of Medici,
to which he was nearly related, partly by the authority of
Francis Guicciardini, who recalled to their memory, .and .
teprefented in itriking colours, the caprice as well as turbu-
lence of their ancient popular government, they agreed to
place Cofmio di Medici, a youth of eighteen, the only male
heir of that fiutrious house, at the head of the government;

though at the fame time such was their love of liberty, tiat
they eftablijhed several regulations id order to circumscnri
nad moderate his power.
Meanwhile, Lorenzo having reached a place of afety,

made known what he had done, to Philip Strozzi and the
other Florentines who had been driven into exile, or whb
had voluntarily retired, when the republican form of govern.
ment was aboliihed, in order to make way for the dominion
of the Medici. By them, the deed was extolled with extra.
vagant praises, and the virtue of Lorenzo was compared to
that of the elder Brutus, who disregarded the ties of blood,
w with that of the younger, who forgot the friendflip and
favours of the tyrant, that they might preserve or recover the
liberty of their countryt. Nor did they reft satisfied with
empty panegyris; they immediately quitted their different
places of retreat, assembled forces, animated their valfals and
partizans to take arms, and to seize this opportunity of re.
establishing the public liberty on its ancient foundation. Be-
ing openly aited by the French ambassador at Rome, and
secretly encouraged by the pope, who bore no good-will to
the house of Medici, they entered the Florentine dominions
with a considerable body of men. But the persons who had
elecd Cosmo possessed not only the means of supporting
his government, but abilities to employ them in the mod
proper manner. They levied, with the greatest expedition
a good number of troops; they endeavoured by every art t<
gain the citizens of greatef authority, and to reader th
adminifration of the yung prince agreeable to the people
Above all, they courted the emperor's protetiae, m the on
ly firm foundation of Cosmo's dignity and power. Chaie
knowing the propensity of the Florentines to the frieadfhi
of France, -and how much all the partizans of a republica
government deteed him as the oppreifr of their ibertie
saw it to be greatly for his intef to prevent the re-est
lisnscat of the ancient contiturion i Florence. For th

t Lettere & Priacpi, tomr iii. p. s.

reason, he not only acknowledged Cosmo as head of the
Florentine fate, and conferred on him all the titles of ho-
nour with which Alexander had been dignified, but engaged
to defend him to the utmost; and as a pledge of this, order-
ed the commanders of such of his troops as were Rationed
on the frontiers of Tuscany, to support him against all ag-
greffors. By their aid, Cafmo obtained an easy vi&ory o.
ver the exiles, whose troops he surprised in the night-time,
and took molt of the chiefs prisoners: an event which broke
all their reafures, and fully eftabli&ed his own authity.
But though he was extremely defirus of the additional ho-
nour of marrying the emperor's daughter, the widow of his
predecessor, Charles, secure already of his attachlert; chose
rather to gratify the pope, by beflowing her on his nephewt-.

During the war between the emperor and Francis, an ec
vent had happened which abated in some degree the warmth
and cordiality of friendlhip which had long subsisted between
the latter and the king of England. James the fifth of
Scotland, an enterprising young prince, having heard of the
emperor's intention to invade Provence, was fo-fond of siew-
ing that he did not yield to any of his ancestors in the since.
rity of his attachment to the French crown, and so eager to
distinguish himself by some military exploit, that he levied a
body of troops with an intention of leading them in person
to the assistance of the king of France. Though iome un-
fortunate accidents prevented his carrying any troops into
France, nothing could divert him from. going thither in per-
son. Immediately upon his landing, he hafiteed to Pro-
vence, but had been detained so long in his voyage, that he
came too late to have any Ihare in the miltary operations,
and met the king on his return after the retreat of the Inipe-
rialifts. But Francis was so greatly pleased with his zeal,
and no less with his manners and converaition, that he could
not refuse him his daughter Magdalen, whaom he demanded

t Jovii Hil. c xcviii. p. as8, &e. Bdcariitemment. . xxii. p.
696. Iftoria de fui Teapi di Giov.,Bat. Adriani. Ven. 1587, p. xo.
Vol. III. L

in marriage. It mortified Henry extremely to fee a prince,
of whom he was immoderately jealous, form an alliance CJa.
1, 15373, from which he derived such an accession of repu.
tation as well as fecurityt. He could not, however, with
decency, oppose Francs's beftowig his daughter upon a
monarch descended from a race of princes, tde most ancient
and faithful aHies of the French crown. But when James,
upon the sudden death of Magdalen, demanded as his second
rife Mary of Guise, he warmly solicited Francis to deny
.his suit, and in order to disappoint him, aLked that lady is
-marriage for himself. When Francis preferred the Scottil
king's fincerecourtlhip to his artful and malevolent proposal,
lie discovered much diffltisfaoion. The pacification agreed
upon at Nice, and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, fdled Henry's mind with new fnfpicions, as
if Francis had altogether renounced his friendfiip for the
fake of new connetions with the emperor. Charles, tho.
roughly acquainted with the temper of the Englilh king, and
watchful to observe all the ihiftings and caprices of his pas-
sions, thought this a favourable opportunity of renewing
his negotiations with him, which had been long broken off.
By the death of queen Catharine, whose interest the empe.

r could not with decency have abandoned, the chief cause

of their discord was removed; so that, without touching up.
on the delicate question of her divorce, he might now take
what measures he thought most effenual for regaining Hen-
ry's good-wilL For this purpose, he began with proposing
several marriag-treaties to the king.- He offered his niece,
a daughter of the king of Denmark, to Henry himself; he
demanded the rincefs Mary for one of the princes of Pod.
tugal, and was even willing to receive her as the king's ille.
gitimate daughter*. Though none of these proje&ed alli.
ances ever took place, or peaaps were ever seriously intend
ed, they occasioned such frequent intercourse between tht

t Ht. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

Mem.de Ribier, t.L 496.

courts, and so many reciprocal professions of civility and e-
fleem, as considerably abated the edge of Henry's rancour:
againfl the emperor, and paved the way for that union be-
tween them which afterwards proved so difadvantageots to-
the French king.

The ambitious schemes in which the emperor had been en-

gaged, and the wars he had been carrying on for some years.
proved, as usual, extremely favourable to the progress of the
reformation in Germany. While Charles was absent upon
his African expedition, or intent on his projecs. againflt
France, his chief objec in Germany was to prevent the dif-
fenfions about religion from diturbing the public tranquilli.,
ty, by granting such indulgence to the protestant princes as,
might induce them to concur with his measures, or at leaf[
hinder them from taking part with his rival. For this rea-
foi, he was iareful to secure to the protestants the poffefiion
of all the advantages which they had gained by the articles
of pacification at Nuremberg, in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty two*; and except some flight trouble
from the proceedings of the Imperial chamber, they met
with nothing to disturb them in the exercise of their religi-
on, or to interrupt the successful zeal with which they pro-
pagated their opinions. Meanwhile the pope continued his
negotiations for convoking a general council; and thought
the protestants had exprefled great diffatisfaiion with his-
intention to fix upon Mantua as the place of meeting, he
adhered obstinately to his choice, issued a bul on the second-
of June one thousand five hundred and thirty-fix, appoint-
ing it to assemble in that city on the twenty-third of May
the year following: he nominated three cardinals to preside,
in his name; enjoined all Christian. princes to countenance it-
by their authority, and invited: the prelates of every natio--
to attend in person. This summons of a council, an assem-
bly which from its nature and intention demanded quiet.
times, as well as pacific difppfitions, at the very juncure

* Du Mont Corps Dipjom. tom iv. part a. p. 138.

L 2

when the emperor was on his march towards France, and
ready to involve a great part of Europe in the confusions of
war, appeared to every person extremely unfeatonable. It
was intimated, however, to all the different courts by nun.
cios dispatched of purpofet. With an intention to gratify
the German, the emperor, during his residence in Rome,
had warmly solicited the pope to call a council; but being at
the fame time wifling to try every art in order to persuade
Paul to depart from the neutrality which he preserved be.
tween him and Francis, he sent Heldo his vice-chancellor
into Germany, along with a nuncio dispatched thither, in.
ftruAing him to second all the nuncio's representations, and
to enforce them with the whole weight of the Imperial au-
thority. The protestants gave them audience at Smalkalde,
[Feb. 25, 1537,3 where they had aflembled in a body i
order to receive them. But after weighing all their arga-
ments, they unanimonfly refused to acknowledge a comnl
fiimmoned in the name and by the authority of the pope a.
lone; in whichhe assumed the sole right of presiding; which
was to be held in a city not only far distant from Germany,
but subjea to a prince, who was a stranger to them, and
lofldy conneAed with the court of Rome; and to which
their divines could not repair with fafcty, efpecialy after
tnhir doerines had been stigmatized in the very bull of con-
vocation with the name of heresy. These and many other
objcations against the council, which appeared to them un-
answerable, they enumerated in a large manifesto, which they
published in vindication of their conduct.

Against this the court of Rome exclaimed as a flagrant

proof of their obstinacy and presumption, and the pope fill
perfiifed in his resolution to hold the council at the time and
in the place appointed. But some unexpeced difficulties
being started by the duke of Mantua, both about the right
ofjurifdition over the persons who resorted to the councils

t Pallavic. Hist. Cone. Trid. 113.
S!cidan. 1. xii. 12*, &c. Seckead. Corn. ib. iii. p. i43,&c.

and the security of his capital amidst such a concourse of
trangers, the pope [Ec. 8, 1538,]:after fruitless endea-
yours to adjust these, firif prorogued the council for some
months, and afterwards, transferring the place of meeting to
Vicenza in the Veaetian territories, appointed it to aflemble
on the first of May, in the following year. As neither the'
emperor nor the French king,;who had not then come to
any accommodation,. would-permit their fubjeas to repair
thither, not a.fingle prelate appeared on the day prefixed,
and the pope, that his authority might not become altoge-
ther contemptible by so many ineffecual efforts to convoke
that assembly, put off' the meeting by an indefinite proroga-
tionA.

But that:he might not seem to have turned iis whole at-

tention towards a reformation which he was not able to ac-
compliDh, while he neglected that which was in his owa
power,.he deputed a certain number of cardinals and bi-
thops, with full authority to inquire into the abuses and cor-
ruptions of the Roman court; and to propose the moit es-
fe¢tual method of removing them. This scrutiny, under-
taken with relucance, was carried on slowly and with e-
rlinnefs. All defets were touched with a gentle hand,
afraid of probing too deep, or of difcoveriag toomuch. But
even by this partial examination, many irregularities were de-
tected, and many enormities exposed to light, while the re-
medies which they fuAgefted as moit proper were either in-
adequate, or were never applied. The report and refolu.
tion of these deputies, though intended to be kept secret,
were transmitted by. some accident into Germany, and being
immediately made public, afforded ample.matter for reflec-
tion, and triumph to the.proteflants*. On the one hand,
they demonstrated the necessity of a reformation in the head
as. well as the members of the church, and even pointed out
mnany of the corruptions against which Luther and his fol-
lowers had remonstrated with the greatest vehemence. They

5 F. Paul, 117. -Pallavic. 1x7. * 51eidan, 2j3.

L3

flewed, on the other hand, that it was vain to expet this
reformation from ecclesiastics themselves, who, as Luther
trongly exprefed it, piddled at curing warts, while they
overlooked or confirmed ulcers t.

1539.] The earnefRnefs with which the emperor seemed,

at firt, to press their acquiescing in the pope's scheme of
holding a council in Italy, alarmed the protestant princes so
much, that they thought it prudent to strengthen their con.
federacy, by admitting several new members who solicited
that privilege, particularly the king 6f Denmark. Heldo,
who, during his residence in Germany, had observed all the
advantages which they derived from that union, endeavour.
ed to counterbalance its effets by an alliance among the
catholic powers of the empire. This league, diftinguiihed
by the name of Holy, was merely defensive; and though
concluded by Heldo in the emperor's name, was afterwards
disowned by him, and subscribed by very few princes t.

The protestants soon got intelligence of this association,

notwithstanding all the endeavours of the contracing parties
to conceal it; and their zeal, always apt to fufpet and to
dread, even to excess, every thing that seemed to threaten
religion, instantly took the alarm, as if the emperor had
been juit ready to enter upon the execution of some formi.
dble plan for the extirpation of their opinions. In order to
disappoint this, they held frequent consultations, they court-
ed the kings of France and England with great assiduity,
and even began to think of raising the refpetive contingents
both in men and money which they were obliged to furnifi
by the treaty of Smalkalde. But it was not long before
they were convinced that these apprehensions were without
foundation, and that the emperor, to whom repose was abfo.
lutely necessary, after efforts so much beyond his strength in
the war with France, had no thoughts of disturbing the
tranquillity of Germany. As a proof of this, at an inter-

t Seck. L iii. 164.
t Seek. . iii. 171. Recucil de Traitez.

view with the protestant princes in Fraefort [April 193,
his ambassadors agreed that all concessions in their favour,
particularly- those contained in the pacification of Nuren-
berg, should continue in force for fifteen months; that
during this period all proceedings of the Imperial chamber
againit themlhould be suspended; that a conference ihould
be held by a few divines of each party, in order to discuss
the points in controversy, and to propose articles of accom-
modation which ihould be laid before the next diet.
Though the emperor, that he might not irritate the pope,
who remonstrated against the first part of this agreement as
impolitic, and against the latter, as an impious encroach-
ment upon his prerogative, never formally ratified this con-
vention, it was observed with considerable exa&nefs, and
greatly strengthened the basis of that ecclesiastical liberty
for which the protestants contended *.

A few days after the convention at Francfort, George

duke of Saxony died [April 24], and his death was an e-
vent of great advantage to the reformation. That prince,
the head of the Albertine, or younger branch of the Saxon
family, possessed, as marquis of Mifnia and Thuringia, ex.
tensive territories, comprehending Drefdien, Leipfic, and
other cities now the most considerable in the eletorate.
From the sirs dawn of the reformation, he had been its ene-
my as avowedly as the ele&oral princes were its protestors,
and had carried on his opposition not only with all the zeal
flowing from religious prejudices, but with a virulence in-
spired by personal antipathy to Luther, and embittered by
the domestic animosity subsisting between him and the other
branch of his family. By his death without issue, his fuc-
ceflion fell to his brother Henry, whose attachment to the
protestant religion surpassed, if possible, that of his predecef.
for to popery. Henry no sooner took pofeflion of his new do-
minions, than, disregarding a clause in George's will, dic-
tated by his bigotry, whereby he bequeathed all his tern.

*F. Paul, 8*. S!cid. 47. Scck. L iii. oo.

tories to the emperor and king of the Romans, if his brother
should attempt to make any innovation in religion, he invit.
ed some protestant divines, and among them-Luther himfnde
to Leipfic. By their advice and assistance, he overturned in
a few weeks the whole system of ancient rites, eftabliihiog
the full exercise of the reformed religion, with the universal
applause of his fubjecs, who had long wished for this
change, which the authority of their duke alone had hitherto
preventedt. This revolution delivered the protestants from
the danger to which they were exposed by having an inve.
terate enemy situated in the middle of their territories; and
they had now the satisfaction of feeing that the poffeions
of the princes and cities attached to their cause, extended il
one great and almost unbroken line from the fbore of the
Baltic to the banks of the Rhine.

Soon after the conclusion of the truce at Nice, an event

happened, which satisfied all Europe that Charles had pro.
fecuted the war to the utmoit extremity that the state of hit
affairs would permit. Vast arrears were due to his troops,
whom he had long amused with vain hopes and promises
As they now foresaw what little attention would bepaid to
their demands, when by the re-eftablilhment of peace thei
services became of -less importance, they loft all patience,
broke out into an open mutiny, and declared that thq
thought themselves entitled to.feize by violence what was
detained from them contrary to all justice. Nor was this
spirit of sedition confined to one part of the emperor's domil
nions; the mutiny was almost as general as the grievana
which gave rife to it. The soldiers in the Milanese plua
dered the open country without controul, and filled the ca
pital itself with consternation. Those in garrison at Golet-
ta threatened to give up that important fortress to Barba
rofla. In Sicily, the troops proceeded to still greater excel
fes; having driven away their officers, they -eleted othen
in their fead, defeated a body of men whom the viceroy
sent against them, took and pillaged several cities, condu&i

t Sleidan. 149.

ing themselves al the while in such a manner, that their
operations resembled rather the regular proceedings of a con-
certed rebellion, than the ralhnefs and violence of a military
mutiny. But by the address and prudence of the generals,
who, partly by borrowing money in their own name, or in
that of their maftcr, partly by extorting large fums from the
cities in their refpe&ive provinces, raised what was sufficient
to discharge the arrears of the soldiers, these infurre&ciona
were quelled. The greater part of the troops were dif.
banded, such a number only being kept in pay as was necef-
fary for garrisoning the principal towns, and proteting the
sea-coasts from the insults of the Turks*.

It was happy for the emperor that the abilities of his ge.

nerals extricated him out of these difficulties, which it ex.
ceeded his own power to have removed. He had depend-
ed, as his chief resource for discharging the arrears due to
his soldiers, upon the subsidies which he expeced from his
Castilian subje&s. For this purpose, he afembled the Cor-
tes of Castile at Toledo, and having repreented to them the
extraordinary expence of his military operations, together
with the great debts in which these had necefarily involved
him, he proposed to levy such supplies as the present exi-
gency of his affairs demanded, by a general excite on corn.
modities. But the Spaniards already felt themselves op-
pressed with a load of taxes unknown to their ancestors.
They had often complained that their country was drained
not only of its wealth but of its inhabitants, in order to pro-
fecute quarrels in which it was not interested, and to light
battles from which it could reap no benefit; and they de-
termined not to add voluntarily to their own burdens, or to
furnish the emperor with the means of engaging in new en.
terprifes no less ruinous to the kingdom than mos of those
which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles in particular
inveighed with great vehemence against the imposition pro.
posed, as an encroachment upon the valuable and diftin,

Jovii Hilt 1. xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. Ferreras, ix. o26.

guiihing privilege of their order, that of being exempted
from the payment of any tax. They demanded a confer.
ence with the representatives of the cities concerning the
tate of the nation. They contended that if Charler would
imitate the example of his predecefors, who had resided
constantly in Spain, and would avoid entangling himself in
a multiplicity of tranfaEions foreign to the concerns of his
Spanish dominions, his stated revenues of the crown would
be fully fuficient to defray the neceflary expences of go.
vernment. They represented to him, that it would be an.
just to lay new burdens upon the people, while this prudent
and effe&ual method of re-eftablihing public credit, aud fe.
curing national opulence, wa totally neglectedt. Charles,
after employing arguments, entreaties, and promises, but
without success, in order to overcome their obstinacy, dif.
mifed the assembly with great indignation. From that pe.
riod neither the nobles nor the prelates have been called
to these affemblie, on pretence that such as pay no part of
the public taxes, hould not claim any vote in laying them
on. None have been admitted to the Cortes but the pro.
curators or representatives of eighteen cities. These to the
number of thirty-fix, being two from each community, form
an assembly which bears no resemblance either in power or
dignity or independence to the ancient Cortes, and are ab.
folutely at the devotion of the court in all their determina-
tionst. Thus the imprudent zeal with which the Callilian
nobles had supported the regal prerogative, in opposition to
the claims of the commons during the commotions in the
year one thouland five hundred and twenty-one, proved at
lait fatal to their own body. By enabling Charles to depref
one of the orders in the ifate, they destroyed that balance
to which the constitution owed its security, and put it in

+ Sandov. HilL voL u. z69.
t Sandov. Ib. Le Science du Gouvernment, par M. de Real
ton. ii. p. Icz.

his power, or in that of his fucceflors, to humble the other,
and to strip it gradually of its most valuable privileges.

At the fame time, however, the Spanilh grandees Rill

pofeffed extraordinary power as well as privileges, which
they exercised and defended with an haughtiness peculiar
to themselves. Of this the emperor himself had a mortifying
proof during the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As he was
returning one day from a tournament accompanied by most
of the nobility, one of the serjeants of the court, out of of.
ficious zeal'to clear the way for the emperor, struck the duke
of Infantado's horse with his batton, which that haughty
grandee relenting, drew his sword, beat and wounded the
officer. Charles, provoked at such an insolent deed in his
pretence, immediately ordered Ronquillo the judge of the
court to arrest the duke; Ronquillo advanced to execute his
charge, when the conflable of Castile interposing, checked
him, claimed the right of jurifdi&ion over a grandee as a pri.
vilege of his office, and conducted Infantado to his own
apartment. All the nobles present were so pleated with.the
boldness of the constable in asserting the rights oftheir order,
that, deserting the emperor, they attended him to his house
with infinite applanfes, and Charles returned to the palace
unaccompanied by any person but the cardinal Tavern. The
emperor, how sensible soever of the affront, saw the danger
of irritating a jealous and high-fpirited order of men, whom
the fighteft appearance of offence might drive to the most
unwarrantable extremities. For that reason, inflead of
Draining at any ill-timed exertion of his prerogative, he
prudently connived at the arrogance of a body too potent
for him to controul, and sent next morning to the duke of
Infantado, offering to inflict what punilhment he pleased on
the perfan who had affronted him. The duke confidering
this as a full reparation to his honour, inftahtly forgave the
officer; beftowingon him, besides, a considerable present as
a compensation for his wound. Thus the affair was entirely

forgotten . nor would it have deserved to be mentioned,
if it were not a ftrliking example of the high and. indepes.
dent pirit of the Spanish nobles in that age, as wel as an in.
otac of the emperor's dexterity in accommodating his con.
du& to the circumfances in which he was placed.

Charles was far from discovering the fame condefcenfio

or lenity toward the citizens f Ghent, who not long after
broke out into open rebelion againlt his government. An
event which happened in the year one thouland five hundred
and thirty-fix gave occasion to this rnh insurrection so i.
tal to that fiouriing city. At that time the queen dowa.
gerof Hungar, govsefs oftheNetherlands, havingreceived
orders from her broter to insd Frace with all the foc
which -ie could raif, fe affimbled the States of the Unit.
ed Provincs, and obtained si them a subsidy of twe~
hundred thousand flons, to defray the expence of that un.
darting. Of this fnm, the county of Flandrs. was o
bliged to pay a third part its proportion. But the citi.
zens ofGhent, the most confideable city in that country,
avcrfe to a war with France, with which they carried on a
cxtcnfive and gainful commerce, refused to pay their quota
and contended, that in consequence of iipulations; beten
them and the aceftors of their prent sovereign the emp
ror, no tax could ie levied upon them,- unless they had given
their erprd confent:to the impoiio of it. The goem
ness on the other hand, maintaied, that as the subsidy of
twelve hundred thousand. forins had been granted by the
State of Slander, of whichxteir representatives were men
bes, they were bound, of course, to conform to what w8
na&ed by them, as it is the sirs principle in society, on
which the tranqillity andorder ofgovernment depend, that
the inclinations of the minority mull be over-ruled by the
judgment and dcdfion of the fuprior number.

Thecitizcns of Ghent, however, were not' wilingtore
linqui a. privilege of such high importance as that whicI

t Sandov. i. a74. Fecrrras, i. as1. Miniana, 113.

*

they claimed. Having been accustomed, under the govern-
ment of the house of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immu-
nities, and to be treated with much indulgence, they disdain-
ed to sacrifice to the delegated power of,a regent, those
rights and liberties which they had often and successfully
aftertcd againif their greatest princes. The queen, though
:le endeavoured at first to soothe them, and to reconcile them
to their duty by various concessions, was at laT so much ir-
ritated by the obftiiacy with which they adhered to their
cl.iin, that (he ordered all the citizens of Ghent, on whom
(he could lay hold in any part of the Netherlands, to bear-
refted. But this irah action made an impreflion very diffe-
rent from what ihe expeted, on men, whose minds were
agitated with all the-violent pallions which indignation at
oppression and zeal for liberty inspire. Less affeced with
the danger of their friends and companions, than irritated
at the governess, they openly despised her authority, and
font deputies to the other towns of Slanders, conjuring
them not to abandon their country at such a junaure, but
to concur with them in vindic(-.tng its rights against the en-
croachments of a woman, who either did not know or did
not regard their immunities. All but a few inconsiderable
towns declined entering into any confederacy against the
governess; they joined, however, in petitioning her to put -
off the term for payment of the tax so long, that they might
have it in their power to fend some of their number into
Spain, in order to lay their title to exemption befo.e their
sovereign. This {he granted with some difficulty. But
Charles received their commiflioners with an haughtiness to
which they were not accustomed from their ancient princes,
and enjoining them to yield the fame refpetful obedience
to his sifter, which they owed to him in person, remitted
the examination of their claim to the council of Malines.
This court, which is properly a ifanding committee of the
parliament or states of the country, and which possesses the

VoL III. M

supreme jurifdi&ion in all matters civil as well as criminal*,
pronounced the claim of the c'tizens of Ghent to be il.
founded, and appointed them forthwith to pay their pro.
portion of the tax.

Enraged at this decision, which they confidered as noto.

rioufly unjust, and rendered desperate on feeing their rights
betrayed by that very court which was bound to prote&t
them, the people of Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary
manner;, drove such of the nobility as resided among them
out of the city; secured several of the emperor's officers;
put one of them to the torture, whom they accused of hai.
ing flolen or destroyed the record that contained a ratifica.
tion of the privileges of exemption from taxes which they
pleaded; chose a council to which they committed the di.
re&ion of their affairs; gave orders for repairing and adding
to their fortifications; and openly erected the standard of re.
bellion againR their forereignt. Sensible, however, of their
inability to support what their zeal had prompted them to
undertake, and- desirous of securing a proteaor againf[ the
formidable forces by which they might expec soon to be
attacked, they sent Come of their number to Francis, offer.
ing not only to acknowledge him as their sovereign, and to
put him in immediate possession of Ghent, but to allift him
with all their forces in recovering those provinces in the
Netherlands, which had anciently belonged to the crown of
France, and had been so lately re-united to it by the decree
of the parliament-of Paris. This unexpeted proposition
coming from persons who had it in their power to have per.
formed instantly one part-of what they undertook, and who
could contribute so effetually towards the execution of the
whole, opened great as well as alluring profpefts to Francis's
ambition. The counties of Slanders and Artois were of

* Dfcriptione di tutti Paefi Bai di Lud. Guicciardini. Ant.

Is57. fol. p. 53.

t Memoirs furla Revoke de Gantois en x139, par Jean d'Hol-

!ander,ecrit en 1547. Ala Haye, 1747. P. Heuter. Rer. Aufr.
lib. i. p. z26. Sandov. Hil. tom. ii. p. 28z.

greater value than the dutchy of Milan, which he had so
long laboured to acquire with passionate but fruitless desire;
their lituation with refpe& to France rendered it more easy
to conquer or to defend them; and they might be formed
into a separate principality for the duke of Orleans, no less
suitable to his dignity than that which his father aimed at
obtaining. To this, the Flemings, who were acquainted
with the French manners and government, would not have
been averse; and his own fubjeds, weary of their deftruc-
tive expeditions into Italy, would have turned their arms
towards this quarter with more good will, and with greater
vigour. Several considerations, neverthelesss prevented Fran-
cis from laying hold of this opportunity, the most favour-
able in appearance which had ever presented itself, of ex-
tending his own dominions, or diftrefihng the emperor.
From the time of their interview at Aigues-mortes, Charles
had continued to court the king of France with wonderful
attention, and often flattered him with. hopes of grati-
fying at last his wishes concerning the M-ilanese, by grant-
ing the investiture of it either to him or to. one ofhhis fobns.
But though these hoped and promises were thrown out with
no other intention than to, detach him from his confederacy
with the grand seignior, or to raise suspicions in Solyman's
mind by the appearance of a cordial and familiar intercourse
subsisting between the courts of Paris and Madrid, Francis
was weak enough to catch at the shadow by which he had'
been so often amused, and from eagerness to seize it, relin-
quihed what must have proved a more substantial acquifi.
tion. Besides this, the- dauphin, jealous to ixcefs of his
brother, and unwilling that a prince who seemed to be of a
restless and enterprising nature, mould obtain an eftabli&-
ment, which from its situation might be confidered almost as.
a domestic one, made use of Montmorency, who, by a fin-
gular piece of good fortune, was at the fame time the fa.
vourite of the father and of the son,. to. defeat the appliga-
tion of the Flemings, and. to divert the king from f oufing,

M

their cause. Montmorency, accordingly, represented, in
rong terms, the reputation and power which Francis would
acq-ire by recovering that footing which he formerly had
in Italy, and that nothing would be so efficacious to over-
come the emperor's aversion to this as a sacred adherence
to the truce, and refusing, on an occasion so inviting, to
countenance the rebellious fubjeas of his rival. Francis, apt
of himfelfto over-rate the value of the Milanese, because he
estimated it from the length of time as well as from the great
efforts which he had employed in order to reconquer it, and
fond of every aaion which had the appearance of generofty,
assented without difficulty to sentiments so agreeable to his
own, rejeted the propositions of the citizens of Ghent, and
dismissed their deputies with an harmh answer*.

Not satisfied with this, by a further refinement in genero-

fity, he communicated to the emperor his whole negotiation
with the malecontents, and all that he knew of their schemes
end intentions t. This convincing proof of Francis's difin-
teeftednefs relieved Charles from the most disquieting appre-
henfions, and opened a way to extricate himself out of all
his difficulties. He had already received full information
of all the tranfations in the Netherlands, and of the rage
with which the people of Ghent had taken arms against his
government. He was thoroughly acquainted with the ge-
nius and qualities of his fubjeAs in that country; with their
love of liberty; their attachment to their ancient privileges
and customs; as well as the invincible obstinacy with which
their minds, flow but firm and persevering, adhered to any
measure on which they had deliberately resolved. He easily
law what encouragement and support they might have deriv
ed from the assistance of France; and though now free from
any danger on that quarter, he was still sensible that some
immediate as well as vigorous interposition was necessary, in
order to prevent the spirit of difaffeion from spreading in

* Mem. de Bellay, p. 63. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. xi. 263.

t Sandov. Hiflor. tom. ii. 284.

a country where the number of cities, the multitude of
people, together with the great wealth diffused among them
by commerce, rendered it peculiarly formidable, and would:
supply it with inexhauffible resources. No expedient, after-
long deliberation, appeared to him so effeoual as his going,
in person to the Netherlandsi and the goverpefs his. fiftr-
being of the fame opinion, warmly solicited. him to under.
take the journey. There- were only two routes. which he
could take; one by land. through Italy and Germany, the
other entirely by sea, from some port in Spain to one in the
Low-Countries. But the former was more- tedious than.
suited. the present. exigency- of his affairs ; nor could he in.
.onfiftency with.his dignity, or-even his.fafety, paf&through
Germany without such. a train both.of. attendants and of;
troops, as would have added greatly to the. time .he must
have confumed-in his journey; the latter was dangerous at
this feafon,.and while he remained uncertain.with refpe& to.
the friendship of the king of England, was not to be ven.
tared upon,. unless under. the. convoy of a powerful. fleet..
This perplexing situation, in, which. he was under.the. ne-
oeffity of chufig,.and did not know what to chufe,..infpired
him at last with the singular, and feemiugly extravagant
thought of pafling through France,.as .the.-mot expeditious
way of reaching. the- Netherlands. He proposed in. his
council. to- demand; Francis's, permiflon. for that purpose.
All his counsellors joined .withone -voice i ..condemning the
mreafure as no less xafi.than unprecedented,. and. which must
infallibly-expofe. him to disgrace or to..dauger to disgrace,,
if the demand were reje&ed in,the mananr that he 'had.rea-
son to expe&t;. to danger, if he put.his-perfon in.the power
of an enemy whom he had often offended,- who had ancient
injuries to.revenge, as. wel as fubjees.o£ present. contest still
remaining undecided.. But Charles, who had ltudied the
characterr of his rival with greater eare and more profouad
discernment than .any of. his ministers, .perfiied in his plan,
and flattered hinfelf.that-it might be accompnlifted not only

M 3.

without danger to his own person, but even without the er
pence of any concession detrimental to his crown.

With this view he communicated the matter to the French

ambassador at his court, and sent Granvelle his chief minister
to Paris, in order to obtain from Francis permiflion to pass
through his dominions, and to promise that he would loon
fettle the affair of the Milanese to his fatisfa&ion. But at
the fame time he entreated that Francis would not exa& any
new promise, or even insist on former engagements, at this
juncture, left whatever he should grant, under his present
circumstances, might seem rather to be extorted by necessity
than to flow from friendlhip or the love of justice. Francis
instead of attending to the snare which such a flight artifice
icarcely concealed, was so dazzled with the splendour of
overcoming an enemy by acts of generosity, and so pleated
with the air of superiority which the rectitude and disinterest.
cdnefs of his proceedings -gave him on this occasion, that he
at once afiented to all that was demanded. Judging of the
emperor's heart by his own, he imagined that the senti-
ments of gratitude, arising from the remembrance of good
offices and liberal treatment, would determine him more for-
cibly to fulfil what he had so often promised, than the most
precise stipulations that could be inserted in any treaty.

Upon this, Charles; to whom every moment was precious

set out, notwithstanding the fears and suspicions of his
5ipaaih fubjeds, with a small. but splendid train of about
an hundred persons. At Bayonne, on the frontiers: of
France, he was received by the dauphin and the duke of
Orleans, attended by the constable Montmorency. The
two princes offered to go into Spain, and to remain there as
hotages for the emperor's safety; but this he rejeAed, de.
claring, that he relied with implicit confidence on the king's
Bonour, and had never demanded, nor would accept of any
other pledge for his security. In all the towns through
which he pagfed, the greatef possible magnificence was dif.

played; the magistrates presented him the keys of the gates;
the prison doors were set open; and by the royal honours paid
to him, he appeared more like the sovereign of the country
than a foreign prince [ 54 o]. The king advanced as far as
Chatelherault to meet him, their interview was distinguished
by the warmeit expressions offriendfhip and regard. They
proceeded together towards Paris, and presented tb the
inhabitants of that city, the extraordinary fpe&acle of two
rival monarchs, whose enmity had disturbed and laid waste
Europe during twenty years, making their solemn entry
together with all the symptoms of a confidential harmony,
as if they had forgotten for ever pail injuries and would ne-
ver revive hostilities for the futuret.

Charles remained fix days at Paris; but amidst the per-

petual caresses of the French court, and the various enter-
tainments contrived to amuse or to do him honour, he dif-
covered an extreme impatience to continue his journey, a-
rising as much from an apprehension of danger which con-
flantly haunted him, as from the necessity of his presence
in the Low-Countries. Conscious of the difingenuity of
his own intentions, he trembled when he reflected that some
fatal accident might betray them to his rival, or lead him to
fufpeft them; and though his artifices to conceal them
Ihould be successful, he could not help fearing that motives
of interest might at last triumph over the scruples of honour,
and tempt Francis to avail himself of the advantage now
in his hands. Nor were there wanting persons among the
French ministers, who advised the king to turn his own arts
against the emperor, and as the retribution due for so many
instances of fraud or falsehood, to seize and detain his person
until he granted him full fatisfaaion with regard to all the
just claims of the French crown. But no consideration
could induce Francis to violate the faith which he had pledg-
ed, nor could any argument convince him that Charles,
after all the promises that he had given, and all the favours

tTbuan. Hit. lib. i. c. 14. Mem. de Bellay, 264.

which he had received, might fill be capable of deceiving
him. Full of this false confidence, he accompanied him to
St. (intin; and the two princes, who had met him on
the borders of Spain, did not take leave of him until he en.
tcred his dominions in the Low-Countries

As soon as the emperor reached his own territories [Ja%

24],mthe French ambassadors demanded the accomplihment
of what he hadpromifed concerning the invftiture of Milan-
but Charles, under the plausible pretext that his whole at-
tention was then engrofled by the consultations necelfary
towards fupprefing the rebellion in Ghent,.put off the mats
ter for some time. But in order to prevent Francis from.
fufpe&ing his sincerity, he ftii' continued to talk of his r-
solutions with refped to that matter in the fme =.rain as;
when he entered France, and even wrote to the king much
to the fame parpowfe though in general terms, and with ..
quivocal expressos, which he might. afterwards explain
away or interpret at pleasure -.

Meanwhile the mnfortunate citizens of Ghent,. defitute of

leaders capable either ofdirefting their councils, .or condu&
ing their troops; abandoned by the French king, and uno
supported by their countrymen; were unable to refit thei
offended. sovereign, who was ready-to advance against them.
with one body of troops which: he had raised in the Nether
lands, with another drawn out. of. Germany,. and a third
which had arrivedfrom Spain.by sea. The near. approach
of danger made them, at last, so enible of their owns folly,
that they feat ambaffadbrs to the. emperor,. iploring his
mercy, and offering to set open their gates athis approach
Charles without vouchsafing them any other- answer, than
that he would appear among them as their sovereign, with the
sceptre and the sword in his hand, began his march at the
head of his troops. Though he chose to enter the city on
the twenty-fourth of February, his birth-day, hewas touch.
ed with nothing of that tenderness or indulgence which

t Memoires de Ribier, i. 504.

was natural towards the place of his nativity. Twepty-fix
of the principal citizens were put to death [April 20]; a
greater number were sent into baniihment; the city was de-
clared to have forfeited all its privileges and immunities;
the revenues belonging to it were confiscated; its ancient
form of government was abolished; the nomination of its
magistrates was veiled for the future in the emperor and his
successors; a new fyflem of laws and political adminifiration
was prescribed t; and in order to bridle the seditious spirit
of the citizens, orders were given to ere&t a strong citadel,
for defraying the expence of which a fine of an hundred and
fifty thousand florins was imposed on the inhabitants, toge-
ther with an annual tax-of fix thousand florins for the sup-
port of the garrison . By these rigorous proceedings,
Charles not only punished the citizens of Ghent, but set an
awful example of severity before his other fubjets in the Ne.
therlands, whose immunities and privileges, partly the effet,
partly the cause of their extensive commerce, eircumfcribed
the prerogative of their sovereign within very narrow bounds,
and often flood in the way of measures which he wished to
undertake, or fettered and retarded him in his operations.

Charles having thus vindicated and re-established his au-

thority in the Low-Countries, and being now under no ne-
ceffity of continuing the fame scene of falsehood and difli-
mulation with which he had long amused Francis, began
gradually to throw aside the veil under which he had con-
cealed his intentions with refpeEt to the Milanese. At fir*,
he eluded the demands of the French ambassadors, when
they again reminded him of his promises; then he proposed,
by way of equivalent for the dutchy of Milan, to grant the
duke of Orleans the investiture of Slanders, clogging the
offer, however, with impracticable conditions, or such as,he
knew would be rejedced§. At las, being driven from all

t Les Coutumes et Loix du Compte de Flandre, par Alex. Ie
Grande, 3 tom. fol. Cambray, 1719, tom. i p. x69.

Harai Annales Brabantiae, vol. i. 616.
§ Mem. de Ribier, i. 509, 514.

his evasions and fubterfnges by their infitsing for a categoi.
cal answer, he peremptorily refused to give up a territoryif
such value, or voluntarily to make such a liberal addition to
the trength of an enemy, by diminifhiing his own power[.
He denied, at the fame time, that he had ever made any pro.
mise which could bind him to an acion so fooliib, and so
contrary to his own interest.

Of all the tranfaAions in the emperor's life, this, without

doubt, reflects the greatest diihonour on his reputation*.
Though Charles was not extremely ferupulous at other time
about the means which he employed for accomplishing hi
ends, and was not always observant of the flrit precepts of
veracity and honour, he had hitherto maintained rome re.
gard for the maxims of that les precilf and rigid morlity
by which monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their condu& But, on this occasion, the scheme that he
formed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted prince
the illiberal and mean artifices bywhich he carried it on;
the infenfiblity with which he received all the marks of hi
friendlip, as wel as the ingratitude with which he requited
them, are all eqally unbecoming the dignity of his charac.
ter, and inconftuent with the grandeur of his views.

This tranfaion exposed Francis to as much scorn as it

did the emperor to censure. After the etprience of a long
reign, after so many opportunities of discovering the dupli
city and artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity with
which he tufed him at this junture seemed to merit no o0
ther return than what it a&aadly met with. Francis, how-
ever, remonstrated and exclaimed, as if this had been the firS
infiance in which the emperor had deceived hia. Feding,
as is usual, the insult which was offered to his understanding
till more sensibly than the injury done to his interest, he di.
covered such resentment, as made it obvious that he would
lay bold on the fir opportunity of being revenged, and that

t Ribicr, i. g. .* Bellay, 395-6

'Joviil His lib. ix. p. 238. a.

a war, no less rancorous than that which had lo lately raged,
would soon break out anew in Europe.

But singular as the tranfa&Cion which has been related may
appear, this year is rendered fill more memorable by the e-
tablifhment of the order of Jesuits; a body whose influence
on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs hath been so confider-
able, that an account of the genius of its laws and govern-
mentjuftly merits a place in history. When men take a view
of the rapid progress of this society towards wealth and
power; when they contemplate the admirable prudence with
which it has been governed; when they attend to the per-
fevering and fyfematic spirit with which its fcheaes have
been carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a fngular in-
fttution to the superior wisdom of its founder, and toTfup-
pose that he had formed and digested his plan with profound
policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the other monastic or-
ders, are indebted for the existence of their order not to the
wisdom of their founder, but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio
Loyola, whom I have already mentioned on occasion of the
wound which he received in defending Pampelunaf, was
a fanatic diftinguilhed by extravagancies in sentiment and
conduc, no less incompatible with the maxims of fober rea.
oon, than repugnant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventures, and visionary schemes, in which his enthusiasm
engaged him, equal any thing recorded in the legends of the
Rorifh faints; but are unworthy of notice in hitory.

Prompted by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the love
of power and diltinAion, from which such pretenders to fu-
perior san&ity are not exempt, Loyola was ambitious of
Decoming the founder of a religious order. The plan,
which he formed of its contitution and laws, was fuggeRed,
is he gave out, and as his followers fill teach, by the im-
ediate inspiration of heaven*. But notwithRanding this

t Vol. ii. Book ii p. 124.
'Compte rendu des Confitutiones des Jesuites au Parlement
de Provence, par M. de Monclar, p. 2z5.

his evasions and subterfuges by their infifing for a eategori.
cal answer, he peremptorily refused to give up a territory of
such value, or voluntarily to make such a liberal addition to
the strength of an enemy, by diminilhing his own powers.
He denied, at the fame time, that he had ever made any pro.
mise which could bind him to an action so foolilh, and so
contrary to his own interest.

Of all the tranfadions in the emperor's life, this, without

doubt, reflets the greatest dishonour on his reputation*.
Though Charles was not extremely scrupulous at other time
about the means which he employed for accomplilhing hit
ends, and was not always observant of the ftri& precepts of
veracity and honour, he had hitherto maintained some re.
gard for the maxims of that less precise and rigid moralty
by which monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their condu& But, on this occasion, the (cheme that he
frmed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted prince;
the illiberal and mean artifices by which he carried it on;
the insensibility with which he received all the marks of hi
friendlhip, as well as the ingratitude with which he requited
them, are all equally unbecoming the dignity of his charac
ter, and inconfent with the grandeur of his views.

This tranifaion exposed Francis to as much scorn as it

did the emperor to censure. After the experience of a long
reign, after so many opportunities of discovering the dupli-
city and artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity with
which he tru~ed him at this junture seemed to merit no o-
ther return than what it actually met with. Francis, how-
ever, remonstrated and exclaimed, as if this had been the filr
instance in which the emperor had deceived hinm. Feeling,
as is usual, the insult which was offered to his understanding
till more sensibly than the injury done to his interest, he dif-
covered such resentment, as made it obvious that he would
lay lold on the first opportunity of being revenged, and that

f Ribier, i. 9. * Bellay, 395-6

Jovii Hit lib. xxxix. p. 238. a,

a war, no less rancorous than that which had so lately raged,
would loon break out anew in Europe.

But singular as the tranfaftion which has been related may
appear, this year is rendered fill more memorable by the e-
ftablihment of the order of Jesuits; a body whose influence
on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs hath been so confider-
able, that an account of the genius of its laws and govern-
ment justly merits a place in history. When men take a view
of the rapid progress of this society towards wealth and
power; when they contemplate the admirable prudence with
which it has been governed; when they attend to the per-
fevering and fyifematic spirit with which its fcheees have'
been carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a singular in-
ftitution to the superior wisdom of its founder, and to fTp-
pose that he had formed and digested his plan with profound
policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the other monafic or-
ders, are indebted for the exiflence of their order not to the
wisdom of their founder, but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio
Loyola, whom I have already mentioned on occasion of the
wound which he received in defending Pampelunat, was
a fanatic diRlinguilhed by extravagancies in sentiment and
conduCt, no less incompatible with the maxims of fober rea-
son, than repugnant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventures, and visionary schemes, in which his enthusiasm
engaged him, equal any thing recorded in the legends of the
Romilh faints; but are unworthy of notice in history.

Prompted by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the love
of power and diftinAion, frotn which such pretenders to fu-
perior fanAity are not exempt, Loyola was ambitious of
becoming the founder of a religious order. The plan,
which he formed of its constitution and laws, was suggested,
as he gave out, and as his followers till teach, by the im-
mediate inspiration of heaven*. But notwithstanding this

tVol. ii. Book ii. 124.
Compte rendu des Conltitutiones des Jfuites au Parlement
de Provence, par M. de Monclar, p. :5j.

his evasions and subterfuges by their insisting for a categori.
cal anfwver, he peremptorily refused to give up a territory of
such value, or voluntarily to make such a liberal addition to
the strength of an enemy, by diminiihing his own power-.
He denied, at the fame time, that he had ever made any pro.
mise which could bind him to an a&ion so foolish, and so
contrary to his own interest*.

Of all the traufaaions in the emperor's life, this, without

doubt, refleAs the greatest dishonour on his reputation*.
Though Charles was not extremely scrupulous at other times
about the means which he employed for accompliihing his
ends, and was not always observant of the firiA precepts of
veracity and honour, he had hitherto maintained some re.
gard for the maxims of that less precise and rigid morality
by which monarchs think themselves entitled to regulate
their condu&. But, on this occalion, the scheme that he
formed of deceiving a generous and open-hearted prince;
the illiberal and mean artifices by-which he carried it on;
the insensibility with which he received all the marks of his
friendlhip, as well as the ingratitude with which he requited
them, are all equally unbecoming the dignity of his charac-
ter, and inconfitent with the grandeur of his views.

This tranfiAion exposed Francis to as much scorn as it

did the emperor to censure. After the experience of a long
reign, after so many opportunities of discovering the dupli-
city and artifices of his rival, the credulous simplicity with
which he trusted him at this juncure seemed to merit no o-
ther return than what it actually met with. Francis, how-
ever, remonstrated and exclaimed, as if this had been the first
instance in which the emperor had deceived hinm. Feeling,
as is usual, the insult which was offered to his understanding
fill more sensibly than the injury done to his interest, he dif.
covered such resentment, as made it obvious that he would
lay hold on the first opportunity of being revenged, and that

Riblcr, i. 19. * Bellay, 395-6.

* Jovii Hist. lib. xxxix. p. 238. a,

a war, no less rancorous than that which had so lately raged,
would soon break out anew in Europe.

But singular as the tranfa&ion which has been related may
appear, this year is rendered still more memorable by the e-
ftablithment of the order of Jesuits; a body whose influence
on ecclesiastical as well as civil affairs hath been so confider-
able, that an account of the genius of its laws and govern-
mentjuftly merits a place in history. When men take a view
of the rapid progress of this society towards wealth and
power; when they contemplate the admirable prudence with
which it has been governed; when they attend to the per-
levering and fyflematic spirit with which its schemes have
been carried on; they are apt to ascribe such a singular in-
ftitution to the superior wisdom of its founder, and to sup-
pose that he had formed and digested his plan with profound
policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the other monastic or-
ders, are indebted for the exifence of their order not to the
wisdom of their founder, but to his enthusiasm. Ignatio
Loyola, whom I have already mentioned on occasion of the
wound which he received in defending Pampelunat, was
a fanatic distinguished by extravagancies in sentiment and
condut, no less incompatible with the maxims of fober rea-
fun, than repugnant to the spirit of true religion. The wild
adventures, and visionary schemes, in which his enthusiasm
engaged him, equal any thing recorded in the legends of the
Romilh faints; but are unworthy of notice in history.

Prompted by this fanatical spirit, or incited by the love

of power and diftincion, from which such pretenders to fu-
perior fancity are not exempt, Loyola was ambitious of
becoming the founder of a religious order. The plan,
which he formed of its constitution and laws, was suggested,
as he gave out, and as his followers still teach, by the im-
mnediate inspiration of heaven*. But notwithstanding this

T Vol. ii. Book ii. p. 124.

Compte rendu des Constitutiones des Jesuites au Parlement
de Provence, par M. de Monclar, p. 285.

high pretension, his design met at first with violent oppofi.
tion. The pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the fanc.
tion of his authority to confirm the intfitution, referred his
petition to a committee of cardinals. They represented
the eftablibhment to be unnecessary as well as dangerous, and
Paul refused to grant his approbation of it. At last, Loy.
ola removed all his scruples by an offer which it was impofli.
ble for any pope to refill. He proposed, that besides the
three vows of poverty, of chastity, and of monaltic obedience,
which are common to all the orders of regulars, the mem.
bers of his society should take a fourth vow of obedience to
the pope, binding themselves to go whithersoever he should
command for the service of religion, and without requiring
any thing from the holy fee for their support. At a time
when the papal authority had received such a {hock by the
revoit of so many nations from the Romifl church; at a time
when every part of the popiih fy--em was attacked with so
mr.ch violence and success, the acquisition of a body of men,
thus peculiarly devoted to the fee of Rome, and whom it
might set in opposition to all its enemies, was an obje& of
the highest consequence. Paul, instantly perceiving this,
confirmed the infitution of the Jesuits by his bull [Sept 27];
granted the most ample privileges to the members of the so-
ciety; and appointed Loyola to be the first general of the
order. The event hath fully justified Paul's difeernment, in
expecting such beneficial consequences to the fee of Rome
from this institution. In less than half a century, the foci.
ety obtained eftabliliments in every country that adhered to
the Roman catholic church; its power and wealth increased
amazingly; the number of its members became great; their
chara&er as well as accompliflments were aill greater; and
the Jesuits were celebrated by the friends, and dreaded bl
the enemies, of the Romish faith, as the molt able and enter
prifing order in the church.

The constitution and laws of the society were perfefte(
by Laynez and Aquaviva, the two generals who fucceedc

Loyola, men far superior to their master in abilities, and in
the science of government. They framed that system of
profound and artful policy which diftinguilhes the order.
The large infusion of fanaticism, mingled with its regula-
tions, should be imputed to Loyola its founder. Many cir-
cumfiances concurred in giving a peculiarity of chara&er to
the order of Jesuits, and in forming the members of it not
only to take a greater part in the affairs of the world than
any other body of monks, but to acquire superior influence
in the conduct of them.

The primary objct of almost all the monastic orders is

:o separate men from the world, and from any concern in
its affairs. In the solitude and silence of the cloiller, the
monk is called to work out his own salvation by extraordi-
nary acts of mortification and piety. He is dead to the
voi-ld, and ought not to mingle in its tranfadtions. He can
be of no benefit to mankind, but by his example and by his
prayers. On the contrary, the Jesuits are taught to confi-
cer themselves as formed for ation. They are chosen fol-
diers, bound to exert themselves continually in the service of
God, and of the pope, his vicar on earth. Whatever tends
to inftrua the ignorant; whatever can be of use to reclaim
or to oppose the enemies of the holy fee, is their proper ob-
jet. That they may have full leisure for this active service,
they are totally exempted from those funtions, the perform-
ance ofwhich is the chief business of other monks. They
appear in no processions; they pradife no rigorous ausleri-
ties; they do not consume one half of their time in the re-
petition of tedious officest. But they are required to at-
tend to all the tranfacions of the world, on account of the
influence which these may have upon religion; they are di-
reced to fRudy the difpolitions of persons in high rank, and
to cultivate their friendShipt; and by the very conititution,

+ Compte rendu par M. de Mlonclar, p. xiii. 290. Sur la De-
rfru&. des Jefiites, par M. d'Alenibert, p. 42.

t Compte par M. de Monclar, p. i z.
Vcl. III. N

as well as genius of the order, a spirit of aion and intrigue
is infused into all its members.

As the object of the society of Jesuits differed from that

of the other monastic orders, the diversity was no less in the
form of its government. The other orders are to be confi.
dered as voluntary associations, in which whatever asse&s the
whole body is regulated by the common suffrage of all its
members. The executive power is vested in the persons
placed at the head of each convent, or of the whole society:
the legislative authority resides in the community. Affairs
of moment, relating to particular convents, are determined
in conventual chapters; such as refpet the whole order are
confidered in general congregations. But Loyola, full of
the ideas of implicit obedience, which he had derived from
his military profession, appointed that the government of his
order ihould be purely monarchical. A general, chosen for
life by deputies from the several provinces, pofleffed power
that was supreme and independent, extending to every per-
son, and to every cafe. He, by his sole authority, nomi-
nated provincials, re&ors, and every other officer employed
in the governr.ent of the society, and could remove them
at pleasure. In him was vested the sovereign adminifiration
of the revenues and funds of the order. Every member be-
longing to it was at his disposal; and by his uncontrollable
mandate, he could impose on them any tafl, or employ
them in what fcrvice soever he pleased. To his commands
they were required not only to yield outward obedience, but
to resign up to him the inclinations of their own wills, and
the sentiments of their own underRfandings. They were to
liften to his in;unCtions, as if they had been uttered by Christ
himself. Under his direction, they were to be mere passive
instruments, like clay in the bands of the potter; or like
dead carcases incapable of refiftancet. Such a singular
form of policy could not fail to impress its characer on all

t Compte rendu ou Parlem. de Bretagne, par M. de Chalotais,
p. 41, &c. Compte par M. de Monclar, 83, 185, 343

the members of the order, and to give a peculiar force to all
its operations. There is not in the annals of mankind any
example of such a perfeft despotism, exercised not over
monks shut up in the cells of a convent, but over men dif.
perfed among all the nations of the earth.

As the constitutions of the order vest in the general such

absolute dominion over all its members, they carefully pro-
vide for his being perfectly informed with refpec' to the
character and abilities of his subjects. Every novice who
offers himself as a candidate for entering into the order, is
obliged to mzniJfef his conscience to the {uperior, or to a'per-
son appointed by him; and in doing this is required to con-
fess not only his fins and defeats, but to discover the inclina-
tions, the pallons, and the bent of his foul. This manifeit-
ation mutl be renewed every fix months*. The society,
not satisfied with penetrating in this manner into the inner-
most recefes of the heart, direAs each member to observe
the words and actions of the novices; they are constituted
spies upon their condut; and are bound to disclose every
thing of importance concerning them to the superior. In,
order that this scrutiny into their characer may be as com-
plete as poflible, a long noviciate must expire, during which
they pass through the several gradations of ranks in the foci-
ety, and they must have attained the full age of thirty-
three years before they can be admitted to take the final
vows, by which they become profejfd memberst. By these
various methods, the superiors, under whose immediate in-
fpEtion the novices are placed, acquire a thorough know-
ledge of their dispositions and talents. In order that the
general, who is the foul that animates and moves the whole
society, may have under his eye every thing necessary to in-
form ordired him, the provincials and heads of the several
houses are obliged to transmit to him regular and frequent

* Compte par M. de Monclar, p. 121, &c.
t Compte par M. de Moncl. 215, 241. Sur. la Deftr. des Je.
par M. d'Alemb. p. 39.

N 2

reports concerning the members under their infpe&ion. In
these they descend into minute details with refpe& to the
charader of each person, his abilities natural or acquired, his
temper, his experience in affairs, and the particular depart-
ment for which he is best fitted*. These reports, when
digefed and arranged, are entered into registers kept on
purpose that the general may, at one comprehensive view,
survey the slate of the society in every corner of the earth;
observe the qualifications and talents of its members; and
thus chute, with perseEt information, the instruments, which
his absolute power can employ in any service for which he
thinks meet to destine themt.

As it was the professed intention of the order of Jesuits

to labour with unwearied zeal in promoting the salvation of
men, this engaged them, of course, in many ative fun&ions.
From their first institution, they confidered the education of
youth as their peculiar province; they aimed at being fpiri-
t al guides and confessors; they preached frequently in order
to inmtrua the people; they set out as miflionaries to convert

' M. de Chalotais has made a calculation of the number of

these reports, which the general of the Jesuits mull annually re-
ceive according to the regulations of the society. Tbefe amount
in all to 6584. If this fum be divided by 37, the number of pro-
vinces in the order, it will appear that 17 7 reports concerning the
atte of each province are transmitted to Rome annually. Compte,
p. 51. Btfides this, there may be extraordinary letters, Qr
such as are sent by the monitors or fpiLs hom the general and
provincials entertain in each house. Conipte par M. de Moncl.
p. 43 . Hift.des Jesuites, Amft. 1761. tom. iv. p. 56. The pro-
vincials and head; of house. not only report concerning the mem-
hers of the society, hut are bound to give the general an account
c the civil affairs in the country wherein they are fettled, as far
as their knowledge of these may be of benefit to religion. This
condition may extcdl to every particular, so that the general is
furnished with full information concerning the tranfacRions of e-
very frince and state in the world. Compte par M. de Moncl.
443. Hill de; Jesuit. ibid. p. 53. When the affairs with re-
spect to which the provincials or redlors write are of importance,
they are direced to use cyphers; and each of them has a particu-
lar cypher from the general. Compte par M. Chalotais, p. 54.

t Compte par M. de Moncl. p. 2ig, 439. Compte par M. de
Chalctais, p. 52, 1 i.

unbelieving nations. The novelty of the institution, as well
as the singularity of its objects, procured the order many
admirers and patrons. The governors of the society had
the address to avail themselves of every circumstance in its fa-
your, and in a short time the number as well as influence of
its members increased wonderfully. Before the expiration
of the sixteenth century, the Jesuits had obtained the chief
dire&ion of the education of youth in every catholic country
in Europe. They had become the confessors of almost all
its monarchs,. a fun&ion-of no, small importance in any
reign, but under a. weak prince superior even to that of mi-
nifter. They were the spiritual. guides of almost every per-
son eminent for rank or power. They possessed the highest:
degree of confidence and-intereltwith the papal courts as the
most zealous and able champions for its authority. The ad-
vantages which an a&ive and enterprising body of men
might derive from all these circumstances are obvious. They
formed the minds of men.in.their youth. They retained an'
ascendant over them .in their advanced years. They posses--
e-, at different periods, the dire&ion of the most confider.
able courts in Europe.. They mingled in all affairs. They
took part in every intrigue and revolution.. The general,.
by means of:the. extensive intelligence .vwhich-he reesived,
could regulate the operations of. the order- with.the most
perse. discernment, and by means of. his absolute power
could carry them on,with.the utmost vigour and effect§.

Together. with. the .poweer of the order,. its wealth .con-

tinued to increase. Various expedients were.devifed for e-
luding the. obligation, of. the vow. of poverty. The order

§ When Lovola, in the year 154o0 peitioned the pope to au.

thorize the institution of the order, he had only ten-dikiptes. But
in the year x608, fixty-eight years after their firif institution, the
number ofJefuits.had increased to. ten thousand five hundred and
eighty-one. In the year I7I10 the order pofiefred twenty-four
posef.d houses; fifty-nine houses of probation; three hundred and
forty refidencies; fix hundred and twelve colleges; two hundred
missions; one hundred and fifty seminaries and boarding-fchools;
and consisted of:9,99g Jesuits. Hist. des Jesuites, tom. i p. zo.

N 3

acquired ample poffefiions in every catholic country; and
by the number as well as magnificence of its public build-
ings, together with the value of its property, moveable or
real, it vied with the most opulent of the monastic fraterni.
tis. Besides the sources of wealth common to all the re.
gular clergy, the Jesuits poflfced one which was peculiar
to themselves. Under pretext of promoting the success of
their missions, and of facilitating the support of their mif-
fionaries, they obtained a special licence from the court of
Rome, to trade with the nations which they laboured to
convert. In consequence of this, they engaged in an exten-
five and lucrative commerce,both in the East and Weft In-
dies. They opened warehouses in different parts of Europe,
ia which they vended their commodities. Not satisfied with
trade alone, they imitated the example of other commercial
societies, and aimed at obtaining settlements. They acquir.
ed poffedfon accordingly of a large and fertile province in
the southern continent of America, and reigned as sovereigns
,ver some hundred thouiind fubjets t.

Unhappily for mankind, the vafl influence which the or.

der of Jesuits acquired by all these different means, has been
often exerted with the mot pernicious cffe. Such was
the tendency of that discipline observed by the society in
forming its members, and such the fundamental maxims in
its constitution, that every Jesuit was taught to regard the
interest of the order a3 the capital objet, to which every
confid-ration was to be sacrificed. This spirit of attach-
meat to their order, the mofl ardent, perhaps, that ever in.
fluenced any body of men $, is the charaaerifeic principle
of the Jesuits, and serves as a key to the genius of their po-
lcy, as well as to the peculiarities in their sentiments and
condue.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the society,
tLat its members ibould possess an ascendant over persons in

t Hit des Jef. iv. x 58-r96, &c.
t Compte par M. de hloncl. p. 285.

high rank or of great power, the desire of acquiring and
preserving such a direfion of their conduc, with greater
facility, has led the Jesuits to propagate a system of relaxed
and pliant morality, which accommodates itself to the pas-
sions of men, which justifies their vices, which tolerates their
imperfecions, which authorizes almost every ation that the
moit audacious or crafty politician would wish to perpe.
trate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately conneced

with the preservation of the papal authority, the Jesuits, in.
fluenced by the fame principle of attachment to the interests
of their society, have been the most zealous patrons of those
doftrines which tend to exalt ecclefiaifical power on the
ruins of civil government. They have attributed to the
court of Rome a jurifdiftion as extensive and absolute as
was claimed by the molt presumptuous pontiffs in the dark
ages. They have contended for the entire independence of
ecclesiastics on the civil magistrate. They have published
such tenets concerning the duty of oppollng princes who
were enemies of the catholic faith, as countenanced the molt
atrocious crimes, and tended to dissolve all the ties which
connea subje&s with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and authority from

the zeal with which it Rood forth in defence of the Romiih
church against the attacks of the reformers, its members,
proud of this dillinc'ion, have confidered it as their peculiar
function to combat the opinions, and to check the progress
of the protestants. They have made use of every art, and
have employed every weapon againit them. They have ft
themselves in opposition to every gentle or tolerating mea-
sure in their favour. They have inceflantly flirred up against
them all the rage of ecclesiastical and civil persecution.

Monks of other denominations have, indeed, ventured to

teach the fame pernicious doctrines, and have held opinions
equally inconsistent with the order'and happiness of civil so-
ciety. But they, from reafous which are obvious, have

either delivered such opinions with greater reserve, or have
propagated them with less success. Whoever recollets the
events which have happened in Europe during two centu.
ries, will find that the Jesuits may justly be confidered as re.
fponfible for most of the pernicious effects ariling from that
corrupt and dangerous casuistry, from those extravagant
tenets concerning ecclesiastical power, and from that intole.
rant spirit, which have been the disgrace of the church of
Rome throughout that period, and which have brought so
many calamities upon civil society *.

But amidst many bad consequences flowing from the in.

ftitution of this order, mankind, it muff be acknowledged,
have derived from it some considerable advantages. As the
Jesuits made the education of youth one of their capital ob.
jces, and as their first attempts to establish colleges for the
reception of fudents were violently opposed by the univerli.
ties in different countries, it became necessary for them, as
the most effectual method of acquiring the public favour, to
surpass their rivals in science and industry. This prompted
them to cultivate the fRudy ofancient literature with extra.
ordinary ardour. This put them upon various methods for
facilitating the inftru&ion of youth; and by the improve.
ments which they made in it, they have contributed so much
towards the progress of polite learning, that on this account
they have merited well of society. Nor has the order of
Jesuits been successful only in teaching the elements of li.
terature; it has produced likewise eminent mafiers in many
branches of science, and can alone boast of a greater number
of ingenious authors than all the other religious fraternities
taken together .

Encyclopedie, art. 7,efu;te, tom. viii. Sri.
LM. d'Alembert has observed, that though the Jesuits have

made extraordinary progress in erudition of every Ipecies; tho'
they can reckon up many of their brethren who have been eminent
mathematicians, antiquaries, and critics; though they have even
formed some orators of reputation; yet the order has never pro-
duced one man, whose mind was so much enlightened with found
knowledge as to merit the name of a philosopher. But it seem

But it is in the new world that the Jesuits have exhibited

the most wonderful display of their abilities, and have con-
tributed molt effeaually to the benefit of the human species.
The conquerors of that unfortunate quarter of the globe
acted at first as if they had nothing in view, but to plunder,
to enslave, and to exterminate its inhabitants. The Jesuits
alone made humanity the objec of their fettling there. A-
bout the beginning of the last century they obtained admif-
i;on into the fertile province of Paraguay, which firetches a-
cross the southern continent of America, from the east fidc
of the immense ridge of the Andes, to the confines of the
Spanish and Portuguese settlements on the banks of the river
de la Plata. They found the inhabitants in a state little dif-
ferent from that which takes place among men when they
firfl began to unite together; firangers to the arts; subsisting
precariously by hunting or fishing; and hardly acquainted
with the first principles of subordination and government.
The Jesuits set themselves to inftruc and to civilize these
savages. They taught them to cultivate the ground, to
rear tame animals, and to build houses. They brought them
to live together in villages. They trained them to arts and
manufactures. They made them taste the sweets of society;
and accustomed them to the blessings of security and order.
These people became the subje&s of their benefactors; who
have governed them with a tender attention, resembling that

to Ie the unavoidable effe& of monatfic education to contrac and
fetter the human mind. The partial attachment of a monk to the
iltereft of his order, which is often incompatible with that of
other citizens; the habit of implicit obedience to the will of a fu-
psrior, together with the frequent return of the wearisome and
frivolous duties of the cloifier, debase his faculties, and extinguish
that generosity of sentiment and spirit, which qualifies men for
thinking or feelingjufily with refpee to what is proper in life and
conduct. Father Paul of Venice Is, perhaps, the only person edu-
cated in a cloister, that ever was altogether superior to its prejudi-
ces, or who viewed the tranfacdions of men, and reasoned concern-
ing the interests of society, with the enlarged sentiments of a phi-
looplier, with the discernment of a man conversant in affairs, and
r.':1 the liberality of a gentleman.

with which a father direcs his children. Refpe&ed and be-
loved almost to adoration, a few Jesuits presided over some
hundred thousand Indians. They maintained a perfect e-
quality among all the members of the community. Each
of them was obliged to labour, not for himself alone, but
for the public. The produce of their fields, together with
the fruits of their indufry- of every species, were deposited in
common flore-boufes, from which each individual received
every thing necessary for the supply of his wants. By this
intfitution, almost all the passions which disturb the peace of
society, and render the members of it unhappy, were extin.
guifhed. A few magiitrates, chosen from among their coun.
trymen by the Indians themselves, watched over the public
tranquillity, and secured obedience to the laws. The fan.
guinary punishments frequent under other governments were
unknown. An admonition from a Jesuit, a flight mark of
infamy, or, on some singular occasion, a few lathes with a
whip, were sufficient to maintain good order among these
innocent and happy people*.

But even in this meritorious effort of the ]efuits for the

good of mankind, the genius and spirit of their order have
mingled and are discernible. They plainly aimed at efta-
blilhing in Paraguay an independent empire, fubje& to the
society alone, and which, by the superior excellence of its
couftitution and police, could scarcely have failed to extend
its dominion over all the southern continent of America.
With this view, in order to prevent the Spaniards or Portu-
guefe in the adjacent settlements from acquiring any dan-
gerous influence over the people within the limits of the pro-
vince fubje& to the society, the Jesuits endeavoured to in.
spire the Indians with hatred and contempt of these nations.
They cut off all intercourse between their fubjefls and the
Spanih or Portuguese settlements. They prohibited any

* llit. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlevoix, tom. ii. 4i, &C.

Voyage au Perou par Don G. Juan & D. Ant. de Ulloa, tom. i.
540, &c. Par. 4to. z7,z.

private trader of cither nation from entering their territories.
When they were obliged to admit any person in a public
charater from the neighbouring governments, they did not
permit him to have any conversation with their fubje&fs, and
no Indian was allowed even to enter the house where these
strangers resided, unless in the presence of a Jesuit. In or-
der to render any communication between them as difficult
as poflible, they industriously avoided giving the Indians any
knowledge of the Spanifl, or of any other European lan-
guage; but encouraged the different fribcs, which they had
civilized, to acquire a certain diale& of the Indian tongue,
and laboured to make that the universal language through-
out their dominions. As all these precautions, without mi-
litary force, would have been insufficient to have rendered
their empire secure and permanent, they infiru&ted their sub-
jeds in the European arts of war. They formed them into
bodies of cavalry and infantry, completely armed and regu-
larly disciplined. They provided a great train of artillery,
as well as magazines flored with all the implements of war.
Thus they eftablilhed an army so numerous and well-appoint-
ed, as to be formidable in a country, where a few sickly and
ill disciplined battalions composed all the military force kept
on foot by the Spaniards or Portuguefel.

The JeSesits gained no considerable degree of power dur-
ing the reign of Charles V. who, with his usual sagacity,
discerned the dangerous tendency of the institution, and
checled its progress*. But as the order was founded in
the period of which I write the history, and as the age to
which I address this work hath seen its fall, the view which
I have exhibited of the laws and genius of this formidable
body will not, I hope, be unacceptable to my readers; efpe-
cially as one circumstance has enabled me to enter into this

t Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Recueil des toutes
Its Pieces qui ont paru fur les Affaires des Jesuites en Portugal,
tom. i. p. 7, &c.
* Cornmte par Mp. de Moncl. p. 31z.

detail with particular advantage. Europe had observed, for
two centuries, the ambition and power of the order. But
while it felt many fatal effets of these, it could not fully dif.
cern the causes to which they were to be imputed. It was
unacquainted with many of the singular regulations in the
political confitution or government of the Jesuits, which
formed the enterprising spirit of intrigue that diftinguithed
its members, and elevated the body itfelfto such a height of
power. It was a fundamental maxim with the Jesuits, from
their first infiitution, not to publill the rules of their order.
There they kept concealed as an impenetrable mystery.
They never communicated them to strangers; nor even to
the greater part of their own members. They refused to
produce them when required by courts of juRicet; and by
a strange solecism in policy, the civil power in different coun-
tries authorised or connived at the eftabliflbment of an order
of men, whose constitution and laws were concealed with a
solicitude which alone was a good reason for excluding them.
During the prosecutions lately carried on against them in
Portugal and France, the Jesuits have been so inconsiderate
as to produce the mysterious volumes of their institute. By
the aid of these authentic records, the principles of their go-
vernment may be delineated, and the sources of their power
inveitigated with a degree of certainty and precision, which,
previous to that event, it was impoflible to attaint. But
as I have pointed out the dangerous tendency of the confti-

t HilL des Jef. tom. iii. 236, &c. Compte par M. de Chalot,
p. 3S.

t The greater part of my information concerning the govern-

ment and laws of the order of Jeluits, I have derived from the re-
ports of M. de Chalotais and M. de Monclar. I reft not my nar
rative, however, upon the authority even of there refpedlable ma
gifirates and elegant writers, but upon innumerable pafiages which
they have extracted from the confiitutions of the order deposited
in their hands. Hofpinian, a protestant divine of Zurich, in his
H.Arr ia Jefaida, printed A. D. 1619, publilhed a fmallpart of thi
contitutions of the Jesuits, of which by some accident be had got
a cpy, p. I3--4.

tution and spirit of the order with the freedom becoming
an hiflorian, the candour and impartiality no less requisite
in that chara&er call on me to add one observation, that no
class of regular clergy in the- Romish church has been more
eminent for decency, and even purity of manners, than the
major part of the order of Jesuitss. The maxims of an in.
triguing, ambitious, interested policy, might influence those
who governed the society, and might even corrupt the heart,
and pervert the condut of some individuals, while the greater
number, engaged in literary pursuits, or employed in the
fun&ions of religion, was left to the guidance of those com-
mon principles which refirain men from vice, and excite them
to what is becoming and laudable. The causes which occa
sioned the ruin of this mighty body, as well as the circum-
stances and ffects with which it has been attended in the
different countries of Europe, though obje&s extremely
worthy the attention of every intelligent obfervcr of human
affairs, do not fall within the period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-eftabliflied order in the Low-

Countries, than he was obliged to turn his attention to the
affairs in Germany. The proteflants pressed him earnefily
to appoint that conference between a fele& number of the
divines of each party, which had been Ripulated in the con-
vention at Francfort. The pope confidered such an at-
tempt to examine into the points in dispute, or to decide
concerning them, as derogatory to his right of being the
supreme judge in controversy; and being convinced that
such a conference would either be ineffecual by determining
nothing, or prove dangerous by determining too much, he
employed every art to prevent it. The emperor, however,
finding it more for his interest to soothe the Germans than
to gratify Paul, paid little regard to his remonstrances. In
a diet held at Haguenaw [June 25], matters were ripened for
the conference. In another diet assembled at Worms
[Dec. 6], the conference was begun, Melan&hon on the

t Sur la Deflrud. des Jef. Par M. d'Alembcrt, p. .s.
'ol. III. 0

one fide and Eckius on the other sustaining the principal
part in the dispute; but after they had made ofme progress,
though without concluding any thing, it was suspended by
the emperor's command, that it might be renewed with
greater solemnity in his own presence in a diet fumnmonedto
meet at Ratilbon. [1541] This assembly was opened with
great pomp, and with a general expectation that its proceed.
ings would be vigorous and decisive. By the content of both
parties, the emperor was entrusted with the power of no.
minating the persons who ihould manage the conference,
which it was agreed hould be conduaed not in the form of
a public disputation, but as a friendly scrutiny or examina.
tion into the articles which had given rife to the present
controversies. He appointed Eckius, Gropper, and Pflug,
on the part of the catholics; Melan&hon, Bucer, and Pif.
torious, on that of the protetants; all men of distinguished
reputation among their own adherents, and, except Eckius,
all eminent for moderation, as well as desirous of peace.
As they were about to begin their consultations, the em-
peror put into their hands a book, composed, as he said, by
a learned divine in the Low-Countries, with such extraordi.
nary perspicuity and temper, as, in his opinion, might go
far to unite and comprehend the two contending parties.
Gropper a canon of Cologne, whom he had named among the
managers of the conference, a man of address as well as of
erudition, was afterwards fufpeced to be the author of this
short treatise. It contained positions with regard to twen.
ty-two of the chief articles in theology, which included
most of the questions then agitated in the controversy be-
tween the Lutherans and the church of Rome. By rang-
ing his sentiments in a natural order, and expressing them
with great simplicity; by employing often the very words of
scripture, or of the primitive fathers; by softening the ri-
gour of fame opinions, and explaining away what was ab-
-fud in others; by concessions, some times on one fide, and
sometimes on the other; and tfpecially.by banilhing as

much as possible scholastic phrases, those words and termn
of arts in controversy, which serve as badges of diftinfion
to different sets, and for which theologians often contend
more fiercely than for opinions themselves; he at last framed
his work. in such a manner, as promised fairer than any thing
that had hitherto been attempted to compose and to termi-
nate religious dissensions*.

But the attention of the age was turned, with such acute

observation, towards theological controversies, that it was
not easy to impose on it by any gloss, how artful or specious
soever. The length and eagerness of the dispute had fepa-
rated the contending parties so completely, and had set their
minds at such variance, that they were not to be reconciled
by partial concessions. All the zealous catholics, particii-
larly the ecclesiastics who had a feat in the diet, joined in
condemning Gropper's treatise as too favourable to the Lu-
theran opinion, the poison of which heresy it conveyed, as
they pretended, with greater danger, because it was in some
degree disguised. The rigid protestants, especially Luther
himself, and his patron the ele&or of Saxony, were for re-
je&ing it as an impious compound of error and truth, craf-
tily prepared that it might impose on the weak, the timid,
and the unthinking. But the divines, to whom the exami-
nation of it was committed, entered upon that business with
greater deliberation and temper. As it was more easy in
itself, as well as more consistent with the dignity of the
church, to make conceflions, and even alterations with re-
gard to speculative opinions, the difcuflion whereof is con-
fined chiefly to schools, and which present nothing to the
people that either strikes their imagination or affeas their
senses, they came to an accommodation about these without
much labour, and even defined the great article concerning
justification to their mutual fatisfa&ion. But, when they
proceeded to points ofjurifdi&ion, where the interest and
authority of the Roman fee were concerned, or to the rites

Goldaft. Conflat. Imper. ii. p. 1ia.

0

and forms of external worship, where every change that
could be made muil be public, and draw the observation of
the people, there the catholics were altogether untraftablt;
nor could the church either with safety or with honour a.
aboli h its ancient inflitutions. All the articles relative to
the power of the pope, the authority of councils, the admi-
niftration of the sacraments, the worship of faints, and ma.
ny other particulars, did not, in their nature, admit of any
temperament; so that after labouring long to bring about an
accommodation with refpe& to these, the emperor found all
his endearours ineffcetual. Being impatient, however, to
close the diet, he at last prevailed on a majority of the mem.
bers to approve of the following recess [July 28]: " That
the articles concerning which the divines had agreed in the
conference, should be held as points decided, and be obfers.
ed inviolably by all; that the other articles, about which
they had differed, should be referred to the determination of
a general council, or if that could not be obtained, to a na-
tional fynod of Germany; and if it should prove imnpracica-
ble, likewise, to afrlmble a fynod, that a general diet of the
empire should be called within eighteen months, in order to
give some final judgment upon the whole controversy; that
the emperor should use all his interest and authority with
the pope, to procure the meeting either of a general council
or fynod; that, in the mean time, no innovations lhould be
attempted, no endeavours should be employed to gain pro-
fclytes; and neither the revenues of the church, nor the
rights of monatleries, should be invaded'."

All the proceedings of this diet, as well as the recess in

which they terminated, gave great offence to the pope. The
power which the Germans had assumed of appointing their
own divines to examine and determine matters of contro-
verfy, he confidered as a very dangerous invafios of his
rights; the renewing of their ancient proposal concerning a

'Sleidan. a67, &c. Pallav. . iv. c. 1I. p. 136. F. Paulsp-
86. ceckend. L iii. aj6.

national fynod, which had been so often reje&ed by him
and his predecessors, appeared extremely undutiful; but the
bare mention of allowing a diet, composed chiefly of laymen
to pass judgment with refpet to articles of faith, was deem-
ed no less criminal and profane than the worst of those here-
fies which they seemed zealous to suppress; On the other
hand, the protestants were no less diflatisfied with a recess,
that considerably abridged the liberty which they enjoyed
at that time. As they murmured loudly against it, Charles,
unwilling to leave any feeds of discontent in the empire,
granted them a private declaration in the most ample terms,
exempting them from whatever they thought oppressive or
injurious in the recess, and ascertaining to them the full-
possession of all the privileges which they had ever enjoy-
ed t.

Extraordinary as these concessions may appear, the fitua-

tion of the emperor's affairs at this juncture made it necef-
fary for him to grant them. He foresaw a rupture with
France to be not only unavoidable, but near at hand, and
durR not give any such cause of disgust or fear to the pro-
teltants, as might force them, in felf-defence, to court the
protection of the French king, from whom, at present, they
were much alienated. The rapid progress of the Turks in
Hungary was a more powerful and urgent motive to that mo-
deration which Charles discovered. A great revolution had
happened in that kingdom; John Zapol Scaepus having
chosen, as has been related, rather to posess a tributary
kingdom, than to renounce the royal dignity to which he
had been accustomed, had by the afiftancc of his mighty
protector Solyman, wrested from Ferdinand a great part of
the country, and left him only the precarious pofeffion of
the reft. But being a prince of pacific qualities, the fre-
quent attempts of Ferdinand, or of his partisans among the
Hungarians, to recover what they had loft, greatly difouiet-

t Sleid. %83. Seckend 366. Du Mont Corps Diplomn. iv. p. .l
p. ao. -

o s

ed him; and the necessity on these occasions, of calling in
the Turks, whom he confidered and felt to be his mailers
rather than auxiliaries, was hardly less mortifying. In or-
der, therefore, to avoid these difireifs, as well as to secure
quiet and leisure for cultivating the arts and enjoying a,
mufements in which he delighted, he secretly came to an
agreement with his competitor [A. D. 1535], on this
condition; That Ferdinand lhould acknowledge him as'king
of Hungary, and leave him during life, the unmolested pof.
ieffion of that part of the kingdom now in his power; but
that, upon his demise, the sole right of the whole should de-
volve upon Ferdinand*. As John had never been married,
and was then far advanced in life, the terms of the contract
seemed Terv favourable to Ferdinand. But, soon after, some
of the Hungarian nobles, solicitous to prevent a foreigner
from ascending their throne, prevailed on John to put an
end to a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the daughter
of Sigifmond king of Poland. John had the fatisfa&ion,
before his death, which happened within less than a year
after his marriage, to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom.
To him, without regarding his treaty with Ferdinand, which
he confidered, no doubt, as void, upon an event not foreseen
when it was concluded, he bequeathed his crown; appoint-
ing the queen and George Martinuezi, bishop of Waradin,
guardians of his son, and regents of the kingdom. The
greater part of the Hungarians immediately acknowledged
the young prince as king, to whom, in memory of the foun-
der of their monarchy, they gave the name of Stephent.

Ferdinand, though extremely disconcerted by this unex-

pected event, resolved not to abandon. the kingdom which
he flattered himself with having acquired by his compa&
with John. He sent ambalfadors to the queen to claim
possession, and to offer the province of Transylvania as a set-
tiement for her son, preparing at the fame time to assert his

* luanhafii Hill. Hung. lib. xii. p. 135.
tJovii s La lib. xxix. p.. 39 a. &c,

right by force of arms. But John had committed the care
of his son to persons, who had too much spirit to give up
the crown tamely, and who possesed abilities sufficient to
defend it. The queen, to all the address peculiar to her
own sex, added a masculine courage, ambition, and magna-
nimity. Martinuzzi, who had raised himself from the low-
eft rank in life to his present dignity, was one of those extra-
ordinary men, who, by the extent as well as variety of their
talents, are fitted to a& a superior part in butling and sac-
tious times. In discharging the funaions of his ecclefiafti-
cal office, he put on the semblance of an humble and auitere
sanctity. In civil tranfaitions, be discovered industry, dex-
terity, and boldness. During war, he laid aside the caflock,
and appeared on horseback with his fcymitar and buckler,
as acive, as ostentatious, and as gallant as any of his coun-
trymen. Amidst all these different and contradi&ory forms
which he could assume, an insatiable desire of dominion and
authority was conspicuous. From such persons it was obvi-
ous what answer Ferdinand had to expet. He soon per-
ceived that he muff depend on arms alone for recovering
Hungary. Having levied for this purpose a considerable
body of Germans, whom his partisans among the Hungari-
ansjoined with their vassals, he ordered them to march into
that part of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. Mar-
tinuzzi, unable to make head against such a powerful army
in the field, satisfied himself with holding out the towns, all
of wvhich, especially Buda, the place of greatet consequence,
he provided with every thing necessary for defence; and in
the mean time he sent ambassadors to Solyman, befeechihig
him to extend towards the son the fame imperial protecion
which had so long maintained the father on his throne. The
fultan,/though Ferdinand used his utmost endeavours to
thwart this negotiation, and even offered to accept of the
Hungarian crown on the fame ignominious condition, of
paying tribute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had
held it, saw such profpeas of advantage from espousing the

ed him; and the necessity on these occaions, of calling is
the Turks, whom he confidered and fdt to be his mal

ther than auxiliaries, was hardly kss mortifying. In or.

der, threfore, to avoid theft difrefiss, as well as to fecurt
quiet and leifum for cultivating the arts and enjoying a.
mulements in which he delighted, he secretly came to an
agreement with his competitor [A: D. zS ], on this
condtionb That Ferdinand should acknowledge him as king
of Hungary, and leave him during life, the unmolested pof.
iefco~ of that part of the kingdom now in his powver; but
that, upon his demise, the sole right of the whole mhould de-
volve upon Ferdinand . As John had never been married,
and was then far advanced in life, the terms of the contra&
femed *ery favourable to Ferdinand. But, soon after, some
of the Hungarian nobles, folictous to prevent a foreigner
from ascending their throne, prevailed on John to put an
end to. a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the daughter
of Sgifmnond king of Poland. John had the fatisfaftion,
before his death, which happened within less than a year
after his marriage, to fee a son born to inherit his kingdom.
To him, without regarding his treaty with Ferdinand, which
he confidered, no doubt, as void, upon an event not foreseen
when it was concluded, he bequeathed his crown; appoint.
ing the queen and George Martinuzzi, bihop of Waradin,
guardians of his son, and' egents of the kingdom. The
greater part of the Hungarians immediately acknowledged
the young prince as king, to whom, in.memory of the foun-
&r of their monarchy, they gave the name of Stephent.

Ferdinand, though extremely disconcerted by this unex

pected event, resolved not to abandon the kingdom which
he flattered himsef with having acquired by his compaa
with Joha. He sent ambaifadors to the queen to claim
possession, and to offer the proxince of Transylvania a a set.
tlemeat for her son, preparing at the fame time to assert his

l*Iuanhaffii Hifi. Hung. hib. xii. p. 135.
tjovs Liut lib. sxiux. p.- 39, a. &c.

right by force of arms. But John had committed the cart
of his Con to persons, who had too- much spirit to give up
the crown tamely, and who possessed abilities sufficient to
defend it. The queen, to all the address peculiar to her
own sex, added a masculine courage, ambition, and magna.
nimity. Martinuzzi, who had raised himself from the low-
eft rank in life to his present dignity, was one of those extra-
ordinary men, who, by the extent as well as variety of their
talents, are fitted to a& a superior part in buffling and sac-
tious times. In discharging the funtions of his ecclefiafti-
cal office, he put on the semblance of an humble and austere
fandity. In civil tranfaCions, he discovered industry, dex-
terity, and boldness. During war, he laid aside the caftock,
and appeared on horseback with his fcymitar and buckler,
as ative, as ostentatious, and as gallant as any of his coun-
trymen. Amidi all there different and contradicory forms
which he could assume, an insatiable desire of dominion and
authority was conspicuous. From such persons it was obvi-
ous what answer Ferdinand had to expect. He soon per-
ceived that he must depend on arms alone for recovering
Hungary. Having levied for this purpose a considerable
body of Germans, whom his partisans among the Hungari-
ans joined with their vafials, he ordered them to march into
that part of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. Mar-
tinuzzi, unable to make head againfi such a powerful army
in the field, satisfied himself with holding out the towns, all
of which, especially Buda, the place of greatest consequence,
he provided with every thing neceflary for defence; and in
the mean time he sent ambalfadors to Solyman, beseeching
him to extend towards the son the fame imperial protection
which had so long maintained the father on his throne. The
fultan,-though Ferdinand used his utmost. endeavours to
thwart this negotiation, and even offered to accept of the
Hungarian crown on the fame ignominious condition, of
paying tribute to the Ottoman Porte, by which John had
held it, saw such profpeas of advantage from espousing the

intere of the young king, that he inftat promised him
his protefion; and commanding one army to advance forth.
with towards Hungary, he himself followed with another.
Meanwhile the Germans, hoping to terminate the war by
the reducion of a city in which the king and his mother
-were ihut up, had formed the siege of Buda. Martinuzzi,
having drawn thither the strength of the Hungarian nobility,
defended the town with such courage and /kill, as allowe
the Turkish forces time to come up to its relief. They in.
-tantly attacked the Germans, weakened by fatigue, difeafs,
and desertion, and defeated them with great niaughtert.
- Solyman soon after joined his vitorious troops, and be.
ing weary of so many expensive expeditions undertaken in
defence of dominions which were not his own, or being us.
able to resist this alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom,
while poffefled by an infant, under the guardianship of a wo-.
man and a priest, he allowed interested considerations to tri.
umph with too much facility over the principles of honour
-and the sentiments of humanity. What he planned ungene.
roufly, he executed by fraud. Having prevailed on the
queen to fend her son, whom he pretended to be desirous of
secing, into his camp, and having, at the fame time, invited
the chief of the nobility to an entertainment there, while
they, fufpe&ing no treachery, gave themselves up to tht
mirth and jollity of the feast, a felea band of troops by the
sultan's orders seized one of the gates of Buda. Being thus
master of the capital, of the king's person, and of the lead-
ing men among the nobles, he gave-orders to condut the
queen, together with her son, to Transylvania, which pro.
vince he allotted to them, and appointing a bafha to preside
in Buda with a large body of soldiers, annexed Hungary to
the Ottoman empirel. The tears and complaints of the un-
happy queen had no influence to change his purpose, nor

t If~aaffi HifL Hung. ib. xiv. p. 15o.
I Iftuanhaffii Hist. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 6. Jovii Hifor. fib
xxxi. p. 1476, &c.

could Martinuzzi either refit his absolute and uncontrollable
command, or prevail on-him to recal it.

Before the account of this violent usurpation reached, Ser.

dinand, he was so unlucky as to have dispatched other am-
baffadors to Solyman with a frehl representation of his right
to the crown of Hungary, as.well as a renewal of his for-
mer overture to hold the kingdom of the Ottoman Porte,
and to pay for it an annual tribute. This ill-timed propo-
fal was reje&ed with scorn. - The sultan, elated with success,
and thinking that he might ptefcribe what terms he pleased
to a prince who voluntarily proffered conditions so unbecom-
ing his own dignity, declared that he would not suspend the
operations of war, unless Ferdinand instantly evacuated all
the towns which he fill held in Hungary, and contented to
the imposition of a tribute upon Austria, in order to reim-
burse the fums which his presumptuous invasion of Hungary'
had obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in defence of that
kingdomll.

In this fate were the affairs of Hungary. As the unfor-

tunate events there had either happened before the diffolu-
tion of the diet at Ratitbon, or were dreaded at that time,
Charles saw the danger of irritating and inflaming the minds
of the Germans, while a formidable enemy was ready to.
break into the empire; and perceived that he could not ex-
pea any vigorous affifance either towards th. recovery of
Hungary, or the defence of the Aufrian frontier, uolefs he
courted and satisfied the protestants. By the concessions
which have been mentioned, he gained this point, and such
liberal supplies both of men and money were voted for car-
rying on the war againt the Turks, as left him under little
anxiety about the security of Germany during next cam-
paign*.

Immediately upon the conclusion of the diet, the empe-

ror set out for Italy. As he passed through Lucca, he had
a Ihort interview with the pope; but nothing could be con-
U Iftuanhafi Hist. Hung. lib. xiv. p. 1s58. Sleid. a3.

eluded concerning the proper method of composing the re.
ligious disputes in Germany, between two princes, whole
views and interets with regard to that matter were at this
junture so opposite. The pope's endeavours to remove the
cadfes of discord between Charles and Francis, and to ex.
tinguifh those mutual animofities which threatened to break
out suddenly into open hostility, were not more successful.

The emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely, at that

time, on the great enterprise which he had concerted againt
Algiers, that he listened with little attention to the pope's
schemes or overtures, and hastened to join his army and fleet§.

Algiers fill continued in that fate of dependence on the

TurkAi empire to which Barbarolfa had fubj&eAd it. Ever
foce he, as captain baba, commanded the Ottoman fleet, Al.
giers had been governed by Hafcen-Aga, a renegado eunuch,
who, by palsing through every tation in the corsair's service,
had acquired such experience in war, that he was well fitted
for a station which required a man of tried and daring cou.
rage. Hafcen, in order to shew how well he deserved that
dignity, carried on his piratical depredations againff the
Christian states with amazing activity, and outdid, if poffli
ble, Barbarossa himself in boldness and cruelty. The com-
merce of the Mediterranean was greatly interrupted by hia
cruisers, and such frequent alarms given to the coaf of Spain,
that there was a necessity of ercaing wateb-towers at pro-
per difances, and of keeping guards constantly on foot, in
order to descry the approach of his squadrons, and to pro-
tec the inhabitants from their defcentst. Of this the em.
peror had received repeated and clamorous complaints from
his fubjcs, who represented it as an enterprise correspond.
ing to his power, and becoming his humanity, to reduce
Algiers, which, since the conquest of Tunis, was the corn
mon receptacle of all the free-booters; and to exterminate
that lawless race, the implacable enemies of the Chrifiiat
same. Moved partly by their entreaties, and partly allured

§ Sandov. Hist. tor. i. 298. t Jovii Hist. 1. Xl p. p66.

by the hope of adding to the glory which he had acquired
by his last expedition into Africa, Charles, before he left
Madrid in his-way to the Low-Countries, had issued orders
both in Spain and Italy, to prepare a fleet and army for
this purpose. No change in circumRtances, since that time,
could divert him from this resolution, or prevail on him to
turn his arms towards Hungary; though the success of the
Turks in that country seemed more immediately to require
his pretence there; though many of his most faithful adhe.
rents in Germany urged that the defence of the empire
ought to be his first and peculiar care; though such as bore
him no good-will ridiculed his preposterous condut in flying
from an enemy almost at hand, that he might go in quest
of a remote and more ignoble foe. But to attack the ful.
tan in Hungary, how splendid soever that measure might
appear, was an undertaking which exceeded his power, and
was not confiitent with his interest. To draw troops out of
Spain or Italy, to march them into a country so distant as
Hungary, to provide the vast apparatus necessary for tranf-
porting thither the artillery, ammunition, and baggage of
a regular army, and to push the war in that quarter, where
there was little profpe of bringing it to an issue during fe-
veral campaigns, were undertakings so expensive and un-
vieldy as did not correspond with the low condition of the
emperor's treasury. While his principal force was thus em-
ployed, his dominions in Italy and the Low-Countries mua
have lain open to the French king, who would not have al-
lowed such a favourable opportunity of attacking them to
go unimproved. Whereas the African expedition, the pre.
parations for which were already finished, and almost the
whole expence of it defrayed, would depend upon a single
effort; and besides the security and fatisfa&ion which the
flccefs of it must give his fubjets, would detain him dur-
ing so Ihort a space, that Francis could hardly take advan-
tage of his absence, to invade his dominions in Europe.

On all there accounts, Charles adhered to his first plan,

and with such determined obinacy, that he paid no regard
to the pope, who advised, or to Andrew Doria, who con.
jued him not to expfe his whole armament to asnoft un.
avoidable defu&ion, by venturing to approach the danger-
ous coast of lgiers at such an advanced-feafon of the year,
and when the autumnal winds were so violent. Havingcm.
barked on board Doria's gallies at Porto Venere in the Ge.
noee territories, he soon found that this expenriced faildr
had not judged wrong concerning the element with which
he was so well acquainted; for such a form arose, that it
ws wih the utmost diiculty and danger be reached Sardi.
nia, the place of general rendezvous. But as his courage
was undaunted, and his temper often inflexible, neither the
renewed remoufrances of the pope and Doria, nor the dai-
ger to which he had already been exposed by dif rding
their advice, had any other effec than to confirm him in his
fatal rfoltion. 'The force, indeed, which he had colIt.
ed, was such as might have inspired a prince less adventur.
ous, and lecf confident in his own schemes, with the most
sanguine hopes of fuccef. It conffted of twenty thousand
foot, and two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, and Ger-
mans, mofly veterans, together with three thousand volun-
teers, the flower of the Spanih and Italian nobility, fond of
paying court to the emperor byattending him in his favou.
rite expedition, and eager to lhare in the glory which they
believed he was going to reap; to-thefe were added a thou-
sand soldiers lent from Malta by the ordetf St. John, led
by an hundred-of its most gallantknights.

The voyage, from Majorca to the African coast, was not

les, tedious, or full of hazard, than that which he had just
fiifhed. When he approached the land, the roll of thefea,
and vehemence of the winds, would not permit the troops to
disembark. But at last, the emperor, seizing a favourabie
opportunity, landed them without opposition, not far-'fom
Algiers, and immediately advanced towards the town. To
oppose this mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred

Turks, and five thousand Moors, partly natives of Africa,
and partly refugees from Granada. He returned, however,
a fierce and haughty answer, when summoned to surrender.
But with such a handful of soldiers, neither his desperate
courage, nor consummate skill in war, could have long refilt-
ed forces superior to those which had defeated Barbarossa
at the head of sixty thousand men, and which had reduced
Tunis, in spite of all his endeavours to save it.

But how far soever the emperor might think himself be-
vond the reach of any danger from the enemy, he was fud-
dclr exposed to a more dreadful calamity, and one against
which human prudence and human efforts availed nothing.
On the second day after his landing, and before he had time
for any thing but to disperse some light armed Arabs who
nmJi:ted his troops on their march, the clouds began to ga-
ther, and the heavens to appear with a fierce and threaten.
iln afpeet. Towards evening, rain began to fall, accompa-
nied with violent wind; and the rage of the tempest increaf-
ing, during.the night, the soldiers, who had brought no-
thing aihore but their arms, remained exposed to all its fury,
without tents, or fl(elter, or cover of any lind. The ground
was soon so wet that they could not lie down on it; their
camp being in a low situation, was overflowed with vater,
and they funk at every Rep to the ankles in mud; while the
wind blew with such impetuosity, that, to prevent their fal-
ling, they were obliged to thrust their spears into the
ground, and to -fpport themselves by taking hold of them.
Hafcen was too vigilant an officer to allow.an enemy in such
difrefs to remain unmolested. About the dawn of morning,
he sallicd out' with soldiers, who having been screened from
the storm under their own roofs, were fresh and vigorous.
A body of Italians, who were Rationed nearest the city, di-
Spirited and benumbed with cold, fled at the approach of the
Turks. The troops at the post behind them discovered
greater courage; but as the rain had extinguished their
matches, and wetted their powder, their muikets were use-
Vol. III. P

less, and having scarcely flrength to handle their other
arms, they were soon thrown into confusion. Almof the
whole army, with the emperor himfelfin person, was obliged
to advance, before the enemy could be repulscd, who, after
spreading such general consternation, and killing a confider.
able number of men, retired at las in good order.

But all feeling or remembrance of this loss and danger were

quickly obliterated by a more dreadful as well as asseting
fpeftade. It was now broad day; the hurricane had abated
nothing of its violence, and the sea appeared agitated with all
the rage of which that deftru&ive element is capable; all the
ships, on which alone the whole army knew that their safety
and fubfifence depended, were seen driven from their anchen,
£ome dashing against each other, rome beat to pieces on the
rocks, many forced alhore, and not a few finking in the
waves. In less than an hour, fifteen Ihips of war, and an
hundred and forty transports with eight thousand men, pe-
rihfed; and such of the unhappy crews as escaped the fury of
the sea, were murdered without mercy by the Arabs, as
soon as they reached land. The emperor flood in silent
anguilh and aftonilhment beholding this fatal event, which
at once blasted all his hopes of success, and buried in the
depths the vast stores which he had provided, as well for an.
noying the enemy, as for subsisting his own troops. He
had it not in his power to afford them any other afiftance or
relief than by fending Come troops to drive away the Ara4
and thus delivering a few who were so fortunate as to get a
Bhore from the cruel fate which their companions had met
with. At las the wind began to fall, and to give some
hopes that as many Ihips might escape as would be sufficient
to save the army from perishing by famine, and transport
them back to Europe. But there were only hopes; the
approach of evening covered the sea with darkness; and it
being impoflible for the officers aboard the Ihips which had
outlived the dorm, to fend any intelligence to their compa-
nions who wereafhore, they remained during the night in

all the anguish of fufpence and uncertainty. Next day, a
boat dispatched by Doria made shift to reach land, with in-
formation, that having weathered out the form, to whicih,
during fifty years knowledge of the sea, he had never seen
any equal in fierceness and horror, he had found it necessary
to bear away with his ihattered ships to Cape Metafuz. He
advised the emperor, as the face of the iky was fill lowering
and tempestuous, to march with all speed to that place,
where the troops could re-embark with greater cafe.

Whatever comfort this intelligence afforded Charles, from

being assured that part of his fleet had escaped, was balanced
by the new cares and perplexity in which it involved him
with regard to his army. Metafuz was at leaf three days
march from his present camp; all the proviflons which he
had brought ashore at his first landing were now confuied;
his soldiers, worn out with farigue, were hardly able for
such a march, even in a friendly country, and being difpi-
rited by a fucceflion of hardlrips, which victory itself would
scarcely have rendered tolerable, they were in no condition
to undergo new toils. But the situation of the army was
such as allowed not£ one moment for deliberation, nor left it
in the least doubtful what to chufe. They were ordered
instantly to march, the wounded, the sick, and the feeble
being placed in the centre; such as seemed most vigorous
were Rtationed in the front and rear. Then the fad effets
of what they had suffered began to appear more manifestly
than ever, and new calamities were added to all those which
they had already endured. Some could hardly bear the
weight of their arms; others, spent with the toil of forcing
their way through deep and almost impassable roads, funk
down and died; many perimhed by famine, as the whole ar-,
my subsisted chiefly on roots and berries, or the flesh of hors-
es, killed by the emperor's order, and distributed among
the several battalions; many were drowned in brooks, which-
were swollen so much by the excessive rains, that in paling.
them they waded up to the chin; not a few were killed by

Pa

the enemy, who during the greatei part of their retreat, a-
larmed, harafed, and annoyed them night and day. At
lal they arrived at Metafuz: and the weather being now so
calm as to retiore their communication with the fleet, they
were afpplied with plenty of provisions, and cheered with
the profpet of afety.

During this dreadful series of calamities, the emperor dif.

covered great qualities, many of which a long continued flow
of prosperity had scarcely afforded him an opportunity of
displaying. He appeared conspicuous for firmness and
conitancy of spirit, for magnanimity, fortitude, humanity, and
compaflion. He endured as great hardships as the meanest
soldier, he exposed his own person wherever danger threat.
ened; he encouraged the delponding, visited the sick and
wounded, and animated all by his words and example.
When the army embarked, he was among the last who left
the shore, although a body of Arabs hovered at no great dif.
tance, ready to fall on the rear. By these virtues, Charlea
atoned, in some degree, for his obstinacy and presumption
in undertaking an expedition so fatal to his subje&s.

The calamities which attended this unfortunate enter.

prise did not end here; for no sooner were the forces got on
board, than a new form arising, though less furious than the
former, scattered the fleet, and obliged them, separately, to
make towards such ports in Spain or Italy as they could
firtf reach; thus spreading the account of their disasters,
with all the circumstances of aggravation and horror, which
their imagination, fill under the influence of fear, suggested.
The emperor himself, after escaping great dangers, and be.
ing forced into the port of Bugia in Africa [Dec. 2,]
where he was obliged by contrary winds to remain fevera]
weeks, arrived at las in Spain, in a condition very different
from that in which he had returned from his former expedi.
tion againfi the infidels*.

CaroL V. Expeditio ad Argyrium, per Nicolaum Villagno

# BOOK VII.

BOOK VII.

THE calamities which the emperor suffered in his unfor-
tunate enterprise against Algiers were great; and the ac-
count of these, which augmented in proportion as it spread
at a greater distance from the scene of his difatlrs, encou-
raged Francis to begin hoftlities, on which he had'for fame
time been resolved. Buthe did not think it prudent to pro-
duce, as the motives of this resolution, either his ancient
pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, or the emperor's difin-
genuity in violating his repeated, promises with regard to.
the refitut;on of that country.. The former might have
been a good' reason against conclhding the-truce of Nice,.
but was none forbreaking it; the latter could not be urged
without exposing his own credulity as much as the enperor's
want of integrity_ - A violent and unwarrantable acion of.
one of the Imperial generals- furnished' him with a reason to
justify his taking arms, which was of greater weight than
either of these, and such as would have roused him, if he.
had been as desirous' of peace as he was. eager for war.
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at Nice, without
consulting Solyman, gave (as he foresaw) great offence to that
haughty-monarch, who confidered an alsianee-withdhim as an
honour of vhich a Chriflian prince had'canfe-t be proud.
The friendly interview of the French king: with the empe-
ror in Provence, followed by such extraordinar appearances
of union and confidence which diltinguilhed the reception of
Charles when he passed- through the dominions of Francis
to the Low-Countries,- induced the sultan to fafpe& that
the two rivals had at laft.forgotten their ancient-enmity, in or-
der that they might form such a general confederacy against
the Ottoman power, as had been long wished for in Chrifti

rt-n Equitem Rhodium, ap. Scardium, v. ii. 365. Jovii Hist 1. xl.
P' 29, &c. Vera y Zuniga Vida.de Carlos V, p.. 8. Sandov.
h.Jt.or. ii. 299,.&c.

P3

endom, and often attempted in vain. Charles, with his u.
fual art, endeavoured to confirm and Rrengthen there fufpi.
cions, by inftruaing his emissaries at Constantinople, as well
as in those court with which Solyman heldany intelligence,
to rrprefent the concord between him and Francis to be so
entire, that their lentiments, views, and pursuits, would be
the fame for the future*. It was not without difficulty
that Francis effaced these impressions; but the address of
Rincon, the French ambassador at the Porte, together with
the manifest advantage of carrying on hostilities against the
house of Auifria in concert with France, prevailed at length
on the sultan not only to banihl his suspicions, but to enter
into a clofr conjuncion with Francis than ever. Rincon
returned into France, in order to communicate to his mallet
a scheme of the sultan's for gaining the concurrence of the
Venetians in their operations against the common enemy.
Solyman having lately concluded a peace with that republic,
to which the mediation of Francis and the good offices of
Rincon had greatly contributed, thought it not impollible
to allure the senate by such advantages, as, together with
the example of the French monarch, might overbalance any
scruples arising either from d*cency or caution, that could
operate on the other fide. Francis, warmly approving of
this measure, dispatched Rincon back to Conftantidople, and
direting him to go by Venice along with Fregofo, a Ge.
noefe exile, whom he appointed his ambassador to that repu-
blic, empowered them to negotiate the matter with the fe.
nate, to whom Solyman had sent an envoy for the fame pur-
pofet. The marqis del Guafto, governor of the Milanese,
an officer of great abilities, but capable of attempting and
executing the most atrocious actions, got intelligence of the
motions and destinations of these ambassadors. As he knew
how much his mafier wilhed to discover the intentions of the
French king, and of what consequence it was to retard the

Mem. de Ribier, tom. i. p. 5o2.
t Hil. de Venet. de Paruta, iv. 15j.

execution of his measures, he employed some soldiers belongr
ing to the garrison of Pavia to lie in wait for Rincon and
Fregofo as they failed down the Po, who murdered them
and most of their attendants, and seized their papers. Up-
on receiving an account of this barbarous outrage, commit-
ted, during the subsistence of a truce, against persons held
sacred by the most uncivilized nations, Francis's grief for
the unhappy fate of two servants whom he loved and truit-
ed, his uneasiness at the interruption of his schemes :by their
death, and every other passion, were swallowed up and lob
in the indignation which this infuk on the honour of hip
crowvn excited. He exclaimed loudly against Guafto, who,
having drawn upon himself all the infamy of affimination
without making any .discovery of importance, as the ambaf-
fadors had left .their inftru&ions and other papers-of confe-
quence behind them, now boldly denied his being accessary
in any wife to the crime. He Sent an ambassador to the
emperor, to demand suitable reparation :for an indignity,
which no prince, how inconsiderable or pusillanimous soever,
could tamely endure: and when Charles, impatient at that
time to let out on his African expedition, endeavoured to
put him off with an evasive answer, he appealed to all the
courts in Europe,.fetting forth the heinousness of the inju-
ry, the spirit of moderation with which he had applied for
redress, and the iniquity of the emperor in disregarding this
just request.

Notwithstanding the confidence with which GuaftR as-

ferted his own innocence, the accusations of the French
gained greater credit than all his protestations; and Bellay,
the French commander in Piedmont, procured, at length,
by his industry and address, such a minute detail of the
tranfa&ion, with the testimony of so many of the parties
concerned, as amounted almost to a legal proof of the mar-
quis's guilt. In consequence of this opinion of.the public,
confirmed by such strong evidence, Francis's complaints
were universally allowed to be well founded, and the Rteps

which he took towards renewing hotilities, were ascribed
not merely to ambition or resentment, but to the unaoid.
able neceffty of vindicating the honour of his crown*.

However jut Francis might effeem his own cause, he did

not trft so much to that, as to neglet the proper precan
tions for gaining other allies besides the sultan, by whose aid
be might counterbalance the emperor's superior power.
But his negotiations to this effea were attended with very
little facess. Henry VIII. eagerly bent at that time upon
schemes against Scotland, which be knew would at once dif.
solve his union with France, was inclinable rather to take
part with the emperor, than to contribute in any degree to.
wards favouring the operations against him. The pope ad.
hered inviolably to his ancient system of neutrality. The
Venetians, notwithstanding Solyman's solicitations, imitated
the pope's eample. The Germans, satisfied with the reli
gious liberty which they enjoyed, found it more their in.
treft to g~tif than to irritate the emperor; so that the
kngs of Dnmark and Sweden, who on this occasion wer
irft drawn in to interft themselves in the quarrels of the
more potent monarchs of the foth, and the duke of Cleves,
who had a dispute with the emperor about- the pofieffion of
Gudrs, were the only confederates whom Francis fecuredi
But the dominions of the two former lay at such a distance,
and the power of the latter was so inconsiderable, that he
gained little by their alliance.

But Francis by vigorous efforts of his own acivity sup.

plied every defec. Being aflimed at this time with a dif-
temper, which was the effea of his irregular pleasures, and
which prevented his pursuing them with the fame licentious
indulgence, he applied to business with more than-his afual
industry. The fame cause which occasioned this extraord
nary attention to his affairs, rendered him morose and di.
satisfied with the ministers whom he had hitherto employed.
This accidental peevilbnefs being sharpened by refleEting on

Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii Hist. lib. xl. a68.

the false feps into which he had lately been betrayed, as
well as the insults to which he had been exposed, some of
those in whom he had usually placed the greatest confidence
felt the effeas of this change in his temper, and were depriv-
ed of their offices. At last he disgraced Montmorency him-
self, who had long dire&ed affairs as well civil as military,
with all the authority of a minister no less beloved than trust-
ed by his matter; and Francis being fond of ihewing that
the fall of such a powerful favourite did not asse&t the vigour
or prudence of his adminifiration, this was a new motive to
redouble his diligence in preparing to open the war by some
splendid and extraordinary effort.

1542.] He accordingly brought into the field five armies.

One to a& in Luxemburg under the duke of Orleans, ac-
companied by the duke of Lorraine as his inftrutor in the
art of war. Another, commanded by the dauphin, march-
ed towards the frontiers of Spain. A third, led by Van
Roffem the marshal of Gueldres, and composed chiefly of
the troops of Cleves, had Brabant allotted for the theatre of
its operations. A fourth, of which the duke of Vendome
was general, hovered on the borders of Slanders. The last,
consisting of the forces cantoned in Piedmont, was destined
for the admiral Annebaut. The dauphin and his brother
were appointed to command where the chief exertions were
intended, and the greatest honour to be reaped; the army of
the former amounted to forty thousand, that of the lat-
ter to thirty thousand men. Nothing appears more
surprising than that Francis did not pour with these
numerous and irrefiltible armies into the Milanese; which
had so long been the object of his wishes as well as
euterprifes; and that he should chufe rather to turn al-
molt his whole Itrength into another direaion, and towards
new conquests. But the remembrance of the disasters
which he had met with in his former expeditions into Italy,
together with the difficulty of supporting a war carried orn
at such a distance from his own dominions, had gradually a.

bated his violent inclination to obtain footing in that coun.
try, and made him willing to try the fortune of his arms in
another quarter. At the fame time he expeCted to make
such a powerful impression on the'frontier of Spain, where
there were few towns of any strength, and no army assem.
bled to oppose him, as might enable him to recover possession
of the country of Roussillon, lately dismembered from the
French crown, before Charles could bring into the field any
force able to obftrud his progress. The necessity of sup.
porting his ally the duke of Cleves, and the hope of draw-
ing a considerable body of soldiers out of Germany by his
means, determined him to at with vigour in the Low.
Countries.

The dauphin and duke of Orleans opened the campaign

much about the fame time [June]; the former laying siege
to Perpignan the capital of Roussillon, and the latter enter-
ing Luxembourg. The duke of Orleans pulhed his opera.
tions with the greatest rapidity and success, one town falling
after another, until no place in that large dutchy remained
in the emperor's hands but Thionville. Nor could he have
failed of over-running the adjacent provinces with the fame
cafe, if he had not voluntarily Ropt fbort in this career of
victory. But a report prevailing that the emperor had de-
termined to hazard a battle in order to save Perpignan, on
a sudden the duke, prompted by youthful ardour, or moved
perhaps by jealousy of his brother, whom he both envied
and hated, abandoned his own conquest, and haRened to-
wards Roussillon, in order to divide with him the glory of
the vitory.

On his departure, some of his troops were disbanded, 0.

ther deserted their colours, and the reft, cantoned in the
towns which he had taken, remained inative. By this con-
du&, which leaves a dishonourable imputation either on his
underflanding or his heart, or on both, he not only renounc
ed whatever he could have hoped from such a promising
commencement of the campaign, but gave the enemy an op'

portunity of recovering, before the end of summer, all the
conquests which he had gained. On the Spaniih frontier,
the emperor was not so inconsiderate as to venture on a bat-
tke, the loss of which might have endangered his kingdom.
Perpignan, though poorly fortified, and brifdly attacked,
having been largely supplied with ammunition and provisions
by the vigilance of Doria *, was defended so long and so
vigorously by the duke of Alva, the persevering obstinacy
of whose temper fitted him admirably for such a service, that
at lat the French, after a siege of three months, wafted by
difeales, repulsed in several assaults, and despairing of success
relinquiflled the undertaking, and retired into their own coun-
tryt. Thus all Francis's mighty preparations, either from
some defect in his own conduct, or from the superior power
and prudence of his rival, produced no effe&s which bore
any proportion to his expence and efforts, or such as grati-
sied, in any degree, his own hopes, or answered the expec-
tation of Europe. The only solid advantage of the cam-
paign was the acquisition of a few towns in Piedmont, which
Bellay gained rather by stratagem and ,address, than by the
force of his arms:. -
.

1543.] The emperor and Francis, though both confider-

ably exhausted by such great but indecisive efforts, discover-
ing no abatement of their mutual animosity, employed all
their attention, tried every expedient, and turned themselves
towards every quarter, in order to acquire new allies, toge-
ther with such a reinforcement of strength as would give
them the superiority in the ensuing campaign. Charles,
taking advantage of the terror and resentment of the Spa-
nairds, upon the sudden invasion of their country, prevailed
on the Cortes of the several kingdoms to grant him subsidies
with a more liberal hand than usual. At the fame time he
borrowed a large fum from John king of Portugal, and, by
way of security for his repayment, put him in poffefion of

* Sigonii Vita A. Doria, p. ti9r. t Sardov. Hist.
ton, u. 315. tlb. ii.318. Bellay, 387,&c. Fcrrt.ix. 37.

the Molucca isles in the East Indies, with the gainful corn.
mcrce of precious spices, which that sequestered corner of
the globe yields. Not satisfied with this, he negotiated a
marriage between Philip his only son, now in his sixteenth
year, and Mary daughter of that monarch, with whom her
father, the most opulent prince in Europe, gave a large
,dower, and having likewise persuaded the Cortes of Ara.
gon and Valencia to recognise Philip as the heir of these
crowns, he obtained from them the donative usual on
such occasions t. These extraordinary supplies enabled
him to make such additions to his forces in Spain that
he could detach a great body into the Low-Countries,
and yet reserve as many as were sufficient for the defence of
the kingdom. Having thus provided for the security of
Spain, and committed the government of it to his son, he
failed for Italy [May], in his way to Germany. But how
-attentive soever to raise the funds for carrying on the war,
or eager to grasp at any new expedient for that purpose, he
xwas not so inconsiderate as to accept of an overture which
Paul, knowing his neceflities, artfully threw out to him.
That ambitious pontiff, no less sagacious to discem, than
watchful to seize opportunities of aggrandizing his family, so.
licited him to grant O&avio his grandchild, whom the empe-
ror had admitted to the honour of being his fon-in-law, the
invefflture of the datchy of Milan, in return for which he
promised such a fam of money as would have gone far to-
wards supplying all his present exigencies. But Charles, as
well from unwillingness to alienate a province of so much
value, as from difguf at the pope, who had hitherto refused
to join in the war against Francis, reje&ed the proposal. His
diffatisfa&ion with Paul at that junture was so great, that he
even refused to approve his alienating Parma and Placentia
from the patrimony of St. Peter, and fettling them on his son
and grandson as a fief to be held of the holy fee. As no other
expedient for raising money among the Italian fates re

t Ferreras, ix. i38, 243. Jvii i. lib. xlii. 198. 6.-

mained, he consented to withdraw the garrisons which he
had hitherto kept in the citadels of Florence and Leghorn;
in consideration for which he received a large present from
Cosmo di Medici, who by this means secured his own inde.
pendence, and got possession of two forts, which werejuftly
called the fetters of Tufcanyt.

But Charles, while he seemed to have turned his whole

attention towards raising the fums necessary for defraying
the expences of the year, had not been negligent of'objects
more distant, though no less important, and had concluded
a league offensive and defensive with Henry VIII. from
which he derived, in the end, greater advantage than from
all his other preparations. Several flight circumstances
which have already been mentioned, had begun to alie-
nate the affetions of that monarch from Francis, with
whom he had been for some time in close alliance; and new
incidents of greater moment, had occurred to increase his
disgust and animosity. Henry, desirous of establishing an
uniformity in religion in both the British kingdoms, as well
as fond of making proselytes to his own opinions, had form.
ed a scheme of persuading his nephew the king of Scots
to renounce the pope's supremacy, and to adopt the fame
fyftcm of reformation, which he had introduced into Eng-
land. This measure he pursued with his usual eagerness
and impetuosity, making such advantageous offers to James,
whom he confidered as not over-fcrupuloufly attached to any
religious tenets, that he hardly doubted of success. His
propositions were accordingly received in such a manner,
that he flattered himself with having gained his point. But
the Scottish ecclesiastics, foreseeing how fatal the union of
their sovereign with England must prove both to their own
power, and to the established system of religion; and the
partisans of France, no less convinced that it would put an
end to the influence of that crown upon the public councils

tAdriani Iforia, i. 195. Sleid. 312. Jovii Hist. lib. xliii. p.
301. Vita di Col Mledici di Baldini,p. 34.

Vol. III. D

of Scotland; combined together, and by their insinuations
defeated Henry's scheme at the very moment when he ex-
pe&ed it to have taken effet*. Too haughty to brook
such a disappointment, which he imputed as much to the
arts of the French, as to the levity of the Scottish monarch,
he took arms againf Scotland, threatening to subdue the
kingdom, since he could not gain the friendihip of its king.
At the fame time, his refntment agaioft Francis quickened
his negotiations with the emperor, an alliance with whom he
was now as forward to accept as the other could be to offer
it. During this war with Scotland, and before the conclu.
ion of his negotiations with Charles, James V. died, leaving
his crown to Mary his only daughter, an infant of a few
days old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once his
whole system with regard to Scotland, and abandoning all
thoughts of conquering it, aimed at what was more advan.
tageous as well as more practicable, an union with that
kingdom by a marriage between Edward his only son and
the young queen. But here, too, he apprehended a vigo.
rous opposition from the French faction in Scotland, which
began to bestir itself in order to thwart the measure. The
necessity of cruihing this party among the Scots, and of
preventing Francis from furnishing them any effetual aid,
confirmed Henry's resolution of breaking with France, and
pulhed him on to put a finishing hand to the treaty of con-
federacy with the emperor.

In this league [Feb. 1] were contained firfl of all, ar.

tides for securing their future amity and mutual defence;
then were enumerated the demands which they were refpec-
tively to make upon Francis; and the plan of their opera.
tions was fixed, if he should refuse to grant them fatisfa&ion.
They agreed to require that Francis Ihould not only re-
nounce his alliance with Solyman, which had been the
source of infinite calamities to Christendom, but also that
he thould make reparation for the damages which that

* Hist. of Scotl. vol i. p. 71, &c. 9th edit. 8vo.

unnatural union had occaiioned; that he lhould restore Bur-
gundy to the emperor, that he Ihould desist immediately
from hostilities, and leave Charles at leisure to oppose the
common enemy of the Chriftiah faith; and that he should
immediately pay the fums due to Henry, or put some towns
in his hands as security to that effec. If, within forty
days, he did not comply with these demands, they then en.
gaged to invade France each with twenty thousand foot and
five thousand horse, and not lay down their arms until they
had recovered Burgundy, together with the towns on the
Somme, for the emperor, and Normandy and Guienne, or
even the whole realm of France, for-Henry*. Their he-
ralds, accordingly, set out with these haughty requisitions»
and though they were not permitted to enter France, the
two monarchs held themselves fully entitled to execute what-
ever was stipulated in their treaty.

Francis on his part, was not less diligent in preparing for

the approaching campaign. Having early observed fymp-
toms of Henry's disgust and alienation, and finding all his
endeavours to soothe and reconcile him ineffe&ual, he knew
his temper too well not to expec that open hostilities would
quickly follow upon this secession of friendship. For this
reason he redoubled his endeavours to obtain from Solyman
such aid as might counterbalance the great accession of
strength which the emperor would receive by his alliance
with England. In order to supply the place of the two am-
baffadors murdered by Guafto, he sent as his envoy, firif to
Venice, and then to Constantinople,. Paulin, who, though
in no higher rank than a captain of foot, was deemed wor-
thy of being raised to this important station, to which he
was recommended by Bellay, who had trained him to the
arts of negotiation, and made trial of his talents and address
on several occasions. Nor did he belie the opinion conceiv-
ed of his courage and abilities. Hastening to Conftanti-
nople, without regarding the dangers to which he was ex-

* Rym. xiv. 768. Herb. ,48.

Qz2

posed, he urged his mafler's demands with such boldness,
and availed himself of every circumstance with such dexteri-
ty, that he soon removed all the sultan's difficulties As
some of the balhaws, swayed either by their own opinion,
or influenced by the emperor's emissaries, who had made,
their way even into this court, had declared in the divan
againit acing in concert with -France, he found means
either to convince or silence them*. At last he obtained
orders for Barbarossa to fail with a powerful fleet, and to re.
gulate all his operations by the dire&cions of the French.
king. Francis was not equally successful in his attempts to
gain the princes of the empire. The extraordinary rigour
with which he thought it neceflary to punish such of his
fubjets as had embraced the protestant opinions, in order
to give some notable evidence of his own zeal for the catho.
lic faith, and to wipe off the imputations to which he was
liable from his confederacy with the Turks, placed an infu.
perable barrier between him and such of the Germans as in.
terest or inclination would have prompted most readily to
join himt. His chief advantage, however, over the empe-
ror, he derived on this, as on other occasions, from the con-
tiguity of his dominions, as well as from the extent of the
roval authority in France, which exempted him from all the
delays and disappointments unavoidable wherever popular
assemblies provide for the expences of government by occa.
fional and frugal subsidies. Hence his domestic preparations
were always carried on with vigour and rapidity, while those
of the emperor, unless when quickened by some foreign sup.
ply, or fume temporary expedient, were extremely flow and
dilatory.

Long before any army was in readiness to oppose him,

Francis took the field in the Low-Countries, against which
he turned the whole weight of the war. He made himself

e Sandov. Hiftor. tom. ii 346. Jovii Hist. lib. xli. I8S, &c.
300, &c. Brantome.

t Scck .

li .
l a3.

matter of Landrecy, which he determined to keep as the key
to the whole province of Hainault; and ordered it to be for-
tified with great care. Turning from thence to the right,
he entered the dutchy of Luxembourg, and found it in the
fame defenceless Rate as in the former year. While he was
thus employed, the emperor, having drawn together an ar-
my, cornpofed of all the different nations fubje& to his go-
vernment, entered the territories of the duke of Cleves, on
whom he had vowed to inflic exemplary vengeance. This
prince, whose condu& and situation were similar to that of
Robert de la Mark in the firR war between Charles and Fran-
cis, resembled him likewise in his fate. Unable, with his
feeble army, to face the emperor, who advanced at the head
of forty-four thousand men, he retired at his approach; and
the Imperialists, being at liberty to a& as they pleased, im-
mediately inveited Duren. That town, though gallantly
defended, was taken by assault; all the inhabitants were put
to the sword, and the place itself reduced to ashes. This
dreadful example of severity fnirck the people of the coun-
try with such general terror, that all the other towns, even
such as were capable of resistance, sent their keys to the em-
peror [August 24]; and before a body of French, detached
to his assistance, could come up, the duke himself was obliged
to make his submission to Charles in the-moft abjed manner.
Being admitted into the Imperial pretence, he kneeled, to-
gether with eight of his principal subje&s, and implored mer-
cy The emperor allowed him to remain in that ignomini-
ous posture, and eyeing him with an haughty and severe
look, without deigning to answer a single word, remitted
him to his ministers. The conditions, however, which they
prescribed were not so rigorous as he had reason to have ex-
petced after such a receptionm He was obliged [Sept. 71
to renounce his alliance with France and Denmark; to resign
all his pretensions to the dutchy of Guedres; to enter into
perpetual amity with the emperor and king of the Romans.
in rt:urn for which, all his hereditary dominions were reftor-

Q

ed, except two towns which the emperor kept as pledges of
the duke's fidelity during the continuance of the war; and
he was reinstated in his privileges as a prince of the empire.
Not long after, Charles, as a proof of the sincerity of his
reconcilement, gave him in marriage one of the daughters of
his brother Ferdinandt.

Having thus chastised the prefamption of the duke of

Cleves, detached one of his allies from Francis, and annex.
ed to his own dominions in the Low-Countries a confider-
able province which lay contiguous to them, Charles advanc.
ed towards Hainault, and laid siege to Landrecy. There,
as the first fruits of his alliance with Henry, he was joined
by fix thousand Englilh under fir John Wallop. The gar.
rifon, confifing of veteran troops commanded by De la Lande
and Deffl, two officers of reputation, made a vigorous refit-
ance. Francis approached with all his forces to relieve that
place; Charles covered the siege; both were determined to
hazard an engagement; and all Europe expefted to fee this
contest, which had continued so long, decided at last by a
battle between two great armies led by their respective mo-
rarchs in person. But the ground which separated their
two camps was such, as put the disadvantage manifestly on
his fide who should venture to attack, and neither of then)
chore to run that rifque. Amidst a variety of movements
in order to draw the enemy into the snare, or to avoid it
themselves, Francis, with admirable conduct and equal good
fortune, threw first a supply of fremh troops, and then a con-
voy of provisions, into the town, so that the emperor, de.
fpairing offucccfs, withdrew into winter-quarters , in order
to preserve his army from being entirely ruined by the rigour
of the season.

Dur;ng this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his engagements

to the French king with great puncuality. He himself
nmarched into Hungary with a numerous army [November];

iarzi Annal. Bra.bnct. t. i. 6f8. Recueil des Traitez, t. ii
a.6. * BeLlay, 4Ce ,JE

and as the princes of the empire made no great effort to save
a country which Charles, by employing his own force a-
gainft Francis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there was no ap-
pearance of any body of troops to oppose his progress. He
besieged, one after another, Quinque Ecclesia, Alba, and
Gran, the three most considerable towns in the kingdom, of
which Ferdinand had kept possession. The first was taken
by storm; the other two surrendered; and the whole king-
dom, a small corner excepted, was fubje&ed to the Turkish
yoket. About the fame time, Barbarossa failed with a fleet
of an hundred and ten gallies, and coasting along the mhore
of Calabria, made a descent at Rheggio, which he plundered
and burnt; and advancing from thence to the mouth of the
Tiber, he ifopt there to water. The citizens of Rome, ig-
norant of his destination, and filled with terror, began to fly
with such general precipitation, that the city would have
been totally deserted, if they had not resumed courage upon
letters from Paulin the French envoy, assuring them that no
violence or injury would be offered by the Turks to any
tate in alliance with the king his -maier*. From Ostia,
Barbarossa failed to Marseilles, and being joined by the
French fleet with a body of land forces on board, under the
count d'Enguien, a gallant young prince of the house of
Bourbon, they direaed their course towards Nice, the sole
retreat of the unfortunate duke of Savoy [August lo].
There, to the aftonilhment and scandal of all Christendom,
the lilies of France and crescent of Mahomet appeared in
conjunction against a fortress on which the cross of Savoy
was displayed. The town, however, was bravely defended
against their combined force by Montfort a Savoyard gen-
tleman, who stood a general assault, and repulsed the enemy
with great loss before he retired into the castle. That fort,
situated upon a rock, on which the artillery made no impref-
sion, and which could not be undermined, he held out so

t Iftuanhaff. Hifor. Hung. 1. xv. 167.
'Jovii Hil 1. xliii. 304, &c. Pallavic. 160.

long, that Doria had time to approach with his feet, and
the marquis del Guafto to march with a body of troops
from Milan. Upon intelligence of this, the French and
Turks railed the siege [Sept 8]t; and Francis had not even
the consolation of success, to render the infamy which he
drew on himself, by calling in such an auxiliary, more par-
donable.

From the small progress of either party during this cam.

paign, it was obvious to what a length the war might be
drawn out between two princes, whose power was so equal.
ly balanced, and who, by their own talents or ativity, could
so vary and multiply their resources. The trial which they
had now made of each other's strength might have taught
them the imprudence of perifting in a war, wherein there
was greater appearance of their difireffing their own domi-
nions than of conquering those of their adversary, and should
have disposed both to with for peace. If Charles and Fran.
cis had been influenced by considerations of interest or pru-
dence alone, this, without doubt, must have been the man.
ner in which they would have reasoned. But the personal
animosity, which mingled itself in all their quarrels, had
grown to be so violent and implacable, that, for the plealure
of gratifying it, they disregarded every thing else; and were
infinitely more solicitous how to hurt each other, than how
to secure what would be of advantage to themselves. No
sooner then did the season force them to suspend hotilities,
than, without paying any attention to the pope's repeated
endeavours or paternal exhortations to re-establish peace,
they began to provide for the operations of the next year
with new vigour, and an activity increasing with their hatred.
Charles turned his chief attention towards gaining the prin-
ces of the empire, and endeavoured to rouse the formidable
but unwieldy strength of the Germanic body against Fran-
cis. In order to underhand the propriety of the steps which
he took for that purpose, it is necessary to review the chief
t Guichcnon Hiftoire dc Savoye, t. i. p. 6j5. Bellay, 45, &c.

tranfafions in that country since the diet of Ratilbon in the
year 1541.

Much about the time that assembly broke up, Maurice
iucceeded his father Henry in the government of that part
of Saxony which belonged to the Albertine branch of the
Saxon family. This young prince, then only in his twen.
tieth year, had, even at that early period, begun to discover
the great talents which qualified him for a&ing such a dif.
tinguifhed part in the affairs of Germany. As soon as he
entered upon the administration, he struck out into such a
new and singular path, as Ihewed that he aimed from the be.
ginning, at Something great and uncommon. Though zeal.
oufly attached to the protestant opinions, both from educa-
tion and principle, he refused to accede to the league of
Smalkalde, being determined, as he said, to maintain the pu.
rity of religion, which was the original objea of that con-
federacy, but not to entangle himself in the political interest
or combinations to which it had given rife. At the fame
time, foreseeing a rupture between Charles and the confede-
rates of Smalkalde, and perceiving which of them was moil
likely to prevail in the contest, instead of that jealousy and
distrust which the other protestants expressed of all the em-
peror's designs, he affe&ed to place in him an unbounded
confidence; and courted his favour with the utmost assiduity.
When the other protestants in the year 1542, either declin-
ed assisting Ferdinand in Hungary, or afforded him reluc.
tant and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither in person, and
rendered himself conspicuous by his zeal and courage. From
the fame motive, he had led to the emperor's afiftance, during
the last campaign, a body of his own troops; and the grace.
fulness of his person, his dexterity in all military exercises,
together with his intrepidity, which courted and delighted
in danger, did not distinguish him more in the field, than his
great abilities and insinuating address won upon the empe-
r9r's confidence and favourt. While by this conduct

t Sleid. 317. Seek. 3. iii. 371, 386, 418.

which appeared extraordinary to those who held the fame
opinions with him concerning religion, Maurice endeavoured
to pay court to the emperor, he began to discover some de.
gree ofjealoufy of his cousin the eletor of Saxony. This,
which proved in the feque so fatal to the ele&or, had almost
occasioned an open rupture between them; and soon after
iaurice's accession to the government, they both took arms
with equal rage, upon account of a dispute about the right
of jurisdiction over a paltry town situated on the Moldaw.
They were prevented, however, from proceeding to a&ioa
by the mediation of the landgrave of Hesse, whose daugh.
ter Maurice had married, as well as by the powerful and
authoritative admonitions of Luther*.

Amidst these tranfaaions, the pope, though extremely ir-

ritated at the emperor's concellions to the protetants at the
diet of Ratisbon, was so warmly solicited on all hands, by
such as were most devoutly attached to the fee of Rome, no
-kl than by those whose fidelity or designs he fufpeted, to
fmnmon a general council, that he found it impollble to a-
void any longer calling that assembly. The impatience for
its meeting, and the expetations of great effets from its
decisions, seemed to grow in proportion to the difficulty of
obtaining it. He still adhered, however, to his original re
solution of holding it in some town of Italy, where, by the
number of ecclefiatics, retainers to his court, and depending
on his favour, who could repair to it without difficulty or
expence, he might influence and even dire& all its proceed-
ings. This proposition, though often rejected by the Ger-
mans, he inftruced his nuncio to the diet held at Spires
[March 3], in the year 1542, to renew once more; and if
be found it gave no greater fatisfation than formely, he
empowered him, as a last concession, to propose for the place
of meeting, Trent, a city in the Tyrol, fubje& to the king
of the Romans, and situated on the confines between Ger-
many and Italy. The catholic princes in the diet, after

Sicid. 9a. Seck. L iii 403.

giving it as their opinion that the council might have been
held with greater advantage in Ratisbon, Cologne, or some
of the great cities of the empire, were at length induced to
approve of the place which the pope had named. The pro-
teltants unanimously expressed their diffatisfa&ion, and pro-
telted that they would pay no regard to a council held be-
yond the precints of the empire, called by the pope's au-
thority, and in which he assumed the right of prefidingt.

The pope without taking any notice of their objections,

published the bull of intimation [May 22, 1542], named
three cardinals to preside as his legates, and appointed them
to repair to Trent before the first of November, the day
le had fixed for opening the council. But if Paul had de-
fired the meeting of a council as sincerely as he pretended,
he would not have pitched on such an improper time for
calling it. Intead of that general union and tranquillity,
without which the deliberations of a council could neither be
condu&ed with security, nor attended with authority, such
a fierce war wasjuft kindled between the emperor and Fran-
cis, as rendered it impossible for the ecclesiastics from many
parts of Europe to resort thither in safety. The legates
accordingly, remained several months at Trent; but as no
person appeared there, except a few prelates from the ec-
lefiaitical state, the pope, in order to avoid the ridicule and
contempt which this drew upon him-from the enemies of the
church, recalled them, and prorogued the council*.

Unhappily for the authority of the papal fee, at the very

time that the German protestants took every occasion of
louting contempt upon it, the emperor and king of the
omans found it necessary not only to connive at their con-
utu, but to court their favour by repeated aAs of indul.
ence. In the fame diet of Spires, in which they had pro.
eted in the most difrefpe&ful terms against assembling a
ouncil at Trent, Ferdinand, who depended on their aid
r the defence of Hungary, not only permitted that pro.

t Sleid. 291. Seek. 1. iii. 283.
* F. Paul, p.. 97. Sleid. 296.

tefation to be inserted in the records of the diet, but re.
newed in their favour all the emperor's concessions at Ratif.
bon, adding to them whatever they demanded for their far.
ther security. Among other particulars, he granted a fur.
pension of a decree of the Imperial chamber against the city
of Goflar (one of those which had entered into the league
of Smalkalde), on account of its having seized the eccles.
aftical-revenues within its domains, and enjoined Henry
duke of Brunswick to defitt from his attempts to car.
ry that decree into execution. But Henry, a furious
bigot, and no less obstinate than raih in all his under.
takings, continuing to disquiet the people of Gofar by
his incursions, the ele&or of Saxony and landgrave of He/fe,
that they might not susser any member of the Smalkaldic
body to be oppressed, assembled their forces, declared war in
form against Henry, and in the space of a few weeks, strip.
ing him entirely of his dominions, drove him as a wretched
exile to take refuge in the court of Bavaria. By this aet of
-vengeance, no les severe than sudden, they filled all Ger.
many with dread of their power, and the confederats of
Smalkalde appeared, by this first effort of their arms, to be
as ready as they were able to protect those who had joined
their association *.

Emboldened by Co many concessions in their favour, a

well as by the progrefa which their opinions daily made, the
princes of the league of Smalkalde took a solemn protcf a
gainft the Imperial chamber, and declined its jurifdiaion fr
the future, because that court had not been visited or re
formed according to the decree of Ratisbon, and continued
to discover a most indecent partiality in all its proceeding,
Not long after this, they ventured a ftep farther; and pan
testing against the recess of a diet held at Nurember g
[April a3, 1543], which provided for the defence of Hit
gary, refused to frnmiih their contingent for that purpo

*Slid. a96. Commemoratio fuccindta Caufarum Belli, ,

a Smalaldicis contra Hair. Brunfw. ab iiUdem edita; ap. Sca'
urn, tom. u. 307.

unless the Imperial chamber were reformed, and full fecu-
rity were granted them in every point with regard to reli-
gion t.

1544.] Such were the lengths to which the protestants

had proceeded, and such their confidence in their own power
when the emperor returned from the Low-Countries, to
hold a diet which he had summoned to meet at Spires.
The refpe& due to the emperor, as well as the importance
of the affairs which were to be laid before it, rendered this
assembly extremely full. All the elecors, a great numner
of princes ecclesiastical and secular, witlh the deputies of
inoft of the cities, were present. Charles soon perceived
that this was not a time to offend the jealous spirit of the
protestants, by asserting in any high tone the" authority and
doalrnes of the church, or by abridging, in the smallest ar-
ticle, the liberty which they now enjoyed; but that, on the
contrary, if he-expeted any support from them, or wvilhed to
preserve Germany from intestine disorders while he was engag-
ed in a foreign war, he mutl soothe them by new concessions,
and a more ample extension of their religious privileges.
He began accordingly, with courting the eletor of Saxony,
and landgrave of Hesse, the heads of the proteftan. party, and
by giving up some things in their favour, and granting liberal
proinifes with regard to others, he secured himself from any
danger of opposition on their part. Having gained this
capital point, he then ventured to address the diet with
greater freedom. He began by representing his own zeal,
and unrwearied efforts with regard to two things mot effen-
tial to Christendom, the procuring of a general council in
order to compose the religious dissensions which had unhap-
pily arisen in Germany, and the providing some proper
means for checking the formidable progress of the Turkish
arms. But he observed, with deep regret, that his pious
endeavours had been entirely defeated by the unjustifiable
ambition of the French king, who having wantonly kindled

t Sleid. 304, 307. Seck, 1 iii. 404, 416.
Vol. III. R

the flame of war in Europe, which had been so lately
extinguilhed by the truce of Nice, rendered it impofible for
the fathers of the church to aflemble in council, or to deli.
berate with security; and obliged him to employ those for.
ces in his own defence, which, with greater fatisfiation to
himself, as well as more honour to Christendom, he would
have turned against the infidels: that Francis, not thinking
it enough to have called him off from opposing the
Mahometans, had, with, unexampled impiety, invited them
into the heart of Christendom, and joining his arms to
theirs, had openly attacked the duke of Savoy a member of
the empire: that Barbarossa's fleet was now in one of the
ports of France, waiting only the return of spring to carry
terror and desolation to the coast of some Christian state:
that in such a situation it was folly to think of distant ex-
peditions against the Turk, or of marching to oppose his
armies'in Hungary, while such a powerful ally received him
into the centre of Europe, and gave him footing there. It
was a dicate of prudence, he added, to oppose the nearelt
and most imminent danger, first of all, and by humbling the
power of France, to deprive Solyman of the advantages
which he X rived from the unnatural confederacy formed
betwveen him and a monarch, who fill arrogated the name
of Alot Chrilfian: that, in truth, a war against the French
king and the sultan ought to be confidered as the fame
thi.ng; and that every advantage gained over the former
xva;.. fivere and sensible blow to the latter: on all these ac-
cun:t;, he concluded with demanding their aid againlf
Francis, not merely as an enemy of the Germanic body, or
cf hIm -.Eo was its head, but as an avowed ally of the in-
E&is and a public enemy to the Christian name.

In order to give greater weight to this violent inve&ive

of the emperor, the king of the Romans food up, and re-
lated the rapid conquets of the sultan in Hungary, occafi-
oned, as he said, by the fatal receffity imposed on his bro.
ther, of employing his arms against France. When he had

finilied, the ambassadors of Savoy gave a detail of Barbarof-
fa's operations at Nice, and of the ravages which he had
committed on that coat. All there, added to the general
indignation which Francis's unprecedented union with the
Turks excited in Europe, made such an impression on the
diet as the emperor wiflhed, and disposed moil of the memo
bers to grant him such effecual aid as he had demanded.
The ambassadors whom Francis had sent to explain the mo-
tives of his condu&, were not permitted to enter the bounds
of the empire; and the apology which they published for
their matier, vindicating his alliance with Solyman, by ex-
amples drawn from scripture, and the pracice of Chriftianr
princes, was little regarded by men who were irritated al-
ready, or prejudiced against him to such a degree, as to be
incapable of allowing their proper weight to any arguments
in his behalf.

Such being the favourable disposition of the Germans,

Charles perceived that nothing could now obftru& his gain-
ing all that he aimed at,- but the fears andjealoufies of the
proteitants, which he determined to quiet by granting eve-
ry thing that the utmost solicitude of these passions could
desire for the security of their religion. With this view,.
he contented to a recess, whereby all the rigorous edits hi-
therto issued against the protestants were. suspended; a coun-
cil either general or national to be atfembled in Germany
was declared necessary, in order to re-eftablilh peace in the
church; until one of these should be held (which the empe-
ror undertook to bring about as soon as poflible), the free
and public exercise of the protestant religion was authorized;:
the Imperial chamber was enjoined to give no molestation to
the protestants; and when the term, for which the present
judges in that court were eleced, should expire, persons du-
ly qualified were then to be admitted as members, without-
any ditlincion on account of religion. In return for these
extraordinary aas of indulgence, the proteltants concurred
wvith the other members of the diet, in declaring war agaiuft

R 2

Francis in name of the empire; in voting the emperor a bo-
dy of twenty-four thousand foot and four thousand horse,
to be maintained at the public expence for fix months, and to
be employed against France; and at the fame time the diet
imposed a poll-tax to be levied throughout all Germany on
every person without exception, for the support of the war
against the Turks.

Charles, while he gave the greatelf attention to the mi.

nute and intricate detail of particulars necessary towards con.
dusting the deliberations of a numerous and divided assembly
to such a successful period, negotiated a separate peace with
the king of Denmark; who, though he had hitherto per-
formed nothing confideable in consequence of his alliance
with Francis, had it in his power, however, to make a trou.
blefome diversion in favour of that monarcht. At the fame
time, he did not neglect proper applications to the king of
England, in order to rouse him to more vigorous efforts a-
gaini their common enemy. Little, indeed, was wanting
to accomplilh this; for such events had happened in Scot.
land as inflamed Henry to the most violent pitch of resent-
ment against Francis. Having concluded with the parlia
ment of Scotland a treaty of marriage between his son and
their young queen, by which he reckoned himself secure of
ffeefing the union of the two kingdoms, which had been
long desired, and often attempted without success by his
predecessors, Mary of Guise the queen-mother, cardinal
Beatoun, and other partizans of. France, found means not
only to break off the match, but tb alienate the Scottihf na-
tion entirely from the friendship of England, and to flrength-
en its ancient attachment to France. Henry, however, did
not abandon an objec of so much importance; and as the
humbling of Francis, besides the pleasure of taking revenge
upon an enemy who had disappointed a favourite measure,
appeared the most effetual method of bringing the Scots to
accept once more of the treaty which they had relinquifEed

Du Mont Corps Diplom. t. iv. p. 2. p. 174.

he was so eager to accomplish this .that he was ready to fe-
eond whatever the emperor coul~epofe to be attempted
against the French king. The plan, accordingly, vhich.
they concerted, was such, if it had been punctually execut-
ed, as mufl have ruined France in the first place, and would
have augmented so prodigiously the emperor's power and
territories, as might in the end have proved fatal to the li-
berties of Europe. They agreed to invade France each
with an army of twenty-five thousand men, and, without
losing time in besieging the frontier towns, to advance di-
rcaly towards the interior provinces, and to join their forces
near Paris*.-

Francis flood alone in opposition to allthe enemies whom

Charles was mustering againfl him. Solyman had been the
only ally who did not desert him; but.the affiltance which
he received from him had rendered him so odious to all
ehriftendom, that he resolved rather. to forego all the ad,
vantages of his friendflip, than to become, on that.account,
the objeEt of: general deteftaion.. For this reason, hedif-
miffed Barbarossa as soon as winter was-over, who, after ra-
vaging the coast of Naples and Tuscany, returned to Con-
ftantinople.. As-Francis could not.hope to equal theforces
of so many powers combined against him, he endeavoured
to fapply that. defe; by. dispatch, which was more in his
power, and'to- get the flart, of them-in taking the field;
Eariy in the spring the count dEngUien invested Carignan,.
a town i. -Piedmont, which the marquis del Guaflo the Imi
perial general having surprised: the fdrmer!year, confidered
as of so much importance, that.he had fortified it at great
expence. The count pufhed:the siege. with such vigoul,
that Guafto, fond of his own conquefti and Teeing no other
way of saving it from falling into the hands of the French,
rcfulved to hazard a battle in order to relieve it.. He began
his march from Milan for this purpose, and as he was at no
pai:s to conceal his intention, it was soon known in the

* Ierbert, 245.. Bellay? 448.

R 3

French camp. Enguien, a gallant and enterprising young
man, winhed paffionatel to try the fortune of a battle; his
troops desired it with no less ardour; but the peremptory in.
juntion of the king not to venture a general engagement,
flowing from a prudent attention to the present situation of
assais, as well as from the remembrance of former difaters,
refrained him from venturing upon it. Unwilling, how.
ever, to abandon Carignan, when it was just ready to yield,
and eager to distinguish his command by some memorable
a&tion, he dispatched Monluc to court, in order to lay before
the king the advantages of fighting the enemy, and the hopes
which he had of vicory. The king referred the matter to
his privy council; all the ministers declared, one-after an.
other, against fighting, and supported their sentiments by
reasons extremely plausible. While they were delivering
their opinions, Monluc, who was permitted to be present,
discovered such visible and extravagant symptoms of impa.
tience to speak, as well as such diffatisfaaion with what he
heard, that Francis, diverted with his -appearance, called on
him to declare what he could offer in reply to sentiments
which seemed to be as just ar they were general Upon
this, Moaluc, a plain but spirited soldier, and of known
courage, represented the good condition of the troops, their
eagerness to meet the enemy in the field, their confidence-in
their officers, together with the everlasting infamy which
the declining of a battle would bring on the French arms;
and he urged his arguments with such lively impetuosity,
and such a flow of military eloquence, as gained over to his
opinion, not only the king, naturally fond of daring acions,
but several of the council. Francis, catching the fame en.
thufiafm which had animated his troops, suddenly started up,
and having lifted his hands to Heaven, and implored the
Divine protection, he then addressed himself to Monluc,
" Go," fays he, " return to Piedmont, and fight in the name
oM
God4."

w Memoires de Mon'uc,

No sooner was it known that the king had given Engui.

en leave to fight the Imperialists, than such was the martial
ardour of the gallant and high-fpirited gentlemen of that
age, that the court was quite deserted, every person desirous
of reputation, or capable of service, hurrying to Piedmont,
in order to ihare, as volunteers, in the danger and glory of
the a&ion. Encouraged by the arrival of so many brave
officers, Enguien immediately prepared for battle, nor did
Guaflo decline the combat. The number of cavalry was
almost equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded the French
by at least ten thousand men. They met near Cerifoles
[April t ], in an open plain, which afforded to neither a-
ny advantage of ground, and both had full time to form
their army in proper order. The {hock was such as might
have been expeEted between veteran troops, violent and ob-
ftinate. The French cavalry rulhing forward to the charge
with their usual vivacity, bore down every thing that op.
posed them; but, on the other hand, the steady and difci.
plined valour of the Spanish infantry having forced the bo-
dy which they encountered to give way, vitory remained
in fufpence, ready to declare for whichever general could
make the best use of that critical moment. Guafto, engag-
ed in that part of his army which was thrown into disorder,
and afraid of falling into the bands of the French, whose
vengeance he dreaded on account of the murder of Rincon
and Fregofo, loft his presence of mind, and forgot to order
a large body of reserve to advance; whereas Enguien, with
admirable courage and equal condu&, supported at the head
of his gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began to yield;
and at the fame time he ordered the Swiss in his service,
who had been viatorious wherever they fought, to fall upon
the Spaniards. This motion proved decisive. All that fol-
lowed was confusion and slaughter. The marquis del Gu-
afto, wounded in the thigh, escaped only by the swiftness of
his horse. The vicory of the French was complete, ten
tloufand of the Imperialits being flaio, and a considerable

number, with all their tents, baggage, and artillery, taken.
On the part of the conquerors, their joy was without allay
a few only being killed, and among these no officer of di
ftin&iont.

This splendid a8ion, beside the reputation with which it

was attended, delivered France from an imminent danger,
as it ruined the army with which Guafto had intended to in.
vade the country between the Rhone and Saone, where
there were neither fortified towns nor regular forces to op.
pose his progres. But it was not in Francis's power tm
pursue the vi&ory with such vigour as to reap all the adL
vantages which it might have yielded; for though the Mi..
lanefe remained now almost defenceless; though the inhabi-
tants who had long murmured under the rigour of the imp
perial government, were ready to throw off the yoke;:
though Enguien, fluhed with success, urged the king to
seize this happy opportunity of recovering a country, the
acquisition of which had been long his favourite object; yet,
as the emperor and the king of England were preparing to.
break in upon the opposite frontier of France with numerous
armies, it became necelary to sacrifice all thoughts ofcon-
quest to the public safety; and to recal twelve thousand of
Enguien's best troops to be employed in defence of the king'
dom. Enguien's subsequent operations were, of consequence,
so languid and inconsiderable, that the reduction of Carig-
nan and some other towns in Piedmont, was all.that he gaiur
cdby his great victory at Cerifoles*.

The emperor, as usual, was late in taking the field, but

he appeared, towards the beginning of June, at the head of
an army more numerous and better appointed than any
which he had hitherto led against France. It amounted a)l
molt to fifty thousand men, and part of it having reduced
Luxembourg and some other towns in the Netherlands, be-

f Bellay, 429, &c. Memoires de Mouluc. Jovii Hilt. 1. xliv.p.
3s7, 6.

*Bellay, 435, &c.

fore he himself joined it, he now marched with the whole
towards the frontiers of Champagne [June.] Charles, ac-
cording to his agreement with the king of.England, ought
to have advanced direfly towards Paris; and the dauphin,
nho commanded the only army to which Francis trusted for
the security of his dominions in that quarter, was in no con-
dition to oppose him. But the success with which the
French had defended Provence in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-fix, had taught them the moat effeaual
method of diltreffing an invading enemy. Champagne, a
country abounding more in vines than corn, was incapable
of maintaining a great army; and before the emperor's ap-
proach, whatever could be of any use to his troops had been
carried offor destroyed. This rendered it necessary for him
to be mailer of some places of fsrength in order to secure
the convoys, on which alone he now perceived that he must
depend for subsistence; and he found the frontier towns so
ill provided for defence, that he hoped it would not be a
work either of much time or difficulty to reduce them. Ac-
cordingly Ligny and Commercy, which he first attacked,
surrendered after a lhort resistance. He then invested St.
Difier [July 8,] which, though it commanded an important
pass on the Marne, was destitute of every thing necessary
for fultaining a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M.
De la Lande, who had acquired such reputation by the de-
fence of Landrecy, generously threw themfdves into the
town, and undertook to hold it out to the last extremity.
The emperor soon found how capable they were of making
good their promise, and that he could not expect to take the
town without belieging it in form. This accordingly he
undertook; and as it was his nature never to abandon any en-
terprife in which he had once engaged, he persisted in it
with an inconsiderate obstinacy.

The king of England's preparations for the campaign

Were complete long before the emperor's; but as he did not
cr:'l, on the one hand, to encounter alone the whole pow-

er of France, and was unwilling, on the other hand, that his
troops should remain inative, he took that opportunity of
chastising the Scots, by fending his fleet, together with a
considerable part of his infantry, under the earl of Hertford,
to invade their country. Hertford executed his commiflion
with vigour, plundered and burnt Edinburgh and Leith,
laid waste the adjacent country, and reimbarked his men
with such dispatch that they joined their sovereign soon as.
ter his landing in France* [July 14.] When Henry ar.
rived in that kingdom, he found the emperor engaged in
the siege of St. Difier; an ambalfador, however, whom he
lent to congratulate the English monarch on his safe arrival
on the continent, solicited him to march, in terms of the
treaty, direlcly to Paris. But Charles had set his ally such
an ll example of fulfilling the conditions of their confede-
racy with exa&nefs, that Henry, observing him employ his
time and forces in taking towns for his ow3n behoof, saw
no reason why he should not attempt the reducion of some
places that lay conveniently for himself. Without paying
any regard to the emperor's remonirances, he immediately
invested Boulogne, and commanded the duke of Norfolk to
press the siege of Montreul, which had been begun before
his arrival, by a body of Flemings, in conjuntion with some
English troops. While Charles and Henry shewed such at.
tention each to his own interest, they both negleAed the
common cause. Instead of the union and confidence re.
quifite towards condu&ing the great plan that they had
formed, they early had discovered a mutual jealousy of each
other, which, by degrees, begot diftruf, and ended in open
hatredt.

By this time, Francis had, with unwearied industry, drawn

together an army, capable, as well from the number as from
the valour of the troops, of making head against the enemy.
But the dauphin, who till acted as general, prudently de.
dining a battle, the loss of which would have endangered

His. Scotland, i. 1:. t Herbert,

the kingdom, satisfied himself with harassing the emperor
with his light troops, cutting off his convoys, and laying
watte the country around him. Though extremely diftref-
fed by these operations, Charles still prefled the siege of St.
Difier, which Sancerre defended with astonishing fortitude
and condu&t. He flood repeated assaults, repulsing the ene-
my in them all; and undismayed even by the death of his
brave associate De la Lande, who was killed by a cannon-
ball, he continued to shew the fame bold countenance and
obstinate resolution. At the end of five weeks, he was
fill in a condition to hold out some time longer, when an
artifice of Granvelle's induced him to surrender. That craf-
ty politician, having intercepted the key to the cypher
which the duke of Guise used in communicating intelligence
to Sancerre, forged a letter in his name, authorising San-
cerre to capitulate, as the king, though highly satisfied with
his behaviour, thought it imprudent to hazard a battle for
his relief. This letter he conveyed into the town in a man-
ner which could raise no fufpicior and the governor fell
into the snare. Even then, he obtained such honourable
conditions as his gallant defence merited, and among others,
a cessation of hoflilities for eight days, at the expiration of

bich he bound himself to open the gates, if Francis, dur-
ng that time, did not attack the Imperial army, and throw
efh troops into the townt. Thus Sancerre, by detaining
he emperor so long before an inconsiderable place, afforded
is (overeign full time to assemble all his forces, and, what
rely falls to the lot of an officer in such an inferior corn-
and, acquired the glory of having saved his country.
As soon as St. Difier surrendered, the emperor advanced
to the heart of Champagne [August 17J, but Sancerre's
btinate resistance had damped his sanguine hopes of pene-
aing to Paris, and led him seriously to refle& on what he
ight expec before towns of greater strength, and defend-
by more numerous garrisons. At the fame time, the pro-

t Brantome, tom. vi. 489.

curing fubfitence for his army was attended'with great dif.
ficulty, which increased in proportion as he withdrew far.
ther from his own frontier. He had loft a-great number of
his heft troops in the siege of St. Difier, and many fell daily-
in {(nniihes, which it was not in his power to avoid, tho'
they wafted his army insensibly, without leading to any de.
cifiv ation. The season advanced apace, and he had not
yet the command either of a sufficient extent of territory,
or of any such considerable town as rendered it safe to-win.
ter in the enemy's country. Great arrears too were now
due to his soldiers, who were upon the point of mutinying
for their pay, while he knew not from what funds to satis>
fy them. All these considerations induced him to liRen to
the overtures of peace, which a Spanifl Dominican, the con.
feffor of his filer the queen of France, had secretly made to
his confessor, a monk of the fame order. In consequence
of this, plenipotentiaries were named on both fides, and be.
gan their conferences in Chaufse, a small village near Cha.
Ions. At the fame time, Charles, either from a desire of
making one great final effort against France, or merely to
gain a pretext for deserting his ally, and concluding a fepa.
rate peace, sent an ambassador formally to require Henry,
according to the stipulation in their treaty, to advance to.
wards Paris. While he expe&ed a return from him, and
waited the issue of the conferences at Chaufse, he continued
to march forward, though in the utmost diftrefa from fcard.
ty of provisions. But at laif, by a fortunate motion on hi
part, or through some negle& or treachery on that ofthe
French, he surprised sirss Efperney and then Chateau Thi
errv, in both which were considerable magazines. No foot!
er was it known that these towns, the latter of which is ndo
two days march from Paris, were in the hands of the enC
my, than that great capital, defenceless, and fufceptillec
any violent alarm in proportion to its greatness, was sied
with consternation. The inhabitants, as if the emperor
been already at their gates, fled in the wildest confusion ad

despair, many fending their wives and children down the
Seine to Rouen, others to Orleans, and the towns upon the
Loire. Francis himself, more afflicted with this than with
any other event during his reign, and sensible as well of the
triumph that his rival would enjoy in insulting his capital,
as of the danger to which the kingdom was exposed, could
not refrain from crying out in the firit emotion of his fur-
prise and forrowr, " How dear, O my God, do T pay for
this crown, which I thought thou hadst granted me free-
ly *!" But recovering in a moment from this sudden sally
of peevishness and impatience, he devoutly added, " Thy
wih, however, be done;" and proceeded to issue the necef-
fary orders for opposing the enemy with his usual acivity
and presence of mind. -The dauphin detached eight
thousand men to Paris, which revived the courage of the as-
frighted citizens; he threw a frong garrison into Meaux,
and by a forced march got into Ferte, between the Imperi-
alill and the capital.

Upon this the emperor, who began again to feel the want

of provisions, perceiving that the dauphin till prudently de-
clined a battle, and not daring to attack his camp with for-
ces so much ihattered and reduced by hard service, turned
suddenly to the right, and began to fall back towards Soif-
sons. Having about this time received Henry's answer,
whereby he refused to abandon the sieges of Boulogne and
Montreuil, of both which he expected every moment to get
pofteflion, he thought himself absolved fiom all obligations
of adhering to the treaty with him, and at full liberty to
consult his own interest in what manner soever he pleased.
He consented, therefore, to renew the conference, which
the surprise of Efperney had broken off. To conclude a
peace between two princes, one of whom greatly dtfired,
and the other greatly needed it, did not require a long
negotiation. It was signed at Crefpy, a small town near
Meaux, on the eighteenth of September. The chief arti-

*Brantome, torn. vi. 381.
Vl. III. S

cles of it were, that all the conqufts which either party had
made since the truce of Nice (hall be reRtored; That the cm.
peror {hall give in marriage to the duke of Orleans, either
his own eldest daughter, or the second daughter of his bro.
ther Ferdinand, that if he chute to bestow on him his own
daughter, he Ihall fettle on her all the provinces of the Low-
Countries, to be erected into an independent state, which
ihal descend to the male issue of the marriage; that if he
determined to give him his niece, he (hall, with her, grant
him the investiture of Milan and its dependencies; that he
{hall within four months declare which of these two princes.
fes he had pitched upon, and fulfil the refpe&ive conditions
upon the consummation of the marriage, which lhall take
place within a year from the date of the treaty; that as
soon as the duke of Orleans is put in poffefion either of the
Low-Countries or of Milan, Francis mhall restore to the duke
of Savoy all that he now pofleffes of his territories, except
Pignerol and Montmilian; that Francis (hall renounce all
pretensions to the kingdom of Naples, or to the sovereignty
of Slanders and Artois, and Charles (hall give up his claim
to the dutchy of Burgundy and county of Charolois; that
Francis {hall give no aid to the exiled king of Navarre; that
both monarchs flall join in making war upon the Turk, to.
wards which the king hall furniih, when required by the em..
peror and empire, fix hundred men at arms, and ten thousand
foot t.

Besides the immediate motives to this peace, arising from

the diflrefs of his army through want of provisions; from
the difficulty of retreating out of France, and the impofflbi-
lity of securing winter-quarters there; the emperor was in-
fluenced, by other considerations, more distant indeed,
but not less weighty. The pope was offended to a
great degree, as well at his concessions to the protestant
in the late diet, as at his contenting to call a council, and to

t Reeueil des Traitez. t. i. 227. Belius de Caufis Pacis Crepi
ac. in ACis Erudit. Lip'. 1763.

admit of public disputations in Germany with a view of de-
termining the dotrines in controversy. Paul confidering
both these steps as sacrilegious encroachments on thejurifdic.
tion as well as privileges of the holy fee, had addressed to
the emperor a remonifrance rather than a letter on this sub-
je&, written with such acrimony of language, and in a flyle
of such high authority, as discovered more of an intention
to draw on a quarrel than of a desire to reclaim him. This
ill humour was not a little inflamed by the emperor's league
with Henry of England, which being contra&ed with an
heretic excommunicated by the apostolic fee, appeared to the
pope a profane alliance, and was not less dreaded by him
than that of Francis with Solyman. Paul's son and grand.
son, highly incensed at the emperor for having refused to
gratify them with regard to the alienation of Parma ana
Placentia, contributed by their suggestions to four and dif-
gull him still more. To all which was added the powerful o-
peration of the flattery and promises which Francis iuceffant-
ly employed to gain him. Though from his desire of main-
taining a neutrality, the pope had hitherto suppresscd his
own resentment, had eluded the artifices of his own family,
and refired the solicitations of the French king, it was not
safe to rely much on the feadinefs of a man whom his pas-
sions, his friends, and his interest combined to shake. The
union of the pope with France, Charles well knew, would
inRantly expose his dominions in Italy to be attacked.
The Venetians, he foresaw, would probably follow the ex-
ample bs a pontiff, who was confidered as a model of politi-
cal wisdom among the Italians; and thus, at a junture
when he felt himself hardly equal to the burden of the pre-
sent war, he would be overwhelmed with the weight of a
new confederacy against him . At the fame time, thel
Turks, almost unrefihted, made such progress in Hungary,
reducing town after town, that they approached near to

tF. Paul. ioo. Pallavic. I63.

S

the confines of the Aufirian provincest. Above all these
the extraordinary progress of the protestant docrines in
Germany, and the dangerous combination into which the
princes of that profession had entered, called for his immedi.
ate attention. Almost one half of Germany had revolted
from the eflablifhed church; the fidelity of the reft was
much shaken; the nobility of Aultria had demanded of
Ferdinand the free exercise of religion 1; the Bohemians,
among whom some feeds of the doctrines of Huss still re-
mained, openly favoured the new opinions; the archbishop
of Cologne, with a zeal which is seldom found among ec-
clefafics, had begun the reformation of his diocese; nor
was it possible, unless some timely and effeaual check were
given to the spirit of innovation, to foresee where it would
end. He himself had been a witness, in the late diet, to the
peremptory and decisive tone which the proteflants had now
afiumed. He had seen how, from confidence in their nmt.
ber and union, they had forgotten the humble ifyle of their
sirs petitions, and had grown to such boldness as openly to
despise the pope, and to shew no great reverence for the Im-
perial dignity itself. If, therefore, he wished to maintain
either the ancient religion or his own authority, and
would not chufe to dwindle into a mere nominal head of
the empire, some vigorous and speedy effort was requisite
on his part, which could not be made during a war that re.
quired the greatest exertion of his strength against a foreign
and powerful enemy.

Such being the emperor's inducements to peace, he had

the address to frame the treaty of Crefpy so as to promote
all the ends which he had in view. By coming to an a.
greement with Francis, he tookfrom the pope all profped
of advantage in courting the friendlhip of that monarch
in preference to his. By the proviso with regard toa
war with the Turks, he not only deprived Solyman 0o
a powerful ally, but turned the arms of that ally agaiufl

t lf-ianhaffi Hifl. Hung. 177. B Sleid. 285.

him. By a private article, not inserted in the treaty,
that it might not raise any unseasonable alarm, he a-
greed with Francis that both Should exert all their influ-
ence and power in order to procure a general council, to as-
fert its authority, and to exterminate the protestant heresy
out of their dominions. This cut off allchance of alifance
which the confederates of Smalkalde might expec from the
French king*; and left their solicitations, or his jealousy of
an ancient rival, should hereafter tempt Francis to forget
this engagement, he left him embarrassed with a war against
England, which would put it out of his power to take any
considerable part in the affairp of Germany.

Henry, possessed at all times with an high idea of his ownr

power and importance, felt, in the most feniible manner, the
neglect with which the emperor had treated him in con-
eluding a separate peace. But the situation of his affaira
was such as somewhat alleviated the mortification which this
occasioncd. For though he was obliged to recal the duke
of Norfolk from the siege of Montreuil [Sept. 14], because
the Flemish troops received orders to retire, Boulogne had'
surrendered before the negotiations at Crefpy were brought
to an issue. While elated with vanity on account of this
conquest, and inflamed with indignation against the emperor,
the ambassadors whom Francis sent to make overtures of
peace, found him too arrogant to grant what was moderate
or equitable; His demands were indeed extraiagant, and
made in the tone of a. conqueror; that Francis hould re.
nounce his alliance with Scotland, and not only pay up the
arrears of formner debts, but reimburse the money which
Henry had expended in the present wart. Francis, though
sincerely desirous of peace, and willing to yield a great deal
il order to obtain it, being now free from the pressure of
the Imperial arms, rejeced these ignominious propositions

' Sck. 1. iii. 496.
t Mcm. de Ribier, t..i p. 57 . Herbert, 244.

S3

with disdain; and Henry departing for England, hoifilitiec
continued between the two nations.

The treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to the people

of France, whom it delivered from the dread of an enemy
who had penetrated into the heart of the kingdom, was
loudly complained of by the dauphin. He confidered it
as a manifest proof ds the king his father's exttrordinary
partiality towards his younger brother, now duke of Or.
leans, and complained that, from his eagerness to gain an
cftablilhment for a favourite son, he had sacrificed the ho.
nour of the kingdom, and renounced the most ancient as
well as valuable rights of the crown. But as he durst not
venture to offend the king by refusing to ratify it, though
extremely desirous at the fame time of securing to hiinfelf
the privilege of reclaiming what was now alienated so much
to his detriment, he secretly protested, in pretence of some
of his adherents, against the whole tranfa&ion; and declared
whatever he should be obliged to do in order to confirm it,
null in itself, and void of all obligation. The parliament
of Thouloufe, probably by the instigation of his partisans,
did the fame*. But Francis, highly pleased as well with
having delivered his fubjets from the miseries of an inva-
flon, as with the profpet of acquiring an independent let.
tiement for his son at no greater price than that of renounc-
ing conqueRs to which he had no just claim; titles which
had brought so much expence and so many disasters upon
the nation; and rights grown obsolete and of no value; rati.
sied the treaty with great joy. Charles, within the tint
prescribed by the treaty, declared his intention of giving
Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the duke of Orleans,
together with the dutchy of Milan as her dowryt. Every
circumstance seemed to promise the continuance of peace.
The emperor, cruelly afflited with the gout, appeared to
be in no condition to undertake any enterprise where great
a&ivity was requisite, or much fatigue to be endured. lie

Recueil des Traitez, t. ii. 235, 238.
t Recutil des Traitcz, t. ii. z38.

himfelffelt this, or wished at least that it ihould be believ-
ed; and being so much disabled by this excruciating diftem-
per, when a French ambassador followed him to Brussels, in
order to be present at his ratification of the treaty of peace,
that it was with the utmost difficulty that he signed his
name, he observed, that there was no great danger of his
violating these articles, as a hand that could hardly hold a
pen, was little able to brandish a lance.

The violence of his disease confined the emperor several

months in Brussels, and was the apparent cause of putting off
the execution of the great scheme which he had formed in
order to humble the protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For, however pre-
valent the motives were which determined him to undertake
this enterprise, the nature of that great body which he was
about to attack, as well as the situation of his own affairs,
made it necessary to deliberate long, to proceed with cau-
tion, and not too suddenly to throw aside the veil under
which he had hitherto concealed his real sentiments and
schemes. He was sensible that the protestants, conscious of
their own strength, but under continual apprehensions of
his designs, had all the boldness of a powerful confederacy
joined to the jealousy of a feeble facion; and were no less
quick-fighted to discern the first appearance of danger, than
ready to take arms in order to repel it. At the fame time,
he still continued involved in a Turkish war; and though,
in order to deliver himself from this incumbrance, he had
determined to fend an envoy to the Porte with moit advan-
tageous and even submissive overtures of peace, the refolu-
tions of that haughty court were so uncertain, that before
there were known, it would have been highly imprudent to
have kindled the flames of civil war in his own dominions.

Upon this account, he appeared dissatisfied with a bull

issued by the pope immediately after the peace of Crefpy
[Nov. 19], summoning the council to assemble at Trent
early next spring, and exhorting all Christian princes to em-

brace the opportunity that the present happy interval of
tranquillity afforded them, of suppressing those heresics which
threatened to subvert whatever was sacred or venerable a,
mong Chriftiaas. But after such a flight expression of dip
like, as was necessary in order to cover his designs, he deter.
mined to countenance the council, which might become no
inconiderable infirument towards accompliflhng his project,
and therefore not only appointed ambafladors to appear there
in his name, but ordered the ecclefiaics in his dominions
to attend at the time prefixed*.

1545] Such were the emperor's views when the Impes

rial diet, after several prorogations, was opened at Worms
[March 24]. The protestants, who enjoyed the free ex.
ercife of their religion by a very precarious tenure, having
no other security for it than the recess of the last diet, which
was to continue in force only until the meeting of a count
ci, wiffed earnestly to eitablifh that important privilege
upon some firmer basis, and to hold it by a perpetual not a
temporary title. But instead of offering them any addition,
al security, Ferdinand opened the diet with observing, that
there were two points, which chiefly required consideration,
the prosecution of the war againfi the Tarks, and the fate
of religion; that the former was the most urgent, as Soly.
man, after conquering the greatest part of Hungary, was
now ready to fall upon the Austrian provinces; that the
emperor, who, from the beginning of his reign,. had negle&,
ed no opportunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and
with the hazard of his own person. had resifted his attacks,
being animated iti wih the fame zeal, had now consented
to flop short in the career of his success against France, that,
in conjun&ion with his ancient rival, he might turn his
arms with greater vigour against the common adversary of
the Christian faith; that it became all the members of the
empire to second those pious endeavours of its head; tha4
therefore, they ought, without delay, to vote him such fc-

F. Paul, 104.

featual aid as not only their duty but their interest called
upon them to furnish; that the controversies about religion
were so intricate, and of such difficult discussion, as to give
no hope of its being possible to bring them at present to any
final issue; that by perseverance and repeated solicitations
the emperor had at length prevailed on the pope to call a
council, for which they had so often wi{hed and petitioned;
that the time appointed for its meeting was. now come, and
both parties ought to wait for its decrees, and submit to
them as the decisions of the universal church.

The popish members of the diet received this declaration

with great applause, and signified their entire acquiefcnce
in every particular which it contained. The protestants
expressed great surprise at propositions, which were so manic
feftly repugnant to the recess of the former diet; they infit
ed that the questions with regard to religion, as first in dig-
nity and importance, ought to come first under deliberation;
that, alarming as the progress of the Turks was to all Ger-
many, the securing the free exercise of their religion touch-
ed them fill more nearly, nor could they prosecute a so-
reign war with spirit, while solicitous and uncertain about
their domestic tranquillity; that if the latter were once ren-
dered firm and permanent, they would concur with their
countrymen in pushing the former, and yield to none of them
in acivity or zeal. But if the danger from the Turkifb
arms was indeed so imminent, as not to admit of such a de-
hy as would be occasioned by an immediate examination of
th, controverted points in religion, they required that a di.
et Ihould be inflantly appointed, to which the final fettle-
ment of their religious disputes should be referred; and that
in the mean time the decree of the former diet concerning
religion Ihould be explained in a point which they deemed
essential. By the recess of Spires it was provided, that they
hould enjoy unmolested the public exercise of their religion,
until the meeting of a legal council; but as the pope had
now called a council, to which Ferdinand had required them

to fubmnt, they began to fufpec that their adversaries might
take advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of the recess,
and pretending that the event therein mentioned had now
taken place, might pronounce them to be no longer entitled to
the fame indulgence. In order to guard againlt this inter.
pretation, they renewed their former remonstrances against
a council called to meet, without the bounds of the empire,
fmumoned by the pope's authority, and in which he aflumn.
ed the right of presiding; and declared that, notwithftand.
ing the convocation of any such illegal assembly, they ftil
held the recess of the late diet to be in full force.

At other juncures, when the emperor thought it of ad.

vantage to soothe and gain the protestants, he had deviftd
expedients for giving them fatisfacRion with regard to de.
mands seemingly more extravagant; but his views at present
being very different, Ferdinand, by his command, adhered
inflexibly to his irft propositions, and would make no con.
cdfons which had the most remote tendency to throw di
credit on the council, or to weaken its authority. The pro.
teitants, on their part, were no les inflexible; and after
much time spent in fruitless endeavours to convince each o-
ther, they came to no agreement. Nor did the presence of
the emperor, who upon his recovery arrived at Worms [May
xi,] contribute in any degree to render the protestants
more compliant. Fully convinced that they were maintain-
ing the cause of God and of truth, they lhewed themselves
superior to the allurements of intercft, or the suggestions
of fear; and in proportion as the emperor redoubled his so.
licitations, or discovered his designs, their boldness seems to
have increased. At last they openly declared, that they
would not even deign to vindicate their tenets in presence of
a council, assembled not to examine, but to condemn them;
and that they would pay no regard to an assembly held un-
der the influence of a pope, who had already precluded him-
self from all title to a& as a judge, by his having ftigmatiz-
ed their opinions with the name of heresy, and denounced

againll them the heaviest censures, which, in the plenitude
of his usurped power, he could inflit*.

While the protestants, with such union as well as firm.

ness, rejeced all intercourse with the council, and refused
their assent to the Imperial demands, in refpe&t to the Turkilh
war, Maurice of Saxony alone ihewed an inclination to gra-
tify the emperor with regard to both. Though he profef-
fed an inviolable regard for the protestant religion, he affum-
ed an appearance of moderation peculiar to himself, by which
he confirmed the favourable sentiments which the emperor
already entertained of him, and gradually paved the way
for executing the ambitious designs which always occupied
his aftive and enterprising mindt. His example, however,
lad little influence upon such as agreed with him in their re-
ligious opinions; and Charles perceived that he could not
hope either to procure-prefent aid from the protestants a-
gainft the Turks, or to quiet their fears andjealoufies on ac-
count of their religion. But as his schemes were not yet
ripe for execution, nor his preparations so far advanced that
he could force the compliance of the protestants, or punish
their obstinacy, he artfully concealed his own intentions.
That he might augment their security, he [August 4] ap-
pointed a diet to be held at Ratisbon early next year, in or-
der to adjust what was now left undetermined; and previ-
ous to it, he agreed that a certain number of divines of each
party fiould meet, in order to confer upon the points in dif-
pute§.

But, how far soever this appearance of a desire to main-

tain the present tranquillity might have imposed upon the
protestants, the emperor was incapable of such uniform and
thorough diflimulation, as to hide altogether from their view
the dangerous designs which he was meditating against
them. Herman count de Weld, archbilhop and ele&or of
Cologne, a prelate conspicuous for his virtue and primitive

' slcid. 3, &c. Seck. ii. 54, &c. Thuan. Hiftor. lib. ii p.
56. t Seck. iii. S r. § S!eid. 351.

simplicity of manners, though not more distinguished fL
learning than the other descendants of noble families, who
in that age poffefled most of the great benefices in Germa.
ny, having become a proselyte, to the dodrines of the reform.
ers, had begun in the year one thousand five hundred and
forty-three, with the assistance of MelancAhon and Bucer,
to abolish the ancient fuperRition in his diocese, and to in.
troduce in its place the rites eflablifhed among the prote.
slants. But the canons of his cathedral, who were not pof.
seifed with the fame spirit of innovation, and who foresaw
how fatal the levelling genius of the new sect would prove
to their dignity and wealth, opposed, from the beginning,
this unprecedented enterprise of their archbishop, with all
the zeal flowing from reverence for old institutions, height.
ened by concern for their own interet. This opposition,
which the arclbilhop confidered only as a new argument to
demonutrate the necessity of a reformation, neither shook his
resolution, nor slackened his ardour in prosecuting his plan,
the canons, perceiving all their endeavours to check his ca.
reer to be ineffectual, solemnly protested against his proceed.
ings, and appealed for redress to the pope and emperor, the
former as ecc!efiaftical, the latter as his civil superior. Tis
appeal being laid before the emperor, during his refidencein
Worms, he took the canons of Cologne under his immediate
protection; enjoined them to proceed with rigour againftal
who revolted from the eftahlifhed church; prohibitedthe
archbiihop to make any innovation in his diocese; and fum.
moned him to appear at Brnffels within thirty days, to an.
fwer the accusations which should be preferred against himn.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions against the

proteilant party, Charles added other proofs fill more ex
plicit. In his hereditary dominions of the Low-Countries,
he persecuted all who were fufpe&ted of Lutheranifm with
unrelenting rigour. As soon as he arrived at Worms, he
fienced the protefant preachers in that city. He allowed

t Sleid. 3 o, 340, 351. Seckend. iii. 443, 553.

an Italian monk to inveigh against the Lutherans from the
pulpit of his chapel, and to call upon him, as he regarded
the favour of God, to exterminate that pestilent heresy.
He dispatched the embassy, which has been already men-
tioned, to Constantinople, with overtures of peace, that he
might be free from any apprehensions of danger or interrup-
tion from that quarter. Nor did any of these steps, or their
dangerous tendency, escape the jealous observation of the
proteRants, or fail to alarm their fears, and to excite their
solicitude for the safety of their fe&.

Meanwhile, Charles's good fortune, which predominated

on all occasions over that of his rival Fraicis, extricated him
out of a difficulty, from which, with all his sagacity and ad-.
dress, he would have found it no easy matter to have difen-
tangled himself. Just about the time when the duke of Or-
leans should have received Ferdinand's daughter in marriage,
and together with her the possession of the Milanese, he died
of a malignant fever [Sept. 8]. By this event, 'the empe-
ror was freed from the necessity of giving up a valuable pro-
vince into the hands of an enemy, or from the indecency of
violating a recent and solemn engagement, which must have
occasioned an immediate rupture with France. He affeced,
however, to express great sorrow for the untimely death of
a young prince, who was to have been so nearly allied to
him; but he carefully avoided entering into any fresh discus-
sions concerning the Milanese; and would not lifRen to a
proposal which came from Francis of new-modelling the
treaty of Crefpy, so as to make him some reparation for the
advantages which hehad loft by the demise of his son. In
the more afive and vigorous part of Francis's reign, a de-
claration of war would have been the certain and inftanta-
neous consequence offuch a flat refusal to comply with a de-
mand seemingly so equitable; but the declining fate of his
own health, the exhausted condition of his kingdom, toge-
therwith the burden of the war against England, obliged
him, at present, to dissemble his resentment, and to put off

Vol. IlI. T

thoughts of revenge to some other junaure. i cobL.
quenct of this event, the unfortunate duke of Savoy loftal
hope of obtaining the restitution of his territories; and the
rights or claims relinquifled by the treaty of Crefpy return.
ed in full force to the crown of France, to serve as pretexts
for future wars.

Upon the first intelligence of the duke of Orleans's death;

the confederates of Smalkalde flattered themselves that the
cisential alterations which appeared to be unavoidable con.
sequences of it could hardly fail of producing a rupture,
which would prove the means of their safety. But they
were not more disappointed with regard to this, than in their
expectations from an event which seemed to be the certain
prelude of a quarrel between the emperor and the pope.
When Paul, whose pafiion for aggrandizing his family in.
creased as he advanced in years, and as he saw the dignity
and power which they derived immediately from him becom.
ing more precarious, found that he could not bring Charles
to approve of his ambitious schemes, he ventured to grant
his ion Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and Placentia,
though at the ritk of incurring the displeasure of the em.
peror. At a time when a great part of Europe inveighed
openly against the corrupt manners and exorbitant power
ofecclefiaftics and when a council was summoned to reformn
the disorders in the church, this indecent grant of such a
principality, to a son of whose illegitimate birth the pope
ought to have been ashamed, and whose licentious morals all
good men detested,. gave general offence. Some cardinals
in the Imperial interest remonfirated against such an unb-
coming alienation of the patrimony of the church; the Spa
nifh ambafiador would not be present at the solemnity of his
infeoffment, and upon pretext that there cities were part of
the Milanese state, the emperor peremptorily refused to con-
firm the deed of investiture. But both the emperor and
pope being intent upon one common objet in Germany,

Btlarii Comment. 769. Paruta, Hit. Venet. iv. p. 177.

they sacrificed their particular pallions to that public cause,
and suppressed the emotions ofjealoufy or resentment which
were rising onthis occasion, that they night jointly pursue
what each deemed to'be of greater importance*.

About this time the peace of Germany was diflurbed by

a violent but short eruption of Henry duke of Brunswick.
This prince, though iill ttript'of his dominions, which the
enpcror held in fequefRration, until his differences with the
confederates of Smalkalde should be adjufed; possessed how-
ever so much credit in Germany, that he undertook to raise
for the French king a considerable body of troops to be em-
ployed in the war against England. The money Ripulatcd
for this purpose was duly advanced by Francis; the troops
were levied; but Henry, inflead of leading them towards
Fiance, suddenly entered his own dominions at their head,
in hopes of recovering possession of them before any army
could be assembled to oppose him. The confetr3-tcs were
not more surprised at thins uexpecced attack, than the king
of France was afonifhed at a mean thievimh fraud,' so unbe-
coming the chara&er of a prince. But the landgrave of
Hesse, with incredible expedition, coHeated as many men as
put a flop to the progress of Henry's undisciplined forces,
and being joined by his for-n-law, Maurice, and by some
troops belonging to the ele&tor of Saxony, he gained fuck
advantages over Henry, who was rash and bold in forming
his schemes, but feeble and undetermined in executing them,
as obliged him to disband his army, and to surrender himselfs
together with his eldest son, prisoners at discretion. He
was kept in close confinement, until a new reverse of affairs
procured him libertyt.

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise added new repu-
tation to the arms of the protellants, the establishment of'the
protellant religion in the palatinate brought a great acceffiorr
of frength to their party. Frederick, who succeeded his bro-

Paruta, Hift.Venet.. iv. 178. Pallavic. i80g

t Sleid. 32. Seek. iii. 567.

T z

ther Lewis in that eltorate, bad long been fufpeced of a fe.
et propensity to the doArines of the reformers, which, upn
his accffon to the principality, he openly manifeted. But as
heexpe&edtat something effetaltowards a generalandlegl
eftablif;mcnt of religion, would be the fruit of so many diets,
conferenccs, and negotiations, he did not, atfirft, attempt any
public innovation in his dominions. Finding all these issue in
nothing, he thought himself called, at length [Jan. to,
15463, to countenance by his authority the system which
he approved of, and to gratify the wifeas of his subjes,
who, by their intercourse with the proteRfant fates: bad aL
most uivcrfally imbibed their opinions. As the warmth
and impetuosity, which accompanied the spirit of reforma
tion in its fir efforts, had somewhat abated, this change
was made with great order and regularity; the ancient rita
were abolihed, and new forms introduced, without any ads
of ii.ace, or symptom of discontent. Though Frederick
adopted the religious ifyietu f the protefta. ts, he imitated
the example of Maurice, and did not accede to the league
of Sialkalde t.

A few weeks before this revolution in the palatinate, the

general council was opened with the accustomed folemnities
at Trent. The eves of the catholic states were turned with
much expe~ation towards an assembly, which all had cos
fidered as capable of applying an effecual remedy for the
disorders of the church when they firit broke out, though
many were afraid that it was now too late to hope for grea
benefit from it, when the malady, by being suffered to-in-
crease during twenty-eight years, had become inveterate and
grown to such extreme violence. The-pope, by: hi at
bull of convocation, had appointed the firit meeting tilb
held in March. But his views and those of the emperor
were so different, that almost the whole year was spent in
negotiations. Charles, who forelaw that the rigorous de
crees of the council against the proteftants'would soo0

tSleid. 36. Seck.Liii.6z6.

drive them, in felf-defence.as well as from resentment, to some
desperate extreme, laboured to put off its meeting until his
warlike peparations were so far advanced, that he might be
in a condition to second its decisions by the force of his
arms. The pope, who had early sent to Trent the legates
who were to preside in his name, knowing to what con-
tempt it would expose his authority, and what suspicions
it would beget of his intentions, if the fathers of the coun*
cil Ihould remain in a itate of inacivity, when the church
was in filch danger as to require their immediate and vigors
eus interposition, insisted' either upon translating the council
to some city in Italy,or upon suspending altogether its pro-
ceedings at that jun&ure, .or upon authorizing it to begirr
its deliberations immediately- The emperor. rejeted the
two former expedients as. equally offensive to the Germanr
of every denomination;- but finding it impoflible to. elude
the latter, he propefed that the council should- begin with
reforming the disorders in the church, before it proceeded.
to examine or define articles- of faith. This was the very
thing which the court of Rome dreaded most, and which·
had prompted it to employ. so many artifices in order to.pre-
vent the- meeting of fich, a. dangerous ipdicatoryp Paul,,
though- more compliant than some of his :Redecefors with,
regard to calling. awcouncil, was. nor ief jealous than they
had been of its jurifdition, and few what matter of triumph'
filch a method of proceeding would afford the heretics.
He apprehended consequences. not only humblingobut fatal:
to the papal fee,,if the council; came toconfider an inqtiefit
into abuses as; their only business, or if inferior prelates
were allowed to gratify their .own envy. and peevishness, by
prescribing. rules to those who. are exalted& above them in
dignity and power. Without listening, therefore, to this
inlidious proposal of the emperor, he inftruded his legates
ta open. the council.

Jan. 18]. The first feflion was spent in matters of form.
In a fubfequenr one,,it was agreed. that the framing a cona

T3

fcfion of faith, wherein ihould be contained all the artida
which the church required its members to believe ought-to
be the firt and principal bufinef of the council; but that
at the fame time, due attention &hould be given to what wa
Beceffary towards the reformation of manners and difciplian
From this fir symptom of the spirit with which the council
was anim~ from the high tone of authority which the
legates who presided in it assumed, and from the implicit
deference with which most of the members followed theie
direions, the protestants conjetured with ease what dcci.
sions they might expe& It afonifhed them, however to
fee forty prelates (for no greater number were yet assem.
bled) assume authority as representatives of the univerfil
church, and proceed to determine the most important -oints
of doarinc in its' name. - Scfible of this indecency, as
well as of the ridicule with which it might be attended, the
council advanced slowly in its deliberations, and al its pro
ceedinge were for some time languishing and feeble. A*
loon as the confederates of Smalkalde received information
of the opening of the council, they publihed a long mani.
s£-o, containing a renewal of their protest against its meet.
ing, together with the reasons which induced them to de
cine its jurifdi'fiom . The pope and emperor, on their
part, were so little solicitous to quicken or add vigour to its
operations, as plainly discovered that some objeft of grate
importance occupied and interested them. - *

The protestants were not inattentive or unconcerne

fpe&aton of the motions of the forciga pontiff and of
Charl, and they entertained every day more: violent fn-
picions of their intentions, ii consequence of intelligence r
eived from different quarters of the machinations carrying
on against them. The king of England informed them,
that the emperor having long resolved to exterminate their
opinions, would not fail to employ this interval of tranqul

* F. Paul, lzo, &c. Pallavic. p. 180, &c.

t Seckend. 1. ii. 6oZ, &c.

-'

lity which he now enjoyed, as the moit favourable junaure
for carrying his design into execution. The merchants of -
Aug(burg, which was at that -time a city of cxtenfive trade,
received advice, by means of their corrfpondents in Italy,
among whom were some who secretly favoured the protef.
tant cause §, that a dangerous confederacy against it was
forming between the pope and emperor. In confirmation
of this they heard from the Low-Countries, that Charles
had issued orders, though with every precaution which
could keep the measure concealed, for raiing troops both
there and in other parts- of his dominions. Such- a variety
of information and corroborating all that their own jealousy
or observation led them to apprehend, left the protestants
little reason to doubt of the emperor's hotile intentions.
Under this impreflion, the deputies of the confederates of
Smalkalde assembled at Francfort, and by communicating
their intelligence and sentiments to each other, reciprocally
heightened their sense of the impending danger. But their
union was not such as their situation required, or the prepa
rations of their enemies rendered necefary. Their league
had now subsisted ten years. Among so many members,
whose territories were intermingled with each other, and
who, according to the cufom of Germany, had created an
infinite variety of mutual rights and claims by intermarri-
ages, alliances, and contrats of different kinds, fubjess of
jealousy and discord had unavoidably arisen. Some of the
confederates, being conneced with the duke of Brunswick,
were highly disgusted with the landgrave, on account of
the rigour with which he had treated that rash and unfortu-
nate prince. · Others taxed the eletor of Saxony and
landgrave, the heads of the league, with having involved the
members in unnecessary and exorbitant expences by their
profuseness or want of economy. The views, likewise, and
temper of those two princes, who by their superior power
and authority, influenced and dire&ed the whole body, be.

§ Seck. l. iii. 579.

ing etremely different, rendered all its motions languid, t
a time when the utmost vigour and dispatch were requisite.
The landgrave, of a violent and enterprising temper, but iot
forgetful, amidst his zeal for religion, of the usual maxims of
human policy, insisted that as the danger which threatened
them was manift and unavoidable, they should have re-
course to the most effe&ual expedient for securing their own
safety, by courting the protction of the kings of Franee
and Enghnd, or by joining in alliance with the proteftaut
canton of Swiferland from whom they might expet fuck
powerful and prfent affifance as their situation demanded.
The eletor on the other hand, with the molt upright inten.
tions of any prince in' that age, and with talents- which
might have qualiiedhim abundantly for the-admiifration
of government n any tranql peiod,, was polfesd- with
such fuperititos veneration for all the partofthe L.uther
an system, and such bigotted attachment to all its tenets, au
made him avere to an union with those who differed from
him in any article of faith, and rendered him very incapable
of undertaking its defence in times of difficuty'and danger;
He feeed to think, that the concerns of religion were to
be regulated by principles and maxims totally different from
tbofe which apply to the common affairs of life,. andbeing
swayed too much by the opinions-of Luther, who was not
only a firanger to the rules of political condu, .but defpifea
them;. he often discovered an uncomplying spirit that prof-
ed of the greatef detriment to the cause which he wfhed-to,
support. Influenced,. on this occasion,. by the fivere and
rigid notions of that reformer, he. refused to enter into inry
confederacy with Francis, becaufehe was perfecutor.ofthe
truth; or to. solicit the friendlhip of Henry,.becaufehe was.
no les impious and profane than the-pope himself;' or even
to join in alliance with the Swifs,.becaufe they differed from
the Germans in several efintial articles of faith. This dif-
fenfion, about a point of such consequence, produced its na-
tural effets Each secretly cerfured and reproached the

other. The landgrave confidered the elecor as fettered by
narrow prejudices, unworthy of a prince called to a& a
chief part in a scene of such importance. The eletor sus-
peaed the landgrave of loose principles and ambitious views,
which corresponded ill with the sacred cause wherein they
were engaged. But though the eletor's scruples prevent-
ed their timely application for foreign aid; and the jealousy
or discontent of the other princes defeated a proposal for
renewing their original confederacy, the term during which
it was to continue in force being on the point of expiring;
yet the sense of their common danger induced them to a-
gree with regard to other point, particularly that they would
never acknowledge the assembly at Trent as a lawful coun-
cil, nor susser the archbishop of Cologne to be oppressed on
account of the iteps which he had taken towards the refor-
mation of his diocese*.

The landgrave, about this time, desirous of penetrating
to the bottom of the emperor's intentions, wrote to Gran-
velle, whom he knew to be thoroughly acquainted with all
his master's schemes, informing him of the several particu-
ars which raised the suspicions of the protefants, and beg-
ging an explicit declaration of what they had to fear or to
hope. Granvelle, in return, affiured them, that the intedl-
gence which they had received of the emperor's militait
preparations was exaggerated, and all their fnfpicions defti-
tute of foundation; that though, in order to guard his fron-
tiers against any insult of the French or English, he had
commanded a small body of men to be raised in the Low-
Countries, he was as solicitous as ever to maintain tranquil-
lity in Germanyt.

But the emperor's a&ions did not correspond with these

professions of his minister. For instead of appointing men
of known moderation and a pacific temper to appear in de-
fence of the catholic dofrines at the conference which had

$ Seck.l. iii. 566, 576, 613. Slid. 355.

t Slcid. 356.

# BOOK VIII.

been agreed on, he made choice of fierce bigots, attaclcd
to their own system with a blind obstinacy, that rendered
all bope of a reconcilement desperate. Malvenda, a Spani0h
divine, who took upon him the conduEt of the debati oe
the part of the catholics, managed it with all the subtle des.
terity of a fcholafllic metaphysician, more studious to per.
plex his adversaries than to convince them, and more intent
on palliating error than on discovering truth. The protest.
ants, filled with indignation, as well at his fopliifry as at
iome regulations which the emperor endeavoured to impose
on the disputants, broke off the conference abruptly, being
now fully convinced that, in all his late measures, the em.
peror could have no other view than to amuse them, and to
gain time for ripening his own schemes*.

BOOK VIII.

\VW nl appearances of danger daily increased, and the
tempet which had been so long a gathering was ready to
break forth in all its violence against the protestant church,
Luther was saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling or
beholding its deilruóive rage. Having gone, though in a
declining state of health, and during a rigorous season, to
his native city of Eyfleben, in order to compose, by his aun
thority, a dissension among the counts of Mansfield, be ma
seized with a violent inflammation in his stomach, which is
a few days put an end to his life, in the fixty-third year of
his age [Feb. 1 8J. As he was raised up by Providence to
be the author of one of the greatest and molt interesting it.
volutions recorded in hifRory, there is not any person perhaps
whose character has been drawn with such opposite colours
In his own age, one party, struck with horror and inflame
with rage, when they law with what a daring hand he over

' Sleid. 358. Secck. L iii. 6z.

turned every thing which they held to be sacred, or valued
as beneficial, imputed to him not only all the defe&s and
vices of a man, but the qualities of a demon. The other,
warmed with the admiration and gratitude, which they
thought he merited as the restorer of light and liberty to
the ChrifRian chlst, ascribed to him perfe&ions above the
condition of humanity, and viewed all his actions with a ve-
neration bordering on that which Ihould be paid only to
those who are guided by the immediate inspiration of Hea.
ten. It is his own condu&, not the undiftinguilhing cen-
sure or the exaggerated praise of his contemporaries, that
ought to regulate the opinions of the present age concern-
ing him. Zeal for what he regarded as truth, undaunted
intrepidity to maintain his own fyffem, abilities, both natu-
ral and acquired, to defend his principles, and unwearied in-
duftry in propagating them, are virtues which (hine so con-
fpicuoufly in every part of his'behaviour, that even his ene-
mies must allow him to have possessed them in an eminent
degree. To these may be added, with equal justice, such
purity and even austerity of manners, as became one who
assumed the character of a Reformer; such san&ity of life
as suited the dotrine which he delivered; and such perfec
disinterestedness as affords no flight presumption of his fin-
cerity. Superior to all selfish considerations, a stranger to
the elegancies of life, and despising its pleasures, he left the
honours and emoluments of the church to his disciples, re-
maining satisfied himself in his original fiate of professor in
the univeriity, and pastor of the town of Wittemberg, with
the moderate appointments annexed to these offices. His
extraordinary qualities were allayed with no inconsiderable
mixture of human frailty and human palfons. These, how-
ever, were of such a nature, that they cannot be imputed to
malevolence or corruption of heart, but seem to have taken
their rife from the fame source with many of his virtues.
His mind, forcible and vehement in all its operations, rous-
td by great objeCts, or agitated by violent paifions, broke

out, on many occasions, with an impetuosity which aftonihce
men of feebler spirits, or such as are placed in a more ttan.
quil situation. By carrying some praise-worthy difpofitioun
to excess, he bordered some times on what was culpable, and
was often betrayed into ations which exposed him to cen.
sure. His confidence that his own opinions were well-found.
ed, approached to arrogance; his courage in asserting them,
to rafhnef; his firmneis in adhering to them, to obstinacy;
and his zeal in confuting his adversaries, to rage and feir.
rility. Accustomed himself to confider every thing as Cub.
ordinate to truth, he expected the fame deference for it from
other men; and without making any allowances for their
timidity or prejudices, he poured forth against -such as dif.
appointed him in this particular, a torrent of invective ming.
led with contempt. Regardless of any diftintion of ran
or charater when his dotrines were attacked, he chafifed
all his adversaries indiscriminately, with the fame rough
hand; neither the royal dignity of Henry VIII. nor the
eminent learning and abilities of Eramius, screened them
from the fame gross abuse with which he treated Tetzel or
Eccius.

But these indecencies of which Luther was guilty, must

not be imputed wholly to the violence of his temper. They
ought to be charged in part on the manners of the age. A.
mong a rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which, by putting continual restraint on the paflions of in
dividuals, have polished society, and rendered it agreeable,
disputes of every kind were managed with heat, and tiog
emotions were uttered in their natural language without re.
serve or delicacy. At the fame time, the works of karned
men were all composed in Latin, and they were not on
authorized, by the example of eminent writers in that lan
guage, to use their antagonits with the most illiberalfcur
rifity; but, in a dead tongue, indecencies of every kind ap
pear less Lbocking than in a living language, whose idiom
and p!rases feeI gross, because they are familiar.

In passing judgment upon the chara&ers of men, we ought

to try them by the principles and maxims of their own age,
not by those of another. For although virtue and vice are
at all times the fame, manners and customs vary continually.
Some parts of Luther's behaviour, which appear to us most
culpable, gave no difgufl to his contemporaries. It was even
by some of those qualities, which we are now apt to blame,
that he was fitted for accomplishing the great work which
he undertook. To rouse mankind, when funk in ignorance
or superstition, and to encounter the rage of bigotry armed
with power, required the utmost vehemence of zeal, as well
as a temper daring to excess. A gentle call would neither
have reached, nor have excited those to whom it was addref.
fed. A spirit more amiable, but less vigorous than Luther's,
would have (hrunk back from the dangers which he braved
and surmounted. Towards the close of Luther's life, tho'
without any perceptible diminution of his zeal or abilities,
the infirmities of his temper increased upon him, so that
he grew daily more peeviih, more irascible, and more im-
patient of contradiction. Having lived to be a witness of
his own amazing success; to fee a great part of Europe em-
brace his dotrines; and to shake the foundation of the pa.
pal throne, before which the mightiest monarchs had trem-
bled, he discovered, on some occasions, symptoms of vanity
and felf-applaufe. He mutl have been, indeed, more than
man, if, upon contemplating all that he actually accompliflt-
ed, he had never felt any featiment of this kind rising in his
breast*.

* A remarkable instance of this, as well as of a certain fingul.

larity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his Last Will. Tho'
the effets which he had to bequeath were very inconsiderable, he
thought it necelfary to make a Testament, but fcoroed to frame
it with the usual legal formalities. Notus fum, fays he, in ccelo,
in terra, & inferno, & aundoritatem ad hoc sufficientem habeo, ut
mihi soli credatur, cum Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et mi-
ferabili peccatori, ex paterna mifericordia Evangelium filii fui cre-
diderit, dederitque ut in eo verax & fidelis fuerim, ita ut nulti
in mundo illud per me acceperint, & me pro.Do6ore veritatis ag-
Vol. III. U

Some time before his death he set his strength declining,

his constitution being worn out by a prodigious multiplicity
of business, added to the labour of discharging his miniftri.
al funeion with unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of

founfant study, besides the composition of works as volumi.
sous as if he had enjoyed uninterrupted leisure and retire.
ment. His natural intrepidity did not forsake him at the
approach of death; his lat conversation with his friends
was concerning the happiness referred for good men in a fu.
ture life, of which he spoke with the fervor and delight na-
tural to one who expeced and wished to enter Coon upon
the enjoyment of it -. The account of his death filled the
Roman catholic party with excessive as well as indecent joy,
and damped the spirits of all his followers; neither party
sufficiently confidering that his dotrines were now so firm-
ly rooted, as to be in a condition to flourish independent of
the hand which had firit planted them. His funeral was ce.
lebrated by order of the elector of Saxony with extraordi.
nary pomp. He left several children by his wife Catherine
a Boria, who survived him. Towards the end of the last
century, there were in Saxony Come of his descendants in
decent and honourable stations $.

The emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan of diffimula.

tion with which he had set out, employing every art to a.
muse the protestants, and to quiet their fears and jealousies.
For this purpose he contrived to have an interview with the
landgrave of Hesse, the most a&ive of all the confederates,
and the most suspicious of his designs. To him he made
Such warm professions of his concern for the happiness of
Germany, and of his aversion to all violent measures; he de.

noverint, fpreto banno papa, Cafaris, regum, principum & facetr
dotum, immo omnium dzmonum odio. Quidni igitur, ad di
positionem hanc, in re exigua, fufficiat, si adft manus mes teffii
monium, & dici poffit, hac fcripfit D. Martinus Luther, Notarius
Dei, & testis Evangdii ejus. Sec. 1. iii. p. 65.

S!id. .362. Seek. lib. iii. 632, &c.
Seck. lib. iL. 65l.

nied in such express terms, his having entered into any
league, or having begun any military peparations which
Thould give any just cause of alarm to the protestants, as
seem to have dispelled all the landgrave's doubts aind appre-
henfions, and sent him away fully satisfied of his pacific in-
tentions. This artifice was of great advantage, and effect-
ually answered the purpose for which it was employed.
The landgrave, upon his leaving Spires, where he had beenr
admitted to this interview, went to Worms, where the
Smalkaldic confederates were assembled, and gave them such
a flattering representation of the emperor's favourable difpo-
fition towards them, that they, who were too apt, as well
from the temper of the German nation, as from the genius
of all great associations or bodies of men, to be flow, and
dilatory, and undecifive in their deliberations, thought there
was no necessity of taking any im. .diate measures again1t
danger, which appeared to be dillant or imaginary *.

Such events, however, soon occurred, as ifaggered the

credit which the protestants had given to the emperor's de-
clarations. The council of Trent, though still composed'
of a small number of Italian and Spanish prelates, without
a tingle deputy from many of the kingdoms, which it a.
ffumed a right of binding by its decrees, being ashamed of
its long inacivity, proceeded now to fettle articles of the
greatest importance. Having begun with examining the
first and chief point in controversy between the church of
Rome and the reformers, concerning the rule which flouldc
be held as supreme and decisive in matters of faith, the
council, by its infallible authority, determined [Apr. 8],
" That the books to which the designation of Apocryphal
hath been given, are of equal authority with those which
were received by the Jews and primitive Chriflians into the
sacred canon; that the traditions handed down from the a.
poltolic age, and preserved in the church, are entitled to as.
nmudh regard as the doctrines and precepts which the infpir-

Sleid. Hist. 367, 373.

U z

ed authors have committed to writing; that the Latin tr.
lation of the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Jerome, and
known by the name of the Vulgat translation, hould be read
in churches, and appealed to in the schools as.authentic.and
canonicaL" Against all who disclaimed the truth of these te.
nets, anathemas were denounced in the name and by the an.
thorityofthe HolyGhot. Thedecifion of thefepointa, which
undermined the main foundation of the Lutheran fylftm,
was a plain warning to the protestants what judgment they
might xpe~ when the council Ihould have leisure to take
into consideration the particular and subordinate articl of
their creed .

This discovery of the council's readiness to condemn the

opinions of the protestants, was soon followed by a friking
infnce of the pope's resolution to punilh such as embrace
them. The appeal of -he canons of Cologne against ther
archbilhop having been carried to Rome, Paul eagerly feiz.
ed on that opportunity, both of displaying the extent of his
own authority, and of teaching the German ecclefiatics the
danger of revolting from the eftablilhed church. As no per
son appeared in behalf of the archbishop, he was held to he
convided of the crime ofherefy, and a papal bull was issued
[Apr. 16,] depriving him of his ecclefiafiical dignity, infli&
ing on him the sentence of excommunication, and absolving
his fubjefts from the oath of allegiance which they had tak.
en to him as their civil superior. The countenance which
he had given to the Lutheran heresy was the only crime im
puted to him, as well as the only reason afigned to juftif
the extraordinary severity of this decree. The protelanti
could hardly believe that Paul, how zealous soever he might
be to defend the eftablilhed fytem, or to humble those who
invaded it, would have ventured to proceed to such extre.
mities against a prince and letaor of the empire, without
having previously secured such powerful protection as would
render his censure something more than an impotent aid

5 F. Paul, 141. Pallav. ao6.

despicable sally of resentment. They were of course deep-
ly alarmed at this sentence against the archbishop, confider-
ing it as a sure indication of the malevolent intentions not on-
ly of the pope, but of the emperor, against the whole par.
ty*.

Upon this fresh revival of their fears, with such violence

as is natural to men roused from a false security, and confci-
eus of their having been deceived, Charles saw that now it
became necessary to throw aside the malk, and to declare-
openly what part he determined to a&. , By a long series of
artifice and fallacy, he had gained so much time, that his
measures, though not altogether ripe for execution, were in
great forwardness. .The pope, by his proceedings against
the eleaor of Cologne, as well as by the decree of the. coun-
cil, had precipitated matters into such a fittation,-as render- -
ed a breach between the emperor and the protestants almoRt
unavoidable. Charles had therefore no choice left him, but
either to take part with them in overturning what the fee
of Rome had determined, or to support the authority of
the church openly by force of arms. Nor did the pope
think it enough to have brought the. emperor under a necef-
fity of aaing; he pressed him to begin his operations irm-
mediately, and to carry them- on with such vigaur as could
not fail of securing success.. Tranfpbrted by his zeal a-
gainft heresy, Paul forgot all the prudent and cautious max-
ims of the papal fee,.with regard to the danger of extend-
ing the imperial authority beyond due bounds; ..and in order
to crulh the Lutherans, he was willing to contribute to-
wards raising up. a matier that might one day prove formi-
dable to himself as well as to the reft of. Italy..

But, besides the certain expectation of affilfance from the

pope, Charleswas now.fecure from any danger of interrup--
tion to his designs by the Turkilh arms. lis negotiations
at the Porte, which he had carried on with great assiduity
since the peace of Crefpy, were on .the point of being ter-

*Skid. 3S4. F. Paul, 155. Fallavic, 224.

U3

minated in such a manner as he desired. Solyman, part
in compliance with the French king, who, in order to avoid
the disagreeable obligation of joining the emperor against
his ancient ally, laboured with great zeal to bring about an
accommodation between them, and partly from its being
necessary to turn his arms towards the eaR, where the Per.
sians threatened to invade his dominions, consented without
difficulty to a truce for five years. The chief article of it
was That each hIould retain possession of what he now
held in Hungary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to the pride
of the sultan, submitted to pay an annual tribute of fifty thou.
land crownst.

But it was upon the aid and concurrence of the Germans

themselves that the emperor relied with the greatest confi.
dence. The Germanic body, he knew, was of such vast
flrength, as to be invincible if it were united, and that it was
only by employing its own force that he could hope to sub.
due it. Happily for him, the union of the several member
in this great system was so feeble, the whole frame was so
loosely compated, and its different parts tended so violently
towards separation from each other, that it was almost i.
possible for it, on any important emergence, to join in a ge.
neral or vigorous effort. In the present juncture, the four.
ces, of discord were as many, and as various, as had been
known on any occasion. The Roman catholics, animated
with zeal in defence of their religion proportional to the
fierceness with which it had been attacked, were eager to fe.
cond any attempt to humble those innovators, who had
overturned it in many provinces, and endangered it in more.
John and Albert of Brandenburg, as well as several 0.
ther princes, inccnfcd at the haughtiness and rigour with
which the duke of Brunswick had been treated by the con-
federates of Smalkalde, were impatient to rescue him, and
to be revenged on them. Charles observed, with fatisfac
tion, the working of thole passions in their minds, and cou~t

t ifuanhaiffi HilL Hu n. x8. Mem. de Ribier, tom i. S81.

ing on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he fhould-think it
proper to a&, he found it, in the mean time, more necessary
to moderate than to inflame their rage.

Such was the situation of affairs, such the discernment

with which the emperor foresaw and provided for every
event, when the diet of the empire met at Ratilbon.
Many of the Roman catholic members appeared there in
person, but most of the confederates of Smalkalde, under
pretence of being unable to bear the expence occasioned by
the late unnecessary frequency of such assemblies, tent only
deputies. Theirjealoufy of the emperor, together with an
apprehension that violence might, perhaps, be employed, in
order to force their approbation of what he Ihould propose
in the diet, was the true cause of their absence. The
speech with which the emperor opened the diet was ex-
tremely artful. After professing, in common form, his re.
gard for the prosperity of the Germanic body, and declar-
ing, that, in order to betlow his whole attention upon the
re-establishment of its order and tranquillity, he had at pre-
sent abandoned all other cares, reje&ed the most pressing so-
licitations of his other fubjets to reside among them, and
postponed affairs of the greatest importance; he took notice,
with some disapprobation, that his disinterested example had
not been imitated; many members of chief consideration
having negle&ed to attend an assembly to which he had re-
paired with such manifest inconvenience to himself. He
then mentioned their unhappy dissensions about religion;
lamented the ill success of his pall endeavours to compose
them; complained of the abrupt dissolution of the late con.
ference, and craved their advice with regard to the best and
most effe&ual method of restoring union to the churches of
Germany, together with that happy agreement in articles of
faith, which their ancestors had found to be of no less ad-
vantage to their civil interest, than becoming their Chritian
profession.

By this gracious and popular method of consulting the

members of the diet, rather than of obtruding upon them
any opinion of his own, besides the appearance of great mo0
deration, and the merit of paying much refpea to their
judgment, the emperor dexterously avoided discovering i
own sentiments, and reserved to himself, as his only part
that of carrying into execution what they should recon
mend. Nor was he less secure of such a decision as he
wished to obtain, by referring it wholly to themselves. The
Roman catholic members, prompted by their own zeal, or
prepared by his intrigues, joined immediately in represent
ing that the authority of the council now met at Trent
ought to be supreme in all matters of controversy; that all
Christians lhould submit to its decrees as the infallible rule
of their faith; and therefore they besought him to exert the
power, with which he was invested by the Almighty, in
prote&ing that assembly, and in compelling the 'protestants
to acquiesce in its determinations. The protetants, on the
other hand, presented a memorial, in which, after repeating
their objections to the council of Trent, they proposed, as
the only effe&ual method of deciding the points in difputc,
that either a free general council mhould be assembled in Get
many, or a national council of the empire should be called,
or a felft number of divines mhould be appointed out of each
party to examine and define articles of faith. They men-
tioned the recesses of several diets favourable to this propofi-
tion, and which had afforded them the profpet of termina-
ing all their differences in this amicable manner; they now
conjured the emperor not to depart from his former plan,
and by offering violence to their confiences, to bring cala.
mities upon Germany, the very thought of which must fll
every lover of his country with horror. The emperor re-
ceiving this paper with a contemptuous smile, paid no far.
ther regard to it. Having already taken his final resolution,
and perceiving that nothing but force could compel them
to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the cardinal of Trent to
Rome [June 9], in order to conclude an alliance with the

pope, the terms of which were already agreed on; he comr
manded a body of troops, levied on purpose in the Low-
Countries, to advance towards Germany; he gave commis-
sions to several Qfficers for raising men in different parts of
the empire; le warned John and Albert of Brandenburg,
that now was the proper time of exerting themselves, in or-
der to rcfcue their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from capti.
vityj.

All these things could not be tranfafted without the ob.
servation and knowledge of the protestants. The secret
was now in many hands; under whatever veil the emperor
till asseted to conceal his designs, his officers kept no such
myfterioua reserve; and his allies and fubjets spoke out his
intentions plainly. Alarmed with reports of this kind from
every quarter, as well as with the preparations for war which
they could not but observe, the deputies of the confederates
demanded audience of the emperor, and, in the name of
their maters, required to know whether these military pre-
parations were carried on by his command, and for what
end, and against what enemy? To a question put in such a
tone, and at a time when fai were become too notorious
to be denied, it was necflry to give an explicit answer.
Charles owned the orders which he had issued, nd profef
sing his purpose not.to molet on account of religion those
who Ihould aft as dutiful fubjeds; declared, that he had
nothing in view but to maintain the rights and prerogatives
of the Imperial dignity, and by punilhing some factious
members, to preserve the ancient constitution of the empire
from being impaired or dissolved by their irregular and li-
centious condut. Though the emperor did not name the
persons whom he charged with such high crimes, and deftin-
ed to be the objects of his vengeance, it was obvious that
he had the elecor of Saxony and landgrave of Hesse in
view. Their deputies confidering what he had said, as a

t Sleid.374. Sck. iji. 6S8.

plain declaration of his hostile intentions, immediately re.
tired from Ratifbont.

The cardinal of Trent found it no difficult matter to

treat with the pope, who having at length brought the em.
peror to adopt that plan which he had long recommended,
alfented with eagerness to every article that he proposed.
The league was signed [July z6] a few days after the car.
dinal's arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies which a.
bounded in Germany, the obstinacy of the protestants in re.
je&ing the holy council assembled at Trent, and the necei
ty of maintaining found docrine, together with good order
in the church, are mentioned as the motives of this union
between the contracing parties. In order to check the
growth of these evils, and to punimh such as had impioufl
contributed to spread them, the emperor, having long and
without success made trial of gentler remedies, engaged in
ftantly to take the field with a sufficient army, that he might
-compel all who disowned the council, or had apostatized
from the religion of their forefathers, to return into the bo.
Amr of the church, and submit with due obedience to the
holy fee. He likewise bound himself not to conclude a
peace with them during fix months without the pope's con
lent, nor without afligning him his ihare in any conqued
which ihould be made upon them; and that even after thU
period he ihould not agree to any accommodation which
might be detrimental to the church, or to the interest of ro
ligion. On his part, the pope stipulatcd to deposit a larg
fum in the bank of Venice towards defraying the expenceol
the war; to maintain, at his own charge, during the fpacc
of fix months, twelve thousand foot, and five hundred horif
to grant the emperor, for one year, half of the ecclesiastic
revenues throughout Spain; to authorize him, by a bull, tc
alienate as much of the lands, belonging to religious house
in that country, as would amount to the fum of five hundred
thousand crowns; and to employ not only spiritual cen.

t Slkid 376.

fures, but military force, against any prince who ihould at-
tempt to interrupt or defeat the execution of this treatyt.

Notwithstanding the explicit terms in which the extirpa-
tion of heresy was declared to be the objec of the war which
was to follow upon this treaty, Charles fill endeavoured to
persuade the Germans that he had no design to abridge their
religious liberty, but that he aimed only at vindicating his
own authority, and reprefling the insolence of such as had
encroached upon it. With this view, he wrote circular let-
ters in the fame ltrain with his answer to the deputies at
Ratilbon, to most of the free cities, and to several of the
princes who had embraced the protestant do&crines. In
these he complained loudly, but in general terms, of the
contempt into which the Imperial dignity had fallen, and of
the presumptuous as well as disorderly behaviour of some
members of the empire. He declared that he now took
arms, not in a religious, but in a civil quarrel; not to op-
press any who continued to behave as quiet and dutiful sub-
jeds, but to humble the arrogance of such as had thrown
off all sense of that subordination in which they were placed
under him as head of the Germanic body. Gross as this
deception was, and manifest as it might have appeared to
all who confidered the emperor's condut with attention, it
became necessary for him to make trial of its effect; and such
was the confidence and dexterity with which he employed
it, that he derived the most solid advantages from this arti-
fice. If he had avowed at once an intention of overturning
the protestant church, and of reducing all Germany under
its former state of fubje&ion to the papal fee, none of the
cities or princes who had embraced the new opinions could
have remained neutral after such a declaration, far less could
they have ventured to afift the emperor in such an enterprise.
Whereas by concealing, and even disclaiming any intention
of that kind, he not only saved himself from the danger of
being overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all the pro-

t Slid. 381. Pallav. z5s. Du Mont Corps Diplom. xx.

teftant states, but he furnished the timid with an excuse for
continuing ina&ite, and the designing or interested with 1
pretext for joining him, without exposing themselves to the
infamy of abandoning their own principles, or taking part
openly in fupprefling them. At the fame time the empero
well knew, that if, by their affiflance, he were enabled to
break the power of the eletor of Saxony and the landgmve,
he might afterwards prescribe what terms he pleased to the
feeble remains of a party without union, and destitute of
leaders, who would then regret, too late, their mistaken con.
fidence in him, and their inconsiderate desertion of their afl.
elates.

The pope, by a sudden and unforeseen display of hi

zeal had well nigh disconcerted this plan which the empe
rer had formed with so much care and art. Proud ofhav.
ing been the author of such a formidable league againftthe
Lutheran heresy, and happy in thinking that the glory of
~etirpating it was referred for his pontificate, he publiled
the articles of his treaty with the emperor, in order to de
mnonftrate the pious intention of their confederacy, as wdl
as to display his own zeal, which prompted him to make
such extraordinary efforts for maintaining the faith in it
purity. Not satisfied with this, he soon after issued a bA
containing most liberal promises of indulgence to all who
Ihould engage in this holy enterprise, together with wan
exhortations to such as could not bear a part in it thben
selves, to increae the fervour of their prayers, and the fre"
rity of their mortifications, that they might draw down the
blessing of Heaven upon those who undertook it*. No
was it zeal alone which pushed the pope to make dedam
tions so inconsistent with the account which the empt
himself gave of his motives for taking arms. He was muck
feandalized at Charles's dissimulation in such a cause; at hi
feming to be atamed of owning his zeal for the cbhr
andat his endeavours to make that pass for a political coO

Du Moot Corps Diplom.

tell, which he ought to have gloried in as a war which had
no other obje& than the defence of religion. With as much
solicitude, therefore, as the emperor laboured to disguise
the purpose of the confederacy, did the pope endeavour to
publish their real plan, in order that they might come at
once to an open rupture with the protestants, that all hope
of reconcilement might be cut off, and that Charles might
be under fewer temptations, and have it less in his power
than at present, to betray the interests of the church by any
accommodation beneficial to himfelft.

The emperor, though not a little offended at the pope's

indiscretion or malice in making this difco.ery, continued
boldly to pursue his own plan, and to aflert his intentions
to be no other than what he had originally avowed. Seve-
ral of the protestant states, whom he had previously gained,
thought themselves justified, in some measure, by his decla.
rations, for abandoning their associates, and. even for giving
afliftance to him.

But these artifices did not impose on the greater and

founder part of the protetlant confederates. They clearly
perceived it to be against the reformed religion that the-em-
peror had taken arms, and that not only the suppression of
it, but the extinction of the German liberties, would be the
certain consequence of his obtaining such an entire fuperiori-
ty as would enable him to execute his schemes in their full
extent. They determined, therefore, to prepare for their
own defence, and neither to renounce those religious truths,
to the knowledge of which they had attained by means so
wonderful, nor to abandon those civil rights which had been
transmitted to them by their ancestors. In order to give
the necessary directions for this purpose, their deputies met
at Ulm, soon after their abrupt departure from Ratisbon.
Their deliberations were now conducted with such vigour
and unanimity, as the imminent danger which threatened

t F. Paul, 188. Thuan. Hill. i. 6x.
Vol. III. X

them requred. The continigent of trtopS i rei *i

^b

the confderates was to firnifh, haviwig-tbe~ fiitC'd-ilt
original treaty of union, orders were gseu nri;¢i
them immediately into the field. Being feiiblt; kit
that through the narow prejudices f fmni of thlii n.
hers, and the imprudent security of others, th ey'i 1 if
glaetd too long to strengthen themelves by foelib rAi
ances, they now applied with great earneftnef to th9c VYia
tians and Swiss. -
- .. 1

To the Venetians they eprefented the emper"rs in'm

tion of overturning the present system of Germany' and i
raising himfdf to absolute power in that country by iii"i
of foreign force furnifehd by the pope; they warned'thdi
how fatal this event would prove to the liberties of Ily,
and that by suffering Charles to acquire unlimited abtliohl
in the one country, they would soon feel his dominiotlto&
no less despotic in the other, they besought thenms, 't
fore, not to grant a passage through'their trtitoi t
those troops, which ought to be-treated as common eniieln,
because by subduing Germany they prepared chainfCfoi th
reft of Europe. Thcfe reflections had not efcapiidt li
gacity of those wife republicans. ' They had conmmuo cati
their fentimcnts to the pope, and had endeouiured to' i: ti
hin from an alliance, which tended to rendetr i r

fs i

power of a potentate, whose ambition' he alreadyf i"tl
be boundlefe. But they had found Paul so eagei' W
prosecution of his own plan, that he difregatded ~LBtlH
r-monfirances t This attempt to alarm the pope t'i
proved unsuccessful, they declined doing any-thiinginotre
wards preventing the dangers which they forelaw; 'Ind
rturr to the application from the confederates of Snlg
I-alde, they informed them, that they'could not dbiftrnudt
;arch of the pope's troops through an oped coiidtly
by levying an army strong enough to face them in the si;
and that this would draw upon thenmfedvc thp ilokiei

Adriani Iftoria di fuoi Tempi, liv. v. p. 3'a. '' ;

ps his as,'wellr ao-,the, eperor's -indignation,. For the
fame reason tbhy declined lending a fum of money, which
the elecor. of Samny and Jaadgrave proposed to borrow of
them, towarda Farrying or the war.

The demands ,f. the confederates upon the Swiss were
not confined to the obfclxting .of thc entrance of foreigners
into Germany;, they required of.them, as the nearest neigh-
bours and closest allies of thei empire, to interpose with their
wonted vigour for the preservation of its liberties, and not
to stand as inacive fpe&ators, .while their brethren were
oppressed and enslaved. , But with whatever zeal some of
the cantons might have been disposed to at when the caufi
of the reformation was in danger, the Helvetic body was so
divided with regard to religion, as; to render it unsafe for
the protestants to take any ftep without consulting their ca-
tbolic associates; and among them the erniiaries of the pope
and emperor had such influence, that a resolution of main-
taining an exaa neutrality between the contending parties
was the utmoit which could be procured§.

Being disappointed in both these applications, the pros
tenants, not long after, had recourse to the kings of France
and England; the approach of danger either overcoming
the eletor of Saxony's scruples, or obliging him to yield to
the importunities of his associates. The situation of the
two monarchs flattered them with hopes of success. Tho'
boflilities between them had continued for some time after
the peace of Crefpy, they became weary at las of a war, at-
tended with no glory or advantage to either, and had lately
terminated all their differences by a peace concluded at
Campe near Ardres. Francis having with great dfficulty
procured his allies, the Scots, to be included in the treaty,
in return for that concession he engaged to pay a great fun
which Henry demanded as due to him on several accounts,

*Sleid. 3Si. Paruta Iflor. Venet. tom. iv. 1go. Lambertuw
0lortenfius de Bello Germanico, apud Scardiuar, vcl. i. p. 547.
Sbleid. 392.

X3

mad. hhl&Bdulogut iv theLnadi ofthe £wgiissila ^d
foihis fithfulptrfonamta.c f tha at li-iit tsaih
thcre-cahliamC ot of peace ieemed to:-ea4 het woa~i
narchs:at liberty to turn .t-ir -ia tio wit~oad>s ti,
so unfirtate were the prtctanta, thati y-.t vdlao
immediate advantage fromn this,'circrmftanoc. Henry,.
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with-tbaht-btt
on such conditions as would render him not only the haidbut
the fiprene director of their league; a preeminc~ne .wih,
-as the bonds of union or interest betweei/ th4mBwetre.,but
feeble. and as he differed from them -.so widely in iit rdliw.
ous featiments, they had no nclination, to adnrit.j..': Bris
cis, morepowerfully inclined by political confideratiots t
afford them affillance; found his kingdom so much exiha.
ed by a long war, and. was so much afraid of iritating thi
pope, by entering into close union with. eeommnmnicatit
heretics, that he durst not undertake the proteioa: of. d
Smalkaldic league. B this ill-timed caution, or by a {it
ftitious deference to fcuples, to which at othet timm k
was not much addited, he loft the mot promifingppoou.
nity of mortifying and diftrefling his val, which plm
sented itself during his whole reign.

But, notwithstanding their il success in their negatil

tions with foreign courts, the confederates found no difiedl
ty at home, in bringing a sufficient force into the siel
Germany abounded at that time with inhabitants;; the fae
dal inflitutions which subsisted in full force, enabled the 1s
bles to call out their numerons vassals, and to putthen i
motion on the shortest warning; the martial fpiri ofth
Germans not broken or enervated by the introducion ofdbc
merce and arts, had acquired additional vigour during th
continual wars in which they had been employedi'for half
century, either in the pay of the emperors or the kitgd'
France. Upon every opportunity of entering into fervic
they were accustomed to run eagerly to arms; and to eVer

t Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, z58.

tandard that was erefted, volunteers flocked from all quar-
ters t. Zeal seconded, on this occasion, their native ardour.
Men on whom the doarines of the reformation had made
that deep impreflion which accompanies truth when first
discovered, prepared to maintain it with proportional vi-
gour; and among a warlike people it appeared infamous to
remain inacive, when the defence of religion was the mo-
tive for taking arms. Accident combined with all these
circumItances in facilitating the levy of foldiera among the
confederates. A considerable number of Germans in the
pay of France, being dismissed by the king on the profpet
of peace with England, joined in a body the standard of the
protestants :. By such a concurrence of causes, they were
enabled to assemble in a few weeks an army composed of
seventy thousand foot and fifteen thousand horse, provided.
with a train of an hundred and twenty cannon, eight hundred.
ammunition waggons, eight thousand beafs of burden, and-
fix thousand pioneers ¶. This army, one of the molt nu-
merous, and undoubtedly the belt appointed, of any which:
had been levied in Europe during that century, did not re-
quire the united effort of the whole proteltant body to raise
it. The elector of Saxony, the landgrave of Hesse, the
duke of Wurtemburg, the princes of Anhalt, and the Im-
perial cities of Augsburg, Ulm, and Strafburg,.were the on-
ly powers which contributed towards this great armament-
the elecors of Cologne, of Brandenburg, and the count Pala-
tine, overawed by the emperor's threats, or deceived by his
proftfions, remained neuter. John marquis of Branden-
burg Bareith, and Albert of Brandenburg Anfpach, tho'
both early converts tb Lutheranifm, entered openly into the
emperor's service, under pretext of having obtained his pro.
mise for the security of the proteltant religion; and Maurice
of daxony, soon followed their example.

t Seck. 1. iii. 16r. Thuan. 1. i. 6g;
1 lb. i i. 6oi. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Conmen.tario.
rum de Bel. Germ. lib. duo, Antw. r15c. ITmo. p. 13, a.

x3

The number of their troops, as well as the m ihtig rapi

di - wherewith they had afembled them, aftonilhed the eml
peror, and filled him with the most disquieting appreht.
ions. He was, indeed, in no condition t6 ritfit fIch s
mighty force. Shut up in Ratilbon, a town of no-great
ftrenit', whose inhabitants, being mostly Lutherans, would
have been more ready to betray than to afift him, with only
three thousand Spanish foot, who had served in Hungary,
and about five thousand Germans who had joined him from
different parts of the empire, he muff have been Overwhelm.
ed by the approach of such a formidable army, 'which he
could not fight, nor could he even hope to retreat from it in
safety. The pope's troops, though in full march to his re-
lief, had hardly reached the frontiers of Germany; 'the for-
ces which he expeted from the Low.Countries had not yet
begun to move, and were even far from being completes;
His situation, however, called for more immediate succour,
nor did it seem practicable for him to wait for such ditant
auxiliaries, with whom his juntion was so precarious.

But it happened fortunately for Charles, that the confe.

derates did not aval themselves of the advantage which lay
so full in their view. In civil wars, the first steps are com-
monly taken w-ith much timidity and hesitation. Men ar
solicitous, at that time, to put on the semblance oftmodera.
ti n and equity; they strive to gain partisans by seeming te
a here fl;itly to known forms; nor can they be brought/
at once, to violate those eftablifled institutions, which in
ti'me f ctranquillity they have been accustomed to reverence;
hel ce their proceedings are often feeble or dilatory, when
they oa.ht to be must vigorous and decisive. Influienced by
th ,f onlide.ations, which, happily for the peace of focietyi
cperate powerfully on the human mind, the confederates could
n ), bin. of throwing off that allegiance which they owed
to t e ..ad of the empire, or o' turning thc:r arms againf
him wit! ou. ne solemn appeal more to his candour, aud

Sleid. 389 Avi!a, 8, a.

to the impartaljudgment of their fellow-fubjeAs. For this
purpose, they addressed a letter to the emperor CJuly 15],
and a manifeRo to all the inhabitants of Germany. The
tenor of both was the fame. They represented their own
condua with regard to civil affairs as dutiful and fubmiflive;
they mentioned the inviolable union in which they had lived
with the emperor, as well as the many and recent marks of
his good-will and gratitude wherewithal they had been hon-
oured; they asserted religion to be the sole cause of the vio-
lence which the emperor now meditated against them; and
in proof of this produced many arguments to convince those
who were so weak as to be deceived by those artifices with
which he endeavoured to cover his real intentions; they de-
dared their own resolution to rifle every thing in mainten-
ance of their religious rights, and foretold the dissolution of
the German conttitution, if the emperor /hould fnally pre-
vail against them *.

Charles, though in such a perilous situation as might
have inspired him with moderate sentiments, appeared as in-
flexible and haughty as if his affairs had'been in the most
prosperous state. His only reply to the address and mani-
fefto of the protestants, was to publish the ban of the em-
pire [July zo], againf the elector of Saxony and landgrave
of Hesse, their leaders, and against all who should dare to as-
sis them. By this sentence, the ultimate and moit rigour-
ous one which the German jurisprudence has provided for
the punishment of traitors, or enemies to their country, they
were declared rebels and outlaws, and deprived of every pri-
vilege which they enjoyed as members ot the Germanic bo-
dy; their goods were confilcated; their fubjets absolved
from their oath of allegiance; and it became not only lawful
but meritorious to invade their territories. The nobles,
and free cities, who framed or perfeEted the constitution of
the German government, had not been so negl:gent of their
own safety and privileges as to truit the emperor with this

Sleid. 384.

formidable jurifdiion. The authority of a dietof them
pire ought to have been interposed before any of its mem
bers could be put under the ban. But Charlk om lok.
ed that formality, well knowing that, if his arms were crown
ed with success, there would remain none who would have
either power or courage to call in question what he had
done +. The emperor however did not found his fentecce
against the elector and landgrave on their revolt from the e.
ftablifed church, or their conduc with regard to religion;
he asseted to aflign for it reasons purely civil, and those too
exprefed in such general and ambiguous terms, without fpe.
cifying the nature or circumfiances of their guilt, as render.
ed it more like an aa of despotic power than of a legal and
limited jurifdidion. Nor was it altogether from choice, or
to conceal his intentions, that Charles had recourse to the
ambiguity of general exprefions; but he durf not mention
too particularly the causes of his sentence, as every aftion
which he could have charged upon the elector and landgrave
as a crime, might have been employed with equal juflice to
condemn many of the proteflants whom he fill pretended to
confider as faithful fuhjeas, and whom it would have been
extremely imprudent to alarm or disgust.

The confederates, now perceiving al hopesof accommodo

tion to be at an end, had only to chute whether they would
submit without reserve to the emperor's will, or proceed to
open hostilities. They were not deflitute either of public
spirit, or of resolution to make the proper choice. A few
days after the ban of the empire was publisled, they, ac-
cording to the custom of that age, sent a herald to the Im-
perial camp, with a folemu declaration of war again
Charles, to whom they no longer gave any other title that
that of pretended emperor, and renounced all allegiance,
homage, or duty which he might claim, or which they had
hitherto yielded to him. But previous to this formality

tSleid. 386. Do Mout corpsDiplom. iv. p. l,314. rifd
His. Abrega du Droit PubL 168, 736, z58

part tf beidim: ps^had.-gtuWT'fo a&,. 'The comanaPd of
r ooafideibloie dyi o f fnnd raised Aby, the city aojAugfthrg
haedibeg!'ist toibaffiad Schertel, a oldier of frtunc,
who, ;by itheloati ithat tre had got when, thei Imperialist
pluurtde Rui e,' together withthe merit of long service,
hla adqiuirt weDhiand authoritr-which placed him ,o a
icvd witbah h& .hiefIof the German nobles: that: gallant vs.
teran resolve&. before he joined tht tnain body. of :the ea
federates, to attempt fornet~tng.fuitable.to.his former faits
and to the tpe&ation!of his countrymen. As the poapct
forces wee hastening towards Tyrols ,in order to pen~ra
into Germanny by the narrow ~ser. through .the mountais
which run acrofeithat.countryhe advanced thitherwith the
utmost rapidity,l and seized Ehrenberg ad- Cufftein, two
strong cafies which comnmaded tke principal dcflesi With.
out stopping' a momentb he coatimued -hi in rchl toward
Infpruck, by getting poffdefit of, which he would lave.s
bliged the- Italianan to flop th and with,. fmaill.bqly.of
men could have refittd athe efforts ofthe greateitarnie.
Caftlealto, the. ogovern ) of -Tientb ,-klowing -rwvht t a fatal
blow this would beto the mprb, ua whofc'dWig mu.
have proved abortive if hi- talian .auxiliaries had been i.
tercepted, aifed a. few, troop. withthe utmost dispatch, and
threw himself into the. town. Schertel, however,- did not
abandon- the taerpifc, :ad -wa preparingto: attack the
place, wheonthe intelligence of te approach .of!the Itaia~
sad an order from-the ele&or and landgrave, obliged him tt
defit. By hi retreat the passea were left .open, and. the -
talians entered Germany without any opposition, but from
the garrisons which Schertel had placed in Ehrenberg and
Cuffitein, andthefe, haying no hopes of beingrelieved,. fur-
rendered, after aflhort refiftance*t. -:

* Seckend' lib. ii. 70. Adridij Iftoia di fuoi Tempi, lib. 33S
t Seckendorf, the induflrious author of the Comrtentarius Apo.
logeticus de Lutheranifmo, whom I have so long and safely fol.
lowed as, my guide in German affairs, was a descendant from
Schertel. With the care and solicitud of a Gorman who was

Nor was the recalling of Schcrttl the only Tov lhiT

the confederates were guilty. As the fuprcmein corPand
of their army was committed, in terms of theaJegu of
Smalkade, to the cletor of Satony and landgraye 9t He{ e
with cqual power, all the iaconveniencies arising fromma i,
wided and co-ordinate authority, which is always of.fatal
consequence in the operations of war, were immediately, fe,
The eleor, though intrepid in his own person to excefi,
and most ardently zealous in the cause, was flow in delibe.
rating, uncertain as well as irresolute in his deteniminationa
and constantly preferred measures which were cautious and
safe, to such as were bold or decisive. -The landgrave, of a
more aftive and enterprising nature, formed all his .rfolr
tions with promptitude, wished to execute them with spit,
and uniformly preferred fuch.meafures as tended toing
the contest to a fpecdy.itfue. Thus their maxsu,, i,.th.
gard to the condua of the war, differe, as widely to
by which they were influenced in preparing for ,it, ,nA
perpetual contrariety in their sentiments gave rifc,,ietc
tibly, tojealoufy and the spirit of contentio.. Thef c mBli
tiplied the diflenfions flowing from the incpmpetibilit. o
their natural tempers, and rendered them mgre po0ant
The other members of the league confidering thiqmfdTe p
independent, and subjea to the eletor and landgrav,.:ol
in consequence of the articles of a voluntary copfcercyl
did not long retain a proper veneration foe ;comnwamu4$t
who proceeded with so little concord; and the numerousaar
my of the protetants, like a val machino whose parts arc iM

bimfelf of noble birth, Scckendorf hu publilhed a long digrtffiot
concerning his ancestor, calculated chiefly to Ihew bow Schiltd
was ennobled, and his poflerity allied to many of the most ancient
families in the empire. Among other curious particulars, he giw
us an account of his wealth, the chief source of which was the
piunder he got at Rome. His landed efate alone was fold by hi
grandsons tor fix hundred thousand florins. By this we may form
rome idea of the riches amafied by the Condtotiri, or commaaden
of mercenary bands in that age. At the taking of Romt, Sc r
was only a czptain. 5eckcd. lib. i. 73.

cpa'ttadnd thich is idftitute of any' power ffiuient to
move and rgtlate' the while, aaeed with no confiflency, vi-
gour, er' effet.

The emperr, Wh'o was afraid that, by remaining at Ra-

tifbon, be mighit' rnder'it impofible for the pope's. forces. t
join him, having boldly 'advanced to Landshut on te Ifer,
the confederates loft some days in deliberating whether it
was proper to follow him into territories of the duke of Ba-
varia, a neutral prinoe. When at last they surmounted
that fcrmple, and began to move towards his camp, they fud-
denly abandoned the design, and hatened to attack Ratif-
bon, id which town Charles could leave only a small garrison.
By, this time the papal troops, amounting fully to that
number which Paul had stipulated to furnilh, had reached
Landflhut, and were soon followed by fix thousand Spani.
ards of the veteran band stationed in Naples. The confede.
irtes, after Sclieftel'' spirited but fruitlets expedition, seem
to have permitted these forces to advance unmolested to the
place -1 rendezvous, without any attempt to attack either
them or the emperor separately, or to prevent their junc-
6on*. The Irnperial army amounted now to thirty-fis
thousand 'men, and' was still more formidable by the difcip.
line and valour ofthe troops,'than by their number. Avila,
icommendatorof Alcantara, 'who had been present in all the
wars carried- on by Charles, and had erved in the armies
Mhich- gained the memorable vitory at Pavia, which con-
quered Tuiis, and invaded Fiance, gives this the preferenc'
to any mnilitary force he kid ever -een afembledt. Oftavio
Farnefe,,the pope's grapdfon, affited by: the ablest office
formed in the long war. between Charles and FranciS,: bomi-
manded the Italian auxiliaries. H tit brother, the cardinal

arnefe, Taccipanied fiun as.a papal legate; and in orde'
to give tht, war the appeaince ofia religiois ¢nterprife,. e
proposed toimrch at tii'e heaiof thearwml,. wiih a oofm

': r; n

. - :,* Avl,. .
.

ried befr him, and to pnblifh indulgence*: hfbe~exr
came,to all-who mhould give them any aflftance,,as had ar.
ciently been the pra&ice in the cruCades'againft the infidds
-But this the emperor ftri&ly prohibited, as inconsistent with
dh the declarations which he had made to the Getmans of
his own party; and the legate perceiving, to his atonil.
ment, that the exercise of the proteRant religion, the extirp"
tion of which he confidered as the sole objef of the wa,
was publicly permitted in the lmper'al camp, fboo returned
in disgust to Italy§.

The arrival of these troops enabled the emperor to fend

such a reinforcement to the garrison at Ratilbon, that
the confederates, rdinquinfing all hopes of reducing that
town, marched towards IngoldRadt on the Danube, nea
to which Charles was now encamped. They exclaimed
loudly against the emperor's notorious iolation of the
laws and constitution of the empire, in having called i
foreigners to lay waste Germany and to oppress its libe-
ties. As, in that age, the dominion of the Roman fee wn
so odious to the protestants, that the name of the pope a-
lone was fuficient to inspire them with horror at any enter-
prise which he countenanced, and to raise in their minds the
blackest suspicions, it came to be universally believed among
them, that Paul, not satisfied with attacking them openly
by force of arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over r-
many, to set on fire their towns and magazines, and to poil
son the wells and fountains of water. Nor did this rumour,
which was extravagant and frightful enough to make a deep
impression on the credulity of the vulgar, spread among
-them only; even the leaders of the party, blinded by their prt
judices, publilhed a declaration, in which they accused tli
-pope of having employed such antichriflian and diabolici
arts agaimft themt. These sentiments of the confedeart
were confirmed, in some measure, by the behaviour of tl
papal troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous towardl

$ F. Paul, 191. i Sleid. 399.

heretics anathematizedb y the church, were guilty of great
excefIes in the territories of the Lutheran states, and aggra-
vated the calamities of war, by mingling with it an the cru-
elty of bigdtted zeal.

The first operations in the field, however, did not corre-

fpond with the violence of those pafilons which animtrted in-
dividuals. The emperor had prudently taken the refolu
tion of avoiding an adion with an army so far superior. it
numbert, especially as he foresaw that aothing conl keep
a body compored of so many- and such dissimilar members
from falling t' pieces, btt the preffig to attack it with an
inconsiderate precipitancy. The confederates, though it
was no less evident that to them every moment's delay was
pernicious, were till prevented by the weakness or division
of their leader.from exerting that vigour, with which their
situation, as well as the ardour of their f61diers, ought to
*have inspired them. On their arrival at Ingoldftadt [Aug.
29,] they found the emperor in a camp not remarkable for
strength, and surrounded only by a flight entrenchment.
Before the camp lay a plain of such extent, as afforded sus-
ficient space for drawingout the whole army, and bringing
it to a& at once. Every consideration lorfh have deter-
mined them to hae seized this opportunity of attacking
the emperor; and their great superiority in numbers, the
eagerness of their troeop,together with the stability of the
German infantry in pithtedbattles, afforded them the most
probable expectation of victory. The landgrave urged
this with great warmt h, dedaring that if the foe command
were vested in him, he: would terminate the war on that oc-
cafion, and decide by one general acion the fate of the two
parties. But the ef~lor, refleting on the valour and dif-
cipline of the -enemy's fo-ce, animated by the presence of
the emperor, and conduted by the best officersof the age,
would not venture upon an a&ion,.which he thought to be
so doubtful, as the atticking- such a body of veterans qn

f Avila, 7, a.
Vol. TIl. Y

ground which they themselves had chosen, and while cover,
-ed by fortifications which, though imperfec, would afford
them no small advantage in the combat. Notwithifanding
his heftation and remonRrances, it was agreed to advance
towards the enemy's camp in battle array, in order to make
a trial whether by that insult, and by a furious cannonade
which they began, they could draw the ImperialiRs out of
their works. But the emperor had too much sagacity to fal
into this snare. He adhered to his own system with inflex.
ible conffancy; and drawing up his soldiers behind thei
trenches, that they might be ready to receive the confede.
rates if they ihould venture upon an affaul, calmly waited
their approach, and carefully retrained his own men from
any excursions or fiirmihes which might bring on a.general
engagement. Meanwhile be rode along the lines, and addref
sing the troops of the different nations in their own language,
encouraged them not only by his words, but by the cheer.
fulness of his voice and countenance; he exposed himself in
places of greaten danger, and amidst the warmest fire of the
enemy's artillery, the molf numerous that had hitherto been
brought into the field by any army. Roofed by his ex.
ample, not a man quitted his ranks; it was thought infa.
mous to discover anyfymptom of fear when the emperor ap-
peared so intrepid; and the meanest soldier plainly perceived,
that their declining the combat at present was not the effed
of timidity in their general, but the result of a wellground-
ed caution. The confederates, aser firing several hours on
the Imperialiits, with more noise and terror than execution,
feeing no profpe& of alluring them to fight on equal terms
retired to their own camp. The emperor employed the
night with such diligence in strengthening his works, that
the confederates, returning to the cannonade next day,
found that, though they had now been willing to venture
upon such a bold experiment, the opportunity of making
an attack with advantage was loft*.

Sleid. 395,397. Avila, 27. a. Lamb. Hortenf. ap. Scard.

After such a discovery of the feebleness or irresolution

of their leaders, and the prudence as well as firrnnefs of the
emperor's condut, the confederates turned their whole at-
tention towards preventing the arrival of a powerful rein-
forcement of ten thousand foot, and four thousand horse,
which the count de Buren was bringing to the emperor
from the Low-Countries. But though that general hiad to
traverse such an extent of country; though his route lay
through the territories of several Itates warmly disposed to
favour the confederates; though they were apprized of his
approach, and by their superiority in numbers might easily
have detached a force ftfficient to overpower him, he ad-
vanced with filch rapidity, and by fich well-concerted nmotc-;
ments, while they opposed hirm with such reriffnefs, and so
little military ikill, that he condu&cd this body to the Im-
pe:al camp without any lofst [Sept. to.]

Upon the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he pleccd

great confidence, the emperor altered, in some degree, hi3
plan of operations, and began to at. more upon the offeni.
five, though he fill avoided a battle with the utmot indu-
ftry. He made himself master of Neuburg, Dillingen, and
Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen, and several other
towns, situated in the most considerable freams which fall
into that mighty river. By this he got the command of a
great extent of country, though not without being obliged
to engage in several Iharp encounters, of which the fuccefa
was various, nor without being exposed oftener than once,
to the danger of being drawn into a battle. In this man-
ner the whole autumn was spent ; neither party gained any
remarkable superiority over the other, and nothing was vfr
done towards bringing the war to a period. The emperor
had often foretold, with confidence, that discord and the
want of money would compel the confederates to disperse
that unwieldy body, which they had neither abilties to,

Sleid. 403.
y 2

guide, nor funds to support t. Though he waited with
impatience for the accomplishment of his predition, ther
was no profpee of that event being at hand. But he him.
self began to susser from the want of forage and provisions;
even the catholic provinces being so much incensed at the
introdu&tion of foreigners into the empire, that they furnish.
ed them with reiuaance, while the camp of the confederates
abounded with a profusion of all neceflaries, which the zeal of
their friends in the adjacent countries poured in with the
utmost liberality and good-wil. Great numbers of the Ita.
lians and Spaniards, unaccuftomedto the food or climate of
Germany, were become unfit for service through ficknef t.
Considerable arrears were now due to the troops, whohad
scarcely received any money since the beginning of the cam.
paign; the emperor, experiencing on this, as well as on for.
.er occasions, that his jurifdiaion was more extensive than
his revenues, and that the former enabled him to assemble a
grea:er numler of soldiers, than the latter were sufficient to

·.er: l.uiyn a;2-fef¢s accomtao, li fond it difficult to

keep his army in the field; some of his ablest generals, and
even the duke of Alva himself, persevering and obstinate as
he usually was in the prosecution of every measure, advising
him to disperse his troops into winter quarters. But as the
arguments againmt any plan which he had adopted, rarly
made much imprefion upon the emperor, he paidRno regard
to their opinion, and determine& to continue hist efforts i
urder to weary out the confederates; being well'afured that
if he could once oblige them to separate, there was little
probability of their uniting again in a body *. Still, how.
ever, it remained a doubtful point, whether his steadiness
was molf likely to fail, or their zeal to be exhausted. It
was ftlil uncertain which party, by firrt dividing its forces,
would give the superiority to the other; when an unexpe&t

t elli Smalkaldici Commentarinsg Graco fermone fcriptus
Joach. Camerario, ap. Frcherum, vol. iii. p. 479.

;Carcrar. ap. Ereber. 48. * Thuan. S

ed event decided the contefr, and occasioned a fatal reverse
in the affairs of the confederates.

Maurice of Saxony having insinuated himself into the em-
peror's confidence, by the arts which have already been de-
fcribed, no sooner saw hostilities ready to break out between
the confederates of Smalkalde and that monarch, than vast
profpeas of ambition began to open upon him. That por-
tion of Saxony, which descended to him by his ancestors,
was far from satisfying his aspiring mind; and he perceived
with pleasure the approach of civil war, as, amidst the revo-
lutions and convulsions occasioned by it, opportunities of ac.
quiring additional power or dignity, which at other times
are fought.in.vain, present themselves to an enterprising fpi.
rit. As he was thoroughly acquainted with the Rateuf
the two contending parties, and the qualities of their leaders,
he did not hesitate long in determining on which fide the
greatefl advantages were to be expe&ed. Having revolved
all these things in his own breast, and having taken his final
refulution of joining the emperor, he prudently determined
to declare early in his favour; that by the merit of this, he
might acquire a title to a proportional recompence. With
this view, he had repaired to Ratiibon in the month of Ma-,
under pretext of attending the diet; and after many con.
ferences with Charles or his ministers, he, with the .most'
mysterious secrecy, concluded a treaty, in which :he engag-
ed to concur in assisting the emperor, as .a faithful subjef;
and Charles, in return, itipulated to beflow on him all the
spoils of the elecor of Saxony, his dignities as well as ter-
ritories*. History hardly records any treaty that can be
colufidered as a- more manifest violation of the mont powerful
principles which ought to influence human a&ioni. Mau.
rice, a professed protettant, at a time when the belief of re.
lgion, as well as zeal for its interests, took itrong poffflfion
Of every mind, binds himself to contribute-his assistance to-

HarCi Annal. Brabant. vol. i. 638. Sruvii Corp. xo49
Thuan. 84.

y3

wards carring on a war which had manifestly no other oh.
jet than the extirpation of the protestant dotrines. He
engages to take arms against his father-in-law, and to ltip
his nearest relation of his honours and dominions. Hejoins
a dubious friend against a known benefactor, to whom his
obligations were both great and recent. Nor was the prince
who ventured upon all this, one of those audacious politi.
cians, who, provided they can accomphifh their ends, and
secure their interell, avowedly disregard the most sacred o.
b!igations, and glory in contemning whatever is honourable
or decent. Maurice's condut, if the whole must be afcnb.
ed to policy, was more artful and masterly; he executed his
plan in all its parts, and yet endeavoured to preserve, n eve-
ry ftlp which he took, the appearance of what was fair, and
virtuous, and laudable. It is probable, from his subsequent
behaviour, that, with regard to the protestant religion'at
leaR, his intentions were upright, that he fondly trusted to
the emperor's promises for its security, but that, according
to the fate of all who refine too much in policy; and who
tread in dark and crooked paths in attempting to deceive
others, he himself was, in some degree, deceived.

His silt care, however, was to keep the engagements in-

to which he had entered with the emperor closely conceal
ed: and so perfec a master was he in the art of diffimula
tion, that the confederates, notwithitanding his declining
all connetions with them, and his remarkable afliduity in
pavn:ng court to the emperor, seemed to have entertained no
f:ifpicion of his designs. Even the eletor of Saxony, when
he marched at the beginning of the campaign to join his
aitociates, committed his dominions to Maurice's proteAion,
which he, with an insidious appearance of friendihip, readi-
ly undertook*. But scarcely had the elector taken the
field, when Maurice began to consult privately with the
kLig of the Roma-rs how to invade those very territories,
with the defuce of which he was eritrufted. Soon after,

* Struyii Corp. 1c45.

the emperor sent him a copy of the Imperial bat denounc-
ed against the ele&or and landgrave. As he was next heir
to the former, and particularly interefed in preventing firan-
gers from getting his dominions into their poffeflion, Charles
required him, not only for his own fake, but upon the alle-
giance and duty which he owed to the head of the empire,
intlantly to seize and detain in his hands the forfeited estates
of the ele&tor; warning him, at the fame time, that if he
negleced to obey these commands, he should be held as ac-
ceffary to the crimes of his kinsman, and be liable to the
fame punishment*.

This artifice, which it is probable Maurice himself fug.
gested, was employed by him in order that his conduc to-
wards the eletor might seem a matter of necessity but not
of choice, an at of obedience to his superior, rather than a
voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinsman and ally.
But in order to give some more fpecions appearance to this
thin veil with which he endeavoured to cover his ambition,
he, soon after his return from Ratisbon, had called together
the states of his country; and representing to them that a
civil war between the emperor and confederates of Smalkalde
was now become unavoidable, desired their advice with re-
gard to the part which he should at in that event. They
having been prepared, no doubt, and tutored beforehand,
and being desirous of gratifying their prince, whom they
efleemed as well as loved, gave such counsel as they knew
would be moR agreeable; advising him to offer his media-
tion towards reconciling the contending parties; but if that
were rejected, and he could obtain proper security for the
protestant religion, they delivered it as their opinion, that,
in all other points, he ought to yield obedience to the em-
peror. Upon receiving the Imperial rescript, together with
the ban against the elector and landgrave, Maurice summon-
ed the fates of his country a second time; he laid before
them the orders which he had received, and mentioned the

*Sleid. 391. Thurn. 84.

punilhment with which he was threatened in cafe of difobe.
dience; he acquainted them, that the confederates had re-
fused to admit of his mediation, and that the emperor had
given him the most fatisfacory declarations with regard to
religion; he pointed out his own interest in securing poflf.
.ion of the electoral dominions, as well as the danger of al-
lowing firangers to obtain an efablifllment in Saxony; and
upon the whole, as the point under deliberation refpe&ed
his fubjeds no lers than himself, he desired to know their
sentiments, how he flould fleer in that difficult and arduous
conjuncure. The lates, no less obsequious and complaisant
than formerly, profelling their own reliance on the empe-
ror's promifts as a perse& security for their religion, pro.
posed that, before he had recourse to more violent methods,
they would write to the elecor, exhorting him, as the bell
means, not only of appeasing the emperor, but of preventing
his dominions from being seized by foreign or hoflile pow-
ers, to give his content that Maurice Ihould take pofffioN
of them quietly and without opposition. Maurice himedf
secondcd their arguments in a letter to the landgrave, his
father-in-law. Such an extravagant proposition was rcjet.
ed with the scorn and indignation which it deferred. The
landgrave, in return to Maurice, taxed him with his treacl-
cry and ingratitude towards a kinsman to whom he was so
deeply indebted; he treated with contempt his affetation
of executing the Imperial ban, which he could not but know
to be altogether void by the unconstitutional and arbitrary
manner in which it had been issued; he besought him, not
to susser himself to be so far blinded by ambition, as to for-
get the obligations of honour and friendship, or to betray
the protestant religion, the extirpation of which out of Ger-
many, even by the acknowledgment of the pope himfelg
was th; great object of the present war:.

But Maurice had proceeded too far to be diverted from
pursuing his plan by reproaches or arguments. Nothing

Sleid. 4Q5, &c. Thuan. 85. Camerar. 484.

now remained but to execute with vigour, what he hitherto:
carried on by artifice and difimulation. Nor was his bold-.
ness in ascion inferior to his subtlety in contrivance. Hav-
ing assembled about twelve thousand men, he suddenly in.
vaded one part of the eletoral provinces, while Ferdinand,
with an army compoeed of Bohemians and Hungarians,
over ran the other. Maurice, in two sharp encounters, de-
feated the troops which the eleCtor had left to guard hi*
country; and improving tbefe advantages to the utmot,
made himself mailer of all the eleaorate, except Wittem.
berg, Gotha, and Eisenach, which being places of confide-
table ltrength, and defended by sufficient garrisons, refused-
to open their gates. The news of there rapid conquests
soon reached the Imperial and confederate camps. In the
former, satisfaction with an event, which it was foreseen
would be produaive of the mofi important consequences,
was expressed by every possible demonfiration of joy. The
latter was filled with aftoniflnent and terror. The name
of Maurce was mentioned with execration, as an apoffare
from religion, a betrayer of the German liberty, and a coun
temner of the most sacred and natural ties Every thing
that the rage or invention of the party could suggest, in or-
der to blacken and render him odious, inve&ives, satires, and
lampoons, the furious declamations of their preachers, toge-
ther with the rude wit of their authors, were all employed
against him. While he, confiding in the arts which he had
so long pratifed, as if his actions could have admitted of
any serious justification, publilhed a manifesto, containing
the fame frivolous reasons for his condu&, which he had for-
merly alledged in the meeting of his Rates, and in his letter
to the landgravet.

The elector, upon the first intelligence of Maurice's mo.
tions, proposed to return home with his troops for the de-
fence of Saxony. But the deputies of the league, assembled
at Ulm, prevailed on him, at that time, to remain with the

t Sleid.409, 410.-

army, and to prefer the success of the common; cause before
the security of his own dominions. At length the fuffer;ngs
and complaints of his subje&s increased so much, that he
discovered the utmost impatience to set out, in order to re.
fcue them from the oppression of Maurice, and from the cru-
elty of the Hungarians, who, having been accustomed to
that licentious and merciless species of war which was
thought lawful against the Turks, committed, wherever
they came, the wildct acts of rapine and violence. This
desire of the elector was so natural and so warmly urged,
that the deputies at Ulm, though fully sensible of the an.
happy consequences of dividing their army, durst not refute
their consent, how unwilling soever to grant it. In this
perplexity, they repaired to the camp of the confederates at
Giengen, on the Brenz, in order to consult their conflitu.
cnts. Nor were they less at a loss what to determine in this
pressing emergence. But, after having confidered feriotfly
the open desertion of some of their allies; the scandalous
lukewarmness of others, who had hitherto contributed noa
thing towards the war; the intolerable load which had fal-
lea of consequence upon such members as were molf zealous
for the cause, or most faithful to their engagements; the ill
success of all their endeavours to obtain foreign aid; the un.
usual length of the campaign; the rigour of the season; to-
gether with the great number of soldiers, and even officers,
who had quitted the service on that account; they conclud-
ed that nothing could fare them, but either the bringing
the contest to the immediate decision of a battle, by at-
tacking the Imperial army, or an accommodation of all their
differences with Charles by a treaty. Such was the defpon
dency and dejecion which now oppressed. the party, that of
these two they chose what was most feeble and unmanly,
empowering a miniller of the eletor of Brandenburg to
propound overtures of peace in their name to the empe
ror.

Io sooner did Charles perceive this haughty confederacy

VH;ich had so lately threatened to drive him out of Germany,
condefce:lding to make the firl advances towards an agree-
ment, than concluding -their spirit to be gone, or their u-
nion to be broken, he immediately assumed the tone of a
conqueror; and, as if they had been already at his mercy,
would not hear of a negotiation, but upon condition that the
elctor of Saxony should previously give up himself and his
dominions absolutely to his disposal t. As nothing more
intolerable or ignominious could have been prescribed, even
inr the worst situation of their affairs, it is no wonder that
this proposition should be rejected by a party, which was
rather humbled and disconcerted than subdued. But tho'
they refused to submit tamely to the emperor's will, they
wanted spirit to pursue the only plan which could have pre-
served their independence: and forgetting that it was the
union of their troops in one body which had hitherto ren-
dered the confederacy formidable, and had more than once
obliged the lmperialifts to think of quitting the field, they
inconsiderately abandoned their advantage, which, in spite
of the diversion in Saxony, would till have kept the empe-
ror in awe; and yielding to the eletor's entreaties, consent-
(d to his proposal of dividing the army. Nine thousand
men were left in the dutchy of Wurtemberg, in 'order to
prote& that province, as well as tbe free cities of Upper
Germany; a considerable body marched with the eletor to-
wards Saxony; but the greater part returned with their re-
fpe&ive leaders into their own countries, and were difperf-
td there *.

The moment that the troops separated, the confederacy
ceased to be the object of terror; and the members of it, whoa
while they composed part of a great body, had felt but lit-
ltle anxiety about their own security, began to tremble when
'licy refleted that they now stood exposed singly to the
v:hole weight of the emperor's vengeance. Charles did not

llortenfus, ap. Scard. ii. 485. * Sleid. 41a.

allow them leisure to recover from their consternation, or to
form any new schemes of union. As soon as the confede.
Tates began to retire, he put his army in motion, and tho
it was nor in the depth of winter, he resolved to keep the
si6ld, in order to make the most of that favourable junture
for which he had waited so long. Some fmaU towns in which
the protestants had left garrifoas, immediately opened their
gates. Norlingen. Rotenberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
submitted soon after. Though Charles could not prevent
the ele&or from levying, as he retreated, large contributions
upon the achbifhop of Mentz, the abbot of Fulda, and o.
thcr ccclfiaftic t, this was more than balanced by the sub.
mission of rlm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly dif.
tinguiihed by its zeal for the Smalkaldic kague. As soon
as an example was (et of deserting the common cause, the
ref of the members became intiantly impatient to follow it,
and seemed afraid left others, by getting the afart of them
in returning to their duty, should, on that account, obtain
~ore favourable terms. The deleor Palatine, a weak prince,
who, notwithfanding his professions of neutrality, had, very
prepoftmrufly, set to the confederates four hundred horse,
a body so inconiderable as to be scarcely any addition to
their strength, but great enough to render him guilty in the
eyes of the emperor, made his acknowledgements in the
most abje& manner 'ihe inhabitants of Augsburg, Ihake
by so many inftaaces of apoftacy, expelled the brae Schertd
out of their city, and accepted fach condition as the eap
"or was plafed to grant them.

1547.] The duke of Wurtemberg, though among thl

6rft who had offered to {ubmit, was obliged to fe for pa
don on his knees; and even after thi mortifying humilin
tion, obtained it with dificulty *. Memmigen, and othe
free cities in Suabia, being now abandoned by all their fx
mer associates, found it necessary to provide for their o0

t Thuan. 88.
* Mer. de Ribier, tom. . 39.

fafetv, by throwing themselves on the emperors mercy.
Strafburg and Frankfort on the Maine, cities far remote
firom the feat of danger, discovered no greater steadiness
than those which lay more exposcd. Thus a confederacy
lately so powerful as to shake the Imperial throne, fell to
pieces, and was dissolved in the space of a few weeks; hard-
ly any member 'of that formidable combination now re-
maining in arms, but the elcsor and landgrave, whom
the emperor, having from the beginning marked out as
the viAims of his vengeance, was at no pains to offer terms
of reconciliation. Nor did he grant those who submitted'
to him a generous and unconditional pardon. Conscious
of his own fuperierity, he treated them both with haughti-
ness and rigour. All the princes in person, and the cities
by their deputies, were compelled to implore mercy in the
humble posture of supplicants. As the emperor laboured
under great difficulties from the want of money, lie imposed
heavy fines upon them, which he levied with most rapacious
exatnefs. The duke of Wurtemberg paid three hundred
thousand crowns; the city of Aug(burg an hundred and
fifty thousand; Ulm an hundred thousand; Frankfort eigh-
ty thousand; Memmingen fifty thousand; and the reft in pro-
portion to their abilities, or their different degrees of guilt.
They were obliged, besides, to renounce the league of Smal-
kalde; to furnish affilfance, if required, towardsexecuting the
Imperial ban against the elecror and landgrave; to give
up their artillery and warlike stores to the emperor; to ad-
mit garrisons into their principal cities and places of trength;
and, in this disarmed and dependent situation, to expec the
final award which the emperor should think proper to pro-
nounce when the war came to an issues. But, amidst the
great variety of articles dictated by Charks on this occa-
lion, he in conformity to his original plan, took care that
nothing relating to religion should be inserted; and to such

tSleid. 411, &c. Thuan, lib. iv.,p. z5. Mem. de Ribier,
tom. i. (;o6.

Vol. III. z

a degree were the confederates humbled or overawed, that
forgetting the zeal which had so long animated them, they
were solicitous only about their own safety, without ventur.
ing to infilt on a point, the mention of which they saw the
emperor avoiding with so much induliry. The inhabitants
of Mbemmingen alone made some feeble efforts to procure a
promise of protection in the exercise of their religion, but
were checked so severely by the Imperial ministers, that
they inifantly fell from their demand.

The eletor of Cologne, whom, notwithstanding the fen.

tence of excommunication issued against him by the pope,
Charles had hitherto allowed to remain in poffeflion of the
archiepiscopal fee, being now required by the emperor to
£ubmit to the censures of the church, this virtuous and dif.
irterefled prelate, unwilling to expose his fubjets to the
miseries of war on his own account, volnntal ily resigned that
high dignity [Jan. 25]. With a moderation becoming
his age and charater, he chose to enjoy truth, together
with the exercise of his religion, in the retirement of a pri-
vate life, rather than to disturb society by engaging in a
doubtful and violent struggle in order to retain his oflice.

During there tranfafAions, the elector of Saxony reached

the frontiers of his country unmolested. As Maurice could
assemble no force equal to the army which accompanied him,
he in a short time, not only recovered possession of his own
territories, but over-ran Mifnia, and stripped his rival of all
that belonged to him, except Dresden and Leipfic, which,
being towns of some strength, could not be suddenly redu-
ced. Mauilice, obliged to quit the field, and to (hut himfelfup
in his capital, dispatched courier after courier to the empe-
ror, representing his dangerous situation, and soliciting him
with the moRt earnest importunity to march immediately to
}!s relief. But Charles, busy at that time in prescribing terms
to such members of the league as were daily returning to
th!ir a"leg;ance, thoughtt it fufcient to detach Albert nmar

Seid. 418. Thuan. lib iv. I8.

quls of Brandenburg-Anfpach with three thousand men ta
his afifllance. Albert, though an enterprising and aaive
effic.r, was unexpetedly surprised by the eletor, who kil-
led many of his troops, dispersed the remainder, and tookl
him prisoner j. Maurice continued as much exposed as for-
merly; and if his enemy had known how to improve the op-
portunity which presented itself, his ruin must have been
i;.nlediate and unavoidable. But the elecor, no less flow
and dilatory when invelted with the sole command, than he
had been formerly when joined in authority with a partner,
never gave any proof of military-a&ivity but in this enter-
prise against Albert. Inflead of marching directly toward3
Maiulice, whom the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed,
he inconfideratc! y lilened to overtures of accommodation,
which his artful antagoniit proposed with no other inten-
tion than to amuse him, and to flacken the vigour of his
ope-:ations.

Such, indeed. was the pollure of the emperor's affair-,

that !e could not march inRtantly to the relief of his ally.
Soon after the separation of the confederate army, he, in or-
der to ease himself of the burden of maintaining a supel.
f.uous number of troops, had dismissed the count of Buren
with his Flemings'*, imagining that the Spaniards and Ger-
mans, together with the papal forces, would be fully fuffi-
cient to crufih any degree of vigour that yet remained .'
mong the members of the league, But Paul, growing wife
too late, began now to discern the imprudence of that mea-
sure from which the more sagacious Venetians had endea-
voured in vain to dissuade him. The rapid progress of the
Imperial arms, and the ease with which they had broken a
combination that appeared no less firm than powerful, open-
ed his eyes at length, and made him not only forget at once all
the advantages which he had expeted from such a complete
triuimph over heresy, but placed, in the ftrongelt light, his-

Avila, 99. 6. Mer. de Ribier, tom. i. 62c.
Avila, )3, 6. Mem. de Ribier, torn. i. .9z.

Z 2

own impolitic condu&, in having contributed towards ac.
quiring for Charles such an immense increase of power, as
would enable him, after oppressing the liberties of Germa.
ny, to give law with ahfolute authority to all the states of
Italy. The moment that he perceived his error, he en.
deavoured to correct it. Without giving the emperor any
warning of his intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson,
to return inotantly to Italy with all the troops under his
command, and at the fame time recalled the licence which
he had granted Charles, of appropriating to his own use a
large ihare of the church lands in Spain. He was not de.
tittute of pretences to justify this abrupt desertion of his
ally. The term of fix months, during which the fipula.
tions in their treaty were to continue in force, was now ex.
pired; the league, in opposition to which their alliance had
been framed, seemed to be entirely dissipated; Charles, in
all his negotiations with the princes and cities which had
submitted to his will, had neither consulted the pope, nor
had allotted him any part of the conquests which he had
made, nor had allowed him any share in the vad contribu.
tions which he had raised. He had not even made any
provilion for the suppression of heresy, or the re-establishment
of the catholic religion, which were Pauis chits induce-
ments to beflow the treasures of the church so liberally in
carrying on the war. These eolours, however specious,
did not conceal from the emperor that secret jealousy which
was the true motive of the pope's conduc. But as Paul's
orders with regard to the march of his troops were no lkfs
peremptory than unexpeaed, it was impossible to prevent
their retreat. Charles exclaimed loudly against his treache
ry, in abandoning him so unseasonably, while he was prost
cuting a war undertaken in obedience to the papal injunc
tions, and from which, if successful, so much honour and
advantage would redound to the church. To complaints
he added threats and expostulations. But Paul remained
iaflesible; his troops continued their march towards the cc

clefiaitical tate, and in an elaborate memorial, intended at
an apology for his condu&, he discovered new and more
manifest symptoms of alienation from the emperor, toge-
ther with a deep rooted dread of his powert. Charles,
weakened by the withdrawing of so great a body from his
army, which was already much diminilhed by the number
of garrisons that he had been obliged to throw into tilhe
towns which had capitulated, found it necessary to recruit
his forces by new levies, before he could venture to march
in pcrfon towards Saxony.

The fame and splendour of his success could not have

failed of attracting such multitudes of soldiers into his ser-
vice fiom all the extensive territories now subjet to his au-
thority, as muif soon have put him in a condition of taking
the field againll the eleaor; but the sudden and violent e-
ruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as well as the great revo-
lutions which that event, extremely mysterious in its first ap
pearances, seemed to portend, obliged him to avoid entang-
ling-himfelf in new operations in Germany, until he had fuli'
ly discovered its source and tendency. The form of governs
iient which had been eitablifhed in Genoa, at the time
when Andrew Doria redtored liberty to his country, though
calculated to obliterate the memory of,former diffeufionr,
and received at first with eager approbation, did not, after
a trial of near twenty years, give universal fatisfacion to
those turbulent and facious republicans, As the entire ad.
miniitration of affairs was now lodged in a certain number of
noble families, many, envying them that pre-emincnce, wvilh.
ed for the reffitution of a popular government, to wh;ch
they had been accustomed; and though all reverenced the
dilinelrciled virtue of Doria, and admired his talents, not a
few were jealous of that ascendant which he had acquired in'
the councils of the commonwealth. His age however, his
nmoderation, and his love of liberty, afforded ample security
to lsi; countrymen that he would not abuse his power, nor

t F. Paul. c8. Pallavic. par. ii. p. . Thuan. iz6.

Z3

slain the close of his days by attempting to overturn that
fabric, which it had been the labour and pride of his life to
erec. But the authority and influence which in his hands
were innocent, they easily saw would prove deiftEive, if
usurped by any citizen of greater ambition, or less virtue.
A citizen of this dangerous character had atually formed
such pretensions, and with tome pTofpet offuccefs. Gian.
netino Doria, whom his grand uncle Andrew deftiaed to
be the heir of his private fortune, aimed ikewife at being his
successor in power. His temper, haughty, insolent, and
overbearing to such a degree as would hardly have been to-
lerated in one born to reign, was altogether unsupportable in
the citizen of a free state. The more sagacious among the
Genoese already feared and hated him as the enemy of those
liberties for which they were indebted to his uncle. While
.ndrew himself, blinded by that violent and uindifceming
affetion which persons in advanced age often contrad for
bhe younger members of their family, set no bounds to the
Idulgence with which he treated him; seeming -l& folici-
tous to secure and perpetuate the freedom of the comnon.
wealth, than to aggrandize that undeferving kinsman.

But whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or whatever

diffatisfaaioi with the system of administration in the comr
monwealth, these circumstances might have occasioned, they
would have ended, it is probable, in nothing more than
murmurings and complaints, if John Lewis Fiefco count f
Lavagna, observing this growing disgust, had not been ten
ccuraged by it to attempt one of the boldest a&ions record
ed in history. That young nobleman, the riche&t and mos
illaitrious subjet in the republic, possessed, in an eminent
degree, all the qualities which win upon the human heart
which command refpe&, or fecere attachment. He waU
graceful and majestic in his person; magnificent even to pro
fusion; of a geaerofity that anticipated the wishes of hi
friends, and exceeded the expetaaions of firangers; of
finnuatipg address, gentle manners, and a iowing affabity.

But under the appearance of these virtues, which seemed to
form him for enjoying and adorning social life, he concealed
all the dispositions which mark men out for taking the lead
in the molt dangerous and dark conspiracies; an insatiable
and reatlefs ambition, a courage unacquainted with fear, and
a mind that disdained subordination. Such a temper could
ill brook that itation of inferiority, wherein he was placed
in the republic; and as he envied the power which the elder
Doria had acquired, he was filled with indignation· at the
thoughts of its defeending, like an hereditary possession, to
Giannetino. These various paions,. preying with violence
on his turbulent and aspiring mind, determined him to at-
tempt overturning that domination to which he could not
submit.

As the moil effectual method of accomplishing this, he
thought at first of forming a conneaion with Francis, and
even proposed it to the French ambaffidor at Rome; and
after expelling Doria, together with the Imperial faction,
by his afiitance, he offered to put the republic once more
under the protection of that monarch, hoping in return for
that service to be entrusted with the principal thare in the
administration of government. But having communicated
his scheme to a few chosen confidents, from whom he kept
nothing secret, Verrina, the chief of them, a man of defpe-
rate fortune, capable alike ofadvifing and executing the most
audacious deeds, remonstrated with earnestness against the
folly ofexpofing himself to the most imminent danger, while
he allowed another to reap all the fruits of his success; and
exhorted him warmly to aim himfeif at that pre-eminence
in his country, to which he was defined by his illustrious
birth, was called by the voice of his fellow-citizens, and
would be raised by the zeal of his friends. This discourse
opened such great profpe&s to Fiefco, and so suitable to his
genius, that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly adopted
that of Verrinat The other persons present, though len.
fible of the hazardous nature of the undertaking, did not

cllufe to condemn what their patron had so warmly approv.
ed. It was instantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to affaf
tinate the two Dorias, as well as the principal persons of
their party, to overturn the eilablifhed fyltem of govern.
ment, and to place Fiefco on the ducal throne of Genoa.
Time, however, and preparations were requisite to ripen
such a design for execution; and while he was employed in
carrying on these, Fiefco made it his chief care to guard
againt every thing that might betray his secret, or create
suspicion. The disguise he affimed, was of all others the
moit impenetrable. He seemed to be abandoned entirely to
pleasure and dissipation. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by
the pursuit of all the amusements in which persons of his age
and rank are apt to delight, engrossed, in appearance, the
whole of his time and thoughts. But amidst this hurry of
dissipation, he prosecuted his plan with the mot cool atten.
tion, neither retarding the design by a timid hesitation, nor
precipitating the execution by an excess of impatience. He
continued his correspondence with the French ambaffadnr
at Rome, though without communicating to him his real
intentions, that by his means he might secure the prote&ion
of the French arms, if hereafter he should find it necessary to
call them in to his aid. He entered into a close confederacy
with Farnese duke of Parma, who being disgusted with the
emperor for refusing to grant him the investiture of that
dutchy, was eager to promote any measure that tended to
diminilh his influence in Italy, or to ruin a family so implit
city devoted to him as that of Doria. Being sensible that,
in a maritime fate, the acquisition of naval power was what
he ought chiefly to aim at, he purchased four gallies from
the pope, who probably was not unacquainted with the de.
sign which be had formed, and did not disapprove of it.
Under colour of fitting out one of there gallies to fail on a
cruise againf the Turks, he not only assembled a good num-
ber of his own vaifals, but engaged in his service many bold

adventurers, whom the truce between the emperor and So-
lyman had deprived of their usual occupation and subsist-

ence.

While Fiefco was taking these important fieps, he pre-
served so admirably his usual appearance of being devoted
entirely to pleasure and amusement, and paid court with
fich artful address to the two Dorias, as imposed not only
on the generous and unfufpieious mind of Andrew, but de-
ceived Giannetino, who, conscious of his own criminal in-
tentions, was more apt to diftruf the designs of others. So
many inflruments being now prepared, nothing remained
but to strike the blow. Various confultationm were held by
Fiefco with his confidents, in order to fettle the manner of
doing it with the greatest certainty and effet. At first,
they proposed to murder the Dorias and their chief adhe-
rents, during the celebration of high mass in the principal
church; but, as Andrew was often absent from religious so-
lemnities on account of his great age, that design was laid
aside. It was then concerted that Fiefco should invite the
uncle and nephew, with all their friends whom he had mark-
ed out as viEtims, to his house; where it would be easy to
cut them off at once without danger or resistance; but as
Giannetino was obliged to leave the town on the day which
they had chosen, it became necefary likewise to alter this
plan. They at last determined to attempt by open force,
what they found difficult to effect by stratagem, and fixed
on the night'between the feeond and third of January, for
the execution of their enterprise. The time was chosen
with great propriety; for as the doge of the former year was
to quit his office, according to custom, on the first of the
month, and his successor could not be eleced sooner than
the fourth, the republic remained during that interval in a
fort of anarchy, and Fiefco might with lets violence take
poffeflion of the vacant dignity.

The morning of that day Fiefco employed in visiting his
iriends, pafling some hours among them with a spirit as gay

and unembarraffed as at other times. Towards evening, he
paid court to the Dorias with his usual marks of refpe&,
and surveying their countenance and behaviour with the at.
tention natural in his situation, was happy to observe the
perfect security in which they remained, without the least
foresight or dread of that formn which had been so long a
gathering, and was now ready to burf over their heads.
From their palace he haRtened to his own, which flood by
itself in the middle of a large court, surrounded by a high
walL The gates had been set open in the morning, and all
persons, without diftinaion, were allowed to enter, but strong
guards posed within the court suffered no one to return.
Verrina, meanwhile, and a few persons trusted with the fe-
cret of the conspiracy, after conducting Fiefco's vaflals, as
well as the crews of his gallies, into the palace in finall bo-
dies, with as little noise as possible, dispersed themselves
through the city, and, in the name of their patron, invited
to an entertainment the principal citizens whom they knew
to be difgufed with the adminiiration of the Dorias, and
to have inclination as well as courage to attempt a change
in the government. Of the vast number of persons wha
now filled the palace, a few only knew for what purpose
they were aflembled; the ret, aftoniihed at finding, instead
of the preparations for a feast, a court crowded with armed
men, and apartments filled with the instruments of war, gaz.
ed on each other with a mixture of curiosity, impatience,
and terror.

While their minds were in this fate of suspense and agi-

tation, Fiefco appeared. With a look full of alacrity and
confidence, he addressed himself to the persons of chief di;
tindion, telling them, that they were not now called to
partake of the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join in a
deed of valour, which would lead them to liberty and im-
mortal renown. He ftt before their eyes the exorbitant
as wtil as intolerable authority of the elder Doria, which
the ambition of Giannetino, and the partiality of the emcp

rDr to a family more devoted to him than to their country,
was about to enlarge and to render perpetual. This un-
righteous dominion, continued he, you have it now in your
power to subvert, and to eflabliffi the freedom of your coun-
try on a firm basis. The tyrants must be cut off. I have
taken the most effectual measures for this purpose. My as-
fociates are numerous. I can depend on allies and pro-
te6tors if necessary. Happily, the tyrants are as secure as I
have been 'provident. Their jnfolent contempt of their
countrymen has banished the suspicion and timidity which
usually render the guilty quick-fighted to discern, as well
as sagacious to guard against the vengeance which they de-
sErve. They will now feel the blow, before they fufped
any hostile hand to be nigh. Let us then sally forth, that
Ywe may deliver our country by one generous effort, almost
unaccompanied with danger, and certain of success. These
words, uttered with that irresistible fervour which animates
the mind when roused by great objets, made the desired
impreflion on the audience. Fiefco's vassals, ready to exe-
cute whatever their maiter should command, received his
discourse with a murmur of applause. To many whose for-
tunes were desperate, the license and confusion of an infur-
reetion afforded an agreeable profpe&. Those of higher
Tank and more virtuous sentiments, durst not discover the
surprise or horror with which they were struck at the pro-
pofal of an enterprise no less unexpected than atrocious; as
each of them imagined the other to be in the secret of the
coinfpiiacy, and saw himself surrounded by persons who wait-
ed only a signal from their leader to perpetrate the greatest
clime. With one voice then all applauded, or feigned to
applaud, the undertaking.

Fiefco having thus fixed and encouraged his associates,

before he gave them his last orders, he hastened for a mo-
'lcnt to the apartment of his wife, a lady of the noble house
of Cibo, whom he loved with tender affection, and whose
beauty and virtue rendered her worthy' of his love. The

noise of the armed men who crowded the court and palace,
having long before this reached her ears, she concluded some
hazardous enterprise to be in hand, and she trembled for her
husband. He found her in all the anguish of uncertainty
and fear; and, as it was now impossible to keep his defiga
concealed, he informed her of what he had undertaken.
The profped of a scene so full of horror as well as danger,
completed her agony; and foreboding immediately in her
mind the fatal issue of it, {he endeavoured, by her tears, her
entreaties, and her despair, to divert him from his purpose.
Fiefco, after trying in vain to soothe and to inspire her with
hope, broke from a situation into which an excess of tender-
ness had unwarily reduced him, though it could not {hake
his resolution. '" Farewell," he cried, as he quitted the a-
partment, " you flall either never fee me more, or you hall
behold to-morrow every thing in Genoa subjec to your
power."

As soon as he rejoined his companions, he allotted each

his proper fation: some were appointed to affauk and seize
the different gates of the city; some to make themfeles
iRafers of the principal ftreeta or places of strength: Fiefco
reserved for himself the attack of the harbour where Doria's
gallies were laid up, as the post of chief importance, and of
greatest danger. It was now midnight, and thecitizens slept
in the security of peace, when this band of conspirator, nu.
merous, desperate, and well armed, rushed out to execute
their plan. They surprised some of the gates, without meet-
ing with any refitance. They got poffelion of others asti
a {harp conflic with the soldiers on guard. Verrina, with
the galley which had been fitted out againt the Turks,
blocked up the mouth of the Darfena or little harbour where
Doria's fleet lay. AlLpoffibility ofefcape being cut off b
this precaution, when Fiefco attempted to enter the gallis
from the hore, to which they were made fast, they wee il
no condition to make refitance, as. they were not only un'
rigged and disarmcd, but had no crew on board,s except the

slaves chained to the oar. Every quarter of the city was
now filled with noise and tumult, all the fireets resounding
with the cry of Fiefco and Liberty. At that name, so po-
pilar and beloved, many of the lower rank took arms and
ioincd the conspirators. The nobles and partisans of the
ariflocracy, aftonilhed or affiighted, shut the gates of their
houses, and thought of nothing but of fecuting them from
pillage. At last the noise excited by this scene of violence
and confusion, reached the palace -of Doria; Giannetino'
started immediately from his bed, and imagining that it was
occasioned by Tome mutiny among the sailors, rulhed out
with a few attendants, and hurried towards the harbour.
The gate of St. Thomas, through which he had to pass,
was already in the poffefilon of the conspirators, who, the
moment he appeared, fell upon him with the utmost fury,
and murdered him on the spot. The fame mufl have been
the fate of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco had execut-
ed his brother's plan, and had proceeded immediately to at-
tack him in his palace; but he, from the fordid consideration
of preventing its being plundered amidst the -ccnfufion, hav-
ing forbid his followers.to advance, Andrew got intelligence
of his nephew's death, as well as ofhis own danger; and
mounting on horseback, saved himself by flight. Amidst
this general coflternation, a few Senators had the courage to
aifemble in the palace of the republicS. At-firft, some of
the most daring among them attempted to rally the scatter-
ed soldiers, and to attack a body of the conspirators; but
being repulsed with loss, all agreed that nothing now re-
mained, but to treat with the party which seemed to be ir-
resistible. Deputies were accordingly sent to learn of Fief-
co what were the concessions with which he would be satis-
fled, or rather to submit to whatever terms he /hould please
to prescribe.

But by this time Fiefco, with which they were empower-
ed to negotiate, was no more. Just as he was about to

t II palazza della Signoria.
Vol. III. A a

leave the harbour, where every thing had succeeded to his
-with, that he might join his victorious companions, he heard
fcmr extraordinary uproar on board the admiral galley.
Alarmed at the noise, and fearing that the saves might
break their chains, and overpower his associates, he ran thi-
ther; but the plank which reached from the mhore to the
,vessel happening to overturn, he fell into the sea, whilst he
hurried forward too precipitately. Being loaded with hea-
vy armour, he funk to the bottom, and perished in the very
anoment when he mufft have taken full poffrfion of every
thing that his ambitious heart co.uld desire. Verrina was
the first who discovered this fatal accident, and foreseeing,
at once, all its consequences, concealed it with the utmost
'iduftry from every one but a few leaders of the conspiracy.
Nor was it difficult, amidst the darkners and confusion of
the night, to have kept itfecret, until a treaty with the fe.
.nators should have put the city in the power of the confpi.
rators. All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the im.
prudence of Jerome Fiefco, who, when the 'deputies of the
senate inquired for his brother, the count 'of Lavagna, that
they might make their proposals to him, replied with a child.
ifh vanity, " I am now the only person to whom that title
belongs, and with me you must treat. These words dif.
.covered as well to his friends -as to his enemies what had
happened, and made the impression which might have been
expeted upon both. The deputies, encouraged by this
event, the only one -which could occasion such a sudden re-
solution as might turn to their advantage, assumed instantly
with admirable presence of mind, a new tone, suitable to the
caange in their circumstances, and made high demands.
While they endeavoured to gain time by protracting the ne-
gotiation, the ref of the senators were busy in assembling
-their partisans, and in forming a body capable of defending
the palace of the republic. On the other hand, the con-
ipirators, astonished at the death of a man whom they ador-
ed aAd trusted, and placing no confidence in Jerome, a gid.

dy youth, felt their courage die away, and their arms fall
from their hands. That profound and amazing secrecy
with which the conspiracy had been concerted, and which-
had contributed hitherto so much to its success, proved now
the chief cause of its miscarriage. The leader was gone;
the greater part of those who aAed under him, knew not
his confidents, and were firangers to the obje& at which he
aimed. There was no person among them whose authority
orabilities entitled him to assume Fiefco's place, or to finith
his plan; after having loft the spirit which animated it, life
and activity deserted the whole body. BMany of the con-
Ipirators withdrew to their houses, hoping that amidst the
darkness of the night they had passed unobserved, and might
remain unknown. Others fought for safety by a timely
retreat; and before break of day, moll of them fled with
precipitation from a city, which but a few hours before,-
was ready to acknowledge them as mailers.

Next morning everxy thing was quiet in Genoa; not an

enemy was to be fcen; few marks of the violence of the former
night appeared, the conspirators having conduced their
enterprise with more noise than bloodfled, and gained all
their advantages by surprise, rather than by force of arms.
Towards evening, Andtew Doria returned to the city, be-
ing met by all the inhabitants, who received him with ac-
ciamations of joy. Though the disgrace as well as danger
of the preceding night were fresh in his-mind, and the
mangled body of his kinsman still before his eyes, such was
his moderation as well as magnanimity5-that the decree if-
sued by the senate against the conspirators, -did not exceed
that jut measure of severity which was requisite for the
f'pport of government, and. was dictated neither by the
Violence ofrefentment, nor the rancour of revenge *.t

' Thuan. 93. Sigonii Vita Andrae Doria, 1196. La Conjuv-
atlon du Compte de Ficfque, par Cardin. de Retz. Adriani If-
tora, lib. vi. 369. Folietae Conjuratio Jo. Lud. Fiefci, ap. Graev.
'hes. Ital. i. 883.
t It is remarkable, that cardinal de Retz, at the age of eig.

Aa 2

After taking the necefflary precautions for preventing the

flame, which was now so happily extinguilhed, from break.
ing out anew, the first care of the senate was to fend an
ambaflador to the emperor, to give him a particular detail of
what happened, and to beg his affiltance towards the reduc.
tion of Montobbio, a strong fort on the hereditary cftate of
the Fiefci, in which Jerome had thut himself up. Charles
was no 'ifs alarmed than aflonifhed at an event so frange
and unexpecdd. He could not believe that Fiefco, how
bold or adventurous soever, durit have attempted such an en-
terprife, but on foreign fuggeition, and from the hope of
foreign aid. Being informed that the duke of Parma was
well acquainted with the plan of the conspirators, he imme.
diately supposed that the pope could not be ignorant of a
measure, which his son had countenanced. Proceeding
from this to a farther conjecure, which Paul's cautious max.
ims of policy in other inltances rendered extremely probable,
he conciuded that the rrench king must have known a-d
approved of the design; and he began to apprehend that
this spark might again kindle the flame of war which had
r.t.ed so long in Italy. As he had drained his Italian ter-
ritories of troops on account of the German war, he was al.
together unprovided for resisting any hoil;le attack in that
country; and on the firit appearance of danger, he muR
have detached thither the greatest part of his forces for its
defence. In this situation of affairs, it would have been al.
together imprudent in the emperor to have advanced in per.
foi again.st the elcdor, until he should learn with fame de.
gree of certainty whether such a scene were not about to
open in Italy, as might put it out of his power to keep the
field with an army sufficient to oppose him.

teen, corpofed.a hifory of this conspiracy, containing such a
difcoverv of his admiration of Fiefro and his enterprise, as ren-
ier it not surprising that a minister, so jealous and discerning as
Richlicu, (hould be led, by the perusal of it, to predidt the tutr
huilent and dangerous spirit of that young ecclefiafic. Mrme. de
Ketz, tou.l i. p. I3.

# BOOK IX.

B 0 0 K IX.

THE emperors dread of the hostile- intentions of the pope
and French king did not proceed from any imaginary or ill-
grounded suspicion. Paul had already given the strongest
proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles could not
hope that Francis, after a rivalihip of so long continuance,
would behold the great advantages which he had gained o-
vcr the confederate proteflants, without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this conjeture.
Francis had observed the rapid progress of his arms with
deep concern, and though hitherto prevented, by circum- -
flances which have been mentioned, from interposing in or-
der to check- them, ,ie was now convinced that, if he did not
make some extraordinary and timely effort, Charles ml'fl
acquire such a degree of power as would enable him to give
la: to the reft of Europe. This apprehension which did
not take its rife from the jealousy of rivailhip alone, but
was entertained by the wisest politicians of the age, fuggefti
ed varions expedients which might serve to retard the course
of tie emperor's vicories, and to form by degrees such a
combination againit him as might put a stop to his danger-

ous career.

With this view, Francis inftruced his emissaries in Ger-

many to employ all their address in order to revive the cou-
rage of the confederates, and to prevent them from submit-
ting to the emperor. He made liberal offers of his assistance
to the ele&or and landgrave, whom he knew to be the most
7zalous as well as the moll powerful of the whole body; he
iftd every argument and proposed every advantage which
could either confirm their dread of the emperor's designs, or
determine them not to imitate the inconsiderate credulity
oftheir a3fociates, in giving up their religion and liberties
to his dipofal. While he took this ftep towards continu-
irg the civil war which raged in Germany, ,he endeavoured

A a 3

likewise to tir up foreign enemies againit the emperor.
Ile fclicited Solyman to fcize this favourable opportunity
of invading Hungary, which had been drained of all the
troops necessary for its defence, in order tcr form the army
against the confederates of Smalkalde. He exhorted the
pope to repair, by a vigorous and seasonable effort, the er-
ror of which he had been guilty in contributing to raise the
emperor to such a formidable height of power. Finding
Paul, both from the consciousness of his own mistake, and
his dread of its confeqtences, abundantly disposed to liften
to what he suggested, he availed himself of this favourable
difpofiton which the pontiff began to discover, as an argu.
ment to gain the Venetians. He endeavoured to convince
tnem that notbing could save Italy, and even Europe, from
opprefion and servitude, but their joining with the pope
ard him, in giving the firit beginning to a general confede.
racy, in order to humble that ambitious potentate, whom
thcv had all equal reason to dread.

Having set on foot there negotiations in the southern

courts, he turned his attention next towards those in the
north of Europe. As the king of Denmark had particular
reasons to be offended with the emperor, Francis imagined
that the obje&c of the league which he had projected would
be highly acceptable to him: and left considerations of cau-
tion cr prudence would restrain him from joining in it, he
a:tempted to overcome these, by offering him the young

iueen of Scots in marriage to his son t. As the ministers
who governed England in the name of Edward VI. had o-
penly declared themrfelves converts to the opinions of the
r:-tornrs, as loon as it became safe upon Henry's death to
lay aiide that dtig-u;ie which his intolerant bigotry had for-
ceel them to afumne, Francis flattered himself that their zeal
wouid not allow them to remain inactive fpe&ators of the 0

-erthrow and deftrufion of those who professed the fame
faith wth thtemfelves. He hoped, that notwithitauding

; MIem. de Ribier, i. 600. 606.

the struggles of fa&ion incident to a minority, and the prof-
pect of an approaching nlpture with the Scots, he might pre-
vail on them likewise to take part in the common cause $.

While Francis employed such a variety of expedients,

and exerted himself with such extraordinary acivity, to
rouse the different fiates of Europe against his rival, he did
not neglet what depended on himself alone. He levied
troops in all parts of his dominions; he colleced military
stores; he coutracted with the Swiss cantons for a confider-
able body of men; he put his finances in admirable order;
lie remitted considerable fums to the eletor and landgrave;
and took all the other steps necessary towards commencing
hoitilities, on the shortest warning, and with the greateit
vigour *.

Operations so complicated, and which required the put-
ting so many instruments in motion, did not escape the em-
peror's observation. He was early informed of Francis's
intrigues in the several courts of Europe, as well as of his
domestic preparations; and sensible how fatal an interrup-
tion a foreign war would prove to his designs in Germany,
he trembled at the profpe& of that event. The danger,
however, appeared to him as unavoidable as it was great.
He knew the insatiable and well-dire&ed ambition of Soly-
nman, and that he always chose the season for beginning his
nmlitaly enterprises with prudence equal to the valour with
which he condu&ed them. The pope, as he had good rea-
fcn to believe, wanted not pretexts to jultify a rupture, nor
inclination to begin hoitilities. He had already made some
discovery of his sentiments, by expressing a joy altogether
nlbecoming the head of the church, upon receiving an ac-
co!nt of the advantage which the elector of Saxony had
gained over Albert of Brandenburg; and as he was now fe-
cure of finding, in the French king, an ally of sufficient
power to support him, he was at no pains to conceal the vio.

{ Mem de Ribier, i. 6j3.

Ibid. 95

lence and extent of his enmity §. The Venetians, Charles
was well assured, had long observed the growth of his pow.
er with jealousy, which, added to the solicitations and promi.
fes of France, might at last quicken their flow counsels, and o-
vercome their natural caution. The Danes and English, it
was evident, had both peculiar reason to be disgusted, as wel
as strong motives to aft against him. But above all, he
dreaded the active emulation of Francis himself, whom he
confidered as the foul and mover of any confederacy that
could be formed against him; and as that monarch had as:
forded protecion to Verrina, who failed diretly to Mar;
feilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefco's conspiracy, Charles
expected every moment to fee the commencement of those
hotile operations in Italy, of which he conceived the in-
furreclion in Genoa to have been only the prelude.

But while he remained in this slate of suspense and foi;-

citude, there was one circumfiance which afforded him tome
profpet of avoiding the danger. The French king's health
began to decline. A disease, which was the effe& of his in-
temperance and inconsiderate pursuit of pleasure, preyed gra-
dually on his constitution. The preparations for war, as wel
as the negotiations in the different courts, began to languish,
together with the monarch who gave spirit to both. The Ge-
noefe, during that interval [March] reduced Montobbio,took
Jerome Fiefco prisoner, and having put him to death, to.
gether with his chief adherents, extinguimhed all remains of
the conspiracy. Several of the Imperial cities in Germany,
despairing of timely assistance from France, submitted to the
emperor. Even the landgrave seemed disposed to abandon
the elector, and to bring matters to a speedy accommoda-
tion, on such terms as he could obtain. In the mean time,
Charles waited with impatience the iffne of a distemper,
which was to decide whether he must relinqui/h all otha
schemes, in order to prepare for refitling a combination do
the greater part of Europe against him, or whether he

I Mem. de Ribier, tom. L 637.

might proceed to invade Saxony, without interruption or
fear of danger.

The good fortune, so remarkably propitious to his fami-

ly, that some historians have called it the Star of the Hourfe
of Atuiria, did not desert him on this occasion. Francis
died at Rambouillet, on the last day of March, in the fifty-
third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his reign.
During twventy-eight years of that time, an avowed rivalfhip
fibfifted between him and the emperor, which involved not
only their own dominions, but the greater part of Europe,
in wars, which were prosecuted with more violent animofi-
ty, and drawn out to a greater length, than had been known
in any former period. Many circu-nlances contributed to
this. Their animosity was founded in opposition of inter-
eil, heightened by personal emulation, and exasperated not
only by mutual injuries, but by reciprocal insults. At the
fame time, whatever advantage one seemed to possess towards
gaining the afcc.daut, was wonderfully balalced by some
favourable circumstance peculiar to the other. The empe-
ror's dominions were of greater extent, the French king's
lay more compat; Francis governed his kingdom with ab-
solute power; that of Charles was limited, but he supplied
the want of authority by address: the troops of the former
vere more impetuous and enterprising; those of the latter
better disciplined, and more patient of fatigue, The talents
and abilities of the two monarchs were as different as the
advantages which they pofleffed, and contributed no less to
pralong the contest between them. Francis took his refo-
litions suddenly, prosecuted them at first with warmth, and
puihed them into execution with a most adventurous cou-
rage; but being destitute of the perseverance necessary to
surmount difficulties, he often abandoned his designs, or re-
laxed the vigour of pursuit, from impatience, and sometimes
from levity. Charles deliberated long, and determined
with coolness; but having once fixed his plan, he adhered
to it with inflexible obstinacy, and neither danger nor dif-

couragement could turn him afde from the execution of it.
The success of their enterprises was suitable to the diverfiy
of their characters, and was uniformly influenced by it.
Francis, by his impetuous acivity, often disconcerted the
emperor's best laid schemes; Charles, by a more calm but
teady prosecution of his designs, checked the rapidity of
his rival's career, and baffled or repulsed his most vigorous
efforts. The former, at the opening of a war or of a cam.
paign, broke in upon his enemy with the violence of a tor.
rent, and carried. all before him; the latter, waiting until
he saw the force of his rival begin to abate, recovered in the
end not only all that he had loft, but made new acquisitions.
Few of the French monarch's attempts towards conquest,
whatever promising aspea they might wear at first, were
conduted to a happy issue; many of the emperor's enterpri.
fes, even after they appeared dcfperate and impracticable,
terminated in the most prosperous manner. Francis was
dazzled with the splendour of an undertaking; Charles wa
allured by the profpet of its turning to his advantage.

The degree, however, of their comparative merit and rt.

putation has not been fixed either by a frit scrutiny into
their abilities for government, or by an impartial confide.
tion of the greatness and success of their undertakings: and
Francis is one of those monarchs who occupies a higher
rank in the temple of Fame, than either his talents or per.
formances entitle him to hold. This pre-eminence he owed
to many different circumstances. The superiority which
Charles acquired by the vitory of Pavia, and which from
that period he preserved through the remainder of his reign,
was so manifest, that FJancis's firuggle against his exorbi.
tant and growing dominion was viewed by molt of the othe
powers, not only with the partiality which naturally arise
for those who gallantly maintain an unequal contelf, bat
with the favour due to one who was resitting a common ent
my, and endeavouring to set bounds to a monarch equall
formidable to them alL The characters of princes, tooP

specially among their contemporaries, depend not only upon
their talents for government, but upon their qualities as men.
Francis, notwithstanding the many errors conspicuous in his
foreign policy and domestic adminiflration, was neverthe-
less humane, beneficent, generous. He poffefled dignity
without pride; affability free from meanness; and courtesy
exempt from deceit. All who had access to him, and no
man of merit was ever denied that privilege, refpe&ed and
loved him. Captivated with his personal qualities, his
subjects forgot his defe&s as a monarch, and admiring him
as the most accomplished and amiable gentleman in his do-
minions, they hardly murmured at a&s of male-adminiftra.
tion, which, in a prince of less engaging dispositions, would
have been deemed unpardonable. This admiration, how-
ever, must have been temporary only, and would have died
away, with the courtiers who bellowed it; the illusion arif-
ing from his private virtues mufl have ceased, and posterity
would have judged of his public condu& with its usual im-
partiality; but another circumstance prevented this, and his
name hath been tranfinitted ,to poflerity with increasing re-
putation. Science and the arts had, at that time, made
little progress in France. They were juit beginning to ad-
vance beyond the limits of Italy, where they had revived,
and which had hitherto been their only feat. Francis took
them immediately under his protection, and vied with Leo
himself, in the zeal and munificence with which he encou.
raged -them. He invited learned men to his court, he con-
vtrfed with them familiarly, he employed them in business,
he raised them to pffices of dignity, and honoured them
with his confidence. That order of men, not more prone
to complain when denied the refpeEt to which they conceive
lt.emfelves entitled, than apt to be pleased when treated
With the difitmnion which they confider as their due,
thought they could not exceed in gratitude to such a bene-
facor, and ,trained their invention, and employed all their
Ingenuity in panegyric. Succeeding authors, warmed with

their descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted their ence.
miums, and even added to them. The appellation of Fath r
of Letter: bestowed upon Francis, hath rendered his memory
sacred among historians; and they seem to have regarded it
as a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to point out
his defeAts. Thus Francis, notwithstanding his inferior a-
bilities, and want of success, hath more than equalled the
fame of Charles. The good qualities which he possessed as
a man, have entitled him to greater admiration and praise
than have been bestowed upon the extensive genius and for-
tunate arts of a more capable, but less amiable rival.

By his death a considerable change was made in the ftateof

Europe. Charles, grown old in the arts of government and
command, had now to contend only with younger.mon.
archs, who could not be regarded as worthy to enter the
lifts with him, who had food so many encounters with Hen-
ry VIII. and Francis I. and come off with honour in aH
those different struggles. By this event, he was eased of
all his disquietude, and was happy to find that he might be.
gin with safety those operations against the deotr of Saxo.
ny, which he had hitherto been obliged to suspend. Be
knew the abilities of Henry II. who had just mounted the
throne of France, to be greasy inferior to those of his fa-
ther, and foresaw that he would be so much occupied for
some time in displacing the late king's ministers, whom he
hated, and in gratifying the ambitions demands of his own
favourites, that he had nothing to dread, either from his
personal efforts, or from any confederacy which this unexpe-
rienced prince could form.

But as it was uncertain how long such an interval of fe-

curity might continue, Charles determined instantly to im-
prove it: and as soon ashe heard of Francis's demise, he be.
gan his march fApril 3] from Egra on the borders of Bo-
hernia. But the departure of the papal troops, together
with the retreat of the Flemings, had so much diminified
his army, that sixteen thousand ~en were all he could affenr

ble. With this inconsiderable body he set out on an ex-
pedition, the event of which was to decide what degree of
authority he fliould possess from that period in Germany:
but as this little army consisted chiefly of the veteran Spaniil'
and Italian bands, he did not, in trusting to them, commit
much to the decision of chance; and even with so fma!l a
force he had reason to entertain the most sanguine hopes of
success. The eletor had levied an army greatly superior in
number; but neither the experience and discipline of his
troops, nor the abilities of his officers, were to be compared
with those of the emperor. The ele&or, betides, had al-
ready been guilty of an error, which deprived him of all the
advantage which he might have derived from his superiority
in number, and was alone sufficient to have occafoned his
ruin. Instead of keeping his forces united, he detached one
great body towards the frontiers of Bohemia, in order to fa-
cilitate hisjnuncdion with the malecontents of that kingdom,
and cantoned a considerable part of what remained in diffe-
rent places of Saxony, where he expected the emperor would
make the first impression, vainly imagining that open towns,
vithi fmnall gar:ifons, might be rendered tenable againfl an e-
nemy.

The emperor entered the fonthern frontier of Saxony,
and attacked Altorf upon the ElRer. The impropritty of
the measure which the elector had taken was immediately
seen, the troops potted in that town surrendering without
resistance; and those in all the other places between that
and the Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled as the
Imperialists approached. Charles that they might not re-
cover from the panic with which they seemed to be struck,
advanced without losing a moment. The elector, who
had fixed his head-quarters at Meissen, continued in his
wonted trate of fluctuation and uncertainty. He even be-
came more undetermined, -n proportion as the danger drew
near, and called for prompt and decisive resolutions. Some-
tines he ated as if he had rcfolved to defend the banks of the
Vol. II. Bb

'Ebe, and to hazard a battle with the enemy, as roon asthe
detachments which he had called in were able to join him.
At other times he abandoned this as rah and perilous, seem.
ing to adopt the more prudent counsels of those who advif.
.ed him to endeavour at protra&ing the war, and for that
end to retire under the fortifications of Wittemberg, where
the Imperialists could not attack him without manifest dif.
advantage, and where he might wait, in safety, for the fuc.
cours which he expeaed from Mecklenburgh, Pomerania,
and the protestant cities on the Baltic. Without fixing
upon either of these plans, he broke down the bridge at
Meissen, and marched along the east bank of the Elbe to
MIuhlberg. There he deliberated anew, and, after much
hesitation, adopted one of those middle schemes, which are
always acceptable to feeble minds incapable of deciding.
IHe left a detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the Imperial.
ils, if they {hould attempt to pars at that place, and ad.
.ancing a few miles with his main body, encamped there in
expe&ation of the event, according to which he proposed to
regulate his subsequent motions.

Charles, meanwhile, pufting forward incessantly, arrived

the evening of the twenty-third of April on the banks of
the Elbe, cppofite to Muhlberg. The river, at that place,
was three hundred paces in breadth, above four feet in
depth, its current rapid, and the bank possessed by the Sax-
ons was higher than that which he occupied. Undismayed,
however, by all these obfiacles, he called together his gene.
ral officers, and, without asking their opinions, communicat-
ed to them his intention of attempting next morning to
force his passage over the river, and to attack the enemy
wherever he could come up with them. They all expressed
their aitonifhment at such a bold resolution; and even the
dake of Alva, though naturally daring and impetuous, and
Maurice of Saxony, notwithstanding his impatience to crulh
iis rival the elecor, remonstrated earnestly against it. But
t*he enmpercr, confiding in his own judgment or good for.

tune, paid no regard to their arguments, and gave the or-
ders neceflary for executing his designs.

Early in the morning a body of Spanish and Italian foot.

marched towards the river, and began an incessant fire upon.
tle ecemy. The long heavy muskets used in that age, did
execution on the opposite bank,. and many of the soldiers,
hurried on by a martial ardour in order to get nearer the
enmvy, rushed into the itream, and, advancing breaft-high,
fired with a more certain aim, and with greater effet. Un-
der cover of their fire, a bridge of boats was begun to be
laid for the infantry; and a peasant having undertaken to
condut the cavalry through the river by a ford with whichl
he was well acquainted, they also were put in motion. The
Saxons potsed in Muhlberg endeavoured to obftrut these
operations, by a brifl fire from a battery which they had-
erected; but as a thick fog covered all the low grounds up-
on the river, they could not take aim with any certainty,.
and the Imperialiils suffered very little; at the fame time
the Saxons being much galled by the Spaniards and Italians,-
they set on fire some boats which had been collected near
the village, and prepared to retire. The Imperialists per.
ceiving this, ten Spanish soldiers infiantly stript themselves,
and holding their swords with their teeth, swam across the
river, put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured to oppose-
them, saved from the flames as many boats as were sufficient
to complete their own bridge, and by this spirited and fuc-
cefsful action, encouraged their companions no less than they,
intimidated the enemy.

By this time the cavalry, each trooper having a foot fol-:
dier behind him, began to enter the river, the light horse
·naTching in the front, followed by the men at arms, whom
the emperor led in person, mounted on a Spanish horse,.
drelled in a sumptuous habit, and carrying a javelin in his.
hand. Such a numerous body ifruggling through a great
fivy-, in whiich, according to the directions of their guide,
tley wvcre obliged to make several turns, sometimes treading.

B b

on a firm bottom, sometimes swimming, prefeated to their
companions, whom they left behind, a spectacle equally mag.
niicent and intereilingt. Their courage, at last, furmourt.
ed every obitac!e, no man betraying any symptom of fear,
when the emperor shared in the danger no less than the'
meancft foldicr. The moment that they reached the oppo-
site fide, Charlts, without waiting the arrival of the reft of
the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons with the troops
which had pased along with him, who, flushed with their
good fortune, and despising an enemy who had negleced to
oppose them, when it might have been done with such ad.
ar.tage, made no account of their superior numbers, and
marched on as to a certain vi&ory.

During all these operations, which neceflarily consumed

much time, the elecor remained inative in his camp; and
from an infatuation which appears to be so amazing, that
the best informed historians impute it to the treacherous arts
of his generals, who deceived him by faife intelligence, he
would not believe that the emperor had passed the river, or
could be so near at hand*. Being convinced, at lat, of his
fatal mitlake, by the concurring testimony of eye-witnesses,
he gave orders for retreat.i;g towards Wittenberg. But a
German army, encumbered, as usual, with baggage and ar-
tillery, could not be put suddenly in motion. They had juit
begun to march when the light troops of the enemy came
in view, and the elector saw an engagement to be unavoid-
able. As he was no less bold in aEtion than irresolute in
council, he rmade the disposition for battle with the greatest
prctence of mind, and in the most proper manner, taking
advantage of a great foret to cover his wings, so as to pre-
vent his being surrounded by the enemy's cavalry, which
were far more numerous than his own. The emperor, like-
wife, ranged his men in order as they came up, and riding

+ Avila, ix1, a.
* Ca^'erar. ap. rrecher. iii. 49,>. Struv. Corp. IIift. Gems
.Z47, 1c4¥.

along the ranks, exhorted them with few but efficacious
words to do their duty. It was with a very different fpi-
rit that the two armies advanced to the charge. As the day,
which had hitherto been dark and cloudy, happened to clear
?p at that moment, this accidental circumstance made an
iinpreffion on the different parties corresponding to the tone
es their minds; the Saxons, surprised and disheartened, felt
pain at being exposed fully to the view of the enemy; the
ImperaaliRs, being now secure that the protestant forces
could not escape from them, rejoiced at the return of fun-
lhine, as a certain presage of vicory. The shock of battle
would not have been long doubtful, if the personal courage
which the elector displayed, together with the activity which
he exerted from the moment that the approach of the ene-
my rendered an engagement certain, and cut off all poffibili-
tv of hesitation, had not revived in some degree the spirit of
i;:, troops. They repulsed tire Hungarian light-horfe whlo
bcgna! tile attack, and received with firmness the:men at arms
who next advanced to the charge; but as these were the
flower of the Imperial army, were commanded by experien-
ced officers, and fought under the emperor's eye, the Saxons
fu;:i began to give way, and the light troops rallying at the
fanme time and falling on their flanks, the flight became ge-
neral. A finall body of chosen soldiers; among whom the
tle¢tor had fought in person, still continued to defend them-
fiIves, and endeavoured to save their master by-retiring into--
tl'e forell; but being surrounded on every fide, the elecor
nourded in the face, exhausted with fatigue, and perceiving
all resistance to be vain, surrendered himself a prisoner. He
was conducted immediately towards the emperor, whom he
found jut returned from the pursuit, standing on the.field,
of battle in the full exultation of success, and receiving the,
coi;;ratlulations of his officers, upon this complete victory
Ob:;ilcd by his valour and conduft. Even in such an un-
furtll;ate and humbling situation, the elecor's behaviour
vwa t(cually magnanimous and decent. Sensible of his con.

Bb3

dition, he approached his conqueror without any of the ful.
lennefs or pride which would have been improper in a cap.
tire; and conscious of his own dignity, h'e descended to no
mean fubnmijion, unbecoming the high flation which-he
held among the German princes. " The fortune of war,"
said he, ", has made me your priforer, roft gracious empe-
ror, and I hope to be treated"- Here, Charles harfily
internapted htir.: " And am I then, at last, acknowledged
to be emperor? Charles of Ghent was the only title you
lately allowed rre. You shall be treated as you deserve."
At these words he turned from him abruptly with an haugh.
ty air. To this cruel repulse, the king of the Romans add.
ed reproaches in his own name, using expreflions still more
ungenerous and insulting. The elector made no reply; but,
with an uraltered countenance, which discovered neither
aftoniflhment nor deieaion, accompanied the Spanifi soldi.
ers appointed to guard himt-.

This decisive viaory cost the Imperialists only fifty men.

Twelve hundred of the Saxons were killed, chiefly in the
pursuit, and a greater number taken prisoners. About four
lundred kept in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg, toge-
ther with the electoral prince, who had likewise been wound-
ed in the actiQn. After refting two days in the field of
battle, partly to refresh his army, and partly to receive the
deputies of the adjacent towns, which were impatient to fe-
cure his proteEtion by submitting to his will, the emperor
began to move toxards Wittemberg, that he might termi-
ntte the war at once, by the reduAion of that city. The
unfortunate elector was carried along in a fort of triumph,
and exposcd every where, as a captive, to his own fubjeds;
a spectacle extremely affliting to them, who both honoured
and loved him; though the iufult was so far from subduing
his firm spirit, that it did not even ruffle the wonted tran-
quillity and coirpofure of his mind.

t Sieid. Hist. 426. Thuan. x36. Hortenfius de Bello German

ap. Scard. vZ.l. ii. 498. Dcl;ri;-t. Pugns Mulberg. ibid. p. 5'-9
P. Ill:cr. ker. Auir. lib. x;. c. 13. p. .98.

As Wittemberg, the residence, in that age, of the elec-
toral branch of the Saxon family, was one of the itrongeft
cities in Germany, and could not be taken, if properly de-
fendcd, without great difficulty, the emperor marched thi-
ther with the utmost dispatch, hoping that while the con-
fternation occasioned by his vi&ory was still recent, the in-
habitants might imitate the example of their countrymen,
and submit to his power, as soon as he appeared before their
walls. But Sybilla of Cleves, the eleaor's wife, a woman
no less diftinguilhed by her abilities than her virtue, instead
of abandoning herself to tears and lamentations upon her
huiband's misfortune, endeavoured by her example as well
as exhortations, to animate the citizens. She inspired them
with such resolution, that, when summoned to surrender,
they returned a vigorous answer, warning the emperor to
behave towards their sovereign with the refpet due to his
rank, as they were determined to treat Albert of Branden-
burg, who was still a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner
that lie treated the elector. The spirit of the inhabitants,
no less than the strength of the city, seemed now to render
a siege in form necessary. After such a signal victory, it
would have been disgraceful not to have undertaken it, tho'
at the fame time the emperor was destitute of every thing
requisite for carrying it on. But Maurice removed all diffi-
culties by engaging to furnilh provisions, artillery, ammuni-
tion, pioneers, and whatever else ihould be needed. Trufl-
ing to this, Charles gave orders to open the trenches before
the town. It quickly appeared, that Maurice's eagerness
to reduce the capital of those dominions, which he expected
as his reward for taking arms against his kinsman, and de-
serting the protestant cause, had led him to promise what
exceded his power to perform. A battering train was, in-
deed, carried safely down the Elbe from Dresden to Wit-
temberg; but as Maurice had not sufficient force to preserve
a secure communication between his own territories and the
calrp us the besiegers, count Mansfeldt, who commanded a

body of ele&oral troops, intercepted and destroyed a convoy
of provisions and military flores, and dispersed a band of pi.
oneers destined for the service of the Imperialists. This put
a flop to the progress of the siege, and convinced the empe-
ror, that as he could not rely on Maurice's promises, recourse
ought to be had to forne more expeditious as well as more
certain method of getting pofleion of the town.

The unfortunate elector was in his hands, and Charles

was ungenerous and hard-hearted enough to take advantage
of this, in order to make an experiment whether he might
not bring about his design, by working upon the tendernefa
of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety of children to.
wards their parent. With this view, he summoned Sybilla
a second time to open the gates, letting her know that if she
again refused to comply, the elector should answer with his
head for her obstinacy. To convince her that this was not
an empty threat, he brought his prisoner to an immediate
trial. The proceedings againit him were as irregular as the
stratagem was barbarous. lnftead of consulting the flates
of the empire, or remitting the cause to any court, which,
according to the German conititution, might have legally
taken cognizance of the elector's crime, he fubje&ed the
greatest prince in the empire to the jurifdiftion of a court-
martial, composed of Spanish and Italian officers, and in
which the unrelenting duke of Alva, a fit instrument for any
a& of violence, presided [May lo]. This strange tribunal
founded its charge upon the ban of the empire which had
been issued against the prisoner by the sole authority of the
emperor, and was destitute of every legal formality which
could render it valid. But the court-martial, presuming the
elector to be thereby manifestly convited of treason and re-
bellion, condemned him to susser death by being beheaded.
This decree was intimated to the ele&or while he was amu-
sing himself in playing at chefs with Ernest of Brunswick
his fellow-prifoner. He paused for a moment, though with-
out discovering any symptom either of surprise or terror;

and after taking notice of the irregularity as well as in-
jfitice of the emperor's proceedings: " It is easy, conti-
iued he, to comprehend his fcheine. I must die, because
Wittemberg will not surrender, and I shall lay down my
life with pleasure, if, by that sacrifice, I can preserve the
dignity of my house, and ti'anfmit to my posterity the in-
heritance which belongs to them. Would to God, that
this sentence may not affeft my wife and children more than
it intimidates me! and that they, for the fake of adding a
few days to a life already too long, may not renounce ho..
nours and territories which they were born to possess*!"'
He then turned to his antagonist, whom he challenged to
continue the game. He played with his usual attention
and ingenuity, and having beat Ernest, expressed all the fa-
tisfadion which is commonly felt on gaining such victories.
After this, he withdrew to his own apartment, that he
might employ the reft of his time in such religious exercif-
es as were proper in his fituationt.

It was not with the fame indifference, or composure,

that the account of the ele&or's danger was received in
Wittemberg. Sybilla, who had supported with such un-
daunted fortitude her husband's misfortunes, while she i-
magined that they could reach no farther than to-diminifh
his power or territories, felt all her resolution fail as soon as
his life was threatened. Solicitous to save that, she despised
every other consideration; and was willing to make any fa-
crifice, in order to appease an incensed conqueror. At the
fame time, the duke of Cleves, the ele&tor of Brandenburg,
and Maurice, to none of whom Charles had communicated
the true motives of his violent proceedings against the elec-
tor, interceded warmly with him to spare his life. The
firit was prompted so to do merely by compassion for his
filter, and regard for his brother-in-law. The two others
dreaded the universal reproach that they would incur, if,
ater having boaRted so often of the ample security which

Tl:uan. i. 14Z. t Struvii Corpus, ioSo.

the emperor had promised them with refpeR to their religi-
on, :he first effe;t of their union with him should be the pu.
blic - xecution of a prince, who was justly held in reverence
as the moA zealous protecor of the protestant cause. Mau.
rice, in Dprticular, fcre.aw that he mull become the object
of detei-at:on to the Saxons, and could never hope to go.
vern them with tranquillity, if he were confidered by them
as accessary to the death of his nearest kinfmau, in order that
he rm:rht obtain pi :effion of his dominions.

While they, from such various motives, solicited Charles,

with the moll earnef importunity, not to execute the fen.
tence; Sbdlla, and his children, conjured the eleaor, by
letters as well as messengers, to scruple at no conceflion that
would extricate him out of the present danger, and deliver
them from their fears and anguish on his account. The
emperor, perceiving that the expedient which he had tried
began to produce the effet that he intended, fell by de.
grees from his former rigour, and allowed himself to soften
into promises of clemency and forgiveness, if the eletor
would shew himself worthy of his favour, by submitting to
reasonable terms. The ele&or, on whom the consideration
of what he might susser himself had made no impreflion,.
was melted by the tears of his wife whom he loved, and
could not resist the intreaties of his family. In compliance
with their repeated solicitations, he agreed to articles of ac-
commodation [May 19,] which he would otherwise have
rejected with disdain. The chief of them were, that he
should resign the eletoral dignity, as well for himself as for
his posterity, into the emperor's hands, to be disposed of
entirely at his pleasure; that he (hould instantly put the Im-
perial troops in poffeflion of the cities of Wittemberg and
Gotha; that he Ihould set Albert of Brandenburg at liber-
ty without ianfom; that he should submit to the decrees of
the Imperial chamber, and acquiesce in whatever reforma-
tion the emperor Ihould make in the conflitution of that
court; that he should renounce all leagues against the em-

peror or king of the Romans, and enter into no alliance for
the future, in which they were not comprehended. In re-
turn for these important concessions, the emperor not only
proiifed to spare his life, but to fettle on him and his po-
fierity the city of Gotha and its territories, together wvith
an annual pension of fifty thousand florins, payable out of
the revenues of the elecorate; and likewise to grant him a
film in ready money to be applied towards the discharge of
his debts. Even there articles of grace were clogged with
the mortifying condition of his remaining the. emperor's
prisoner during the reit of his life*. To the whole,
Charles had fulbjoined, that he should submit to the decrees
of the pope and council with regard to the controverted
points in religion; but the eledtor, though he had been
pcrfladed to facifice all the objeEts which men commonly
hold to be the dearest and most valuable, was inflexible with
regard to this point; and neither threats nor intreaties could
prevail to make him renounce what he deemed to be truth,
(,r perflude him to ad in opposition to the dictates of his
conscience.

As soon as the Saxon garrison marched out of W\ittem-
berg, the emperor fulfilled his engagements to Maurice;
a:id in reward for his merit in having deserted the prote-
ftant cause, and having contributed with stich success to-
viards the dissolution of the Smalkaldic league, he gave
him poiffffion of that city, together with all the other towns
intilte eletorate. It was not without relu&tance, however,
tlit lie made fuich a sacrifice; the extraordinary success of
his armnshad begun to operate in its usual manner, upon his
ambitious mind, faggelting new and va1t projects for the
aggriadifinmeent of his family, towards the accomplifhmenr
ol wiich the retaining of Saxony would have been of the
tiitnlt con{equence. But as this scheme was not then
ripe for execution, he durit not yet venture to dilclofe it;

Sltic!. 47. Thuan.i. 142. Du Mont. Corps Diplom. iv.
fIl. .32.

nor would it have been either safe or prudent to offend Mau.
rice at this ju.aiurc, by filch a manifefl violation of all the
promises, which had fcduced him to abandon his natural
allies.

The landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was still in arms;

and though now left alone to maintain the protestant cause,
was neither a feeble nor contemptible enemy. His domi-
nions were of considerable extent; his fubjeas animated
with zeal for the reformation; and if he could have held the
ImperialiRs at bay for a fliort time, he had much to hope
from a party whose strength was fill unbroken, whose n.
nmon as well as vigour might return, and which had reason
to depend, with certainty, on being effectually supported by
the king of France. The landgrave thought not of any
thing so bold or adventurous; but being seizcd with the
fame consternation which had taken possession of his affo-
ciates, he was intent only on the means of procuring favour.
able terms from the emperor, whom he viewed as a conquer-
or, to whose will there was a necessity of submitting. Mau.
r.ce encouraged this tame and pacific spirit, by magnifying,
on the one hand, the emperor's power; by boalting, on the
other, of his own intereRf with his victorious ally; and by
reprefcnting the advantageous conditions which he could
not fail of obtaining by his intercession for a friend, whom
he was so solicitous to save. Sometimes the landgrave was
induced to place such unbounded confidence in his promises,
that he was impatient to bring matters to a final accommo-
dation. On other occasions, the emperor's exorbitant am-
bition, restrained neither by the scruples of decency, nor
the maxims ofjuitice, together with the recent and flocking
proof which he had given of this in his treatment of the
tledor of Saxony, came so full into his thoughts, and
made such a livelv impression on them, that he broke of
abruptly the ncgotiations which he had begun; seeming to
be convinced that it was more prudent to depend for safety
·.Z his own arms, than to coutide in Charles's generoltyf

But this bold resolution, which despair had suggested to an
inrpatient spirit, fretted by disappointments, was not of
long continuance. Upon a more deliberate survey of the
enemy's power, as well as his own weakness, his doubts
and fears returned upon him, and together with them the
spirit of negotiating, and the desire of accommodation.

Maurice and the elector of Brandenburg aded as media-

tors between him and the emperor; and after all that the
former had vaunted of his influence, the conditions prefcrib-
ed to the landgrave were extremely rigorous. The articles
with regard to his renouncing the league of Smalkalde, ac-
knowledging the emperor's authority, and submitting to
the decrees of the Imperial chamber, were the fame which
hadbeen imposed on the ele&or of Saxony. Besides these,
he was required to fuin-ender his person and territories to
the emperor; to implore for pardon on his knees; to pay an
hundred and fifty thousand crowns towards defraying the
expences of the war; to demolish the fortifications of all the
towns in his dominions except one; to oblige the'garrifon
which he placed in it to take an oath of fidelity to the
emperor; to allow a free passage through his territories to
the Imperial troops as often as it (hall be demanded; to de-
liver up all his artillery and ammunition to the emperor; to set
at liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunswick, together
with the other prisoners whom he had taken during the
war; and neither to take arms himself, nor to permit any of
his subje&s to serve againfl the emperor or his allies for the
future t.

'The landgrave ratified these articles, though with the ut-

mos reluc'dance, as they contained no flipulation with re-
gard to the manner in which he was to be treated, and left
hinm entirely at the emperor's mercy. Neceflity, however
compelled him to give his assent to them. Charles who
lad assumed the haughty and imperious tone of a conquek-
or, ever since the reduStion of Saxony, insisted on uncondi-

t Skid. 430. Thuan. 1. iv. 146.
Vol. II. C c

ti'nal fubmificn, and would permit nothing to be added
to the terms which he had prescribed, that could in any de-
gree limit the fulness of his power, or reilrain him from be-
having as he saw meet towards a prince whom he regarded
as absolutely at his disposal. But though he would not
vouchsafe to negotiate with the landgrave on such a footing
of equality, as to susser any article to be inserted among those
which he had dictated to him, that could be confidered as a
formal stipulation for the security and freedom of his own
person; he, or his ministers in his name, gave the elector
of Brandenburg and Maurice such full fatisfation with re.
gard to this point, that they assured the landgrave, that
Charles would behave to him in the fame way as he had
done to the duke of Wurtemberg, and would allow him,
whenever he had made his submission, to return to his own
territories. Upon finding the landgrave to be still possessed

i-th his former suspicions of the emperor's intentions, and
unwilling to trust verbal or ambiguous declarations, in a
matter of such essential concern as his own liberty, they sent
him a bond signed by them both, containing the molt so-
lenan obligations, that if any violence whatsoever was offer-
ed to his person, during his interview with the emperor,
they would instantly surrender themfclved to his sons, and
remain in their hands to be treated by them in the fame
manner as the emperor mhould treat him *.

This, together with the indispensable obligation of per-

forming what was contained in the articles of which he had
accepted, removed his doubts and scruples, or made it necef-
fary to get over them. He repaired for that purpose, to
the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a circumltance
cccunred which revived his suspicions and increased his fears.
jufl as he was about to enter the chamber of presence, in or-
der to make his public fubmitfion to the emperor, a copy
of the articles which he had approved of was put into his
hands, iin order that he might ratify them anew. Upon

-* : Mont Corps Diplor. iv. p. iI. 336.

perusing them, he perceived that the Imperial ministers had'
added two new articles; one importing, that if any difpiut
ihould arise concerning the meaning of the former condi-
tions, the emperor should have the right of putting what in-
terpretation upon them lie thought most reasonable; the o-
tler, that the landgrave was bound to submit implicitly to-
the decisions of the council of Trent. This unworthy arti-
fice, calculated to surprise him into an approbation of arti-
cles, to which he had not the moif distant idea ofaffenting,
L; proposing them to him at a time when his mind was en-
grosfd and disquieted with the thoughts of that humiliat-
iig ceremony which he had to perform, filled the landgrave
with indignation, and. made him break out into all those
violent exprefions of rage to which his temper was prone.
With some difficulty, the eletor of '- andenburg and Mau-
rice prevailed at length on the emperor's ministers to drop
the former article as unjust, and to explain the latter in such
a manner, that he could agree to it, without openly reaouulc-
ing the proteflant religion.

This obstacle being surmounted, the landgrave was im-

patient to finith a ceremony which, how mortifying soever,
'had been declared neccffary towards his obtaining pardon.
The emperor was feated on a magnificent throne, with all
thet ensigns of his dignit3, surrounded by a numerous train
of the princes of the empire, among whom was Henry of
P':'unfwick, lately the landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a
sudden reverse of fortune, a spectator of his humiliation.
The landgrave was introduced with great solemnity, and ad-
vancing towards the throne, fell upon his knees. His
chancellor, who walked behind him, immediately read, by
his mailer's command, a paper which contained an humble
ci£feflion of the crime whereof he had been guilty; an ac-
ki:.ov'lcdgment that he had merited on that account the molt
severe punifihment; an absolute resignation of himself aid
lis dominions to be disposcd of at the emperor's pleasure;.
', fbmiifive petition for pardon, his hopes of which were

Cc 2

founded entirely on the emperor's clemency; and it corm
eluded with promises of behaving, for the future, like a
subjet whose principles of loyalty and obedience would be
confirmed, and would even derive new force from the senti-
ments of gratitude which mull hereafter fill and animate his
heart. While the chancellor was reading this abjet de-
claration, the eyes of all the fpeaators Here fixed on the
unfortunate landgrave; few could behold a prince, so pow-
erful as well as high-fpirited, suing for mercy in the posture
of a fuppli.at, without being touched with commiseration,
and perceiving serious refleAions arise in their minds upon
the inflabilitv and emptiness of human grandeur. The em-
peror viewed the whole transaction with an haughty unfeel-
ing corrpofare; and preserving a profound silence himself,
ir.ade a sign to one ofthis secretaries to read his answer: the
tenor of which was, That though he might have justly in-
fii;ced on him the grievous punishment which his crimes de-
served, vet, prompted by his own generosity, moved by the
iolicitations of several princes in behalf of the landgrave,
and influenced by his penitential acknowledgments, he
would not deal with him according to the rigour ofjuftice,
and would fubje& him to no penalty that was not specified
in the articles which he had already subscribed. The mo
rrrn-t the secretary had f£niihed, Charles turned away abrupt-
ly, withdut deigning to give the unhappy suppliant any
fiSn of compassion or reconcilement. He did not even de-
fire him to rien from his knees; which the landgrave having
ventured to do unbidden, advanced towards the emperor
with an intention to kifs his hand, flattering himself, that
his guilt being now fully expiated, he might presume to
take that liberty. But the eleaor of Brandenburg, per-
ceiving that this familiarity would be offensive to the empe-
ror, interposed, and desired the landgrave to go along with
him and Maurice to the duke of Alva's apartments in the
catlle.

He was received and entertained by that nobleman with

the refpeEt and courtesy due to such a guest. But after
sipper, while he was engaged in play, the duke took the
crletor and Maurice aside, and communicated to them the
emperor's orders, that the lapdgrave, must remain a prisoner in
that place under the custody of a Spanish guard. As they
had not hitherto entertained the most distant suspicion of the
emperor's sincerity or retitlude of intention, their surprise
was excessive, and their indignation not inferior to it, on
discovering how greatly they had been deceived themselves,
and how infamoufy abused, in having been made the inftru-
nients of deceiving and ruining their friend. They had re-
course to complaints, to arguments, and to entreaties, in or-
der to save themselves from that disgrace, and to extricate
Lini out of the wretched situation into which he had been
bl traycd by too great confidence in them. But the duke
oF Alva remained inflexible, and pleaded the necessity of ex-
cclting the emperor's commands. By this time it greuw
latc, and the landgrave, who knew nothing of what had pas-
fid, nor dreaded the snare in which he was entangled, pre- -
,:ired for departing, when the fatal orders were intimated
to h;im. He was firuck dnmb at firil with aRonifllment,
hnt after being silent a few moments, he broke out into all
i. violent exprefiions which horror, at injullice accompa-.
i.icd with fr-ad, naturally suggests. He complained, he ex-
po;lu!ated, lie exclaimed; fometilucs inveighing against
tile emperor's artifices as unworthy of a great and ge-
er;-ous prince; sometimes cenfurling the credulity of his
f!tinds in trusting to Charles's insidious promises; some-
tines charging them with mcannl.fs in stooping to lend
their affillance towards the execution of such a perfidious
r.ud dilhonoulrable scheme; and in the end he required
them to remember their engagements to his children,
and instantly to fulfil them. They, after giving way
fir a little to the torrent of his paflion, solemnly asserted
thlir own innocence and upriglht intention in the whole
trariatiuon, and cicouraged iimt to lioue, ltat as fuotl as

Cc 3

they saw the emperor, they would obtain redress of an in-
jury, which affeced their own honour, no less than it did
his liberty. At the fame time, in order to soothe his rage
and impatience, Maurice remained with him during the
night, in the apartment where he was confinedf.

Next morning, the elector and Maurice applied jointly to

the emperor. representing the infamy to which they would
be exposed throughout Germany, if the landgrave were de-
tained in cuRody; that they would not have advised, nor
would he himself have consented to an interview, if they had
fufpeted that the loss of his liberty was to be the confe.
quence of his submission; that they were bound to procure
his release, having plighted their faith to that effet, and en-
gaged their own persons as sureties for his. Charles hisen-
ed to their ear:.efl remonflrances with the utmost coolness.
As he now ilood no longer in need of their services, they
had tlhe mortification to find that their former obsequious-
ness was fo-z?:ten, and little regard paid to their intercef.
s.on. He was ;gnorant, he told them, of their particular or
private tranfacaions with the landgrave, nor was his conduct
to be reg:!ated by any engagements into which they had
thought fit to enter; though he knew well -what he himself
had pror.ifed, which was not that the landgrave should be
exempt from an restraint, but that he (hould not be kept a
prisoner during life*. Having said this with a peremptory

* Sleid. 433. Thuan. 1. iv. 147. Struv. Corp. Hist. Germ. ii.

According to several hiflorians of great name, the emperor,

in r.s tre:-v with the landgrave, stipulated that he would not de-
tain him in any prison. But in executing the deed, which was
written in the German tongue, the Imperial ministers fraudulent-
ly iubfti:oted the word ,:..7:r, instead of einiger, and thus the
treaty, in place of a promise that he lhould not he detained in any
prison, contained only an engagement that he should not be de-
tainet in petrptual imprisonment. But authors, eminent for hiflo-
rical knowledge and critical accuracy, have called in question the
truth of this common flory. The silence of Sleidan with regard
to it, as well as its not being mentioned in the various memorials
which Le hs. pubiShed con.crring the landgrave's imprisonment,

and decisive tone, he put an end to the conference; and they
feeing no probability, at that time, of making any impref-
sion upon the emperor, who seemed to have taken this refo-
lution deliberately, and to be obstinately bent on adhering
to it, were obliged to acquaint the unfortunate prisoner with
the ill success of their endeavours in his behalf. The dif-
appointment threw him into a new and more violent trauf-
port of rage, so that to prevent his proceeding to some def-
perate extremity, the elector and Maurice promised that
they would not quit the emperor, until, by the frequency
and fervour of their intercessions, they had extorted his con-
sent to set him free. They accordingly renewed their soli-
citations a few days afterwards, but found Charles more
haughty and intractable than before, and were warned that
if they touched again upon a subje&t so disagreeable, and
with regard to which he had determined to hear nothing
farther, he would instantly give orders to convey the prison-
er into Spain. Afraid of hurting the landgrave by an offi-
cious or ill-timed zeal to serve him, they not only desisted,
but left the court, and as they did not chufe to meet the
firit sallies of the landgrave's rage upon his learning the
cause of their departure, they informed him of it by a letter,
wherein they exhorted him to fulfil all that he had promised
to the emperor, as the most certain means of procuring a
speedy release.

Whatever violent emotions their abandoning his cause in

this manner occasioned, the landgrave's impatience to reco-
ver liberty made him follow their advice. He paid the fum
which had been imposed on him, ordered his fortrefles to be
razed, and renounced all alliances which could give offence.

greatly favour this opinion. But as several books which contain
the information necessary towards discussing this point with accu-
racy, are written in the German language, which I do nor under-
fland, I cannot pretend to inquire into this matter with the fame
precision wherewith I have endeavoured to fettle some other con-
troverted facls which have occurred in the course of this history.
See Struv. Corp. Iosz. Mofieim's Eccles. Hist. vol. ii. p. i6xi
&6,. Engl. edition.

lThis prompt complianc it the

wt ill of the conqueror

ptoduced no tcffcc. He was frill guarded with the fame
vigilant severity; and being carnied about, together with the
degrded elector of Saxony, wherever the emperor went;
thtir difrace and Ils triumph was each day renewed. The
fnrtitude as well as equanimity, .vith which the eleEtor bore
thefc repeatcd ilfults, wr-re not more remarkable than the
landgrave's fretfulne's and impatience. His aftive impetu-
ous mind could ill brook reltraint; and refleefion upon the
f:am-rful artifices, by wih.h he had been decoyed into that
situation, as well as indignation at the injullice with which
he was flill detained in it, drove him often to the wiideft ex-
cciTes of paffon.

The people of the different cities, to whom Charles thus

wanlonly exposed tl.ofe illultricus prisoners as a public spec-
tacle, were fenfibl- touched with such an infilt offereid to
the Germanic body, and murmured loudly at this indecent
treatment of two of its lieatell princes. They had fcon
other causes of complaint, and such as affeEted them more
nearly. Charles proceeded to add oppression to insult, and
arrogating to himself all the rights of a conqueror, exercised
them wxith the utmost rigour. He ordered hi, troops to
fr.ze the artilerv and n;!ita-n stores belonging to such as
had been memb.rs of the Smalkaldic league, and having
collected upwvartds of five lundred pieces of cannon, a great
n-imber in that age, he sent part of them into the Low-
Countries, pa3it into Italy, and part into Spain, in order to
fprcad by this means the fame of his success,. and that they
might serve as monuments of his having subdued a nation
hiilherto deemed invincible. He then levied, by his sole
authority, large fimns ;fmroney, as well upon those who had
fnrvte him with fidclitv during the war, as upon such as had
been in arms against him; upon the former, as their con-
tingent tw;-ards a war, whichl, having been undertaken, as
lie pretended, for the common bencfit, ought to be carried
on at the common charge; upon the latter, as a finc by way

of punishment for their rebellion. By these exaFtIons, he
amassed above one million fix hundred thousand crowns, a
film which appeared prodigious in the sixteenth century.
But so general was the conilernation which had seized the
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their dread of his
victorious troops, that all implicitly obeyed his commands;
though, at the fame time, these extraordinary stretches of
power greatly alarmed a people jealous of their privileges,
and habituated, during several ages, to confider the Impe-
rial authority as neither extensive nor formidable. This
discontent and resentment, how industriously soever they
concealed them, became universal; and the more these pas-
sians were retrained and kept down for the present, the
more likely were they to burst out soon with additional vi-
olence.

While Charles gave law to the Germans like a conquered

people, Ferdinand treated his fubjecs in Bohemia with still
greater rigour. That kingdom possessed privileges and im-
munities as extensive as those of any nation in which the feudal
institutions were eftablilhed. The prerogative of their kings
was extremely limited, and the crown itself elecive. Ser-
dinand, when raised to the throne, had confirmed their li-
berties with every solemnity prescribed by their excessive
solicitude for the security of a conititution of government
to which they were extremely attached. He soon began,
however, to be weary of a jurifdidcion so much circumfcrib-
ed, and to despise a sceptre which he could not transmit to
his posterity; and notwithstanding all his former engage-
ments, he attempted to overturn the constitution from its.
foundations; that, instead of an elective kingdom, he might
render it hereditary. But the Bohemians were too high-
spirited tamely to relinquifi privileges which they had long
enjoyed. At the fame time, many of them having embrac-
ed the dodtrines of the reformers, the feeds of which John
HuTs and Jerome of Prague had planted in their country
about the beginning of the preceding century, the desire of

acq.iring rie,-io'us liberty mingled itself with their zeal for
the:r civil r'gL:s; and these two kindred passions height.
ening, as ulfal, each o:her's force, precipitated them im-
mediately into violent mcafures. They had not only re.
si.sed to serve their sovereign againit the confederates of
Smalkalde, but having entered into a close alliance with
the clecor of Saxony, they had bound themfe!ves, by
a solemn afociation, to defend their ancient contitution;
and to perfin, until they should obtain such additional pri-
vileges as they thought necessary towards perfecing the
present model of their gcvernment, or rendering it more
permanent. They chose Caspar Phlug, a nobleman of di-
ftinction, to be their general; and raised an army of thirty
thousand men to enforce their petitions. But either from
the weakness of their leader, or from the diffenflons in a
great unwieldy body, which, having united haffily, was not
thoroughly corrpaaced, or from some other unknown cause;
the subsequent operations of the Bohemians bore no pro.
portion to the zeal and ardour with which they took their
first resolutions. They suffered themselves to be amused so'
long with negotiations and overtures of different kinds, that
before they could enter Saxony, the battle ofPMuhlberg
was fought, the eledor deprived of his dignity and terri-
tories, the landgtave confined to close cullody, and the
league of Srralkalde entirely dissipated. The fame dread of
the emperor's power which had seized the reft of the Ger-
mrans, reached them. As soon as their sovereign approach-
ed with a body of Imperial troops, they instantly dispersed,
thinking of nothing but how to atone for their past guilt,
and to acquire some hope of forgiveness by a prompt fuh-
nmiiloin. But Ferdinand, who entered his dominions full
of that implacable refeitmient which inflames monarcls
whiofe authority las l-een dcfpifed, was not to be mollified
by the late repentance and involuntary return of rebellious
fukjcts- to their duty. He even heard, unmo;cd, the in.
treat:cs and tears cf the citizens of Prague, who appeared

before him in the posture of suppliants, and implored for
mercy. Tile sentence which he pronounced againit them
was rigorous to extremity; he aboliflhed many of their pri-
vileges, he abridged others, and new modelled the confitu-
tion according to Iiis pleasure. He condemned to death
many of those who had been motl a&ive ill forming the
late allociation aga;niu him, and pumifhed Itill a greater
number with coniifcation of their goods, or perpetual ba-
nilhment. He obliged all his fubjeds, of every condition,
to give up their arms to be deposited in forts where he
planted garrifols; and after disarming his people, he loaded
them with new and exorbitant taxes. Thus, by an ill-con-
ducted and unfucccfsful effort to extend their privileges, the.
Bohemians not only enlarged the sphere of the royal prero-
gative, when they intended to have circumferibed it, but they
almnolt annihilated those liberties which they aimed at elta-
blifluing on a broader and more secure foundation*.

The emperor, having now humbled, and, as he imagined,

subdued the independent and Aulbborn spirit of the Ger-
mans by the terror of arms and- the rigour of punishment,
held a diet at Augsburg, in order to compose finally the
coltr-overfies with regard to religion, which had so long di-
itlrbed the empire. He durit not, however, truit the de-
termination of a matter so interefling to the free suffrage of
the Germans, broken as their minds now were to fubjetion.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanish troops, and
aifigned them quarters there. The resl of his folditrs he
cantoned in the adjacent villages; so that the members of
the diet, while they carried on their deliberations, were fur.
rounded by the fame army which had overcome their coun-
trymen. Immediately after his public entry, Charles gave
a proof of the violence with which he intended to proceed.
lie took poffielion by force of the cathedral, together with
,one of the principal churches; and his priess having, by va-
iuiis ceremonies, purified them fiom the pollution with
Slid 488, 419, 434. Thuan. !. iv.: a9, Jo. Struv. Corp. ii.

which they supposed the unhallowed ministrations of the
protestants to have defiled them, they re-established with
great pomp the rites ofthe Romr.ifh worfhipt.

The cjncourfe of members to this diet was extraordina-

ry; tie importance of the affairs concerning which it was
to deliberate, added to the fear of giving offence to the em.
peror by an absence which lay open to mifconftruaion,
brought together almost all the princes, nobles, and repre-
fer.tat-ves of cities who had a right to fit in that assembly.
The emperor, in the speech with which he opened the meet.
ing, called their attention immediately to that point, which
feemned chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned the fatal es.
fcas of the religious dissensions which had arisen in Germa.
ny, and taken notice of his own unwearied endeavours
to procure a general council, which alone could provide a
remedy adequate to those evils, he exhorted them to recog-
nife its authority, and to acquiesce in the decisions of an as.
fembly to which they had originally appealed, as having the
sole right of judgment in the cafe.

But the council, to which Charles wished them to refer all

their ccntrovr..ies, had, by this time, undergone a violent
ch.-ge. The fear and jealousy, with which the emperor's
fi.r; fucceiTes against the confederates of Smalkalde had in.
fprred' the pope, continued to increase. Not satisfied with
attempting to retard the progref-of the Imperial arms, by
the sudden recal of his troops, Paul began to confider the
emperor as an enemv, the weight of whose power he muit
soon feel, and againtl whom he coul\ not be too \haty in
taking precautions. He foresaw that the immediate effe&
of the emrperor's acquiring absolute power in Germany,
wxvuld be to render him entirely matter of all the decisions
of the council, if it Thould continue to meet in Trent. It
was dangerous to allow a monarch, so ambitious, to get the
command of this formidable engine, which he might employ
at pleaf-re to limht or overturn the papal authority. As

f S'eid. 435, 437.

the only method of preventing this, he determined to re.
move the council to some city more immediately under his
own jurifdition, and at .a greater diitance from the terror of
the emperor's arms, or the reach of his influence. An in-
cident fortunately occurred, which gave this measure the
appearance of being necessary. One or two of the fathers
of the council, together with some of their domestics, hap-
pening to die suddenly, the physicians, deceived by the
symptoms, or suborned by the pope's legates, pronounced
the distemper to be infetious and pestilential. Seme of the
prelates, struck with a panic, retired; others were impatient
to be gone; and after a short consultation, the council was
translated to Bologna [March i,] a city subjet to the
pope. All the bilhops in the Imperial interest warmly op-
posed this resolution, as taken without neceffitv, and found-
ed on sa}fe or frivolous pretexts. All the Spanish pre!ates,
and moRt of the Neapolitan, by the emperor's express com-
mand, remained at Trent; the reft, to the number ofthirty-
four, accompanying thelegates to 3Bologna. Thus a schism
commenced in that very assembly w.vhich had been called to
heal the divisions of 'Chriitendom; the fathers of ]Bologna
inveighed againit those who staid at Trent, as corttumacious
and regardless of the pope's authority; while the other ac-
cufed them of being so far intimidated by the fears of ima-
ginary danger, as to remove to a place where their conftl-
tations could prove of no service towards re-establishing
peace and-order in Germanyt.

The emperor, at theflame tlme, employed al his interes

'to procure the return of the council to Trent. But Paul,
who highly applauded his own fagacty in having taken a
ftep which put it cut of Charles's power to acquire the di-
rection of that alfembly, paid no regard to a request, the ob-
jcc't of which was so extremely obvious. The summer was
consumed in fruitless negotiations with refpet to this point,
the importunity of the one and obstinacy of the other daily

t F. Paul, 248, &c.
Vl. III. D d

increaTing. At last an event happened which widened the
breach irreparably, and rendered the pope utterly averse from
i-itlening to any proposal that came from the .emperor.
Charles, as has been already obierved, had so violently ex-
raperated .Peter Lewis Farnese, the pope's son, by refusing
to grant him the investiture of Parma and Placentia, that
h.e h!id watched ever firce that time with all the vigilance of
tfresrtment for an qpportunity of revenging thatinjury. -He
'had endeavoured to precipitate the pope into open hoftili-
;ties againf the emperor, and had earnefily solicited the king
,of France to invade Italy. His hatred and resentment ex.
tended-to 1ll those whom he knew that the emperor favour.
.ed, he did every ill office in his power to Gonlzaga, gover-
nor of Milan, and had encouraged Fiefco in his attempt up-
on the life of Andrew Doria, because both Gonzaga and
lDoria possessed a great degree of the emperor's esteem and
.confidence. His malevolence and secret intrigues were not
.unknown to the emperor, who could not be more desirous
.to take vengeance on him, +han Gonzaga and Doria were
Jo be employed as his instruments in infliting it. Farnese,
4hy the profligacy of his life, and by enormities of every
kind, equal to those committed by the worit tyrants. who
thave disgraced human nature, had rendered himself so odi-
oas, that it was thought any Niolence whatever might be
lawfully attempted againit him. Gonzaga and Doria foan
found among his own fabje&s, persons who were eager, and
even deemed it meritorious, to lend their hands in fuchsa
service. As Farnese, animated with the jealousy which u-
fually possesses petty sovereigns, had employed all the cru-
elty and fiaud, whereby they endeavour to supply their de-
sec of power, in order to humble and extirpate the nobility
subjec to his government, five noblemen of the greatest di.
ftinaion in PIacentia combined to avenge the injuries which
they themselves had suffered, as well as those which lhe had
offered to their order. They formed their plan in conjunr-
-::a with Gonzaga; but it remains uncertain whether- i

originally suggested the scheme to them, or only -approved,
of what they proposed, and co-operated in carrying it on.,
They concerted all the previous feps with such forelight,
conduced their intrigues with such secrecy, and displaycd
such courage in the execution of their design, that it may
be ranked among the moll audacious deeds of that nature,
mentioned in history. One body. of the conspirators fur-,
prifed, at mid-day [Sept. 0o], the gates of tie citadel of
Placentia where Farnese resided,- overpowered his guards,
and murdered him. Another party of them made them-
selves masters of the town, and called upon their fellow-citi-
zens to take arms,. in order to recover their liberty. The
multitude ran towards the citadel, from which three great
guns, a signal concerted with Gonzaga, had been fired; and
before they could guess the cause or. the authors of the tu-
mult, they saw the lifeless body of the tyrant hanging by
the heels from one of the windows of the citadel. But si
universally detestable had he become, that not one expressed
any sentiment of concern at such a fad reverse of fortune,
or discovered the least indignation at this -ignominious treat-
ment of a sovereign prince. The exultation at the success
of the conspiracy was general, and alL applauded the a'tors
in it, as the deliverers of their country. The body was
tumbled into the ditch that surrounded the citadel, and ex-
posed to the insults of the rabble; the reft of the citizens re---
turned to their usual occ-pations) as if nothing extraordiua-
ry had happened.

Before next morning, a body of troops arriving from the,

fiontiers of the hMilanefe, where they had been posted in ex-
pectation of the event, took possession of the city in the em-
peror's name, and reinstated the inhabitants in the pofffiou
of their ancient privileges. Parma, which the Imperialiids
attempted likewise to surprise, was saved by the vigilance
and fidelity of the officers whom Farnese had intrusted with
thl command of the garrison. The death of a son whom,
nutwithllanding his infamous vices, Paul loved with an cxicsu

Dd2-

cf parental tenderness, overwhelmed him with the deepest

idction; and the loss of a city of such consequence as Pla-

centia, greatly embittered his sorrow. He accuscd Gonza.
ga, in open consistory, of having committed a cruel murder,
in order to prepare the way for an unjust ufnrpation, and
imm.ediately demanded of the emperor fatisfadion for bothl
for the former, by the punimunent of Gonzaga; for the lat.
ter, by the restitution of Placentia to his grandson O&avia,

5s rightful owner. But Charles, who, racher than quit a
F:-ze of such value, was willing not only to expose hinfelf
to the imputation of being accessary to the crime which had
given an opportunity of seizing it, but to bear the infamy
of defrauding his own fon-in-law of the inheritance which
belonged to him, eluded all his solicitations, and determined
to keep poffcffion of the city, together with its territories-.

This resolution, flowing from an ambition so rapacious,

as to be refrained by no consideration either of decency or
ji!;ice, transported the pope so far beyond his usual modera-
tion and prudence, that he was eager to take arms against
the emperor, in order to be avenged on the murderers of his
son, and to recover the inheritance wrelted from his family.
Conscious, however, of his own inability to contend with
fich an enemy, he warmly solicited the French king and
the republic of Venice to join in an offensive league againit
Charles. But Henry was intent at that time on other ob-
iects. His ancient allies the Scots, having been defeated
Ly the Engiilh in one of the greatest battles ever.fought be-
tween ftcfe t\o rival nations, he was about to fend a nume-
rous body of veteran troops into that country, as well to pre-
lerve it from being conquered, as to gain the acquisition of
a new kingdom to the French monarchy, by marrying his
ion the dauphin to the young queen.of Scotland. An un-
<ertaking accompanied with such manifest advantages, the
i;.cctfs of which appeared to be so certain, was not to be re-

+ r. Paul, :57. Pallavic. 41, 42. Thuan. iv. 156. Meni.de
9.iitr, 59, c,;. Natalis Coniis lliftor. lib. iii. p. 64.

linquifhcd for the remote profped of benefit from an alli-/
ance depending upon the precarious life of a pope of four-
score, who had nothing at heart but the gratification of his
own private resentment. Initead, therefore, of ruffing!
headlong into the alliance proposed, Henry amused the
pope with such general professions and promises, as might
keep him from any thoughts of endeavouring to accommo.'
date his'differences with the emperor, but at the fame time
be avoided any filch engagement as might occasion an im-'
mediate rupture with Charles, or precipitate him into a war
for which he was not prepared. The Venetians, though
muc -alarmed at feeing Placentia in the hands of the Impe-
rialilts, imitated the wary conduc of the French king, as it
nearly resembled the spirit which usually regulated their own.
conduca.

But though the pope found that it was not in his power

to kindle immediately the flames of war, he did not forget
the injuries which he was obliged for the present to endure;
resentment fettled deeper in his mind, and became more ran-
corous in proportion as he felt the difficulty of gratifying it.
It was while these sentiments of enmity were in full force,
and the desire of vengeance at its height, that the diet of
Augiburg, by the emperor's command, petitioned the pope,
in the name of the whole Germanic body, to enjoin the pre-
lates who had retired to Bologna to return again to Trent,
and to renew their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing the members to join in this
request. Having observed a considerable variety of senti-
ments among the protestants with refpe& to the fubmifi3an
which he had required to the decrees of the council, some
of them being altogether intradable, while others were rea-
dy to acknowledge its right of juriidicion upon certain con-
ditions, he employed all his address in order to gain or to di-
vide them. He threatened and overawed the ele&tor Pala-

t Mem. de Riher, ii. 63, 7, ;8, 5, 95. Paruta Ifor. di Vn:lz.
199, oj. lTiitaa. iv. 160.

d 3

tine, a weak prince, and afraid that the emperor might in-
fiic on him the punishment to which he had made himself
iable by the assistance that he had given to the confederates
of Smalkalde. The hope of procuring liberty for the land-
grave, together with the formal confirmation of his own e-
leciora! dignity, overcame Maurice's scruples, -or prevented
him from opposing what he knew would be agreeable to the
emperor. The ele&or of Brandenburg, less influenced by
religious zeal than any prince of that age, was easily induced
to imitate their example, in assenting to all that the emperor
required. The deputies of the cities remained fill to be
brought over. They were more tenacious of their princi-
ples, and though every thing that could operate either off
their hopes or fears was tried, the utmost that they would
promise was, to acknowledge the jurifdiEtion of the council,
if effetual provision were made for securing to the divines
of all parties free access to that affemnbly, with entire liberty
of debate; and if all points in controversy were decided ac-
cording to scripture and the usage of the primitive church;
But vlhen the memorial containing this declaration was pre-
fclnted to the emperor, he ventured to put in practice a very
txtraordinary artifice. Without reading the paper, or tak-
ing any notice of the conditions on which they had insisted,
he seemed to take it for granted that they had complied with
hiis demand, and gave thanks to the deputies for their full
and unreserved fubmifion to the decrees of the council [Ot.
g]. The deputies, though astonished at what they had
tlard, d',d not attempt to set him right, both parties being
better pleased that the matter should remain under this fiate
of mbI;guittv, than to push for an explanation, which mirfi
have occasioned a dispute, and would have led, perhaps, to
a r::pturet.

laving obtained this seeming fubmiflon from the mem

bers of the diet to the authority of the council, Charles em-
t!. ''d that a; an argument to enforce their petition for its

, F. Pau!, :s, SiCed. 440. Thuan. tom. i, 155.

return to Trent. But the pope, from the fatisfaftion which
he felt in mortifying the emperoras well as from his own a-
version to what was demanded, resolved, without hesitation,
that his petition should not be granted; though, in order to
avoid the imputation of being influenced wholly by resent-
ment, he had the address to throw it upon the fathers at Bo-
logna, to put a dire& negative upon the request. With
this view he referred to their consideration the petition of
the diet [Dec. 20], and they, ready to confirm by their
alfent whatever the legates were pleased to dictate, declared
that the council could not, consistently with its dignity, re-
turn to Trent, unless the prelates who, by remaining there,
had discovered a schismatic spirit, would firit repair to Bo.
logna, and join their brethren; and that, even after their
junction, the council could not renew its consultations with
any profpeft of benefit to the church, if the Germans did
not prove their intention of obeying its future decrees to be
sincere, by yielding immediate obedience to those which it
had already passed;.

This answer was communicated to the emperor by the

pope, who at the fame time exhorted him to comply with-
demands which appeared to be so reasonable. But Charleg
was better acquainted with the duplicity of the pope's cha-
rafer than to be deceived by such a gross artifice; he knew
that the prelates of Bologna durst utter no sentiment but
what Paul inspired; and, therefore, overlooking them as
mere tools in the hand of another, he confidered their re-
ply as a full discovery of the pope's intentions. As he could
no longer hope to acquire such an ascendant in the council
as to render it subservient to his own plan, he saw it to be
necessary that Paul should not have it in his power to turn
against him the authority of so venerable an affenibly. In
order to prevent this, he sent two Spanish lawyers to Bolog-
na [Jan. 16, 1548], who, in the presence of the legates,
protested, That the translation of the council to that place

. F Paul, 250. Pallav. ii. 49.

had been nnmeceffry, and founded on sale or frivolous pre.
texts; that while it continued .to-meet there, it ought to be
deemed an unlawful and schismatical conventicle; that all its
decisions ought of course to be held as null and invalid; and
that since the pope, together with the corrupt eccleliaftics
who depended on him, had abandoned the care of the church,
the emperor, as its proteior, would employ all the power
which God had committed to him, in order to preserve it
from those calamities with which it was threatened. A few
days after [Jan- 23], the Imperial ambassador at Rome de-
manded an audience of the pope, and in presence of all the-
cardinals, as well-as foreign ministers, protested against the-
proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms equally
harth and difrdcpeafult.

It was not long before Charles proceeded to carry these

threats, which greatly alarmed both the pope and council at
Bologna, into execution. He let the diet know theill fuc-
ces of his endeavours to procure a favourable answer to
their petition, and that the pope, equally regardefs of their
entreaties, and of his services to the. church, had refused to
gratify them by allowing the council to meet again at Trent;
that, though all hope of holding this assembly in a place,
where they might look for freedom of debate and judgment,
was not to be given up, the profpe& of it was, at present,
diltant and uncertain; that in the mean time, Germany was
torn in pieces by religious dissensions, the purity of the
faith corrupted, and the minds of the people disquieted with
a multiplicity of new opinions and controversies formerly
unknown among Christians; that, moved by the duty which
he owed to them as their sovereign, and to the church as
its protecor, he had employed fume divines of known abi-
lities and learning, to prepare a syRem of doctrine, to which
all ihould conform, until a council, such as they wished for,
could be convocated. This system was compiled bt Plug,

tF. Paul, 64. Pallav.$. Skid. 446. GoldaftiConftit. m-
periaL i. 56i.

Helding, and Agricola, of whom the two' fretiir *ieredig'
nitaries-in- the Romish church, but remarkable for their 'ilpa
cific andihealing spirit-; the last was a protestant divinie, ri.
peded,. uot.without .rcfon,.bf having;been gained by'bribes
and promises; to'betray'6r mislead his party on this occafin.'
The articlesiprefented to 'the' diet of Ratilbon- in t' -'yaf
one thousand five hundred and forty-one, in order to reccsti.
cile the contending parties, served as a model for the prefeii
work. RBut as the emperor's situation was much ceangei
since that time, -and he found it 'no longer necessary to mtila
nage the proteftlats with the fame'delicacy as at that juItiw
ture,' the concefflons in their favour were not now so 'nime
rous, nor did they extend to points osso much confequerte.
The treatise contained a complete system of theology, con-
formable in almost every article to the tenets of the'Roi*iif
church, though exprefled, for the roft part, in the foftefi
words, or in fcriptnral phrases,- or in terms of fudied aaii
biguity. - Every doctrine, however, peculiar to popery, was
retained, and the observation of all the rites, which the pro'-
teinants condemned as inventions of men introduced into the
worship of God, was enjoined. With regard to two pointi
only, some relaxation in the rigour of opinion as well asi
some latitude in the pratice were admitted. Such ecclefi-'
aftics as had married; and would not put away their wives,
were allowed, nevertheless, to perform all the fun&ions of
their facred-office; and those provinces which had been ac-
customed to partake of the cup as well as-os the bread in the
sacrament of the Lord's fnpper, were fill indulged in the
privilege of receiving both.' Even there were declared to.
be conceions for the fake of peace, and granted only for a-
ftafonb ir compliance with the weakiefs or prejudices of-
their. eountryment.

This sysem of doarine, known afterwards by the name
of th:'Atarim, because it contained temporary regulations,

F. Paul, ao. Pallav. ii. 6o. Sleid 453, 457. Struv. Corp.
1054. Goldaft. Contfit. inper. i. si.

which were to continue no longer in force than -until a free
general council could be.held.the emperor presented to the
diet [May i-j, with a pompous declaration of his fincerc
intention to re-efablfilh- tranquillity and order in the church.
as well as of his hopes- that their adopting these regulations
would contribute greatly to bring about that defirabl ec
vnt, It was read in presence of the diet, according ta
fSm. As-foon as it was finifled,the archbifhp of Mentzi
prdeat of the elecoral college, rose up hatily; and hav-
ing thanked the emperor for his unwearied and pious en-
deaours in order to restore peace to the churcht he, in name
of the diet, figuified their approbation of the system of doe.
t. hue which had been read, together with their resolution of
conforming to it in every particular. The whole assembly
was amazed at a declaration so unprecedented and unconiti.
tutional, as well as at the eledor's presumption in pretend,
iag to deliver the sense of the diet, upon a point which had
not hitherto been the subjet of consultation or debate;
Bu ot ot ne member had the courage to contradict what-
the eelor had said, some being overawed by fear, others
emaining fient through compaifance- The emperor held
the archbihop't declaration to be a full contitutional ratifi-
cation of the Interim, and prepared to enforce the obfer*
ance of it, as a decree of the empireI.

Duning this diet, the wife and children of the landgravet

warmly seconded by Maurice of Saxony, endeavoured to
interre the members in behalf of that unhappy prince, who
fill languiled in confinement. -But Charles, who did not
chuZe to be brought under the neceifity of reje&ing any re.
quest that came from such a refpeftable body, in order to
prevent their reprcfentations, laid before the diet an ac-
count of his tranfaAions with the landgrave, together with
the motives which had at firt induced him to detain that
prince in custody, and which rendered it prudent, as he al-
kdged, to keep him still under rcftraint. It was no ealy

SSkid. 460. F. Paul, 2;. PaUav. 63.

matter ..to give any good reason for an,.action, ilncapable of
being justified. But he thought the mos frivolous .pretexte
mnight be produced .in an assembly the members of which
were willing.to'be deceived, and afraid of nothing so muck
as of discovering that they Law his con~dut in its true'-co.
lours.. His account.of his, own.condut was accotdingly- ad
nitted toberfully fatisfa&ory, and after.fome feeble enttr
ties that h'e .would extend his clemency to -his unfortunate
:prisoner, the Jandgrave'se cocerns were no ~more mentios
.ed t.
-. In order to -counterbalance ,the unfavourable impreflion
which this inflexible rigour might make, Charles, as a proof
that his gratitude was no less permanent and unchangeable
than his resentment, inwefted Maurice in the-electoral dig-
nity, with all. the legal formalitie. The cereniony wae
-perfrmed, with .extraordinary. pomp, in an open court, si
near the apartment in which the degraded elector was kept
a prisoner, that.. he could view it fpom his windowd
.Even. this insult did not ruffle his usual tranquillity.; and
-turning his eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival te
ceiving those enlfgns of dignity of which he had been strip;
ped, without uttering one fenthment unbecoming thefortt-
-tude that henhad preserved amidst al his calamities *.

Immediately after.the dissolution of the diet% the emperor

ordered the - Interim .to be publihied in the German -as well
as Latin language. It met with *he ufual-reception of con
ciliating fobemes, when proposed to men heated with digS
-putation; both pastiesmdeclaimed against it with equal vio-
lence. The protestants condemned it as a system containilig
.the grossE errors of -popery, disguised with so -little art
.that it cbuld impose only-on the most ignorant, or bio th6fi
.rwho, by: auilfully .hutting their eyes, favoured the decep/

Skeid. 44 -: . . :'
'Thuan. Ilift. lib. -v..76.. Struv. Corp. os4, Inveflitua

Mauritii, a Mammera;io Luc-cmburgo dcfcripta, ap. Scardiunfi ii.
.08. ..' . .

ihich were to continue no longer in force than until a free
general council could be. held,..te emperor presented to the
diet [May

r s1- with a pompous declaration of his sincere

intention to- re-eablih- tranquillity and order in the churche.
as well as of his hopes-that their adopting these regulations
would contribute greatly to bring about that desirable e.
vnt. It was read in presence. of the diet, according toe
form. As soon as it was finifhedthe archbifbop of Mentz#
preideat of the elecoral college, rose up hastily; and hav.
ing thanked the emperor for his unwearied and pious en-
deaours in order to restore peace to the church, he, in name
of the diet, signified their approbation of the syster of doc-
t. ae which had been read, together with their resolution of
conforming to it in every particular. The whole assembly
was amazed at a declaration so unprecedented and unconfti-
tutioual, as well as at the eletor's presumption in pretend,
ing to deliver the sense of the diet, upon a point which had
not hitherto been the fubje& of consultation or debate.
But not one member had the courage to contradit what
the el~tar had aid; some being overawed by fear, others

uemaining silent through complaisance- The emperor held

the archbilhop'~ declaration to be a full constitutional ratifi-
cation of the Interim, and prepared to enforce the obfer.
ance of it, as a decree of the empire$.

During this diet, the wife and children of the landgrave,

warmly seconded by Maurice of Saxony, endeavoured to
interrlt the members in behalf of that unhappy prince, who
fill languiihed in confinement. But Charles, who did not
chufe to be brought under the necefiity of rejecting any re.
quest that came from such a refpetable body, in order to
prevent their reprcfentations, laid before the diet an ac-
count of his tranfa&ions with the landgrave, together with
the motives which had at. firi induced him to detain thai
prince in custody, and which rendered it prudent, as he al
lkdged, to keep him till under restraint. It was no eaf]

t Slid. 460. F. Paul, z73. Palay. 63.

matter ..to give any good reason for an:aftion, incapable of
beingjuftified. But he thought ,the molt frivolous pretexts
mnight be produced ia an assembly the members of which
were willing.to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so much
as of discovering that they aw his condu in its true-'co-
lours.. His account.of his own.condut was accordingly ad.
.initted to.becfuly fatisfa&ory, and after .some feeble entt~
ties that he .would :extend his clemency to his unfortruate
,prisoner, the landgrave's £concers woere no rmore mentiono
ed 1+.

-In order to -counterbilance 'the nunfavourable impref~l
which this inflexible rigour might make, Charles, as a proof
that his gratitude was no less permanent and unchangeable
than his resentment, invested Maurice in the eleCtoral dig-
nity, with all ithe legal formalities. The ceremony wa
-performed, with extraordinary pomp, in an open-court, fe
near the.apartment in which the degraded elector was kept
a prisoner, that. he could view it fpom his windows
Even. this insult did not ruffle his usual tranquillity.; ani
-turning his eyes that way, he beheld a prosperous rival -te
ceiving thole :ensigns .of dignity of which he had been strip;
ped, without uttering one feuthnent unbecoming the fort-;
-tude that. hehad preserved amidit all his calamities *. -

Immediately after.the dissolution of the diet, the emperor

ordered the -Interim to be -publilhed in the German as wel
as Latin language. It met with the ufual-reception of cond
ciliating fohemes, when proposed to men heated with di.f
-putation; -both pactiesdeclaimed againlt it with equal vio-
lence. . The protestants condemned it as a system containing
.the grossest errors. of -popery, difgaifed with so -little arr
that it could impose only-on the moa ignorant, or on thofis
*who, by: wilfully- shutting their eyes, favoured the deceip

f Skid. 441. .-:: -

Thuan. I-Lift. lib. v,. 67. Struv, Corp. tro4., InveLfit

Mauritii, a MB mmneraio Lucemburgo defcripia, ap. Scardiui ii.
^08. - '

*- . -
- * -* - -

tio. The papists inveighed against it, as a work in which
some dofrines f the church were impiously given up, o.
thers meanly coocealed, and al of them delivered in terms
alculated rather to deceive the unwary, than to iftru~ the
ignorant, or to reclaim such as were enemies to the truth.
While the Lutheran divines fiercly attacked it on one
hand, the general of the Dominicans with no less vehemence
impugned it on the other. But at Rome, as soon as the
contents of the Interim came to be known, the indignation
of the courtiers and ecclefiafics rose to the greatet height,
They exclaimed againit the emperor's profane encroachment
on the sacerdotal funcion, in presuming, with the concur.
rence of an assembly of laymen, to define articles of faith
and to regulate modes of worship. They compared this
ralh deed to that of Uzziah, who, with an unhallowed hand,
Lad touched the ark of God; or to the bold attempts of
those emperors, who had rendered their memory detestable,
by endeavouring to model the Christian church according
to their pleasure. They even affeced to find out a refem.
blance between the emperor's condu& and that of Henry
VIII. and expressed their fear of his imitating the example
of that apostate, by usurping the title as well as jurifdi&ioa
belonging to the head of the church. All, therefore, con-
tended with one voice, that as the foundations ofecclefiaf-
tical authority were now thaken, and the whole fabric .ready
to be overturned by a new enemy, some powerful method
of defence floud be provided, and a vigorous refitance
must be made, in the beginning, befote he grew too ftrmid-
able to le -opposed.

The pope, whofejudgment was improvedby longerexpeni-
.nce in great tranfaEions, as well as by a more extenfiveob,
servation of human affairs, viewed thematter with more acute
discernment, and derived comfort from the very circumstance
which filled them with apprehension. He was, astonished
'that a prince of such superior sagacity asthe emperor, flould
bee so intoxicated with a -ingle victory, as to imagine that he

might give law to mankind, and decide even in tbofe mat-
ters, with regard to which they are molt impatient of do.
minion. He saw that by joining any one of the contend-
ing parties in Germany, Charles might have had it in his
power to have oppressed the other, but that the prefump-
tion of success had now inspired him with the vain thought
of his being able to domineer over both. He foretold that a
fyRemn which all attacked, and none defended, could not be
of long duration; and that,, for this reason, there was no
need of his interposing in order to haften its fall; for as
soon as the powerful hand which now upheld it was witl-
drawn, it would fink of its own accord, and be forgotten;
for ever :.

The emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered to his refo-

lution of carrying it into full execution. But though the
elecor Palatine, the elector of Brandenburg, and Maurice,
influenced by the iame considerations as formerly, seemed
ready to yield implicit obedience to whatever he should en-
join, he met not every where with a like obsequious fubmif.
sion. John marquis of Brandenburg Anfpach, although he
had taken part with great zeal in the war againif the con-
federates of Smalkalde, refused to renounce do&trines which
he held to be sacred; and reminding the emperor of tie re-
peated promiies which he had given his .protestant allies, of
allowing them the free exercifo of their religion, he claimed,
in consequence of these, to be exempted frem receiving the
Interim. Some other princes, also, ventured to mention
the fame scruples, and to plead the fame indulgence. But
on this, as on other trying occasions, the firmness of the e-
letor of Saxony was moll distinguished, and merited.the
highest praise. Charles well knowing the authority of his
example with all the protestant party, laboured with the ut-
molt earneltnefs, to gain his approbation of the Interim,
and by employing sometimes promises of setting him at li-
berty, sometimes threats of treating him with greater harsh-

s Sleid. 468; F. Paul, 771, 277. Pallav. ii. 64.
Vol. III. Ec

.·es, attempted alternately to work upon his hopes and
his fears. But be was alike regardless of both. After
:having declared his fixed belief in the dotrines of the re.
ormation, " I cannot now," said he, " in my old age, a-
bandon the principles for which I early contended; nor, i#
,order to procure freedom during a few declining years, will
I betray that good canfe, on account of which I have sus-
jCed so much, and am ftll willing to susser. Better for me
-t6 enjoy, in this solitude, the fteem of viituous men, tog.-
ither with the approbation of my own conscience, than to re-
turn into the world, with the imputation and guilt of apof.
~tay, -to dilgrace and embitter the remainder of my days."
By this magnanimous resolution, he set his countrymen a
pattern of conduc, so very different from that which the
empeor wished him to have exhibited to them, that it drew
mpon him freh marks of his displeasure. The rigour of his
confinement was increased; the number of his servants a-
ibridgcd; the Lutheran clergymen, who had hitherto been
permitted to attend him, were dismissed; and even the books
of devotion, which had been his chief consolation during
a tedious imprisonment, were taken from himt. The land.
grave of Hefie, his companion in misfortune, did not main-
tain the fame constancy. His patience and fortitude were
-both so much exhaunfed by the length of his confinement,
hat, willing to purchase freedom at any price, be wrote to
the emperor, offering not only to approve of the Interim,
'but to yield an unreserved submission to his will in every o-
ther particular. But Charles who knew that whatever
.coufe the landgrave might hold, neither his example nor
authority would prevail on his children or fubjefti to re-
ceive the Interim, paid no regard to his offers. He was
kept confined as ftri&ly as ever; and while he suffered the
cruel mortification of having his condu& set in contrast to
that of the elector, he derived not the fmallft benefit fror

t Sleid. 46z,

the mean siep which exposed him to such deserved cen-
sure*.

But it was in the Imperial cities that Charles met with'

the most violent opposition to the Interim. These small
commonwealths, the citizens of which were accubtmed to
liberty and independence, had embraced the dotrines of'the'
reformation when they were first published, with remarkable
eagernes;. the bold spirit of innovation being peculiarly suit*
ed to the genius of free government. Among them, the
proteilant teachers had made the greatest number of prose-
lytes. The woof eminent divines of the party were fettled;
in them as pallors. By having the dire&ion of'the fchoola-
and other seminaries of learning, they had trained up difd
ciples, who were as well inftruted in the articles of their
faith, as they were zealous to defend them. Such persona-
were not to be guided by- example, or swayed by authority,
but having been taught to employ their own understanding
in examining and deciding with refpeEt to the points in cm' -
troverfy, they thought that they were both qualified and
entitled to judge for themselves. As soon as the contents
of the Interim were known, they, with one voice, joined in
refuting to admit it. Augiburg, Ulm, Straburg, Con-
Rance, Bremen, Magdeburg, together with many- other
towns of less note, presented remonstrances to the emperor.
letting forth the irregular and-uneonftLtutional manner in
which the Interim had been enafted, and beseeching him not
to offer such violence to their consciences, as to require their
aflent to a form of do&rine and worihip, which appeared to
them repugnant- to the express precepts of the divine law.
But Charles having prevailed on so many-.princes of the
empire to approve of his new model, was. not much moved
by the representations of those cities, which, how formid-
able soever they might have proved, if they could have been
formed into one body, lay so remote from each other, -that

* Sleid. 46X.

Ee

it was easy to 6pprefs them separately, before it was pofible
for them to unite.

In order to accomplish this, the emperor saw it to be re-

quifite that his measures should be vigorous, and executed
with such rapidity as to allow no time for concerting any
common plan of opposition. Having laid down this max-
im as the rule of his proceedings, his first attempt was upon
the city of Augsburg, which, though overawed by the pre-
fence of the Spanish troops, he knew to be as much diffatis-
fid with the Interim as anyin the empire. He ordered one
body of these troops to seize the gates; he polled the reft in
different quarters of the city; and assembling all the bur-
geffes in the town-hall [Aug. 3,] he, by his sole absolute
authority, publiied a decree abolilhing their present form
cf government, dissolving all their corporations and fraterni-
ties, and nominating a small number of perfans, in whom he
veiled for the future all the powers of government. Each
of the persons, thus chosen, took an oath to observe the In-
terim. An aR of power so unprecedented as well as arbi-
trary, which excluded the body of the inhabitants from any
fhate in the government of their own community, and sub-
je&ed them to men who had no other merit than their ser-
vile devotion to the emperor's will, gave general disgust; but
as they durf not venture upon resistance, they were obliged
to submit ia silence*. From Augsburg, in which he left a
garrison, he proceeded to Ulm, and new-modelled its go-
vernment with the fame violent hand; hefeized such of their
palors as refused to subscribe the Interim, committed them
to prison, and at his departure carried them along with him
in chains-t. By this severity he not only secured the recep-
tion of the Interim, in two of the mod powerful cities, bet
gave warning to the reft what such as continued refractory
had to expect. The efftc& of the example was as great as
ihe could have wished; and many towns, in order to fare
themfdlves from the like treatment, found it necessary to

Sleid. 469. t Ibid. 471.

comply with what he enjoined. This obedience, 'extorted
by the rigour of authority, produced no change in the senti-
ments of the Germans, and extended no farther than to
make them conform so far to what le required, as was bare-
ly sufficient to screen them from punishment. The proteflant
preachers accompanied jthofe religious rites, the observation
of which the Interim prescribed, with such an explication of
their tendency, as served rather to confirm than to remove
the scruples of their hearers with regard to them. The
people, many of whom had grown up to mature years
since the ertabliihment of the reformed religion, and' ne-
ver known any other form of public worship, beheld the
pompous pageantry of the popiih service with contempt
or horror; and in most places the Romish ecclesiastics who
returned to take poflefflon of their churches, could hardly
be protected from insult, or their minitrations from inter.
ruption. Thus, notwithstanding the apparent compliance
of so many cities, the inhabitants being accustomed to free-
dom, submitted with reluctance to the power which now op.
pressed them. Their understanding as well as inclination
revolted against the doctrines and ceremonies imposed on
them; and though, for the present, they concealed their
disgust and resentment, it was evident that these pafions
could not always be kept under reitraint, but would break
out at las in effeas proportional to their violence*.

Charles, however, highly pleased with having bent the

itubborn spirit of the Germans to such general fubmiflion,
departed for the Low-Countries, fully determined to com-
pel the cities, which still flood out, to receive the Interim.
He carried his two prisoners, the eleaor 'of Saxony and
landgrave of Hesse, along with him, either because he durst
not leave them behind him in Germany, or because he wish.
ed to give his countrymen the Flemings this illustrious proof
of the success of his arms, and the extent of his power. Be-
fore Charles arrived at Bruifels [Sept. 17,] he was inform-

lem. de Ribier,ii. 18. Sleid. 491.

ed that the pope's legates at Bologna had dismissed the
council by an indefinite prorogation, and that the prelates;
afembled tlere had returned to their resqeaive countries.
Necessity had driven the pope into this. mcaurire. By the.
fecefion of those who had voted against the translation, to-
gether with the departure of others, who grew weary of'
continuing in a place where they were not suffered to pro-
ceed to business, so few and such inconsiderable members re-
mained, that the pompous appellation of a General Coun-
cil could not, with decency, be bftowed any-longer upoQ
them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve an assembly
which was become the object of contempt, and exhibited to
al ChriftLndom a mors glaring proof of the impotence of
the Romnih fee. But unavoidable as the ineafure was it
ly open to be unfavourably interpreted, and- had the.ap.
pearance of withdrawing the remedy, at'the-very time when
those for whose recoveryit was provided, were prevailed oK
to acknowledge its virte,rand to make trial of its efficacy.
Charles did not fail to put this conftru&ion on the conduc
of the pope; and by an artful comparison of his own efforts
to suppress heresy, with Paul's scandalous inattention to -
point so effentia, be endeavoured to reader the pontiff odi,
ous to all zealous catholics. At the fame timehe comnand,
ed the prelates of his fafion to remain at Trent, that the.
council might fill appear to have a being, and might be
ready, whenever it was thought expedient, to resume its de-
liberations for the good of the churcht.

The motive of Charles's journey to the Low-Countrie,-

beide.gratifying his favourite passion of travelling from one
part of his dominions to another, was to receive Philip his
only son, who was now in the twenty-firit year of his age,
and whom he had called thither, not only that he might be
recognized by the fates of the Netherlands as heir-apparent,
but in order to facilitate the execution of a vafR scheme, the
objec of which, and the reception it met with, -hall be here-

t rallav. P. xi--71.

after explained. Philip having left the government of
Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's eldelt son, to whom the
emperor had given the princeis Mary his-daughter in mar.
riage, embarked for Italy, attended by a numerous retinue
-of Spanilh noblest. .The squadron which escorted him,
.was commanded by Andrew Doria, who, notwithIfanding
'his advanced age, insisted on the honour of performing, in
person, the fame duty to the son, which he had often dif-
.charged towards the father. He landed safely at Genoa
[Nov. 25;] from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
:through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court in Brussels
[April i, 1549.] The flates of Brabant, in the sirs place,
-and those of the other provinces in their order, acknowledg-
ed his right of fucceflion in- common form, and he took
*the customary oath to preserve all thrirprivileges inviolatet.
In all the towns of the Low-Countries through which Phi-
lip passed, he was received with extraordinary pomp. No-
.thing that could either-exprefs the refpef of the people, or
.contribute to his amusement, was neglected; pageants, tour-
naments, and public fpe&tacles of every kind, were exhibit-
.ed with that expensive magnificence which commercial na-
tions are fond of displaying, when, on any occasion, they
depart from their usual maxims of frugality. But amidst
these cfenes of fefivity and pleaiure, Philip's natural severity
of temper was discernible. Youth itself could not render
him agreeable, nor his being a candidate for power form
him to courtesy. He maintained a haughty reserve in his
behaviour,; aad discovered such manifest partiality towards
his Spanish attendants, together with such an avowed pre-
ference- to the manners of their country, as highly difgufRed
the Flemings, and gave rife to that antipathy, which after-
wards occasioned a revolution o fatal to him in that part of
his dominions*.

t Ochoa, Carolea, 362. t Harei. Annal. Brabant. 652.

Mem. de,Ribier, ii. z9. L'vel'que Mbem. de Card. Gran-
'velle, i. 1a.

Charles was long detained in the Netherlands by a vio-

lent attack, of the gout, which returned upon him so fre-
quently, and with such increasing violence, that it had bro-
ken, to a great degree, the vigour of his constitution. He
ncverthelefs did not flacken his endeavours to enforce the In.
terim. The Inhabitants of Straiburg, aftera long struggle,
found it necessary to yield obedience; those of Constance,
who had taken arms in their own defence, were compelled by
force, not only to conform to the Interim, but to renounce
their privileges as a free city, to do homage to Ferdinand as
archduke of Austria, and as his vassals, to admit an Auftri-
an governor and garrifont. Magdeburg, Bremen, Ham.
burgh, and Lubeck, were the only Imperial cities of note
that fill continued refraaory.

t Sleid. 474, 491.

IND OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
PRINTED BY CHAPMJAN & LANG,<

TKOh.GATE, GLASGOW. J
