2

J S
i '
H I S

I

TORY

OF THE
R E GN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

K

i

/
/

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REI G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

WITH
A VIEW of the PROGRESS of SOCIETY

in EUROPE, from the Subversion of the Roman En-
pire, to the Beginning of the Sixteenth Century.

IN THREE VOLUMES.

.By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the UNIVERSITY of EDINBURCG, and
HISTORIOGRAPHER to His MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

VO L. L

DUBLIN
Printt for W. and W. SUITR, A. LEATILEY, G.

FAULKNER, S. POWELL, P. WILSON, J. EXSHAW, H.
SAUNDERS, W. WHITESTONg, W. SLEATEI, L. FLIN,
B. GRIBRSON, E. LYNCH, D. CMAMBRtLAINE, J.
PoTTS, J. HoEY. jun. J. WILLIAMS, J. MITCHELL,
W COLLIS, J. MILIKEN, C. INOHAM, and J. POR-
r1m, Booksellers.

M DCC LXIX

# TO THE KING.

TO THE

K I N G.

SIR,
T PRESUME to lay before

Your Majesty the History of a

Period, which, if the abilities of the
Writer were equal to the dignity
ps the Subject, would not be un-
worthy the attention of a Monarch,
who is no less a Judge than a Patron
)f Literary Merit.

HISTORY
A3

HISTORY claims it as her prero-

gative to offer inftruedion to KINGS,
as well as to their people. What
refletions the Reign of the Empe-
ror CHARLES V. may suggest to Your
Majesty, it becomes not me to con-
jeture. But your Subje6ts cannot
observe the various calamities, which
that Monarch's ambition to be di-
flinguiihed as a Conqueror, brought
upon his dominions, without recol-
lecting the felicity of their own
times, and looking up with grati-
tude to their Sovereign, who, dur-
ing the fervour of youth, and amidfl
the career of victory, poIfeTfed such

fell-

felf-command, and maturity ofjudg-
ment, as to set bounds to his own
triumphs, and prefer the bleflings of
peace to the splendour of military
glory.

POSTERITY will not only celebrate

the Wisdom of Your Majesty's
choice, but will enumerate the many
Virtues, which render Your Reign
conspicuous for a sacred regard to all
the duties, incumbent on the Sove-
reign of a Free People.

IT is our happiness to feel the in-

fluence of these Virtues; and to live
under the dominion of a Prince, who

A 4 delights

delights more in promoting the Pub,
lick Welfare, than in receiving the
juif Praise of his royal beneficence.
I am, -

SIR,
YOUR MAJESTY's

Most faithful Subjed,

And most dutiful Servant,

WILLIAM ROBERTSON.

# THE PREFACE.

T H.E

PR EFAC E.
N O period in the history of ones own

country can be confidered as altoge-

ther uninterefing. Such tranfaaions as tend
to illustrate the progress of its constitution,
laws, or manners, merit the utmost atten-

tion. Even remote and minute events ale

objects of a curiosity, which, being natural to
the human mind, the gratification of it is
attended with pleasure.

BUT, with refpeat to the history of

foreign States, we muit set other bounds to
our desire of information. The universal
progress of science during the two last cen-
turies, the art of printing, and other obvious
causes, have filled Europe with such a mul-

tiplicity

tiplicity of histories, and with such vast
colle&ions of historical materials, that the
term of human life is too short for the study
or even the perusal of them. It is necefiary,
then, not only for those who are called to
condu& the affairs of nations, but for such
as inquire and reason concerning them, to
remain fatisfed with a general knowledge of
distant events, and to confine their fiudy of
history in detail chiefly to that period, in
which the several States of Europe having
become intimately conneaed, the operations
of one power are so felt by all, as to influence
their councils, and to regulate their mea-
fures.

SOME boundary, then, ought to be fixed

in order to separate there periods. An sera
should be pointed out, prior to which, each
country, little conneted with those around
it, may trace its own history apart; after
which, the tranfa&ions of every considerable
nation in Europe become interesting and

inftrustive

inftruteive to all. With this intention 1
undertook to write the history of the Em-
peror CHARLES V. It was during his ad-
minifiration that the powers of Europe were
formed into one great political system, in
which each took a Rfation, wherein it has
since remained with less variation, than could
have been expected after the shocks occa-
sioned by so many internal revolutions, and
so many foreign wars. The great events
which happened then have not hitherto spent
their force. The political principles and
maxims, then established, still continue to
operate. The ideas concerning the balance
of power, then introduced or rendered ge-
neral, till influence the councils of nations.

THE age of CHARLES V. may- therefore

be confidered as the period at which the
political state of Europe began to aflame a
new form. I have endeavoured to render
my account of it, an introdution to the
history of Europe subsequent to his reign.

While

xl

While his numerous Biographers describe
his personal qualities and ations; while the
historians of different countries relate occur-
rences the consequences of which were local
or transient, it hath been my purpose to
record only those great tranfaAions in his
reign, the effeds of which were universal,
or continue to be permanent.

As my readers could derive little inftruc-

tion from such a history of the reign of
CHARLES V. without some information
concerning the itate of Europe previous to
the sixteenth century, my desire of supplying
this has produced a preliminary volume, in
which I have attempted to point out and
explain the great cauies and events, to whose
operation all the improvements in the poli-
tical slate of Europe, from the subversion
of the Roman Empire to the beginning of
the sixteenth century, mnft be ascribed.
I have exhibited a view of the progress of
society in Europe, not only with refped to

interior

interior government, laws and manners, but
with refpec to the command of the national
force requisite in foreign operations; and I
have described the political conititution of
the principal flates in Europe at the time
when CHARLES V. began his reign.

IN this part of my work I have been led

into several critical disquisitions, which be-
long more properly to the province of the
lawyer or antiquary, than to that of the
historian. These I have placed at the end
of. the firfi volume, under the title of Proofs
and Illufirations. Many of my readers will,
probably, give little attention to such re-
searches. To some they may, perhaps, ap-
pear the most curious and interelting part of
the work. I have carefully pointed out the
sources from which I have derived informa-
tion, and, have cited the writers on whose
authority I rely with a minute exadnefs,
which might appear to border upon oftenta-
tion, if it were possible to be vain of hav-

ing

ing read books, many of which nothing btit
the duty of examining with accuracy vWht-
ever I laid before the publick, could have
induced me to open. As my inquiries con-
dupted me often into paths which were
obscure or little frequented, such constant
recourse to the authors who have been
my guides, was not only neceftary for au-
thenticating the fads which are the foun-
dations of my reasonings, but may be use-
ful in pointing out the way to such as shall
hereafter hold the fame coufe, and in ena-
bling them to carry on their researches with
greater facility and success.

EvE-tt intelligent reader will observe one

omission in my Work, the reaion of which
it is eceiat'y to explain. I have given no
account of the cohquefts of Mexico and
Peru, or of the establishment of the Spanish
colonies in the continent aid islands of Ame-
rica. The history of these events I origiial-
ly intended to have related at considerable
length. But upon a nearer and more at-

tentive

tentive consideration of this part of my plan,
I found that the discovery of the new world;
the Rfate of society among its ancient inha-
bitants; their characer, manners, and arts;
the genius of the European settlements in'its
various proiiriceds, together with the influ-
ence of there ip6n the fyttems of policy
or comnmerce in Europe, were ifubjes so
splendid and imnportzant, that a tuiperficial
view of them could afford little 'atisfaction;
to treat of them as extensively as they
merited, muff produce an episode, difpro-
portionate to the principal work. I have
therefore reserved these for a separate history;
which, if the performance now offered to
the publick shall receive its approbation, I
propose to undertake.

THOUGH, by omitting such confidera-

ble but detached articles in the reign of
CHARLES V. I have circumscribed my nar-
ration within more narrow limits, I am
yet persuaded, from this view of the inten-

tion

tion and nature of the work which I thought
it necetary to lay before my readers, that
the plan must still appear to them too ex-
tensive, and the undertaking too arduous,
I have often felt them to be so. But my
conviRion of the utility of such a history
prompted me to persevere. With what
success I have executed it, the publick must
now judge. I wait, in follicitude, for its
decision; to which I shall submit with a
refpetful silence.

.. A V IE W
. ~ ~ : ·AYI

## SECTION I. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to interior Government, Laws and Manners.

A

V I E W
VIEW

OF THE
PROGRESS oF SOCIETY

I N
EURO P E,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

T TH E
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SECTION I.

View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with re.
'fpet7 to interior Government, Laws and Manners.
rT W O great revolutions have happened SECT. I.

in the political fate, and in the man-

t. The efseas

ners of the European nations. The of the Ro-

rft was occasioned by the progress of the Ro- ma power
man power; the second by the lubverfion of the lte of au.
Roman Empire. When the spirit of conquest rop-.
led the armies of Rome beyond the Alps, they
Found all the countries which they invaded, in-
habited by people whom they denominated bar-

VO L. 1. B barians,

SECT. T. barians, but who were nevertheless brave and

L' independent. Thefedefended their ancient pof-

sessions with obstinate valour. It was by the fu-
periority of their difciptine, rather than of their
courage, that the Romans gained any advan-
tage over them. A single battle did not, as
among the effeminate inhabitants of Asia, de-
cide the fate of a state. The vanquished people
resumed their arms with fresh spirit, and their
undisciplined valour, animated by the love of li-
berty, supplied the want of conduc as well as

The defola- of union. During there long and fierce itrug-
tion which , :> Z D
it occasion- gles for dominion or independence, the coun-
td. tries of Europe were successively laid waste, a

great part of their inhabitants perished in the
field, many were carried into slavery, and a fee-
ble remnant, incapable of further refiltance,
submitted to the Roman power.

The im- T HE Romans having thus desolated Europe,
proveeriets
whichit in- set themselves to civilize it. The form of go-
troduced. vernment which they established in the con-

quered provinces, though severe, was regular,
and preserved public tranquillity. As a confo-
lation for the loss of liberty, they communica-
ted their arts, sciences, language, and manners,
to their new fbbjeds. Europe began to breathe,
and to recover firength after the calamities
which it had undergone; agriculture was en-
couraged; population encreated; the ruined ci-
ties were rebuilt; new towns were founded ; an
appearance of prosperity succeeded, and repair-
ed, in Come degree, the havock us war.

The bad TiIS state, however, was far from being
ceef t,, happy, or favourable to the improvement of the
dominion. human mind. The vanquished nations were dif

armed by their conquerors, and overawed by
soldiers kept inpay to restrain therm. They

were

ao iX

l,
2

were given up as a prey to rapacious governors, SECT. I.
who plundered them with impunity ; and were '"
drained of their wealth by exorbitant taxes im-
posed with so little attention to the situation of
the provinces, that the impolitions were gene-
rally encreafed in proportion to their inability to
support them. They were deprived of their
most enterprizing citizens, who resorted to a di!-
tant capital in quest of preferment, or of riches;
and were accuftorned in all their acions to look
up to a superior, and tamely to receive his com-
mands. Under all these depressing circumftan-
ces, it was impossible that they could retain vi-
gour or generosity of mind. The martial and
independent spirit, which had distinguished their
ancestors, became extindt among all the people
fubjeted to the Roman yoke; they loft not on-
ly the habit but even the capacity of deciding
for themselves, or of acting from the impulse of
their own minds ; and the dominion of the Ro-
mans, like that of all great Empires, degraded
and debased the human species [A].

A SOCIETY in this state could not fubiifL long. The irrup-

tion of the

There were defects in the Roman government, barbarous
even in its moll perfect form, which threatened nations.
its dissolution. Time ripened these original
feeds of corruption, and gave birth to many
new disorders. A constitution, unsound, and
worn out, muff have fallen in pieces of itfeif,
without any external shock. The violent ir-
ruption of the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and other
barbarians hastened this event, and precipitated
the downfal of the Empire. New nations seem-
ed to arise, and to rulh from unknown regions
in order to take vengeance on the Romans for
the calamities which they had infliced on man-
kind. These fierce tribes either inhabited the

[A]. NOTE I.

B 2 various

3

-Y* been subdued by the Romans, or were scattered

over the vast countries in the north of Europe,
and north-west of Asia, which are now occupi-
ed by the Danes, the Swedes, the Poles, the
fubjets of the Ruffian empire, and the Tartars.
Their condition, and tranfadtions previous to
their invasion of the Empire are but littleknown.
All our information with refped to these is de-
rived from the Romans; and as they did not
penetrate far into countries which were at that
time uncultivated and uninviting, the accounts
of their original Rate given by them are ex-
tremely imperfeEt. The rude inhabitants them-
selves, destitute of science, and of records, with-
out leisure, or curiosity to enquire into remote
events, retained, perhaps, some indiftint me-
mory of recent occurrences, but beyond there,
all was buried in oblivion, or involved in dark-
ness, and in fable [B].

State of the THE prodigious swarms which poured in upon
countries o
from which the Empire from the beginning of the fourth
they issued. century to the final extinction of the Roman

power, have given rife to an opinion that the
countries whence they iflued were crowded with
inhabitants; and various theories have been
formed to account for stich an extraordinary de-
gree of population as hath procured these coun-
tries the appellation of The Storehouse of Na.
tions. But if we confider that the countries pof-
sessed by the people who invaded the Empire
were of vast extent; that a great part of there
was covered with woods and marshes; that some
of the most considerable of the barbarous nati-
ons subsisted entirely by hunting or pasturage, in
both which flates of society large tracts of land
are required for maintaining a few inhabitants;

[3] NOTE 11.

and

A VIEW'~ OF THE
4

and that all of them were firangers to the arts, SECT. I.
and indufiry, without which population cannot --v
increase to any great degree, it is evident, that
these countriescould not be so populous in anci-
ent times as they are at present, when they still
continue to be less peopled than any other part
of Europe or of Asia.

BUT if these circumstances prevented the bar- The peorle

barous nations from becomingpopulous, they con- fiter darings
tributed to inspire, or to strengthen the martial
spirit by which they were distinguished. Inured
by the rigour of their climate, or the poverty of
their foil, to hardships which rendered their bo-
dies firm, and their minds vigorous; accuf-
tomed to a course of life which was a continual
preparation for ation ; and disdaining every oc-
cupation but that of war; they undertook, and
prosecuted their military enterprizes with an ar-
dour and impetuosity, of which men softened by
the refinements of more poliihed timtes, can
scarce form any idea [C].

THEIR first inroads into the Empire proceed- The ro.
ed rather fiom tne love of plunder, than from tives of

their sirss

the desire of new settlements. Roused to arms excursions.]
by tome enterprizing or popular leader, they
rallied out of their forels ; broke in upon her
frontier provinces with irresistible violence; put
all who opposed them to the sword; carried off
the most valuable effects of the inhabitants;
dragged along multitudes of captives in chains;
wafted all before them with fire or sword; and
retfrned in triumph to their wilds and fastnesses.
Their ficcefs, together with the accounts which
they gave of the unknown conveniencies and
luxuries that abounded in the countries better
cultivated, or blefled with a milder climate than

rC] NOTE III.

13 3 their

5

SECT. I. their own, excited new adventurers, and exposed
s-c^"P the frontier to new devaltations.

'Their reat- WHEN nothing was left to plunder in the ad-
frns for set- .
tling in thejacent provinces ravaged by frequent incursions,
,which the they marched farther from home, and finding
conquered. it difficult, or dangerous to return, they began

to fettle in the countries which they had fubdu-
ed. The sudden and short excursions in quest
of booty, which had alarmed, and disquieted
the Empire, ceased; a more dreadful calamity
impended. Great bodies of armed men with
their wives and children, and slaves and flocks,
issued forth, like regular colonies, in quell of
new settlements. People who had no cities, and
seldom any fixed habitation, were so little at-
tached to their native foil, that they migrated
without reluctance from one place to another.
New adventurers followed them. The lands
which they deserted were occupied by more re-

f their set- mote tribes of barbarians. These, in their turn,
tlements. pushed forward into more fertile countries, and

like a torrent continually increasing, rolled on.
and swept every thing before them. In less thar
two centuries from their first irruption, barba.
rians of various names and lineage, plunderec
and took possession of Thrace, Pannonia, Gaul
Spain, Africa, and at last of Italy, and Rome it
self. The vast fabrick of the Roman power
which it had been the work of ages to perfect
was in that short period overturned fiom thi
foundation.

The cir- MANY concurriOg causes prepared the way to
which ,cea- this great revolution, and ensured success to tll

'fion'd thll nations which invaded the Empire, The Ro

downfal of
the Roman man commonwealth had conquered the worlt
minpir.. by the wisdom of its civil maxims, and the ri

gour of its military discipline. But, under th

Emrpe
6

7

Emperors, the former were forgotten or derpifed, SECT. I.
and the latter was gradually relaxed. The ar-
mies of the Empire in the fourth and fifth cen-
turies bore scarce any resemblance to those invin-
cible legions which had been vitorious wherever
they marched. Inflead of freemen, who volun-
tarily took arms from the love of glory, or of
their country, provincials and barbarians were
bribed or forced into service. They were too
feeble, or too proud to submit to the fatigue of
military duty. They even complained of the
weight of their defensive armour, as intolerable,
and laid it aside. Infantry, fiom which the ar-
mies of ancient Rome derived their vigour and
stability, fell into contempt the effeminate and
undisciplined soldiers of later times could scarce
be brought to venture into the field but on horse-
back. These wretched troops, however, were
the only guardians of the Empire. The jealousy
of despotism had deprived the people of the ule
of arms; a:d fubjeds oppressed and rendered
incapable of defending themselves, had neither
spirit nor inclination to resist their invaders, fiom
whom they had little to fear, becatul they
could scarce make their condition more unhappy.
As the martial spirit became extinct, the reve-
nues of the Empire gradually diminilhed. The
tate for the luxuries of the East increascd to such
a pitch in the Imperial court, that great fums
werecarried into Indiai, tfom whence money never
returns. By the vast iftbfidics paid to the barba-
rous nations a trill greater quantity of lpecies was
withdraw: from circulation. The frontier pro-
vinces wafted by frequent incursions becalme un-
a!)le to pay the cftlomary tribute; and the wealth
of the world, which had lonll centered in the ca-
pital of the Empire, cealed to rliw thither in the
fhmi, abundance, or was diverted into other chan-
:M,;. The limits of the Empire continucd to be

iL 4 a;

SECT. I. extensive as ever, while the spirit requisite for its
'v_'- defence declined, and its resources were exhauf-

ted. A valf body, languid, and almost unani-
mated, became incapable of any effort to save it-
self, and was easily overpowered. The Empe-
rors, who had the absolute direction of this difor-
dered system, funk in the softness of Eastern lux-
ury, shut up within the walls of a palace, igno-
rant of war, unacquainted with affairs, and go-
verned entirely by women and eunuchs, or by
ministers equally effeminate, trembled at the ap-
proach of danger, and under circumstances
which called for the utmost vigour in counsel as
well as in acion, discovered all the impotent ir-
resolution of fear, and of folly.

The chi- IN every refpel, the condition of the barba-
,,"ci con- rous nations was the reverse of that of the Ro-
tributed to mans. Among them, the martial spirit was in
thf"r"ucC full vigour ; their leaders were hardy and enter-
barous nati- prizing; the arts which had enervated the Ro-

n mans were unknown among them; and such

was the nature of their military institutions, that
they brought forces into the field without any
trouble, and supported them at little expence.
The mercenary and effeminate troops stationed
on the frontier, aftonifled at their fierceness, ei-
ther fled at their approach, or were routed in the
firit onset. The feeble expedient to which the
Emperors had recourse, of taking large bodies of
the barbarians into pay, and of employing them
to repel new invaders,. instead of retarding, has-
tened the deftruttion of the Empire. They soon
turned their arms against their masters, and with
greater advantage than ever: for, by serving in
the Roman armies. they had acquired all the
discipline, or skill in war, which the Romans
fill retained; and upon adding these to their na-
tive ferocity, they became altogether irrefiftiblc.

BulT
8

9

BUT though from there, and many other causes, SECT. r.
the progress and conquests of the nations which 'A'

The spirit

over-ran the Empire, became Co extremely rapid, with wihich
they were accompanied with horrible devaflations, they car"ied
and an incredible destruction of the human fpe-
cies. Civilized nations which take arms upon
cool reflecio:, from motives of policy or pru-
dence, with a view to guard against Tome distant
danger, or to prevent some remote contingency,
carry on their hostilities with so little rancour, or
animosity, that war among them is disarmed of
half its terrors. Barbarians are firangers to such
refinements They ruih into war with impetu-
ofity, and prosecute it with violence. Their sole
object is to make their enemies feel the weight of
their vengeance, nor does their rage subside until
it be satiated with inflicting on them every pofli-
ble calamity. It is with such a spirit that the fa-
vage tribes in America carry on their petty wars.
It was with the fame spirit that the more power-
ful and no less fierce barbarians in the north of
Europe, and of Asia, fell upon the Roman Em-
pire.

WHEREVER they marched, their route was The depfa-

marked with blood. They ravaged or destroyed ,i., wl"hi
all around them. They made no diftintion be- brought
tween what was sacred, and what was profane. lwp" t.
They refpeCed no age, or sex, or rank. What
escaped the fury of the firit inundation perishcd
in those which followed it. The most fertile and
populous provinces were converted into deserts,
in which were scattered the ruins of villages and
cities, that afforded Shelter to a few miserable
inhabitants whom chance had preserved, or the
sword of the enemy, wearied with dell:roying,
had Ipared. The conquerors who firif fettled in
the countries which they had wafted were expel-

led

SECT. I. led or exterminated by new invaders, who com-
-v-
3 ing from regions farther removed from the civili-

zed parts of the world, were still more fierce and
rapacious. This brought new calamities upon
mankind, which did not cease until the north, by
pouring forth fucceflive swarms, was drained of
people, and could no longer furnish instruments
of deftruoion. Famine and pestilence, which
always march in the train of war, when it rava-
ges with such inconsiderate cruelty, raged in every
part of Europe, and compleated its sufferings.
If a man were called to fix upon the period in
the hilfory of the world, during which the condi-
tion of the human race was most calamitous and
affliced, he would without hesitation, name that
which elapsed from the death of Theodosius the
Great, to the establishment of the Lombards in
Italy c. The contemporary authors who beheld
that scene of desolation, labour and are at a loss
for exprefflons to describe the horror of it. T'he
scourge of God, IThe destroyer of nations, are the
dreadful epithets by which they distinguish the
rmoft noted of the barbarous leaders; and they
compare the ruin which they had brought on the
world, to the havock occasioned by earthquakes,
conflagrations, or deluges, the most formidable
and fatal calamities which the imagination of man
can conceive.

iTheuner- yBUT no expreffons can convey so perfect an
,,h`,h ti"\I, idea of the deftrutive progress of the barbarians,
.ll th1I,,ei as that which must firike an attentive observer,
of £uil,. when he contemplates the total change, which he

will discover in the state of Europe when it began
to recover some degree of tranquillity towards the
close of the sixth century. The Saxons were by

' Theodofiui died A. D. 395. The reign of Alboinu.i

in Lolllbardy, began A. D, 571, so that this period was
176 yais..

thr.t
TO

that time maiters of the southern, and more fer-SE T. I.
tile provinces of Britain; the Franks of Gaul ; a" '
the Huns of Pannonia; the Goths of Spain; the
Goths and Lombards of Italy and the adjacent
provinces. Scarce any vestige of the Roman po-
licy, jurisprudence, arts, or literature remained.
New forms of government, new laws, new man-
ners, new dresses, new languages, and new names
of men and countries, were every where intro-
duced. To make a great or fuden alteration
with refpet to any of these, unless where the
ancient inhabitants of a country have been almost
totally exterminated, has proved an undertaking
beyond the power of the greatest conquerors [D].
The total change which the settlement of the
barbarous nations occasioned in the state of Eu-
rope, may, therefore, be confidered as a more
decisive proof, than even the teitimony of con-
temporary historians, of the deitructive violence
with which they carried on their conquests, and
of the havock which they had made from one
extremity of this quarter of the globe to the
other [El.

IN the obscurity of the chaos occasioned by this Fromr tihi

general wreck of nations, we must search for the ord' ."si
feeds of order, and endeavour to discover the first laws of go-
rudiments of the policy and laws now eftablithed ~""' l"
in Europe. To this source, the historians of its blifhcd mutt
different kingdoms, have attempted, though vwith b tr'cd.
less attention and induifry than the importance of
the enquiry merits, to trace back the institutions,
and customs peculiar to their countrymen. It is
not my province to give a minute detail of the
progrets of government and manners in each parti-
cular nation, whose tranfacions are the objedt of
the following hilfory. But in order to exhibit a

[D] NOTE IV. r] NOTE V.

lUsL

SECT. 1. just view of the state of Europe at the opening of

the sixteenth century, it is neceflary to look back,
and to contemplate the condition of the northern
nations upon their first settlement in those coun-
tries which they occupied. It is necessary to
mark the great steps by which they advanced
from barbarifin to refinement, and to point out
those general principles and events which by their
uniform as well as extensive operation conducted
all of them to that degree of improvement in
policy and in manners which they had attained at
the period when Charles V. began his reign.

The princi- WHEN nations subjet to despotic government
which the make conquests, these serve only to extend the
norTthrn dominion and the power of their master. But
mad thcir armies composed of freemen conquer for them-
fettl'ne fe elves, not for their leaders. The people who

overturned the Roman Empire, and fettled in its
various provinces, were of the latter class. Not
only the different nations that issued from the
north of Europe, which has always been confi-
dered as the feat of liberty, but the Huns and
Alans who inhabited part of those countries which
have been marked out as the peculiar region of
Pervitude f, enjoyed freedom and independence to
such a high degree as seems to be scarce compati-
ble with a state of social union, or with the sub-
ordination neceflary to maintain it. They follow-
cd the chieftain, who led them forth in quest of
new settlements, not by conitraint, but from:
choice; not as soldiers whom he could order to
march, but as volunteers who offered to accom-
pany him [F]. They considered their conquelts
as a common property, in which all had a title

Dc L'efplit des loix, liv. 17. ch. 3. [F] NO'IE VI.

to

to share, as all had contributed to acquire them SECT. L
[G]. In what manner, or by what principles, '
they divided among them the lands which they
seized, we cannot now determine with any cer-
tainty. There is no nation in Europe whose re-
cords reach back to this remote period; and there
is little information to be got from the uninitruc-
tive and meagre chronicles, compiled by writers
ignorant of the true end, and unacquainted with
the proper objects of history.

THIS new division of property, however, to- The fudal

i government

gether with the maxims and manners to which it gradually
gave rife, gradually introduced a species of go- efablifld

P among

vernment formerly unknown. This singular in- them.
ftitution is now diffinguifhed by the name of the
Feudalfyftem : and though the barbarous nations
which framed it, fettled in their new territories at
different times, came from different countries,
spoke various languages, and were under the com-
mand of separate leaders, the Feudal- policy and
laws were established, with little variation, in
every kingdom of Europe. This amazing uni-
formity hath induced some authors to believe
that all there nations, notwithstanding so many
apparent circumstances of diftintdion, were origi-
nally the fame people. But it may be ascribed
with greater probability to the similar state of
society and of manners to which they were ac-
cufftomed in their native countries, and to the
similar situation in which they found themselves
on taking poffefllion of their new domains.

[G] NOTE VIT. ' Procop. de Bcllo Vandal. ap.
Script. Byz. edit. Ven. vol. i. p. 345.

As

SECT. I As the conquerors of Europe had their acquifi-
N'-3a -tions to maintain, not only against such of the
*efence the ancient inhabitants as they had spared, but againif
grfea fije the formidable inroads of new invaders, felf-de-
policy. fence was their chief care, and seems to have

been the sole object of their firit institution and
policy. Inpfead of those loose associations, which,
though they scarce diminilhed their personal inde-
pendence, had been sufficient for their security
while they remained in their original countries,
they saw the necessity of confederating more
closely together, and of relinquishing some of
their private rights in order to attain publick safe-
ty. Every freeman, upon receiving a portion of
the lands which were divided, bound himself to
appear in arms against the enemies of the com-
munity. This military service was the condition
upon which he received and held his lands, and
as they were exempted from every other burden,
that tenure, among a warlike people, was deemed
both easy and honourable. The King or general,
who led them to conquest, continuing still to be
the head of the colony, had, of course, the lar-
gest portion allotted to him. Having thus acqui-
red the means of rewarding past services, as well
as of gaining new adherents, he parcelled out his
lands with this view, binding those on whom they
were bestowed, to follow his standard with a
number of men in proportion to the extent of
the territory, which they received, and to bear
arms in his defence. His chief officers imitated
the example of the sovereign, and in distributing
portions of their lands anmo:g their dependants,
annexed the fame condition to the grant. Thus
a feudal kingdom resembled a military establish-
ment, rather than a civil inflitution. The viCto-
rious army cantoned out in the country which it
had seized, continued ranged under its proper offi-
cers, and subordinate to military command,

The

The names of a soldier and of a freeman were SECT. I.
fynonimous '. Every proprietor of land, girt '-v
with a sword, was ready to march at the summons
of his superior, and to take the field against the
common enemy.

BUT though the Feudal policy seems to be so The feudall

admirably calculated for defence against the at- o',e't
faults of any foreign power, its provisions for the its ,roifi-
interior order and tranquillity of society were ex- teno ordier
tremely defective. Tle principles of disorder in focety.
and corruption are discernable in that constitution
under its best and most perfect form. They soon
unfolded themselves, and spreading with rapidity
through every part of the system, produced the
most fatal effects. The bond of political union
was extremely feeble; the sources of anarchy
were innumerable. The monarchical and arifto-
cratical parts of the constitution, having no in-
termediate power to balance them, were perpetu-
ally at variance, and juftling with each other.
The powerful vassals of the crown soon extorted
a confirmation for life of those grants of land,
which being at first purely gratuitous, had been
bestowed only during pleasure. Not satisfied
with this, they prevailed to have them converted
into hereditary poffeflions. One ftep more com-
pleated their usurpations, and rendered them un-
alienable [H]. With an ambition no less enter-
prifing, and more preposterous, they appropriated
to themselves titles of honour, as well as offices
of power or trust. These personal marks of dif-
tinCtion, which the publick admiration bestows on
illustrious merit, or which the publick confidence
confers on extraordinary abilities, were annexed
to certain families, and tranfinitted like fiefs, from
father to son by hereditary right. The crown

k Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Milts. [H] NOTE VIII.

* vassals

SECT. T. vassals having thus secured the poflefion of their

lands and dignities, the nature of the Feudal in-
ftitutions, which though founded in subordination,
verged to independence, led them to new, and
frill more dangerous encroachments on the prero-
gatives of the sovereign. They obtained the
power of supreme jurisdiction both civil and cri-
minal within their own territories; the right of
coining money; together with the privilege of
carrying on war against their private enemies in
their own name, and by their own authority.
The ideas of political subjection were almost en-
tirely loft, and frequently scarce any appearance
of feudal Subordination remained. Nobles who
had acquired such enormous power, scorned to
confider themselves as subje&s. They aspired
openly at being independent: the bonds which
connected the principal members of the conftitu-
tion with the crown, were dissolved. A king-
dom considerable in name and in extent, was
broken into as many separate principalitits as it
contained powerful barons. A thousand causes
of jealousy and discord subsisted among them,
and gave rife to as many wars. Every country in
Europe, wafted or kept in continual alarm during
there endless contests, was filled with castles and
places of strength, erected for the security of the
inhabitants, not against foreign force, but againit
internal hostilities. An universal anarchy, de-
ftruCtive, in a great measure, of all the advanta-
ges which men expeCt to derive from society,
prevailed. The people, the m ift numerous as well
as the most ufefil part of the community, were
either reduced to a slate of aCtual servitude, or
treated with the fame insolence and rigour as if they
had been degraded into that wretched condition [I].
The King, stripped of almost every prerogative,
and without authority to enaCt or to execute falu-

[r] NOTE IX,

tary

tary laws, could neither prote-t the innocent,SEcT, 1.
nor puni(h the guilty. The nobles, superior to
all restraint, harrafled each other with perpetual
wars, oppreifed their fellow fubjeLts, and hum-
bled or insulted their sovereign. To crown all,
time gradually fixed, and rendered venerable
this pernicious system, which violence had efta-
blifhed.

SUCH was the state of Europe with refpet It prevent-
to the interior administration of government from ed nations

likewise

the seventh to the eleventh century. All the from aeing
external operations of its various states, during with ,igour

i n their ew-

this period, were, of course, extremely feeble. ternal ope-
A kingdom dismembered, and torn with difen- rations.
tion, without any common interest to rouze, or
any common head to conduct its force, was in-
capable of acting with vigour. Almost all the
wars in Europe, during the ages which I have
mentioned, were trifling, indecisive, and produc-
tive of no considerable event. They resembled
the short incursions of pirates or banditti, rather
than the feady operations of a regular army.
Every baron at the head of his vassals, carried
on rome petty enterprize to which he was promp-
ted by his own ambition, or revenge. The
slate itself, destitute of union, either remained
altogether inactive, or if it attempted to make
any effort, that served only to discover its im-
potence. The superior genius of Charlemagne,
it is true, united all these disjointed and dilcor-
dant members, and forming them again into
one body, restored that degree of activity to go-
vernment which diflinguith his reign, and ren-
der the transactions of it, objects not only of at-
tention but of admiration to more enlightened
times. But this state of union and vigour not
being natural to the feudal government, was of
flhort duration. Immediately upon his death,

VOL. 1. C the

- " L nn 1' 1 T7 T T h r% Irl T

SECT. I. the spirit which animated and sustained the vast

system which he had established, being with.
drawn, it broke into pieces. All the calamities
which flow from anarchy and di(cord, returning
with additional force, afflited the different
kingdoms into which his Empire was split. From
that time to the eleventh century, a succession
of uninterested events; a series of wars, the mo-
tives as well as the consequences of which were
equally unimportant, fill and deform the annals
of all the nations in Europe.

The fatal To there pernicious effeAs of the feudal anar.
thistateofchy, may be added its fatal influence on the
foety o charader and improvement of the human mind,
ad ats; If men do not enjoy the protecion of regular

government, together with the certainty of per-
fonal security which naturally flows from it, they
never attempt to make progress in science, nor
aim at attaining refinement in taste, or in man-
ners. That period of turbulence, oppreflion,
and rapine, which I have described; was ill suit-
ed to favour improvement in any of there. In
less than a century after the barbarous nations
fettled in their new conquest, almost all the es-
se&ts of the knowledge and civility which the
Romans had spread through Europe disappear.
ed. Not only the arts of elegance which mini-
fter to luxury, and are supported by it, bui
many of the useful arts, without which life can
scarcely be confidered as comfortable, were ne
gle4ted or loft. Literature, science, taste, were
words scarce in use diiing the ages we are con
templating; or if they occur at any time, emi
nence in them is ascribed to persons and produc
tions so contemptible that it appears their trut
import was little understood. Persons of the
highest rank, and in the most eminent ftationa
could not read or write. Many of the clergy dic

no
]8

not understand the breviary which they wereSECT. I.
obliged daily to recite; some of them could '-"'
scarce read it [K]. All memory of past tranf-
adlions was loft, or preserved in annals filled
with trifling events, or legendary tales. Even
the codes of laws published by the several nati-
ons which established themselves in the different
countries of Europe, fell into disuse, while in
their place, customs, vague and capricious, were
substituted. The human mind neglected, un-
cultivated, and depressed, funk into the most
profound ignorance. Europe did not produce,
during four centuries, one author who merits to
be read, either on account of the elegance of his
composition, or the justness and novelty of his
sentiments. There is scarce one invention use-
ful or ornamental to society of which that long
period can boast.

EVEN the Christian religion, though its pre-Upon reli-

cepts are delivered, and its institutions are fixed gion;
in scripture with a precision which should have
exempted them from being misinterpreted or
corrupted, degenerated during those ages of
darkness into an illiberal superstition. The bar-
barous nations when converted to Christianity
changed the objeCt, not the spirit of their religi-
ous worship. They endeavoured to conciliate
the favour of the true God by means not unlike
to those which they had employed in order to
appease their false deities. Instead of aspiring to
fandtity and virtue, which alone can render men
acceptable to the great author of order and of
excellence, they imagined that they satisfied
every obligation of duty by a icrupulous obfer-
vance of external ceremonies [L]. Religion,
according to their conception of it, comprehen-
ded nothing elie ; and the rites, by which they

[K] NOTL X. [L] NOTE XI.

C 2 persuaded

19

SECT. I. persuaded themselves that they could gain the
v"Y favour of heaven, were of fich a nature as

might have been expeced from the rude ideas
of the ages which devised and introduced them,
They were either so unmeaning as to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Being to whose honour they
were consecrated; or so absurd as to be a dif.
grace to reason and humanity[M]. Charlemagne
in France, and Alfred the Great in England,
endeavoured to dispel this darkness, and gave
their fubjets a short glimpse of light and know-
ledge. But the ignorance of the age was too
powerful for their efforts and institutions. The
darkness returned, and fettled over Europe more
thick and heavy than formerly.

Upon the
character As the inhabitants of Europe during these
and virtues centuries were strangers to the arts which embel-
man mind lilh a polished age, they were destitute of the

virtues which abound among people who conti-
nue in a simple slate. Force of mind, a sense
of personal dignity, gallantry in enterprise, in-
vincible perseverance in execution, and con-
tempt of danger and of death, are the charate-
riftic virtues of uncivilized nations. But there
are all the offspring of equality and indepen-
dence, both which the feudal institutions had
destroyed. The spirit of domination corrupted
the nobles; the yoke of servitude depressed the
people; the generous sentiments inspired by a
sense of equality were extinguished, and nothing
remained to be a check on ferocity and violence.
Human society is in its molt cuiuipted slate at
that period when men have loft their original
independence and simplicity of manners, but
have not attained that degree of refinement
which introduces a sense of decorum and of
propriety in conduEt, as a restraint on those pal:

[M] N Or TE XII.

sions
20

sions which lead to heinous crimes. According- SECT. I.
ly, a greater number of those atrocious aations --V
which fill the mind of man with astonishment
and horror, occur in the hifiory of the centuries
under review, than in that of any period of the
fame extent in the annals of Europe. If we open
the hiflory of Gregory of Tours, or of any con-
temporary author, we meet with a series of
deeds of cruelty, perfidy, and revenge, so wild
and enormous as almost to exceed belief.

BUT, according to the obCervation of an ele- From the

gantand profound historian , there is an ultimate beginnine
point of depression, as well as of exaltation, venthcen-
from which human affairs naturally return in a vUer mnt
contrary progress, and beyond which they fel- andmanner,
dom pass either in their advancement or decline. improve.
When defects, either in the form, or in the ad-
ministration of government, occasion such dif-
orders in society as are excellive and intolerable,
it becomes the common interest to discover and
Ito apply such remedies as will molt effectually
iremove them. Slight inconveniencies may be
long overlooked or endured, but when abuses
|grow to a certain pitch, the lociety mult go to
rutin, or muff attempt to reform them. The
lilo;rders in the feudal fyftcm, together with
the corruption of rafte and manners consequent
iupon these, which had gone on increasing du-
ring a loing course of years, seem to have attain-
ed their utrnoft point of excess towards the clole
of the elventh century. From that aera, we
many date the return of government and mian-
ners in a contrary direction, and can trace a
liccelioon of caulesand events which contributed,
lhme with a nearer and more poweitul, others
v.ith a more renmote and less perceptible influ-

1 hlunll', History of EnglaiiJ, vol. ii. p. 441.

2r
C3

ence,

SECT. I. ence, to abolish confusion and barbarifin, ant
'-^- to introduce order, regularity, and refinement.
Necefrary IN pointing out and explaining these cause
to point out
the cau'es and events, it is not necessary to observe the or
and events der of time with a chronological accuracy ; it i
which con-
tliluteto- of more importance to keep in view their mu
wrosthis tual connection and dependance, and to fhox
ment. how the operation of one event, or of one cause

prepared the way for another, and augmente
its influence. We have hitherto been contem
plating the progress of that darkness whicl
spread over Europe from its first approach, t{
the period of greatest obscuration; a more plea
sant exercise begins here, to observe the sirs
dawnings of returning light, to mark the vari
ous acceflions by which it gradually increafec
and advanced towards the full splendor of day

Th' teo- I. THE Crusades, or expeditions in order t;
theCru- rescue the Holy Land out of the hands of Infi
aduc to a dels, seem to be the first event that rouzed Eu
change in rope from the lethargy in which it had been lonE
,nde man funk, and that tended to introduce any change
ners. in government, or in manners. It is natural tr

mor the human mind to view those places whicl

remote cau- have been distinguished by being the residence ol
e.s of there any illustrious personage, or the scene of any
expeditions. ' . r

. , 0 '
, „ , .

great tranfadion, with tbme degree of delighi
and veneration. From this principle flowed
the superstitious devotion with which Christians,
from the earliest ages of the church, were ac-
customed to visit that country which the Al.
mighty had feleded as the inheritance of his fa
vourite people, and in which the son of God had
accomplished the redemption of mankind. As
this distant pilgrimage could not be performed
without considerable expence, fatigue, and dan-
ger, it appeared the more meritorious, and
came to be confidered as an expiation for almofl

every

every crime. An opinion which spread with SEcr. L
rapidity over Europe about the close of the *
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century,
and which gained universal credit, wonderfully
augmented the number of these credulous pil-
grims, and encreafed the ardour with which
they undertook this useless voyage. The thou-
sand years mentioned by St. John t were sup-
posed to be accomplilhed, and the end of the
world to be at hand. A general consternation
seized mankind; many relinquished their pof-
sessions; and abandoning their friends and fami-
lies, hurried with precipitation to the Holy
Land, where they imagined that Chtift would
quickly appear to judge the world". While
Palestine continued subject to the Caliphs, they
had encouraged the resort of pilgrims to Jeru-
falem; and confidered this as a beneficial fpe,-
cies of commerce, which brought into their do-
minions gold and silver, and carried nothing out
of them but relics and consecrated trinkets. But
the Turks having conquered Syria about the
middle of the eleventh century, pilgrims were
exposed to outrages of every kind from these
fierce barbarians. This change happening pre,
cifely at the juncture when the panic terror
which I have mentioned rendered pilgrimages
moif frequent, filled Europe with alarm and in-
dignation. Every person who returned from
Palestine related the dangers which he had en-
countered, in visiting the holy city, and defcri-
bed with exaggeration the cruelty and vexations
of the Turks,

WHTEN the minds of men were thus prepared,The imme-

diate occa-
the zeal of a fanatical monk, who conceived sion of

C 4 the hem.

t Revel. xx. 2, 3, 4.
" Chronic. Will. Godelli ap. Bouquet Recueil des His-

toriens de Fiance. tom. x. p. 262. Vita Abbonis, ibid. p.
332. Chronic. S. Pantaleonis ap. Eccard. Corp. Script.
mcdii xvi, vol. i. p. 909. Annalifta Saxon. ibid. 576.

23

SECT. 1. the idea of leading all the forces of Christendom
^*~' against the infidels, and of driving them out of

the Holy Land by violence, was sufficient to
give a beginning to that wild enterprize. Peter
the hermit, for that was the name of this marti-
al apostle, ran from province to province with
a crucifix in his hand, exciting Princes and peo-
ple to this Holy war, and wherever he came
kindled the fame enthusiastic ardour for it with
which he himself was animated. The council
of Placentia, where upwards of thirty thousand
persons were aflembled, pronounced the scheme
to have been suggested by the immediate infpi-
ration of heaven. In the council of Clermont,
flill more numerous, as loon as the measure was
proposed, all cried out with one voice, " It is
" the will of God." Persons of all ranks were
smitten with the contagion; not only the gallant
nobles of that age, with their martial followers,
whom the boldness of a romantic enterprize
might have been apt to allure, but men in the
more humble and pacific flations of life eccle-
fiaftics of every order, and even women and
children engaged with emulation in an under-
taking which was deemed sacred and meritori-
ous. If we may believe the concurring teftimo-
ny of contemporary authors, fix millions of per-
sons assumed the cross", which was the badge
that diftinguilhed such as devoted themselves to
this holy warfare. All Europe, fays the Prin-
cess Anna Comnena, torn up from the founda-
tion, seemed ready to precipitate itself in one
united body upon Asia Y. Nor did the fumes of
this enthusiastic zeal evaporate at once: the fren-
zy was as lafling, as it was extravagant. During
two centuries, Europe seems to have had no

objeCt

x Fulcherius Carnotenfis ap. Bongarfii Gefta Dei per
Francos, vol. i. 387. edit. Han. 16xI.

Y Alexias. lib. x. ap. Byz. script. vol. xi. p. z24.
24

objea but to recover, or keep possession of the SECT. .
Holy Land, and through that period, vast armies v'
continued to march thither [N].

THE firit efforts of valour animated by enthu- The fuccefi

So the Cru-

fiafm were irresistible; part of the lesser Asia, fades.
all Syria and Palestine were wrested from the
infidels; the banner of the cross was displayed
on Mount Sion; Constantinople the capital of
the Christian empire in the East, was seized by a
body of these adventurers, who had taken arms
against the Mahometans, and an Earl of Slanders,
and his descendants, kept possession of the Impe-
rial throne during half a century. But though
the firRf impression of the Crusaders was so unex-
peted that they made their conquests with great
ease, they found infinite difficulty in preserving
them. Establishments so distant from Europe,
surrounded by warlike nations, animated with
fanatical zeal scarce inferior to that of the Crufa-
ders themielves, were perpetually in danger of be-
ing overturned. Before the expiration of theA. D.19.
thirteenth century, the Christians were driven out
of all their Asiatic pofleffions, in acquiring of
which incredible numbers of men had perished,
and immense fums of money had been wafted.
The only common enterprize in which the Eu-
ropean nations ever engaged, and which all un-
dertook with equal ardour, remains a singular
monument of human folly.

BuT from there expeditions, extravagant asThebenef-

they were, beneficial consequences followed, which cial eff'as
had neither been foreseen nor expected. In their afdheoC U
progress towards the Holy Land, the followers ofmannars.
the cross marched through countries better culti-

[N] NOTE XIII.

vated,

25

SECT. I. vated, and more civilized than their own. Their
--B'-' firfl rendezvous was commonly in Italy, in which

Venice, Genoa, Pisa, and other cities had begun
to apply themselves to commerce, and had made
some advances towards wealth as well as refine-
ment. They embarked there, and landing in Dal-
matia, pursued their route by land to Conftantino-
pie. Though the military spirit had been long ex-
tinc in the eaffern empire, and a despotism of the
worit species had annihilated almost every public
virtue, yet Constantinople having never felt the
deftrudive rage of the barbarous nations, was the
greatest, as well as the most beautiful city in Eu-
rope, and the only one in which there remained
any image of the ancient elegance in manners,
and arts. The naval power of the eastern Em-
pire was considerable. Manufactures of the most
curious fabrick were carried on in its dominions.
Constantinople was the only rmart in Europe for
the commodities of the East Indies. Although
the Saracens and Turks had torn from the Em-
pire many of its richest provinces, and had redu-
ced it within very narrow bounds, yet great wealth
flowed into the capital from these various sources,
which not only cherished such a taste for magni-
ficence, but kept alive such a relish for the sciences
as appear considerable when compared with what
was known in other parts of Europe. Even in
Asia, the Europeans who had assumed the cross
found the remains of the knowledge and arts
which the.example and encouragement of the Ca-
liphs had diffused through their empire. Although
the attention of the historians of the Crusades
was fixed on other objets than the state of foci-
ety and manners among the nations which they
invaded, although moit of them had neither taste
nor dilfcelmment enough to describe them, they
relate, hlowever, such signal ads of humanity

and
26

and generosity in the conduc of Saladin as well SECT. I.
as some pther leaders of the Mahometans, as give '-v '
us a very high idea of their manners. It was not
poflible for the Crusaders to travel through so
many countries, and to behold their various cuf-
toms and institutions without acquiring informa-
tion and improvement. Their views enlarged;
their prejudices wore off; new ideas crowded in-
to their minds; and they must have been sensible
on many occasions of the rusticity of their own
manners when compared with those of a more
polished people. These impressions were not so
flight as to be effaced upon their return to their
native countries. A close intercourse subsisted
between the East and Weft during two centu-
ries; new armies were continually marching from
Europe to Asia, while former adventurers return-
ed home and imported many of the customs to
which they had been familiarized by a long refi-
dence abroad. Accordingly, we discover, soon
after the commencement of the Crusades, great-
er splendour in the courts of Princes, greater
pomp in public ceremonies, a more refined tate
in pleasure and amusements, together with a more
romantic spirit of enterprize spreading gradually
over Europe; and to these wild expeditions, the
effect of superstition or folly, we owe the first
gleams of light which tended to dispel barbarity
and ignorance.

BuT these beneficial consequences of the Cru- Their influ-

on the

fades took place slowly; their influence upon the te of pro.
ltate of property, and consequently of power, in perty.
the different kingdoms of Europe, was more im-
mediate as well as discernible. The nobles who
assumed the cross, and bound themselves to march
to the Holy Land, soon perceived that great fums
were necelhary towards defraying the expences of

such

Sec'. I. such a distant expedition, and enabling them to
i-'v, appear with suitable dignity at the head of their

vaflals. But the genius of the feudal system was
averse to the imposition of extraordinary taxes;
and fubjets in that age were unaccustomed to
pay them. No expedient remained for levying
the fums requisite, but the (ale of their pofieffi-
ons. As men were inflamed with romantic ex-
pecations of the splendid conquests which they
hoped to make in Asia, and possessed with such
zeal for recovering the Holy Land as swallowed
up every other passion, they relinquished their
ancient inheritances without any reluctance, and
for prices far below their value, that they might
rally forth as adventurers in quest of new fettle-
ments in unknown countries. The Monarchs of
the different kingdoms, none of whom had en-
gaged in the first Crusade, eagerly seized this
opportunity of annexing considerable territories
to their crowns at small expence a. Besides this,
several great barons who perished ir the Holy
war, having left no heirs, their fiefs reverted of
course to their refpetive sovereigns, and by these
acceflions of property as well as power taken
from the one scale and thrown into the other,
the regal authority increased in proportion as that
of the aristocracy declined. The absence, too,
of many potent vaflals, accustomed to controul
and give law to their sovereigns, afforded them
an opportunity of extending their prerogative,
and of acquiring a degree of weight in the con-
ftitution which they did not formerly possess.
To there circumstances, we may add, that as all
who assumed the cross, were taken under the im-
mediate protection of the church, and its heavi-
eft anathemas were denounced against filch as
should dilquiet or annoy those who had devoted

» Willelin. Malhilb. Guibcrt. Abbas. ap. Bongarf. vol. i.
481.

them-

themselves to this service; the private quarrelsSECT. I.
and hostilities which banished tranquillity from a
feudal kingdom were suspended or extinguished;
a more general and steady administration of jus-
tice began to be introduced, and Come advances
were made towards the eftabli(hment of regular
government in the several kingdoms of Europe h
[O].

THE commercial effects of the Crusades were Their corn-

not less considerable than those which I have al- mercil, et-
ready mentioned. The first armies under the
standard of tile cross which Peter the hermit and
Godfrey of Bouillon led through Germany and
Hungary to Constantinople, suffered so much by
the length of the march, as well as the fierceness
of the barbarous people who inhabited those
countries, that it deterred others from taking the
fame route; so that rather than encounter so ma-
ny dangers, they chore to go by sea. Venice,
Genoa, and Pisa furnished the transports on which
they embarked. The Tum which these cities re-
ceived merely for freight from such numerous ar-
mies was immense d. This, however, was but
a small part of what they gained by the expediti-
ons to the Holy Land; the Crusaders contracted
with them, for military stores and provisions;
their fleets kept on the coast as the army advan-
ced by land; and supplying them with whatever
was wanting, engrossed all the profits of that
lucrative branch of commerce. The success
which attended the arms of the Crusaders was
productive of advantages still more permanent.
There are charters yet extant, containing grants

b Du Cange Gloflar. voc. Crue fignatus. Guil. Abbas
ap. Bongars. vol. i. 480, 482.

[0] NOTE XIV.
" Muratori Antiquit. Italic. medii. xvi, vol. ii. 9o5.

to

SECT. I. to the Venetians, Pifans, and Genoese of the most
'~-- 'extensive immunities in the several Settlements

which the Christians made in Asia. All the corn-
modities which they imported or exported are
thereby exempted from every imposition ; the
property of entire suburbs in some of the mari-
time towns, and of large streets and houses in
others, is vested in them; and all questions ari-
sing among persons fettled within their precints,
or who traded under their protection, are ap-
pointed to be tried by their own laws and by
judges of their own appointment'. When the
Crusaders seized Constantinople, and placed one
of their own number on the Imperial throne, the
Italian states were likewise gainers by that event.
The Venetians who had planned the enterprize,
and took a considerable part in carrying it into
execution, did not neglect to secure to themselves
the chief advantages redounding from its success.
They made themselves masters of part of the
ancient Peleponnefus in Greece, together with
some of the modt fertile islands in the Archipela-
go. Many valuable branches of the commerce,
which formerly centered in Conflantinople, were
transferred to Venice, Genoa or Pisa. Thus a
fucceflion of events occasioned by the Holy war,
opened various sources, from which wealth flow-
ed in such abundance into these citiess, as ena-
bled them, in concurrence with another initituti-
on which shall be immediately mentioned, to fe-
cure their own liberty and independence.

Tbihenit II. THE inititution to which I alluded was the
communi- forming of cities into communities, corporations,
tis favou- or bodies politick, and granting them the privi-
verment lege of municipal jurifdition, which contributed
and order.

' Murat. ibid. 906, &c.
f Villchardouin hilt. de Constant. fous I'Enlpcreurs Fran-
cois 10o5, &c.

more,
30

more, perhaps, than any other cause, to intro- SECT. I.
duce regular government, police and arts, and "--
to diffuse them over Europe. The feudal go-
vernment had degenerated into a system of op-
pression. The usurpations of the nobles were
become unbounded and intolerable: they had
reduced the great body of the people into a state
of actual servitude: the condition of those digni-
sied with the name of freemen, was often little
preferable to that of the other. Nor was such
oppression the portion of those alone who dwelt
in the country, and were employed in cultivating
the estate of their master. The cities and villa- a:atch
ges held of Come great lord, on whom they de- tci
pended for protection, and were no less subjet
to his arbitrary jurifdiAion. The inhabitants
were deprived of the natural, and most unalien-
able rights of humanity. They could not dispose
of the effects which their own industry had ac-
quired, either by a latter will, or by any deed
executed during their life g. They had no right
to appoint guardians for their children, during
their minority. They were not permitted to
marry without purchasing the content of the lord
on whom they dependedh. If once they had
commenced a law suit, they durst not terminate
it by an accommodation, because that would
have deprived the lord in whose court they plead-
ed, of the perquifitesdue to him on pafling fen-
tence . Services of various kinds, no less dif-
graceful than opprefive, were exated from them
without mercy or moderation. The spirit of in-
dullry was choaked in some cities by abfird re-
gulations, and in others by unreasonable exadi-

g Dacherii Spiceleg. torn. xi. 374. 375. edit. in 4to. Or-
donances deh Rois de France, tomi. iii. 204. No. 2. 6.

h Ordonances dea Rois de France, ron. i. p. zz. torn.

iii. 203. No. i. Mura. Antiq. ital. vol. iv. p. zo. Dacher.
Spicel vol. xi. 325. 341.

t Dacher. Spicel. vol !.. 1Sz.

SecT. 1. ons: nor would the narrow and oppressive max-

-'*~v~" ims of a military aristocracy have permitted it

ever to rife to any degree of height or vigour. k

The free- BUT as Coon as the cities of Italy began to
dom of ci-
ties firfte- turn their attention towards commerce, and to
ablyihed in conceive rome idea of the advantages which they

might derive from it, they became impatient to
shake off the yoke of their insolent lords, and
to establish among themselves such a free and
equal government as would render property fe-
cure, and industry flourishing. The German
Emperors, especially those of the Franconian and
Suabian lines, as the feat of their government
was far distant from Italy, possessed a feeble and
imperfect jurifdition in that country. Their per-
petual quarrels either with the Popes or with their
own turbulent vassals diverted their attention
from the interior police of Italy, and gave con-
ftant employment to their arms. These circum-
stances encouraged the inhabitants of some of the
Italian cities, towards the beginning of the ele-
venth century, to assume new privileges, to unite
together more closely, and to form themselves
into bodies politick governed by laws established
by common content . The rights, which many
cities acquired by bold or fortunate usurpations,
others purchased from the Emperors, who deem-
ed themselves gainers when they received large
fums for immunities which they were no long-
er able to withhold; and some cities obtained
them gratuitously from the generosity or faci-
lity of the Princes on whom they depended.
The great increase of wealth which the Crusades
brought into Italy, occasioned a new kind of
fermentation and acivity in the minds of the

k M. l'Abbe Mably obfervat. fur l'hit. de France, toni.
ii. p. 2.96.

i Murat. antiquit. Ital. vol. iv. p. 5,
32

people, add excitfed uch a general paffiofi for ScT. t.
liberty arid independence, that before the con- -;.-
clufiii of the las (Crusade all the cotifiderable
cities iii that country had either purchased or
had extorted large immunities from the Empe-
rors [Pi.

THIS innovation was not long known in Italy is ',.P

before it made its way into France. Louis the Fnceand
GroTs, in order to create some power that might into other
counterbalance those potent vassals who con- "urop'
trouled,. or' gave law to the crown, first adopted A. D. Xot
ithe plan of conferring new privileges on the-""37'
;towns situated within his own domaine. These
'privileges were called charters of community, by
Iwhich he enfranchised the inhabitants, abolili-
ied all mnarks of servitude, and formed them in-
ito corporations or bodies politick, to be gover-
!ned by a council an'd magistrates of their owrd
'nomination. These magistrates had the right
!of adminiitring justice within their own pre-
cints, of levying taxes, of embodying and
training to arms the militia of the town, which
took the field when required by the sovereign,
under the command of officers appointed' by
the community. The great barons imitated the
example of their monarch, and granted like
immunities to the towns within their territories;
They had wafted such great fums in their expe-
ditions to the Holy Land, that they were eager
to lay hold on this new expedient for railing
money, by the sale of there charters of liberty.
Though the institution of communities was as
repugnant to their maxims of policy, as it was
adverei to their power, they disregarded remote
consequences, in order to obtain.prefent relief.
In less than two centuries servitude was abolifled
in moll of the' towns in France, and they be-

P]' N OTE XV.
Vo . I. D came

SECT. I. came free corporations, instead of dependant

v'v »* villages without jurifdiison or privileges [Q.]

Much about the fame period, the great cities in
Germany began to acquire like immunities, and
laid the foundation of their present liberty and
independence [R]. The practice spread quick-
ly over Europe, and was adopted in Germany,
Spain, England, Scotland, and all the other
feudal kingdoms [S].

Iffe o

nP T THE good effects of this new inflitution were

the conditi. immediately felt, and its influence on govern-
*n of the inhabitnts;ment as well as manners was no less extensive

than salutary. A great body of the people was
released from servitude, and from all the arbi-
trary and grievous impositions to which that
wretched condition had ftibjeted them. Towns,
upon acquiring the right of community, be.
came so many little republicks, governed by
known and equal laws; and liberty was deemed
such an essential and charateriflic part in their
conflitution, that if any slave took refuge in
one of them, and resided there during a year
without being claimed, he was instantly declared
a freeman, and admitted as a member of the
commurity q.

Upon the As one part of the people owed their liberty
PIw0 eos to the erection of communities, another was
the nobili-
ty; indebted to them for their security. Such had

been the state of Europe during leveral centu-
ries, that felf-prefervation obliged every man
to court the patronage of some powerful baron,
and in times of danger his cattle was the place
to which all retorted for safety. But towns fiur
rounded with walls, whose inhabitants were re.

t[Q] NOTE XVI. [R] NOTE XVII.
S] N0 T E XVII.

q Siatut. Humberti Bellojoci. Dacher. Spicel. vol. ix. 18,.
18S. Charta Comlit, Forenf. ibid, 19;.

gulally
34

gularly trained to arms, and bound by interest, SCT. I.
as well as by the moftCfolemn engagements, re- --
ciprocally to defend each other, afforded a more
commodious and secure retreat. The nobles
began to be confidered as of leTs importance,
when they ceased to be the Cole guardians to
whom the people could look up for protection
againRt violence.

IF the nobility suffered some diminution ofUponths

their credit and power by the privileges granted power of
to the cities, the crown acquired an increase of
both. As there were no regular troops kept on
foot in any of the feudal kingdoms, the Mo-
narch could bring no army into the field but
what was composed of soldiers furnished by the
crown-vaffals, always jealous of the regal au-
thority, and often in rebellion against it; nor
had he any funds for carrying on the publick
service, but such as they granted him with a
very sparing hand. But when the members of
communities were permitted to bear arms, and
were trained to the use of there, this in some
degree supplied the first defet, and gave the
crown the command of a body of men inde-
pendent of its great vassals. The attachment
of the cities to their sovereigns, whom they ref-
peted as the first authors of their liberties, and
whom they were obliged to court as the protec-
tors of their immunities against the domineering
spirit of the nobles, contributed romewhat to-
wards removing the second evil, as it frequently
engaged them to grant the crown such supplies
of money as added new force to government r.

THE acquisition of liberty made such a hap-. P."h

py change in the condition of all the members industry.

r Ordon. des Rois de France, tom. i. 602, 785. tom. ii.
318. 4:».

D 2 of

$Sc.t. L of ciiommufniities, as routed them from that fRu-
*' pldi Pidity and inadion into which they had been

funk by the wretchedness of their former slate.
The spirit of indiiftry revived. Commerce be-
came an objec of attention, and began to fou-
rifh. Population incteated. Independence was
eftablithed ; and wealth flowed into cities which
had long been the feat of poverty arid opptrefi-
on. Wealth was accompanied by its usual at-
tendants, ostentation and luxury; and though
the former was inelegant and cumbersome, and
the latter indelicate, they led gradually to
greater refinement in manners, and in the ha-
bits of life. Together with this improvement
in, manners, a more regular species of govern-
ment and police was introduced: As cities grew
to be more populous, and the occasions of in-
tercourfe among. men increased, flatutes and: re-
gulations multiplied of courle, and all became
lenfible that their common safety depended on
observing them with exatnefs, and on punishing
such as violated them, with promptitude and ri-
gour. Laws and subordination, as well as po-
lifhed tmanners, took their rile in cities, and (if-
fused themlelves insensibly through the reft of
the society.

The inhabi- Il. THE inhabitants of cities having obtain.
tants of ci-
ties acquire ed personal freedom and municipal jurildic.ioln,
political soon acquired civil liberty and political power.
power as
members of It was a fundamental principle in the feudal sys-
th1 cofti- tern of policy, that no freemar could be go-

veried or taxed unlels by his own conlent. In
consequence of this, the vadils of every baron
were called to his court, in which they eltlbblilh-
ed by mutual consent ilch regulations as they
deemed mol beneficial to their linall tociety,
and granted their superior fich supplies of mo-
nay us were pruportionable to their abilities, or

to

to his wants. -Te barons thebezlves, confor. SECT. L
mably to the fm.e magr im, were admitted into '
the supreme .affebly of the nation, and concur-
red with the sovereign in iena.t.ing laws, or in im-
poring taxes. ,As the superior lord, according
to the original plan of feudal policy, retained
the direEt property of those lands which he
granted, in temporary pofleflion, to his vaffials,
the law, eyegn after fiefs became hereditary, atil
supposed this eriginal prafice to fubfilt, and a
bgron coptinned to be confidered as the guardi-
an of all who resided within his territories.
The great couoniJ of each nation, whether dif-
tinguilfed by the name of a parliament, a diet,
the Cortes, or ,t;e ste.ts general, was composed
entirely of such parons and dignified eccle-
fiatticks, as held immediately of the crown.
Towns, whether situated within the royal do-
maine, or on the lands of a subject, depended
for protecion on the lord of whom they held.
They had no 1egal name, no political existence,
which cQuld entitle them to be admitted into
th. lgiflative assembly, or could give them
any authorixy there. But as soon as they were
enfranchised, arnd formed into Bodies Corporate,
they became legal and independent members of
the conflitutioli, and acquired all the rights es-
fential to freemenl. Amongst there, the moR
valuable, was the privilege of a decisive voice
in enadting laws, and in granting rubfidies. It
was natural for cities, accultomed to a form of
municipal government, according to which no
regulation could be established, and no money
could be raijed without their own consent, to
claim this privilege. The wealth, the power
and consideration which they acquired on re-
covering their liberty added weight to their
claimai and favourable events happened, or for-
tunate eonjuntures occurred in the different

D $ kingdoms

SCST. I. kingdoms of Europe, which facilitated or for-
^-'v'- warded their obtaining poffeflion of this impor-

tant right. In England, one of the first coun-
tries in which the representatives of boroughs
were admitted into the great council of the na-
tion, the barons who took arms against Henry
A. D. iS. Il. summoned them to attend parliament in or-

der to add greater popularity to their party,
and to strengthen the barrier against the en-
croachment of regal power. In France, Philip
the Fair, a Monarch no less sagacious than en-
terprizing, confidered them as instruments which
might be employed with equal advantage to
extend the royal prerogative, to counterbalance
the exorbitant power of the nobles, and to faci-
litate the imposition of new taxes. With these
views, he introduced the deputies of such towns
as were formed into communities into the states
general of the nation'. In the Empire, the
wealth and immunities of the Imperial cities
placed them on a level with the most considerable
members of the Germanic body. Conscious of
A . t.93. their own power and dignity, they pretended to

the privilege of forming a separate bench in the
diet; and made good their pretension '.

The happy BUT in what way soever the reprefentativesof
effcsPof cities first gained a place in the legislature, that
this upon
govern- event had great influence on the form and geni.
*Ment' us of government. It tempered the rigour ol

ariftocratical oppreflion, with a proper mixture
of popular liberty: It secured to the great body
of the people, who had formerly no reprefenta.
tives, atlive and powerful guardians of their
rights and privileges: It established an interme
diate power between the King and nobles, tc
which each had recourse alternately, and which

* Pafiluier Recherches de la France, p. 8. edir. Par. 1633
t Pfeffel Abrege de I'hifoire & droit d'Allemagne, p. 408'
45'.

i1
38

at Come times opposed the usurpations of the for- SE c. I.
mer, on other occasions checked the encroach- '-
ments of the latter. As Coon as the reprefenta-
tives of communities gainedcany degree of cre-
dit and influence in the legislature, the spirit of
laws became different from what it'had formerly
been; it flowed from new principles; it was di-
rected towards new objects; equality, order,
the publick good, and the redress of grievan-
ces, were phrases and ideas brought into use,
and which grew to be familiar in the statutes
and jurisprudence of the European nations.
Almost all the efforts in favour of liberty in eve-
ry country of Europe have been made by this
new power in the legislature. In proportion as
it rose to consideration and influence, the feve-
rity of the ariftocratical spirit decreased; and
the privileges of the people became gradually
more extensive as the ancient and exorbitant ju-
ridi&tion of the nobles was abridged [T].

IV. THE inhabitants of towns having been Thepeop

declared free by the charters of communities, acquire li
that part of the people which resided in the bertYhbye.
country, and was employed in agriculture, be- ment.
gan to recover liberty by enfranchisement. Dur-
ing the rigour of feudal government, as hath
been already observed, the great body of the
lower people was reduced to servitude. They
were slaves fixed to the f6il which they cultiva-
ted, and together with it were transferred from
one proprietor to another, by sale, or by con-
veyance. The spirit of feudal policy did not
favour the enfranchisement of that order of men.
It was an established maxim that no vassal could
legally'diminifh the value of a fief, to the detri.
ment of the lord from whom he had received it.
In consequence of this, manumiflion by the

ET] NOTE XIX.

D 4 authority

' '-"-- lid; and unless it was confirmed by the fuperijo

lord of whom he held, slaves of this fpecis did
not acquire a contpleat right to their liberty.
Thus it became nefary to arcend through all
,the gradations of feudal holding to the King,
-the lord Paramount '. A form of prpcedure so
.tedious and troublesome discouraged the praticp
of manumission. Domestic or personal flayes of-
ten obtained liberty from the humanity or benefi
cence. of their malters, to whom they belonged
in absolute property. The condition of slaves
fixed to the foil was much more unalterable.

The m- BUT the freedom and independence which
tives and
progresl of one part of the people had obtained by the in-
this. ftitution of communities, inspired the other

with the most ardent desire of acquiring the
fame privileges; and their superiors, sensible of
the benefits which they themselves had derived
from former conceflions, were less unwilling to
,graify them by ,Jte grant of new immunities.
Thp epffranChiiteent of slaves became more
frequent i and the Monarchs o'f France prqomp
ted by pec elity, no less than by their inclination
to reduce the power of the nobles, endeayvoure
A.D. 31s5. tp render it geperal. L Xuis X. and his brother

hnd hilip issued ordinances, declaring, " That as

,aJl men were by nature freeborn, and as their
kiqgdOg wya callei Ihe. k'ingdom of granks,
,tJey de ermpined that ; Ifhould be so in reality as
well as ir name ; therefore they appointed tiat
.enfranchiferments should be granted throuughoyt
;lh whole kingdom, upopjuft and reafonqble corl-
ditiopnsbY." These editp were carried into ipmrne
,diate expcqtiqn withip the'royal domgine. T!ie
eximnlple of .heir qyVereigns, together itlj .the
e:ct(atijon f .tJi cgpfiderable frtlp w ishj

they

tabliffemens de St. Vouls, liv. i. ch. 34. Ordon
tom. i. 283. not. (a).

Y Ordon. tom.. p. 583, 653.

A T· s EW ·OF TH R
40

they might raise by this expedient, led many of SECT. I.
the nobles to set tbeir dependants at liberty; and

g V '

reryitde, was gradually abolished in almost every
province of the kingdom [U]. In Italy, the es-
tablifhrment of republican government ir their
great cities, the genius and maxims of which
were extremely different from those of the feudai
policy, together with the ideas of equality which
the prigrefs of commerce had rendered familiar,
gradually introduced the pratice of enfranchi-
sing the ancient prfdial slaves. In some provin-
ces of Germany, the persons who had been sub-
jed to this species of bondage, were released;
in oth.ers, the rigour of their state was mitiga-
ted. In England, as tle spirit of liberty gained
gron4d, the very name and idea of personal ser-
vitulde, without any formal interposition of the
leg'ia.ture to prohibit it, was totally banished.

TH, effets of filch a remarkable change in The effrca

the · 't.... ... '

, of this upon

the cQrditipn of so great a part of the people, theimprove-
could not fail of being considerable and exten- ment of so-
fvye. The husbandman, master of his own in- cey.
4ftry, and fetre .of reaping for himself the
fruits of his labour, became the farmer of the
fame fields where he had formerly been compel-
led to toil for the benefit of another. The odi-
oQU namnes of malter and of slave, the moRi mor-
tifyijg an4 depressing of all distinCtions to human
n.atpre, wre a'boifi'ed. New profpeEs opened,
and new incitements to ingenuity and enterprize
prefente.4 themselves, to those who were emanci-
pated. The expetation of bettering tleir for-
tunq, a ' well as that of raising themselves to a
mor, honourable condition, concurred in calling
fqrth their aaivity and genius; and a numerous
claf of nmep, who formerly had no political ex-
itlPnpe, and were employed merely as inftru-

[V] NOTE XX,

ilents

SECT. I. ments of labour, became useful citizens, and con-
-'V- ' tributed towards augmenting the force or riches

of the society, which adopted them as members.

The intro- V. THE various expedients which were em-
dntion of a l
mortegu- ployed in order to introduce a more regular,
ratdminof equal, and vigorous adminiRration of justice,
juliice, con contributed greatly towards the improvement of
thsibtp toe society. What was the particular mode of dif-
mnent or so- pensing juflice in the several barbarous nations
C'"ie. which over-ran the Roman Empire, and took

poffeflion of its different provinces, cannot now
be determined with certainty. We may conclude
from the form of government eftablilhed among
them, as well as from their ideas concerning the
nature of society, that the authority of the ma-
giftrate was extremely limited, and the indepen-
dence of individuals proportionably great. Hifto-
ry and records, as far as they reach back, justify
this conclusion, and represent the ideas and exer-
cife of justice in all the countries of Europe, as
little different from those which must take place
in a state of nature. To maintain the order and
tranquillity of society by the regular execution of
known laws; to inflict vengeance on crimes de-
ftrutive of the peace and safety of individuals,
by a prosecution carried on in the name, and by
the authority of the community; to confider
the puniflment of criminals as a public example
to deter others from violating the laws; were ob-
jets of government little understood in theory,
and less regarded in practice. The magistrate
could scarce be said to hold the sword ofjuftice;
't was left in the hands of private persons. Re-
fentmeint was almost the role motive for profecu-
ting crimes; and to gratify that paffien, was the
end and rule in punilhing them. He who susser-
ed the wrong, was the only person who had a
right to purlue the aggressor, and to exat or to

remit

remit the punishment. From a system ofjudici- SECT. I
al procedure, so crude and defeEtive as seems '"
to be scarce compatible with the subsistence of
civil society, disorder and anarchy flowed. Su-
perftition concurred with this ignorance concern-
ing the nature of government, in obftrusting the
administration of justice, or in rendering it ca-
pricious and unequal. To provide remedies for
these evils, so as to give a more regular course to
justice, was, during several centuries, one great
obje&t of political wisdom. The regulations for
this purpose, may be reduced to three general
heads: to explain there, and to point out the
manner in which they operated is an impor-
tant article in the history of society among the
nations of Europe.

i. THE first considerable flep towards efta-Thiseffec.

-"-

*i *ted by abo-

blifhing an equal administration of justice, was linhing the
the abolishment of the right which individuals tratice of
claimed of waging war with each other, in their prte
own name, and by their own authority. To re-
pel injuries, and to revenge wrongs, is no less
natural to man than to cultivate friendship; and Original
while society remains in its most simple state, the ideasofm«e
former is confidered as a personal right no lets jutce.
unalienable than the latter. Nor do men in this
situation deem that they have a title to redress
their own wrongs alone; they are touched with
the injuries of those with whom they are connec-
ted, or in whose honour they are interested; and
are no less prompt to avenge them. The fa-
vage, how imperfectly soever he may compre-
hend the principles of political union, eels warm-
ly the sentiments of social affection, and the ob-
ligations arising from the ties of blood. On the
appearance of an injury or affront offered to his
family or tribe, he kindles into rage, and pursues
the authors of it with the keenest rcfentment.

He

SECT. I. He confiders it as cowardly to exp~et redrcfs fronr

t any arm but his own, and as infamous to give

up to another the right of determining what re-
paration he should accept, or with what venge-
ance he should reft satisfied.

*ihefe lea THE maxims and pra&ice of all uncivilized
to the prac- . - '-' a
tice of pri- nations, with refped to the prosecution and pu-
rate war. nifhment of offenders, particularly those of the

ancient Germans, and other Barbarians who in-
vaded the Roman empire, are perfetly confor-
mable to these ideas a. While they retained their
native simplicity of manners, and continued to
be divided into small tribes or societies, the de-
seAs in this imperfedt system of criminal jurifpru-
denee (if it merits that name) were lets sensibly
felt. When they came to fettle in the extensive
provinces which they had conquered, and to form
themselves into great monarchies; when new
objets of ambition presenting themselves, increa-
fed both the number and the violence Ps their
difenfions, they ought to have adopted new
maxims concerning the redress of injuries, and to
have regulated by general and equal laws, that
which they formerly left to be directed by the
caprice of private passion. But fierce and haugh-
ty chieftains, accustomed to avenge themselves
on such as had injtred them, did not think of
relinquilhing a right which they confidered as a
privilege of their order, and a mark of their in-
dependence. Laws enforced by. the authority of
Princes and Magistrates who pofleffed little pow-
er, commanded no great degree of reverence.
The adminifiratior of justice among rude illit-
rate people, was not so accurate or decisive, or uni-
form, as to induce men to filbmit implicitly to its
determinations. Every offended baron buckled on

a TI'it. de Mor. German. cap. 2a. Veil. Patcrc. lib. ii.

his

S 1 A 1 .- U P- U K U r It. 45

his arndtiour and fought redress at the head of his SECT. f.
vaflals. 4is adversary met him in like hostile'-''
array. jeither of them appealed to impoterin
laws which could afford them no protedion.
Neither of them would submit points, in which
their passions were warmly interested, to the
Blow determination of a judicial enquiry.
Both trusted to their swords for the decision of
the contest. The kindred and dependants of the
aggressor, as well as of the defender, were in-
volved in the quarrel. They had not even the
iberty of remaining neutral. Such as refu-
fed to aft in concert with the party to which
they belonged, were not only exposed to infamy,
but fubjeed to legal penalties.

THE different kingdoms of Europe were torn The perni-

and affli5ted, during several centuries, by intef- oit
tine wars, excited by private animofities, and
carried on with all the rage natural to men of
fierce manners, and of violent passions. The
efate of every baron was a kind of independent
territory, disjoined from those around it, and
the hoRilities between them were perpetual. The
evil became so inveterate and deep-rooted, that
the form and laws of private war were ascertain-
ed, and regulations concerning it made a part in
the system of jurisprudence b, in the fame man-
ner as if this pradtice had been founded in rome
natural right of humanity, or in the original con-
litution of civil society.

So great was the disorder, and such the cala- Various m.

mities which there perpetual hostilities occasion- toydan
ed, that various efforts were made to wrest from order to a-
the nobles this pernicious privilege which theyb°t oli

b Beaumanoir Couftuemes de Beauvoifis, ch. q9, et lea
n¢1 a
de Thautmaflier, p. 447.

claimed.

SECT. I. claimed. It was the interest of every sovereign

to abolish a practice which almost annihilated hi,
authority. Charlemagne prohibited it by an ex-
press law, as an invention of the devil to destroy
the order and happiness of society c; but the'
reign of one Monarch, however vigorous and ac.
tive, was too short to extirpate a custom so firmly
eflablifhed. Infiead of enforcing this prohibiti.
on, his feeble fuccefolrs durst venture on nothing
more than to apply palliatives. They declared
it unlawful for any person to commence war,'
until he had lent a formal defiance to the kindred
and dependants of his adversary ; they ordained!
that, after the commiflon of the trespass or crime
which gave rife to a private war, forty days muf.
elapse before the person injured ihould attack the
vassals of his adversary; they enjoined all per-
sons to suspend their private animofities, and to
cease from hostilities when the king was engaged
in any war against the enemies of the nation.
The church co-operated with the civil magif-
trate, and interposed its authority in order to ex-
tirpate a pratice so repugnant to the spirit of
Christianity. Various councils issued decrees, pro.
hibiting all private wars; and denounced the hea-
vleft anathemas against fich as should dilturb
the tranquillity of society, by claiming or exer-
cifing that barbarous right. The aid of religion
was called in to combat and subdue the ferocity
of the times. The Almighty was said to have
manifested, by visions and revelations to different
persons, his disapprobation of that spirit of re
venge, which armed one part of his creature
against the other. Men were required, in thi
name of God, to sheath their swords, and to re
member the sacred ties which united them a
Christians, and as members of the fame society
But this junction of civil and ecclesiastic authc

C Cnpitul. A.D. 801. Edit. Baluz. Vol. i. p. 371'

rit)

rity, though itrengthened by every thing most SEcr. I.
apt to alarm and to over-awe the credulous fpi- .-v.
rit of those ages, produced no other effe& than
some temporary suspensions of hostilities, and a
cessation from war on certain days and seasons
consecrated to the more solemn aAs of devotion.
The nobles continued to aflert this dangerous pri-
vilege; they refused to obey some of the laws
calculated to annul or circumscribe it; they e-
luded others; they petitioned; they remonftra-
ted; they struggled for the right of private war
as the highest and most honourable diftintion of
their order. Even so late as the fourteenth cen-
tury, we find the nobles in several provinces of
France contending for their ancient method of
terminating their differences by the sword, in pre-
ference to that of submitting them to the decifi-
on of any judge. The final abolition of this prac-
tice in that kingdom, and the other countries in
which it prevailed, is not to be ascribed so much
to the force of statutes and decrees, as to the
gradual increase of the royal authority, and to
the imperceptible progress of juster sentiments
concerning government, order, and public fecu-
rity [X].

2. THE prohibition of the form of trial byju- The p'rohi'

J bition of tri-

dicial combat, was another considerable ftep to- al by judici-
wards the introduction of such regular govern- a1 C.ombt,

another im-

ment as secured publick order and private tran- provement
quillity. As the right of private war left many of 'ithationam f
the quarrels among individuals to be decided, like justice.
those between nations, by arms; the form of tri-
al by judicial combat, which was established in
every country of Europe, banished equity from
courts of justice, and- rendered chance or force
the arbiter of their determinations. In civilized

[X] NOTE XXI.

nations,

47

SECT. I. nations, all ttanfatiois'i of any imfpoftande are
^'"^'ch'ncluded iii writing. tlihe exhibition of the
Defeas in deed of iridfturiient is full evidence of the fadt
prceaing ahd afcetaints ith preci.fiohi what each party has
of the mid- ifipulated to peiform. But among a rude people,
die ages wlen the arts of reading arid writing were such

uneofnmon attainfnents, that to be a master of
either, inititled a perfoni t the appellation of a
clerk of lcairned nian, scarce any thing was com-
mitted to writifig but treaties between Princes,
their grants ard clhaites to their fuibjets, or such
trarifafions between private parties as were of
extraordinary consequence, or had an extensive
effe&. lhe greater part of affairs in common
life and bafinefs were carried on by verbal con-
tracts or promises. this, in many civil questions,
ndt only mrade it dfficult to bring proof sufficient
to efta'fil:fh any ciaiirfi, but encouirged falsehood
and fraud, by renderiig them extremely easy.
Even iii critintal cafes, wliere a particular fad
must be afcertairied, or an accusation be difpro-
ved, the hature and effct of legal evidence was
little ti-derftdod by barb'arous nations. To define
with atcuratcy that fpjcies of evidence which a
court had reason to expet ; to determine when
it ought to iniift on positive proof, and when it
should be' fatisfled with a proof from circum-
flances; to compare the tcftlimony of discordant
witheiles; and to fix' te' degree of credit due to
each; were difcufliiois too iihtricate and subtile for
the jutifpruidence of igiioraiit ages. In order to
av6id e'n'cutnbering tlhe'felves wilth these, a more
simple fbfii of ptbceduite was introduced into
courts as well civil as criminal. In all cafes,
where the notoriety of the faa did not fuinifl the
clearest aTrd mol t dire6 evidcnce, the person
accused, or he againfit' iwhomn a dn ation was
brouglht, was called legally, or ofleled volmnti-

liy

tily to purge himself by oath, and upon his de- SECT. I.
daring his innocence,: he was instantly acquit-t- '
ted'. This absurd practice effectually screened
guilt and fraud from detection or punishment,
by rendering the temptation to perjury so pow-
erful, that it.was not easy to resist it. The per-
nicious effetls of it were sensibly felt; and in
order to guard against them, the laws ordained
that oaths should be. administered with great so-
lemnity, and accompanied with every circum-
stance which could inspire religious reverence,
or fuperRitious terrors. This, however, pro-
ved a feeble remedy . these ceremonious rites
became familiar, and their impreflion on the
imagination gradually diminished; men who
could venture to disregard truths were not apt
to startle at the folemnities of an oath. 'heir
observation of this, put legislators upon deviling
a new expedient for rendering the purgation by
oath more certain and fatisfaaory. They requir-
ed the person accused to appear with a certain
number of freemen, his neighbours or relations,
who corroborated the oath which he took, by
swearing that they believed all that he had ut-
tered to be true. These were called Compurgators,
and their number varied according to the impor-
tance of the fubjeat in dispute, or the nature of
the crime with which a person was charged g. In
rome cafes, the concurrence of no less than three
hundred of these auxiliary witnesses was requisite
to acquit the person accuted h. But even this de-
vice was found to be ineffectual. It was a point
of honour with every man in Europe, during le-
veral ages, not to desert the chief on whom he

e Leg. Burgund. Tit. 8, & 45. Leg. Aleman. Tit. 89.

Leg Baiwar. Tit. 8. j 5. . &c. t Du Cange Gloflar.
voc. 7uramentlum, vol. iii. p. 1607. Edit. Benedift. s Du
Cange, ibid. vol. iii. p. 1 599. h Spelman Gloflar. voc.
Abuh. Gregor. Turon. Hist. lib. viii. c. 9.

Vo L. I. E depended,

SECT. . depended, and to dand by thdfe 'with whom the

tieó.ties of blood cotnneted him. Whoever then

Wvas bold enough to violate the laws, was sure
ds devoted adherents, willing'to abet, and eager
to serve him in whatever manner he required.
The formali:ty of calling Compurgators, :proved
nahapparent, not a real security, against false.
hood and p6rjury; :and 'the sentences of courts,
while they icdntinued to, refer every point in
question to the oath of the defendant, became
so flagrantly iniquitous as excited universal in-
dignation agaihft !this method of procedure i.

trodce SEWSIBLE :of ithefe defects, but ftrangersto
the praic the

t manner of correcting them, or 'of introdu.
toheaven cing" a more proper 'form, bur ancestors, as an

infallible tmetiod of discovering truth, and of
;guarding agaiAti deception, iappealed to Heaven,
'and referred every point in dispute to be deter-
mined, 'as 'they itiagined, by the decisions of un-
erring wifdorm and impartial justice. The person
acculed, in order to improve 'his innocence,
submitted, in some cafes, to trial, ;by plunging
-his arm in hboiling water ; by lifting a red hot
iron with his naked hand 'by walking bare-foot
over burning 'plbugh-fhares ;' er by other expe-

P.rticular- riments eq:ual!y eperilous -and formidable. ,On
ly by jadii- other occasions, 'he challenged his accuser to

mbafight him in single combat. A1i tlefe various

forms of;trial were conduC&ed with many dbvout
ceremonies :the ministers of religion were em-
ployed, the Almighty was calledlupon to;interpo(e
for the manifestation of gtlillt, 'and for thepro-

&tedion of. innocence ,;, anidx'hoever .escaped uo-

hurt, or came off victorious, was pronounced
·to be adquitted ;by the yudgmint .of God ;.

Leg. Lan obiard. 'ib. ii. tit. 5 § 34.

k' Murat. iffettrtio de judtciis Dei. Antiquir. Italic
tol. iii. p. 612.

AMONG
50

AMONG all the- wihmfical and absurd inftitu- SSCT. I.

tions which owe their existence to the weakness T-'T
of human reason, .this, which fubmritted quefti- duati .of
Ons that affeded the property, the reputation, ,c favour-
and tile lives of men, to the determination ofedbythe u-
chance, or of bodily strength and address, ap- the,'riddof
pears to be the molt extravagant and prepofte- ages.
rous. There were circumflances, however,
which led the nations of Europe to confider this
equivocal mode of deciding any point in contest,
as a diret appeal to heaven, and a certain me-
thod of discovering its will. As men are unable
to comprehend the manner in which the Al-
mighty carries on the government of the unib
verse, by equal, fixed, and general laws, they
are ap to imagine that in every cafe which their
pallions or interest render important in their own
eyes, the Supreme Ruler of all ought visibly to
display his power, in vindicating innocence and
punishing vice. It requires no inconsiderable
degree of science and philolbopy to correct this
popular error. But the sentiments prevalent
in Europe during the dark ages, instead of cor-
recing, strengthened it. Religion, tor .several
centuries, consisted chiefly in believing the le-
gendary history of those faints whole names
crowd and disgrace the Romifllcalendar. The
fabulous tales concerning their miracles,
had been declared authentic. by the bulls
of Popes, and the decrees .of councils;
they made the gregt flubljedt of the instructions
which the clergy ofi-red to the people, and
were received by ,tlern witil implicit credulity
and admiration. By these, men were accufr
tomed to believe that: the eftablifaied laws of na-
ture might be violated on the molt frivolous oc-
cafons, and were. aught to look rather for pare
ticular and extraordinary acts of power under
the divine adminis'ration, than to contemplate
the regular progress and execution of a general

E z plan.

5.t

SECTr. I. plan. One fuperflition prepared the way for ano.
..-. ther; and whoever believed that the Supreme

Being had interposed miraculously on those tri.
vial occasions mentioned in legends, could not
but expect his intervention in matters of greater
importance, when solemnly referredto hisdecifion.

wine Iby Ir'ITH this superstitious opinion, the martial
their marti- spirit of Europe, during the middle ages, con-

fi"t. c-curred in eflablifhing the mode of trial by judi-

cial combat.' To be ready to maintain with his
sword whatever his lips had uttered, was the first
maxim of honour with every gentleman. To as-
fert their own rights by force of arms, to inflid
vengeance on those who had injured or affronted
them, were the diftintion and pride.of high-fpi-
rited nobles. The form of trial by combat co-
inciding with this maxim, flattered and gratified
there palfions. --Every man was the guardian of
his own honour, and of his own life ; the jul-
tice of his cause, as well as his future reputation,
depended on his own courage and prowess. This
-mode of decision was confidered, accordingly,
as one of the happiest efforts of wife policy; and
as soon as it was introduced, all the forms of tri-
al by fire or water, and other superstitious expe-
riments, fell into disuse, or were imployed only
in controversies between persons of inferior
rank. The trial by combat was authorised over
all Europe, and received in every country with
equal fatisfation. Not only questions concerning
uncertain or contested fads, but general and ab-
Itrat points in law were determined by the iflue
of a combat; and the latter was deemed a me-
thod of discovering truth more liberal as well as
more fatisfatory, than that by examination and
argument. Not only might parties, whose minds
were exasperated by the eagerness and the hofli-
lity of opposition, defy their antagonist, and re-

quire

quire him to make good his charge, or to prove SECT. I.
his innocence, with his sword; but witnesses,"
who had no interest in the issue of the queflion,
though called to declare the truth by laws which
ought to have afforded them protection, were
equally exposed to the danger of a challenge,
and equally bound to assert the veracity of their
evidence by dint of arms. To complete the ab-
furdities of this military jurisprudence, even the
character of a judge was not sacred from its vi-
olence. Any one of the parties might interrupt
a judge when about to deliver his opinion;
might accuse him of iniquity and corruption in
the most reproachful terms, and throwing down
his gauntlet, might challenge him to defend his
integrity in the field ; nor could he, without in-
famy, refuse to accept the defiance, or decline
to enter the lilts against such an adversary.

THUS the form of trial by combat, like other I, becomes

abuses, spread gradually, and extended to allunivrial.
persons and almost to all cafes. Ecclesiastics, wo-
men, minors, superannuated and infirm persons,
who could not with decency or julice be com-
pelled to take arms, and to maintain their own
cause, were obliged to produce champions, whom
they engaged by affetion or rewards, to fight
their battles. The folemnities of a judicial com-
bat were luch as were natural in an adion, which
was confidered both as a formnal appeal to God,
and as the final decision of quetions of the high-
:ft moment. Every circumflance relating to
themr was regulated by the edicts iof Princes,
and explained in the comments of lawyers, with
a minute and even fiperflitious accuracy Skill
in these laws and rites was the only Icience of
which warlike nobles boasted, or which they
were ambitious to attain 1

E 3 By

See a crtiouq dlifcourfe concerning the laws of judicial

combat, )y Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Glouccfeir,
incle to . ichald II. in Spelian'ia' Glollar. rvoc. Call:pis.

T'" n"j proceeding, both in civil and criminal queflions,
ci)us effeas was entirely perverted. Force uflirped the place
of it of equity in courts of judicature, and justice was

banilhed from her proper manfiori. Discern-
ment, learning, integrity, were qualities less ne-
cefTary to a judge than bodily strength, and dex-
terity in the use of arms. Dairirtg courage, and
liperiot vigour or address, were of mote moment
towards securing the favourable issue of a fuir,
than the equity of a caule, or the clearness of the
evidence. Men, of courle, applied thernfelves
to cultivate the talents which they found to be of
greatest utility. As strength of body and ad-
dress in arms were no lets requisite in those lifts
which they were obliged to enter in defence of
their private rights, than in the field of battle,
where they met the enemies of their country, it
became the great object of education, as well as
the chief employment in life, to acquire these
martial accomplifhiments. The administration
of justice, instead of accustoming men to liften
to the voice of equity, or to reverence the deci-
lions of law, added to the ferocity of their man-
ners, and taught them to confider force as the
great arbiter of right and wrong.

ri'onus CX- THESE pernicious effedts of the trial by corn-
for abolifln- bat were lo obvious, that they did not altoge-
Prcti^. ther escape the view of the unobferving age in

which it was introduced. The clergy, from the
beginning, remonstrated againfi it as repugnant
to the spirit of Clli ilianity, and subversive ofjur-
tice and order ". But the maxims and pallions
which favoured it, lhad taken lilch hold of the
minds of men, that they difregprded admoniti-
ons and ccnfiUrcs, which, on other occasions,
would have firuck them with terror. The evil

Il Du Cange Clouflar. voc. puellumr, vol. ii. p. 1675.

w1as

A VIE W-~ OFi THR
54

was too great and inveterate to, yield to that re- SECr. L
mredy, and continuing to encreafe, the civil pow-
er at length found it necessary to interpole. Con-
feious, however, of their own limited! authority,
monarchs proceeded with caution,, and their firfl
attempt to restrain, or to set any bounds to this
practice, were extremely feeble. One of the
earliest reftridtions of this praCtice which occurs
in the history of Europe, is that of Henry 1. of
England. It extended no farther than to pro-
hibit the trial by combat in questions concerning
property of small value '. Louis VI}. of -rance
imitated his example, and ifiued an edict to the
fame effec °. St. Louis, whose ideas as a legis-
lator, were far superior to those of his age, en-
deavoured to introduce a more perfect jurifpru-
dence, and to substitute the trial by evidence, in
place of that by combat. But his regulations,
with. refped to this, were confined to his own
domains; for the great vassals of the crown, pof-
selfed such independant authority, and were so
fondly attached to the ancient practie, that he
durst not venture to extend it to the whole king-
dom. Some barons voluntarily adopted his re-
gulations. The spirit of courts of justice became
averse to the mode of decision by combat, and
discouraged it on every occasion. The nobles,
nevertheless, thought it so honourable to depend
for the security of their lives and fortunes on
their own courage alone, and contended with so
much vehemence for the preservation of this fa-
vourite privilege of their order, that the iuccel-
fors of St. Louis, unable to oppole, and afraid
of offending such powerful subjects, were obliged
not only to tolerate, but to authorile the praclice
which he had attempted to abolilh P. In other
countries of Europe, efforts equally zealous were

l" liliuffl Uinge des Fiefs. vol. ii. p. 961. ° Ordon. tom.
i p. 16. P Ordon. toln. i. p. 328, 390, 435.

E 4 employed

SECT. I. employed to maintain the established cuflomi

L'--v. and finilar conceflions were extorted from their

refpedtive sovereigns. It continued, however,
to be an objec of policy with every monarch of
abilities or vigour, to explode the trial by cornm
bat; and various edicts were issued for this pur-
pose. But the observation which was made con-
cerning the right of private war, is equally ap-
plicable to the mode of trial under review. No
custom, how absurd soever it may be,.if it has
subsisted long, or derives its force from the man-
ners and prejudices of the age in which it pre-
vails, was ever abolished by the bare promulga-
tion of laws and flatutes. The sentiments of the
people must change, or some new power fuffici-
ent to counteract it must be introduced. Such a
change, accordingly, took place in Europe, as
science gradually increased, and society advan.
ced towards more perfec order. In proportion
as the prerogative of Princes extended, and
came to acquire new force, a power, interested
in suppressing every practice favourable to the
independence of the nobles, was introduced.
The struggle, nevertheless, subsisted for several
centuries; iometimes the new regulations and
ideas seemed to gain ground; sometimes anci-
cient habits recurred; and though, upon the
whole, the trial by combat went more and more
into disuse, yet instances of it occur, as late as
the sixteenth century, in the history both of
France and of England. In proportion as it decli-
ned, the regular administration of juitice was
restored, the proceedings of courts were directed
by known laws, the study of thel'e became an
object of attention to judges, and the people of
Europe advanced fast towards civility, when this
great cause of the ferocity of their manners was
removed LY].

[Y] NOTE XXII.

3. By
56

3. BY authorizing the right of appeal from the SECT. I.

courts of the Barons to those of the King, and , '

.

fubjefting the decisions of the former to the re- lege of ap-
view of the latter, a new ftep, not less confidera- Po he
ble than there which I have already mentioned, courts of
was taken towards effablifhing the regular, con- the bharon
fiftent, and vigorous administration of juffice. great im-
Among all the encroachments of the feudal no- in'the ai
bles on the prerogative of their Monarchs, their niftration of
usurping the administration ofjuftice with supreme ju"tce.
authority, both in civil and criminal causes, with-
in the precindts of their own estates, was the moil
singular. In other nations, fubjedts have con-
tended with their Princes, and have endeavoured
to extend their own power and privileges; but in
the history of their struggles and pretensions, we
discover nothing similar to this right which the
feudal barons claimed, and acquired. It must origin of
have been something peculiar in their genius and ahnd ind'e1
manners that suggested this idea, and prompted p,?endnt

· ,,-. ·TL I *

\ J- i Juril'diactiO

them to inuit on such a claim. Among the rude of the
people who conquered the various provinces of no"ility
the Roman Empire, and established new king-
doms there, the paflion of resentment, too impe-
tuous to bear controul, was permitted to remain
almost unrestrained by the authority of laws.
The person offended, as has been observed, re-
tained not only the right of prosecuting but of
punishing his adversary. To him it belonged to
inflid fulch vengeance as satiated his rage, or to
accept of fich fatisfadion as appeared it. But
while fierce barbarians continued to be the sole
judges in their own cause, their enmities were
implacable, and immortal; they set no bounds
either to the degree of their vengeance, or to the
duration of their resentment. The excesses which
this occasioned, proved so deftruttive of peace
and order in society, as forced them to think of
lome remedy. At , rl}, arbiters interposed,

and

SECT. I. and by persuasion or intreaty prevailed on tile
'*'"v-'u party offended to accept of a fine or composition

fromn the aggreflbr, and to drop all farther prose-
cution. But as submission to persons who. had no
legal or magisterial authority, was altogether
voluntary, it became necessary to eftablifhl judges
with power sufficient to enforce their own deciii-
ons. The leader whom they were accultomed to
follow and to obey, whose courage they refpeeed,
and in whose integrity they placed confidence,
was the person to whom a martial people naturally
committed this important prerogative. Every
chieftain was the commander of his tribe in war,
and their judge in peace. Every baron led his
vassals to the field, and administered justice to
them in his hall. Their high-fpirited dependants
would not have recognized any other authority,
or have submitted to any other jurifdiEtion. But
in times of turbulence and violence, the exercise
of this new function was attended not only with
trouble, but with danger. No person could as-
fume the character of a judge, if he did not pof-
fess power sufficient to protet the one party from
the violence of private revenge, and to compel
the other to accept of such reparation as he en-
joined. In consideration of the extraordinary es-
forts which this office required, judges, besides
the fine which they appointed to be paid as a conm-
pelfa.tion to the person or family who had been
injured, levied an additional fum as a recompence
for their own labour; and in all the feudal king-
doms the latter was as precisely ascertained, and
as regularly exacted, as the former,

1'le(r li TH US, by the natural operation of circum-
!',, i,i, fances peculiar to the manners or political flatc
lii.iilc. of the feudnal nations, separate and territorial juri-

dichtiolns came not only to be citablilhcd in ever)

kitlrg
58

kingdom, but were established in such a way, that SEC1. I.
the interest of the barons concurred with their am- - r
bition in maintaining and extending them. It was
not merely a point of honour with the feudal nobles
to dispense justice to their vassals; but from tle
exercise of that power arose one capital branch of
their revenue ; and the emoluments of their courts
were frequently the main filpport of their dignity.
It was with infinite zeal that they asserted and de-
fended this high privilege of their order. ' By this
inilitution, however, every kingdom in Europe was
split into as many separate principalities as it con-
tained powerful barons. Their vassals, whether in
peace or in war, were scarce sensible of any autho-
rity, but that of their superior lord. They felt
tlhenfelves subjed to no other command. They
were amenable to no other jurifdicion. The ties
which linked together these smaller confederacies
became close and firm; the bonds of public union
relaxed, or were dissolved. The nobles strained
their invention in devising regulations that tended
to ascertain and perpetuate this diftintion. In or-
der to guard against any appearance of fubordi-
nation in their courts to those of the crown, they
constrained their monarchs to prohibit the royal
judges from entering their territories, or from
claiming any juriidiction there; and if, either
through mistake, or fiom the spirit of encroach-
ment, any royal judge ventured to extend his au-
thority to the valials of a baron, they might plead
tlieir right of exemption, and the lord of whom
lleyl held could not only rcfcue them out of his
hands, but was entitled to legal reparation for the
injury and affront offirtd to him. The jurifdic-
tion of the royal judges icarce reached beyond the
narrow limits of the Kiig's dclcfiles. Instead of
a regular gradation of courts, all acknowledging
the authority of lte lmune general laws, and look-
ing up to tlrei ;is llie guides, of their decisions,

there

Cv."' independent tribunals, the proceedings of which

were directed by local customs and contradictory
forms. The collision ofjurifdidion between these
numerous courts, often retarded the execution of
justice: The variety and caprice of their modes
of procedure muff have for ever kept the admini-
ftration of it from attaining any degree of uni-
formity or perfection.

Expedients ALT. the monarchs of Europe perceived there
ordeld in encroachments on theirjuurifdition, and bore them
limit or with impatience. But the usurpations of the no-
'Jlinl it. bles were so firmly established, and the danger of

endeavouring to overturn them by open force was
so manifest, that they were obliged to remain fa-
tisfied with attempts to undermine them. Various
expedients were employed for this purpose; each
of which merit attention, as they mark the pro-
grefs of law and equity in the several kingdoms of
Europe. At first, Princes endeavoured to circum-
scribe the jurifdidion of the barons, by permit-
ting them to take cognizance only of fialler of.
fences, reserving those of greater moment, under
the appellation of Pleas of the Grown, and Royd
CafJfes, to be tried in the King's courts. This
affected only the barons of inferior note; the
more powerful nobles scorned fich a distinction,
and not only claimed unlimited jurisdiction, but
obliged their sovereigns to grant them charters,
conve ing or recognizing this privilege in the m(ft
ample form. The attempt, nevertheless, was
productive of some good confcqucnces, and paved
tile way for more. It turned the attention of
men towards a jurisdiction diftinEt from that of
the baron whole vafaTls they were; it accuflored
them to tile pretentions of filperiolity which the
crovn claimed over territorial judges; and taught
thnm, when oppreflld by their o\xn fiperior lord,

A V IE W O F THE3
60o

to look up to their sovereign as their protetor. SECT. I.
This facilitated the introduction of appeals, by ' '
which Princes brought the decisions of the baron's
courts under the review of the royal judges.
While trial by combat subsisted in full vigour, no
point decided according to that mode, could be
brought under the review of another court. It
had been referred to the judgment of God; the
iffie of battle had declared his will; and it would
have been impious to have called in question the
equity of the divine decision. But as soon as
that barbarous custom began to fall into disuse,
Princes encouraged the vassals of the barons to
sue fdr redress, by appealing to the royal courts.
The progress, however, of this pradcice, was flow
and gradual. The first instances of appeals were
on account of the delay, or the refusal of jifiice
in the baron's court; and as these were counte-
nanced by the ideas of subordination in the feudal
constitution, the nobles allowed them to be intro-
duced without much opposition. But when these
were followed by appeals on account of the in-
justice or iniquity of thefentence, the nobles then
began to be sensible, that if this innovation be-
came general, the shadow of power alone would
remain in their hands, and all real authority and
jurisdiction would center in those courts which
possessed the right of review. They instantly
took the alarm, remonstrated against the encroach-
ment, and contended boldly for their ancient pri-
vileges. But the monarchs in the different king-
doms of Europe pursued their plan with lleadi-
ness and prudence. Though forced to suspend
their operations, on some occasions, and seeming-
lyto yield when any formidable confederacy of their
vassals united against them, they resumed their
measures, as soon as they observed the niobles to be
remiss or feeble, and pushed them with vigour.
They appointed the royal courts, which originally

were

6i

SECT. I. were ambulatory, and irregular with refpeEt to

- - their times of meeting, to be held in a fixed place,

and at flated seasons. They were follicitous to
name judges of more diffinguifhed abilities than
such as presided in the courts of the barons.
They added dignity to their character, and fplen-
dor to their assemblies. They.laboured to render
their forms regular, and their decrees confifient.
Such judicatories became, of course, the objects of
public confidence as well as veneration. The peo-
-ple, relinquishing the partial tribunals of their lords,
were eager to bring every subjet of contest under
the more equal and discerning eye of those whom
their sovereign had chosen to give judgment in his
name. Thus Kings became once more the heads
of the community, and the dispensers of justice
to their fubjets. The barons, in Come kingdoms,
ceased to exercise their right of jurifdidion, be-
cause it fink into contempt; in others; it was cir-
cumfcribed by such regulations as rendered it in-
nocent, or it was entirely abolished by express
statutes. Thus the administration of juRice ta-
king its rife from one source, and following one
dire'tion, held its course in every slate with more
uniformity, and with greater force ,[Z].

The regi- .VI. THE forms and maxinmsof the canon dla,
lations o which were become univerlfally refpeaable fiom
the canon
i, ,,or" their authority in the spiritual courts, contributed
ioi"t a not a little towards tlefe improvements ;in jurif
more pcr-
f.a aili, - prudence which I have enumerated. If the canor
nittLation. law be confidered .politically, either as a Iyideri

framed on purpose to aflift the clergy in itfurpVin
*powers and urifdidRion no less repugnant to dt
nature of their function, than inconfiflient witi
the order.of government; or as the chief infiru
ment.in. eftabtilhing the dominion of .hle Pope
which Ihbok the throne, and endangered the lliber
ties of every kingdom in Europe, we must pro

[Z] NOTE XXIII.

lou .1li't

nounce it one of the most formidable engines ever SECT. I.
formed against the happiness of civil society. But v '
if we contemplate it merely as a code of laws re-
fpeting the rights and property of individuals,
and attend only to the civil effeEts of its decisions
concerning there, we must view it in a different,
and a much more favourable light. In ages of Thc pr-
ignorance and credulity, the ministers of religion clfciaftical
are the objecs of superstitious veneration. When uTurpalion.
the barbarians who over-ran the Empire first em-
braced the Christian faith, they found the clergy
in poffeflion of considerable power; and they'natu-
rally transferred to there new guides the profound
futbmiflion and reverencewhich theywereaccuftom-
ed to yield to the priests of that religion which they
had 'forsaken. They deemed their persons to be
as sacred as their fun6tion; and would have confi-
dered it as impious to fuibjeCt them to the profane
jurifdi&tion of the laity. The clergy were not
blind to the advantages which the weakness of
mankind afforded them. The established courts,
in which every question relating to their ownicha-
rafter, their funAion, or their property, was tried.
They pleaded, and obtained an almost total ex-
emption from the authority of civil judges. Upon.
different pretexts, and by a multiplicity of !arti-
sices, they communicated this privilege to so ma-
ny persons, and extended their jurifdiEtion to such
a variety of cafes, that the greater part of those
affairs which give rife to contest and litigation, was
drawn under the cognizance of the fpiritul .courts.

Eu T in order to dispose the laiety to susser these Tic plan o
ulfurpations without mlrmuring or opposition, it ecclfiatti-

i . cal jurif-

was necessary to convince, them, that theadmini- pd,.,u.iic'
ftration of justice would be rendered more per- :nore I'i -
set by the establishment of this new jurisdition. ta in the
This was not a difficult undertaking, at the pe- civil .:ourt"
riod when the clergy carried on their encroach-

ments

63

SECT.. . ments with the greatest success. That scanty
^"v^ portion of science which served to guide men in

the ages of darkness, was wholly engrossed by the
clergy. They alone were accustomed to read, to
enquire, and to reason. Whatever knowledge of
ancient jurisprudence had been preserved, either
by tradition, or in such books as had escaped the
deftrudtive rage of barbarians, was pofleffedtonly
by them. Upon the maxims of that excellent
system, they founded a code of laws consonant
to the great principles of equity. Being direced
by fixed and known rules, the forms of their
courts were ascertained, and their decisions be-
came uniform and consistent. Nor did they want
authority sufficient to enforce their sentences.
Excommunication and other ecclesiastical cen-
fures, were punishments more formidable than
any that civil judges could inflic in support of
their decrees.

The good IT is not surprising, then, that ecclesiastical
eetat jurisprudence should become such an objeCt of
and adopt- admiration and refpe&t; that exemption from
ing it. civil jurifdi&ion was courted as a privilege, and

conferred as a reward. It is not surprising, that
even to rude people, the maxims of the canon
law should appear more equal and just than that
ill-digeffed jurisprudence which direced all pro-
ceedings in the civil courts. According to the
latter, the differences between contending barons
were terminated, as in a state of nature, by the
sword; according to the former, every mat.
ter was fubjeted to the decision of laws. The
one, by permitting judicial combats, left chance and
force to be arbiters of right or wrong, of truth or
falfhood; the other, paired judgment with refpet
to these by the maxims of equity, and the teftimo'
ny ofwitneffes. Any error or iniquity in a sentence

pro.
64

pronounced by a baron to whom feudaljurifdiai- SECT. L.
on belonged, was irremediable, because originally ~'v'
it was subje&t to the review of no fiujerior tribu-
nal; the ecclesiastical law establishe7d a regular
gradation of courts, through all which a cause
might be carried by appeal, until it was determi-
ned by that authority which was held to be fu-
preme in the church. Thus the genius and prin-
ciples of the canon law prepared men for appro-
ving these three great alterations in the feudal
jurisprudence which I have mentioned. But it
was not with refpe&t to there points alone that
the canon law suggested improvements benefici-
al to society. Many of the regulations, now
deemed the barriers of personal (ecurity, or the
safe-guards of private property, are contrary to
the spirit, and repugnant to the maxims of the
civil jurisprudence, known in Europe during Ce-
veral centuries, and were borrowed from the rules
and practice of the ecclesiastical courts. By ob-
serving the wisdom and equity of the decisions in
these courts, men began to perceive the neceffi-
ty either of deserting the martial tribunals of the
barons, or of attempting to reform them [AA].

VII. THE revival of the knowledge and study The revival

of the Roman law, co-operated with the causes han laR
which I have mentioned, in introducing more contributes
just and liberal ideas concerning the nature of ideas con-
government, and the administration of justice. cernin ju-
Among the calamities which the devastations of der.
the barbarians who broke in upon the Empire
brought upon mankind, one of the greatest was
their overturning the system of Roman jurifpru-
dence, the noblest monument of the wisdom of
that great people, formed to subdue and to go-
vern the world. The laws and regulations of a Thecircurn-
civilized community, were altogether repugnant 'a,""fom

[AA] NOTE XXIV. Romrn law

EVeT

L~ . T~. -~ to~

lfell into ob-
L. I. F to Ijyio,.

SICr. . to the manners and ideas of there fierce invaders.
"vr" They had refped to objets, of which a rude

people had no conception; and were adapted to
a tate of society with which they were entirely
unacquainted. For this reason, wherever they
fettled, the Roman jurisprudence soon funk into
oblivion, and lay buried for some centuries under
the load of those institutions which the inhabitants
of Europe dignified with the name of laws. But
towards the middle of the twelfth century, a copy
of Justinian's Pandes was accidentally disco.
vered in Italy. By that time, the state of society

Circrman. was so far advanced, and the ideas of men so
ecs which much enlarged and improved by the occurrences
favouredthe of several centuries, during which they had con-

tinued in political union, that they were struck
with admiration of a system which their ancef-
torscould not comprehend. Though they had
not hitherto attained such a degree of refinement,
as to catch from the ancients a relish for true
philosophy, or speculative science ; though they
were still insensible to the beauty and elegance of
classical composition; they were sufficiently quali-
sied tojudge with refped to the merit of their sys-
tem of laws, in which all the points mofi interef-
ting to mankind, and the chief objedts of their at-
tention in every age, were fettled with dilcern-
ment, precision and equity. All men of letters
studied this new Icience with eagerness; and
within asew years after the discovery of the Pan-
deds, professors of civil law were appointed, who
taught it publickly in most countries of Europe.

The effeRa THu effefets of having such a perfec model
th idoeaos to fludy and to imitate were soon maniieft,
mcn,nndthe Men, as fco I as they were acquainted with fixed
dlfpenfation
o[jaic.d and general lawvs, perceived the advantage ou

them, and became impatient to ascertain the
principles and torms by which judges should re,

gulate
66

gulate their decisions. Such was the ardour Sec. I.
with which they carried on an undertaking of'-'
so great importance to society, that before the
close of the twelfth century, the feudal law was
reduced into a regular fyffem; the code of ca-
non-law was enlarged and methodized; and the
loose uncertain customs of different provinces or
kingdoms, were collected and arranged with an
order and accuracy acquired from the knowledge
of Roman jurisprudence. In some countries of
Europe the Roman law was adopted as fubfidia-
ry to their own municipal law; and all cafes to
which the latter did not extend, were decided
according the principles of the former. In
others, the maxims as well as forms of Roman
jurisprudence mingled imperceptibly with the
laws of the country, and had a powerful, though
less sensible, influence, in improving and per-
teaing them [BB].

THESE various improvements in the system From aln

ofjurifprudence, and administration of justice, diftinaio
occasioned a change in manners of great impor- i nrofe-
tance, and of extensive effeit. They gave rife
to a diftinstion of professions; they obliged men
to cultivate different talents, and to aim at dif-
ferent accomplishments, in order to qualify
themselves for the various departments and
functions which became necessary in society r.
Among uncivilized nations, there is but one
profefion honourable, that of arms. All the
ingenuity and vigour of the human mind are ex,
erted in acquiring military skill, or address.
The funtions of peace are few and simple;
and require no: particular course of education or
study, as a preparation for discharging them.

I' [*BB]J NOTE XXV.
Dr. Ferguson's Eil'y on the history of Civil Society,
parti. iv . sea . .

F. 2 This

67

SECT. i. This was the state of Europe during several cea.

turies. Every gentleman, born a soldier, scorned
any other occupation; he was taught no feienec
but that of war; even his exercises and pastimes
were fates of martial prowess. Nor did thejudi.
cial character, which persons of noble birth were
alone entitled to assume, demand any degree of
knowledge beyond that which such untutored
soldiers possessed. To recollet a few traditina.
ry customs which time had confirmed, and'ren.
dered refpedable; to mark out the lilts of bat.
tle with due formality ; to ohferve the issue f
the combat; and to pronounce whether it had
been conducted according to the laws of arms;
included every thing that a baron who acted as
a judge, found it necefary to underfand.

The effeas BUT when the forms of legal proceedings were
Of ity.o0 fixed, when the rules of decilion were committed

to writing, and collected into a body, law became
a science, the knowledge of which required a re.
gular course of ffudy, together with long atte'n
tion to the practice of courts. Martial and illi.
terate nobles, had'neither leisure nor inclination
to undertake a task (b laborious, as well'aslof'o
reign from all the occupations which they deenm
ed entertaining, or suitable to their rank. Thei
gradually relinquilhed their places in cotirtsol
justice, where their ignorance expiofec tlhemn to
contempr. They became weary of attendingt0
the difcuflion of cafes, which grew too intricite
for them to comprehend. 'Nit'5il'fy the judicial
idetermination of points whiclh Wetre the lubjeet
of controversy, but the condu.t of:all'legal bufi'
nels and tranlaFtions was cimmitted to perfoni
trained by previous study and application to the
knowledge of Jaw. An order;of men to whlo(
their fellow-citizens had daily recourse for advice
and to whom they looked up for decision in theil

""**~
'' ~~~~monol

most important concerns, naturally acquired con- SECT. I.
fideration and influence in society. They were
advanced to honours which had been confidered
as the peculiar rewa;ds of military virtue. They
were entrusted with offices of the highest dignity,
and most extensive power. Thus, another pro-
session than that of arms, came to be introduced
among the laiety, and was reputed honourable.
The funtions of civil life were attended to. The
talents requisite for discharging them were culti-
vated. A new road was opened to wealth and
eminence. The arts and virtues of peace were
placed in their proper rank, and received their
due recompence [CC].

VIII. WHILE improvementsfe important with The rpirit

refpec to the state of society, and the adminif- ntroduce
tration ofjuftice, gradually made progress in Eu- more liberal

r * ri -

i i i i sentiment,,

rope, sentiments more liberal and generous had and more
begun to animate the nobles. These were in- generous
spired by the spirit of Chivalry, which, though ner
confidered, commonly, as a wild institution,
the effect of caprice and the source of extra-
vagance, arose naturally from the slate of society
at that period, and had a very serious influence
in refining the manners of the European nations.
The feudal state was a state of perpetual war, ra- origin of
pine, and anarchy; during which the weak and chivalry
unarmed were exposed every moment to insults
or injuries. The power of the sovereign was too
limited to prevent these wrongs ; and the admi-
niftration of justice too feeble to redress them.
There was Icarce any protection against violence
and opprellion, but what the valour and genero-
fity of private persons afforded. Tlie fame fpi-
rit of enterprize which had prompted so many
gentlemen to take arms in defence of the op-
pressed pilgrims in Palefline, incited others to

[CC] NO T E XXVI.

F 3 declare

SErC. I. declare themselves the patrons and avengers of
^~~--- injured innocence at home. When the final re-

dution of the Holy Land under the dominion of
Infidels put an end to these foreign expeditions,
the latter was the only employment left for the
activity and courage of adventurers. To check
the insolence of overgrown oppressors; to succour
the difireffed; to rescue the helpless from cap-
tivity; to protect, or to avenge women, orphans,
and ecclesiastics, who could not bear arms in
their own defence; to redress wrongs and to re-
move grievances; were deemed ads of the
highest prowess and merit. Valour, humani-
ty, courtesy, justice, honour, were the charade-
riftick qualities of chivalry. To there were added
religion, which mingled itself with every passion
and institution during the middle ages, and by
infusing a large proportion of enthusiastic zeal,
gave them such force, as carried them to roman-
tic excess. Men were trained to knighthood by
a long previous discipline; they were admitted
into the order by folemnities no less devout than
pompous; every person of noble birth courted
that Ionour; it was deemed a diftintion fupe-
rior to royalty; and monarchs were proud to re-
ceive it from the hands of private gentlemen.
1it benefici- THIs singular inftitutiton, in which valour,

gallantry, and religion, were so strangely blend.
ed, was wonderfully adapted to the tarte and ge-
nius of martial nobles; and its effects were soon
visible in their manners. War was carried on
with lels ferocity, when humanity came tobe
deemed the ornament of knighthood no less than
courage. More gentle and polished manners
were introduced, when courtesy was recommend-
ed as the molt amiable of knightly virtues.
Violence and opprellion decreased, when it was
reckoned meritorious to check and to punifl

them,
7o

them. A scrupulous adherence to truth, with SECT. I.
the most religious attention to fulfil every engage- ,-,-
ment, became the distinguishing charateriftic of
a gentleman, because chivalry was regarded as
the school of honour, and inculcated the mort de.
licate sensibility with refpe&t to that point. The
admiration of there qualities, together with the
high diftintions and prerogatives conferred on
knighthood in every part of Europe, inspired
persons of noble birth on rome occasions with a
fpeciesof military fanaticism, and led them to ex-
travagant enterprizes. But they imprinted deep-
ly in their minds the principles of generosity and
honour. These were strengthened by every
thing that can affect the senses, or touch theheart.
The wild exploits of those romantic knights who
sallied forth in quest of adventures, are well
known, and have been treated with proper ridi-
cule. The political and permanent effeCts of the
spirit of chivalry have been less observed. Per-
haps, the humanity which accompanies all the
operations of war, the refinements of gallantry,
and the point of honour, the three chief circum-
flances which distinguish modern from ancient
manners, may be ascribed in a great measure to
this whimsical institution, seemingly of little be-
nefit to mankind. The sentiments which chival.
ry inspired, had a wonderful influence on man-
ners and condutt, during the twelfth, thirteenth,
fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. They were
so deeply rooted, that they continued to operate
after the vigour and reputation of the institution
itself began to decline. Some considerable tranf-
adions, recorded in the following history, re-
femble the adventurous exploits of chivalry, ra-
ther than the well regulated operations of found
policy. Some of the molt eminent personages,
whose characers will be delineated, were strong-
ly tincured with this romantic spirit. Francis I.
was ambitious to dlftinguifh himself by all the

F 4 qilllitice

7'

SBCT. I. qualities of an accomplished knight, and endea.

C'"' voured to imitate the enterprizing genius of chi-

valry in war, as well as its pomp and courtesy du-
ring peace. The fame which he acquired by
these splendid actions, To far dazzled his more
temperate rival, that he departed on Come occa-
sions from his usual prudence and moderation,
and emulated Francis in deeds of prowess, or of
gallantry [DD].

The pro- IX. THE progress of science and the cultiva-
ce h~aS tion of literature, had considerable effeat in chan-
great infl- ging the manners of the European nations, and
mannersand introducing that civility and refinement by which
charaater of they are now distinguished. At the time when
men' their Empire was overturned, the Romans,

though they had loft that correct taste which has
rendered the productions of their ancestors the
standards of excellence, and models for imitation
to succeeding ages, till preserved their love of
letters, and cultivated the arts with great ardour.

Ignonce" f But rude barbarians were so far from being firuck
the middle
ages. with any admiration of these unknown accom-

plifhments, that they despised them. They were
not arrived at that fate of society, in which those
faculties of the human mind, that have beau-
ty and elegance for their objeas, begin to un-
fold themselves. They were firangers to all those
wants and desires which are the parents of inge-
nious invention; and as they did not comprehend
either the merit or utility of the Roman arts, they
destroyed the monuments of them, with industry
not inferior to that with which their posterity have
since studied to preserve or to recover them. The
convulsions occasioned by their settlement in the
Empire; the frequent as well asviolent revolutions
in every kingdom which they established; toge-
ther with the interior defecs in the form of go-
vernment which they introduced, banished fecu-

[DD] NO T E XXVII.

rity
72

rity and leisure; prevented the growth of taste, or SECT. I.
the culture of science; and kept Europe, during -v-
several centuries, in that state of ignorance which
has been already defcrbed. But the events and
institutions which I have enumerated, produced
great alterations in society. As soon as their
operation, in refioring liberty and independence
to one part of the community, began to be felt;
as soon as they began to communicate to all the
members of society rome taste of the advantages
arising from commerce, from public order, and
from personal security, the human mind be-
came conscious of powers which it did not for-
merly perceive, and fond of occupations or pur-
suits of which it was formerly incapable. To-
wards the beginning of the twelfth century, we
discern the first symptoms of its awakening from
that lethargy in which it had long been funk,
and observe it turning with curiosity and atten-
tion towards new objets.

THE first literary efforts, however, of the The firll

European nations in the middle ages, were ex- terary es-
tremely ill-directed. Among nations, as well reaed, and
as individuals, the powers of imagination attain the caufi"
some degree of vigour before the intellectual fa-
culties are much exercised in speculative or ab.
ftradt disquisition. Men are poets before they
are philosophers. They feel with fenlibility, and
describe with force, when they have made but
little progress in investigation or reasoning. The
age of Homer and of Hesiod long preceded that
ot Thales, or of Socrates. But, unhappily for
literature, our ancestors deviating from this course
which nature points out, plunged at once into the
depths of ab(trufe and metaphysical inquiry.
They had been converted to the Christian faith,
soon after they fettled in their new conqueits.
But they did not receive it pure. The prefump-

tilo

73

^-v3 tive doctrines of Christianity, the theories of a

vain philosophy, that attempted to penetrate in.
to mysteries, and to decide questions which
the limited faculties of the human mind are un.
able to comprehend, or to resolve. These over.
curious speculations were incorporated with the
system of religion, and came to be confidered
is the molf eflential part of it. As soon, then,
as curiosity prompted men to inquire and to
reason, there were the fubjeats which first pre-
sented themselves, and engaged their attention.
The fcholaflic theology, with its infinite train
of bold disquisitions, and tubtile diftlndions
concerning points which are not the objel of
human reason, was the first produ&tion of the
spirit of enquiry after it began to resume some
degree of aStivity and vigour in Europe. It was
not this circumstance alone that gave such a
wrong turn to the minds of men, when they be-
gan again to exercise talents which they had so
long neglected. Most of the persons who at-
tempted to revive literature in the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries, had received inftru6tion, or
derived their principles of science from theGreeks
in the eastern Empire, or from the Arabians in
Spain and Africa. Both there people, acute and
inquisitive to excess, corrupted those sciences
which they cultivated. The former rendered
theology a system of speculative refinement, or
of endless controversy. The latter communi-
cated to philosophy a spirit of metaphysical and
frivolous subtlety. Misled by there guides, the
persons who first applied to science were involved
in a maze of intricate inquiries. Inflead of al-
lowing their fancy to take its natural range, and
to produce fich works of invention as might have
improved their taste, and refined their senti-
mnents; instead of cultivating those arts which

embel-

A VIEW OF THE
74

embellilhed human life, and render it comforta- SECT. I.
ble; they were fettered by authority, they were '.v"
led astray by example, and wafted the whole
force of their genius in speculations as unavailing
as they were difficult.

BUT fruitless and ill-direded as there fpecu- They had,

lations were, their novelty rouzed, and their coferable
boldness interested the human mind. The ar- effsas.
dour with which men pursued these uninviting
studies, was aflonifhing. Genuine philosophy
was never cultivated, in any enlightened age,
with greater zeal. Schools, upon the model of
there instituted by Charlemagne, were opened
in every cathedral, and almost in every monas-
tery of note. Colleges and universities were erec-
ted, and formed into communities or corporati-
ons governed by their own laws, and invefred
with separate and extensive jnrifdiAion over their
own members. A regular course of studies was
planned. Privileges of great value were confer-
red on masters and scholars. Academical titles
and honours of various kinds were invented, as
a recompence for both. Nor was it in the schools
alone that superiority in science led to reputation
and authority ; it became the object of refpea in
life, and advanced such as acquired it to a rank
of no inconsiderable eminence. Allured by all
these advantages, an incredible number of flu-
dents retorted to there new feats of learning, and
crowded with eagerness into that new path which
was opened to fame and diftmlnion.

BUT how considerable soever there firfl efforts A circum-
may appear, there was one circumstance which ""nce

'j yy *. , **

_ ~~which pre-

prevented the effects of them from being as ex-ventedtheir
tensive as they ought to have been. All the lan- beinGfmore
guages in Europe, during the period under re-
view, were barbarous. They were destitute of
elegance, of force, and even of perspicuity.

No

SECT. I. No attempt had. been hitherto made to improve

- or to polish them. The Latin tongue was con.

fecrated by the church to religion. Custom, with
authority scarce less sacred, had appropriated it
to literature. All the sciences cultivated in the
twelfth and thirteenth centuries, were taught in
Latin. All books with refpeEt to them were
written in that language. To have treated of
any important subjet in a modern language,
would have been deemed a degradation of it.
This confined science within a very narrow circle.
The learned alone were admitted into the temple
of knowledge; the gate was shut against all
others, who were allowed to remain involved in
their former darkness and ignorance.

tle inu- BUT though [cience was thus prevented, du-
,ncner.n ring feveral'ages, from diffusing itself through so-
merits at ciety, and its influence was circumscribed; the
terAlon. progress of it may be mentioned, nevertheless,

among the great causes which contributed to in-
troduce a change of manners into Europe.
That ardent, though ill-judged fpiritof enquiry
which I have described, occasioned a fermenta-
tion of mind which put ingenuity and invention
in motion, and gave them vigour. It led men
into a new employment of their faculties, which
they found to be agreeable as well as interesting.
It accustomed them to exercises and occupations
which tended to soften their manners, and to
give them iome relish for those gentle virtues,
which are peculiar to nations among whom ici.
ence hath been cultivated with success [EE].

The pro- X. THE progress of commerce had confide-
gorts erc rable influence in polishing the manners of the
bad great European nations, and in leading them to order,
mrnmneon equal laws, and humanity. The wants of men,
and govern-
ment. rr1Pl K T rr VVIiTTT

[LJ .J 1 'V/ Lj. A.dV AL.

in
76

in the original and molt simple state of society, SECT. I.
are so few, and their desires so limited, that they -
reft contented with the natural produtions of
their climate and foil, or with what they can add
to there by their own rude indufRry. They have
no superfluities to dispose of, and few necessities
that demand a supply. Every little community
fbfibting on its own domeftick flock, and satis-
sied with it, is either unacquainted with the states
around it, or at variance with them. Society Lw ,e
and manners muff be confiderabfy improved, of com-
and many provisions muff be made for public tmhercidd
order and personal security, before a liberal in- age,.
tercourfe can take place between different nati-
ons. We find, accordingly, that the first effet
of the settlement of the barbarians in the Em-
pire, was to divide those nations which the Ro-
man power had united. Europe was broken in-
to many separate communities. The commu-
nication between these divided ifates ceased al-
most totally during several centuries. Navigati-
on was dangerous in seas infested by pirates; nor
could strangers trust to a friendly reception in the
ports of uncivilized nations. Even between dif-
tant parts of the fame kingdom, the intercourse
was rare and difficult. The lawless rapine of
banditti, together with the avowed exations of
the nobles, scarce less formidable and oppreflive,
rendered a journey of any length a perilous en-
terprize. Fixed to the spot in which they resided,
the greater part of the inhabitants of Europe
lot, in a great measure, the knowledge of re-
mote regions, and were unacquainted with their
names, their situations, their climates, and their
commodities.

VA RIOUS causes, contributed to revive the fpi- c.aucs of

rit of commerce, and to renew in some degree its arrivai.
the intercourse between different nations. The

Italians

$SCT, I. Italians, by their corqnesion with Conltantinople

w'3 and other cities of the Greek empire; preserved

in their own country some relish for the precious
commodities, and curious manufa&tures of the
East. They communicated some knowledge of
there to the countries contiguous in Italy. This
commerce, however, was extremely limited, nor
was the intercoirfe considerable which it occa-
sioned between different nations. The Crusades,
by leading multitudes from every corner of Eu-
rope into Aia, opened a more extensive commu.
nication between the Eart and Weft, which sub-
sifted for two centuries; and though the object
of these expeditions was conquest and not corn
merce; though the issue of them proved as un-
fortunate, as the motives for undertaking them
were wild and enthusiastic, their commercial es-
feds, as hath been b(ewn, were both beneficial
and permanent. During the continuance of the
Crusades, the great cities in Italy and in other
countries of Europe acquired liberty, and toge-
ther with it luch privileges as rendered them re-
fpetable and independen.t, ommunities. Thus,
in every state there was fqrmed a new order of
citizens, to whom qommerce presented itself as
their proper object, and opened to them a certain
path to wealth and dignity. Soon after the close
of the Holy war, the mariner'scormp.afs was in-
vented, which, by rendering navigarti(c. more
secure as well as more adventrous, fa4clitated the
communication between remote ,natipns, and
brought them nearer to eqach other.

Firlt among THE Italian States, during the rame period,
the Italiins. eftabli(hed a regular commerce with tl!h lft in

the portsof Egypt, and drew from thence all
the rich produts of the Indies. They introdu-
ced into their own territories manufadur¢.s of
various kinds, and carried them on with great

ingenuity
78

ingenuity and vigour. They attempted new SECT. I.
arts ; and transplanted from warmer climates, 1
to which they had been hitherto deemed peculiar,
several natural producions which now furnish
the materials of a lucrative and extended com-
merce. All these commodities, whether import-
ed from Asia, or produced by their own ikill, they
disposed of to great advantage among the other
people of Europe, who, began toacquire Come
taste of elegance unknown to their ancestors, or
despised by them. During the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, the commerce of Europe was
almost entirely in the hands of the Italians, more
commonly known in those ages by the name of
Lombards. Companies or societies of Lombard
merchants fettled in every different kingdom.
They were taken under the immediate protec-
tion of the several governments. They enjoyed
extensive privileges and immunities. The ope-
ration of the ancient barbarous laws concerning
firangers was suspended with refpea to them.
They became the carriers, the manufacturers,
and the bankers of all Europe.

WHtILE the Italians, in the south of Europe, Thel by
cultivated trade with such industry and success, means of

the Hafca

the commercial spirit awakened in the north, tick.
towards the middle of the thirteenth century.
As the nations around the Baltick were, at that
time, extremely barbarous, and infested that sea
with their piracies, this obliged the cities of Lu-
beck and Hamburgh, soon after they began to
open Come trade with these people, to enter into
a league of mutual defence. They derived such
advantages from this union, that other towns
acceded to their confederacy, and, in a short
time, eighty of the most considerable cities scat-
tered through those vast countries which firetch
from the bottom of the Baltick to Cologne on

the

79

SECT; I. the Rhine, joined in the famous Hanfeatick
'-"v' league, which became so formidable, that its al-

liance was courted, and its enmity was dreaded
by the greatell monarchs. The members of this
powerful association formed the first fyftematick
plan of commerce known in the middle ages,
and conduted it by common laws enacted in
their general assemblies. They supplied the reft
of Europe with naval flores, and pitched on
different towns, the most eminent of which was
Bruges in Slanders, where they established fta-
ples in which their commerce was regularly car-
ried on. Thither the Lombards brought the pro.
ducions of India, together with the manufac.
tures of Italy, and exchanged them for the more
bulky, but not less useful commodities of the
North. The Hanfeatick merchants disposed of
the cargoes which they received from the Lom-
bards, in the ports of the Baltick, or carried
them up the great rivers into the interior parts
of Germany.

Commerce TH IS regular intercourse opened between the
makes pro- North and South of Europe, made them sensible
grefs in the of their mutual wants, and created such new
Nether-
,nid. and vast demands for commodities of every

kind, that it excited among the inhabitantsof
the Netherlands a more vigorous spirit in carry-
ing on the two great manufactures of wool and
flax, which seem to have been considerable
in that country as far back as the age of Charle.
magne. As Bruges became the centre of com-
munication between the Lombard and Hanfe-
atick merchants, the Flemings traded with
both in that city to such extent as well as advan-
tage, as spread among them a general habit of in-
dullry, which long rendered Slanders and the

adjacent

adjacent provinces the most opulent, the most SECT. I.
populous, and heft cultivated countries in Eu- 'V",
rope.

STRUCK with the flourifling state of these AndinEng-

provinces, of which he discerned the true caule, '

i d

Edward III. of England, endeavoured to excite
a Cfirit of indiftry among his own lfujedts, who,
blind to the advantages of their situation, and ig-
norant of the source from which opulence was
destined to flow into their cointry, totally ne-
glected commerce, and did not even attempt
thufl manufactures, the materials of which tlhey
furniihed to foreigners. By alluring Flemifl ar-
tifans to fettle in his dominions, as well as by ma-
ny wife laws for the encouragement and regulati-
on of trade, he gave a beginning to the woolen
manufacures of England, and first turned the
ative and enterprizing genius of his people to-
wards those arts which have raised the Englifl to
the highest rank among commercial nations.

THIS increase ofcommerce, and of interccurfe Thi benc-

between nations, how inconsiderable soever it dl thEcis
may appear in refpe&t of their rapid and exten-
five progrels during the last and pretcilt age,
lcems vail, when we compare it with the llate
Of both in Europe previous to the twelfth cen-
tury. It did not fail of prodlcing great effcts.
C('Olmnercle tends to wear off thofil prejudices
\ lil imaintain diftindtion and aninlolity between
::a:ions. It Iuftens and poliihes the nianncrs of
it1n. It unites them, by one of the itrungclt of
ail tics, the delire of flipplying tleir mutual
:n;lts. It dlifll(,s tlemi Lo peace, by eRfablifli-
I::' il every fl;tt; an order of citizens bound
1)y thei intlril. tu be the guardians of public
tla,:(lilility. As lioui as tihe commercial Ipirit

V\'L... G begins

SECT. I. begins to acquire vigour, and to gain an afcen

sV ^ dant in any society, we discover a new genius ii

its policy, its alliances, its wars, and its negocia
tions. Conspicuous proofs of this occur in thn
history of the Italian States, of the Hanfeatici
league, and the cities of the Netherlands durin!
the period under review. In proportion as con
merce. made its way into the differentcountrie
of Europe, they successively turned their attenti
on to those objects, and adopted those manner
which occupy and distinguish polished nati
ons [FS].

[FS] NOTE XXIX.

A VIE"

## SECTION II. View of the Progress of Society in Europe, with respect to the command of the national force requisite in foreign operations.

A
VI E W

OF THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

SE C T IO N II.

Siew of tbe Progress of Society in Europe, zwitb re-

fpef to the command of the national fbrce reqi:-
flte in foreign operations.

UC H are the events and infritutions, which Se

S .T IL.
by their powerful operation contributed, <-'f1

„. i *

i,

.
1

, r

, ' State of lb-
gradually, to introduce more regular government ciety greatj

olld more polilhed manners into the various nati- impve""c i,

ons of Europe. When we survey the slate of niig ;i tlh
fic'iety, or the charadtcr of iidivilu;idls, at the iftc"tllt
("pcning of the fiftcenth century, and then turn
bLak to view the condlition of both at the time

G z hen

SE CT. II. when the barbarous tribes which overturned the
'--v' Roman power compleated their settlement in their

new conquercs, the progress which mankind had
made towards order and refinement will appear
immense.

Still defec- GOVERNMENT, however, was still far from
reVCpe to having attained that state, in which extensive mo.
the con- narchies at with united vigour, or carry on
natodath great undertakings with perseverance and fuccels
force. Small tribes or communities, even in their rudel

state, may operate in concert, and exert thei
utmost force. They are excited to aft not by
the distant objeCts, and subtile speculations
which interest or affeAt men in polished focietieh
but by their present feelings. The insults of an
enemy kindle refenentent; the success of a rival
tribe awakens emulation ; there paflions cormmu
nicate from breast to breast, and all the rner
bers of the community, with united ardour,
rush into the field in order to gratify their re.
venge, or to acquire distinCtion. But in widely
otended flates, such as the great kingdomsof
Europe at the beginning of the fifteenth century,
where there is little intercourse between the dif.
tant members of the community, and where
every great enterprize requires previous concert
and long preparation, nothing can route and call
forth their united strength, but the abfllutt
command of a Despot, or the powerful influeuct
of regular policy. Of the former the vast Em
pires in the East are an example; the irrfiftablc
mandate of the Sovereign reaches the most re.
mote provinces of his dominions, and comptel
whatever number of his fubjefts he is plcatedei
fiuinmon, to follow his flandard. The king.
doms of Europe, in the present age, are au il
ltance of the latter; the Prince, by the lets fri
ltnt, but no less effectual operation of la'"

aijd
_ _ . __I

and a well regulated government, is enabled to S.CT. II.
avail himfelfof the whole force of his state, and .V
toemploy it in enterprizes which require ftrenu-
ous and persevering efforts.

BUT, at the opening of the fifteenth century, The power
the political constitution in all the kingdoms off Morid,
Europe was very different from either of these
tates of government. The several monarchs,
though they had somewhat enlarged the boun-
daries of prerogative by successful encroachments
on the immunities and privileges of the nobility,
were possessed of an authority extremely limited.
The laws and interior police of kingdoms,
though much improved by the various events
and regulations which I have enumerated, were
fill feeble and imperfect. In every country, a
numerous body of nobles, still formidable not-
withstanding the various expedients employed to
depress them, watched all the motions of their
sovereign with a jealous attention, which set
bounds to his ambition, and either prevented his
forming schemes of extensive enterprize, or
thwarted the execution of them.

THE ordinary revenues of every Prince were Theireret.
so extremely fiall as to be inadequate to any nuasm.
great undertaking. He depended for extraor-
dinary ftpplies on the good will of his ftibjecs,
who granted them often with a reluctant and al-
ways with a sparing hand.

As the revenues of Princes were inconfidera- Their ar.

ble, the armies which they could bring into the mits infit
field were unfit for long and efsedual service.
Iflfcad of being able to employ troops trained

fl, 1ill in arms, and to military subordination,
by ltgular discipline, Monarchs were obliged

G 3 to

SECT. II. to depend on such forces as their vassals condud.
.''V" ed to their standard in consequence of their mili.

tary tenures. These, as they were bound to re
eain under arms only for a short time, could
not march far from their ufuial place of residence,
and being more attached to the lord of whom
they hcid, than to the Sovereign whom they ser-
ved, were often as much disposed to counterac
as to forvward his fchcmncs. Nor were they, even
if they had been more iubjet to the command
of the monarch, proper instruments to carry into
execution any great and arduous enterprize,
The flrength of an army formed either for con-
quest or defence lies in infantry. To the flabili.
ty and discipline of their legions, consisting chief.
ly of infantry, the Romans during the times of
the republick were indebted for all their vido.
ries; and when their defsendants, forgetting the
institutions which had led them to universal do.
minion, so far altered their military system as to
place their principal confidence in a numerous
cavalry, the undisciplined impetuosity of the bar-
barous nations who fought mostly on foot, was
fuflicient, as I have already observed, to over-
come them. These nations soon after they set-
tled in their new conquests, uninftriued by the
fatal error of the Romans, relinquishcd the cuf-
toms of their ancestors and converted the chief
force of their armies into cavalry. Among the
Romans this change was occasioned by the effli
minacy of tlheir troops, who could not endure
the I'ntigpues of iervice, which their more virtu-
ous and hardy ancestors fiftained with ease. A.
nong the people who eflablifed the new mo-
narcliies into which Europe was divided, this
innovation in military discipline seems to liave
flowed from the pride of the nobles, who scorning
to mingle with persons of inferior rank, aimed at

being
86

being distinguished from them in the field, as SECT. If.
well as during peace. The institution of chival- V
ry, and the frequency of Tournaments, in which
knights, in complete armour, entered the lifts on
horseback with extraordinary splendour, display-
ing amazing address, and force, and valour,
brought cavalry into itill greater esteem. The
fondness for that service increased to such a de-
gree, that, during the thirteenth and fourteenth
centuries, the armies of Europe were composed
almost entirely of cavalry. No gentleman would
appear in the field but on horseback. To serve
in any other manner he would have deemed de-
rogatory to his rank. The cavalry, by way of
dilfinction, was called, T'he battle, and on it
alone depended the fate of every aaion. The
infantry, collected from the dregs and refuse of
the people, ill armed and worse dicfiplined,
uas of no account.

As there circumstances rendered the operati- Tlleyarein-

ons of particular kingdoms less considerable and Fapabl of
less vigorous, so they long kept the Princes of generalor
Europe from giving such attention to the schemes itenrnpe
and transactions of their neighbours, as led them ration.
to iorm any regular system of publick security.
They prevented them from uniting in confedera-
cy, or from acting with concert, in order to es-
tablifl such a distribution and balance of power,
as fliould hinder any state from rising to a fuperi-
oiity, which might endanger the general liberty
and independance. During several centuries,
the nations of Europe appear to have confidered
tllhnlllves as separate Sicieties, scarce conneced
togcthcr by any common intcreft, and little con-
ccr;I'cd in each others aflairs or operations. An
cxlulnlivc conmmerce did not afrtiJd them an op-
I(lortuiity of obltrving and pcncrating into the

G 4. i'licmca

SECT. II. schemes of every different state. They had not
- ".. ambalTadors residing constantly in every court tc

watch and give early intelligence of all its moti.
ons. The expectation of remote advantages, or
the prospect of distant and contingent evils were
not sufficient to excite nations to take arms
They only, who were within the fphereof imme.
diate danger, and unavoidably exposed to injllur
or insult, thought themselves interested in al)
contest, or bound to take precautions for theil
own safety.

Theywe-e WHOEVER records the transactions of any ol
litte c . .-

Cte(o itli the more considerable European states during thl
atlh other. two last centuries, must write the history of En

rope. Its various kingdoms, throughout that pe.
riod, have been formed into one great system, f
closely united, that each holding a determinate
tlation, the operations of one are so felt by all, a!
to influence their counsels and regulate their mea
fures. But previous to the fifteenth century, un
less when vicinity of territory rendered the occa
lions of discord frequent and unavoidable, or whet
national emulation fomented or embittered ti(
spirit of hostility, the affairs of different countie!
are seldom interwoven. In each kingdom of Eu
rope great events and revolutions happened
which the other powers beheld with the fame in
difference as if they had been unintercfted fpcc
tators, to whom the effect of there tranfaCtioun
could never extend.
A confirm,- DURING the violent struggles between Francc

f, llf'.tl a- and England, and notwithstanding the alarminil

fii so progrels which was made towards rendering oin
F ance. l'rince the master of both there kingdoms, liaid

]y one measure which can be conlidered as tin
result of a sagacious and prudent policy, was form-

.td
88

ed in order to guard against an event so fatal to SEcT. II.
Europe. The Dukes of Burgundy and Bretagne, /V'
whom their situation would not permit to remain
neutral, engaged, it is true, in the eonteft ; but
they more frequently took the part to which their
pallinns prompted them, than that which a just
difernment of the danger which threatened
themflves and the tranquillity of Europe should
have pointed out. The other Princes, seemingly
uniafUdted by the alternate fuccefles of the con-
tending parties, left them to decide the quarrel,
or interposed only by feeble and ineffecual nego-
ciations.

NOTWITHSTANDING the perpetual hostilities From thore

in which the various kingdoms of Spain were f Spain
engaged during several centuries, and the fuccef-
five occurrences which visibly tended to unite that
part of the continent into one great monarchy, the
Princes of Europe scarce took a tingle ftep, which
discovers that they gave any attention to that im-
portant event. They permitted a power to arise
imperceptibly, and to acquire strength there,
which soon became formidable to all its neigh-
bours.

AMIDST the violent convulsions with which Fromthore

the spirit of domination in the See of Rome, and ofGermany
the turbulent ambition of the German nobles,
agitated the Empire, neither the authority of the
Popes, seconded by all their artifices and in-
trigues, nor the follicitations of the Emperors,
could induce any of the powerful monarchs in
Europe to engage in their quarrel, or to avail
themfclves of many favourable opportunities of
interposing with efltct and advantage.

THIS

SETr. 11. THIS amazing inactivity, during tranifations

f

.r o inrerefting, is not to be imputed to any inca-

This inl-ti- . . . . ..
xry occfi- paciry of discerning their political consequences.
cacl entire- T he power°of judging with sagacity, and of ad-
t., tenigo- ing with vigour, is the portion of men in every
crnment. rage. The Monarchs who reigned in the diffe-

rent kingdoms of Europe during several centu-
ries were not blind to their particular interest,
negligent of the publick safety, or strangers to
the method of securing both. If they did not
adopt that salutary fyflem, which teaches modern

otliticialns to take the alarm at the profpeft of
diflant dangers, which prompts them to check
the first encroachments of any formidable power,
and which renders each slate the guardian, in
loni: degree, of the rights and independance of
all its neighbours, this was owing entirely to the
imperfedtions and diiorders in the civil govern-
ment of each country, which made it impoflible
for sovereigns to act luitably to those ideas which
.the posture of affairs, and their own observation
must have fuggefied.

Events hi.p. BUT during the course of the fifteenth centu-
lrengct tll ry, various events happened, which, by giving
c.ntuy Princes more entire command of the force in
,',itclht e- their rep)cctdive dominions, rendered their ope-
xler the es-
flrts of ns- rations more vigorous and extensive. In confe-

i,,.,lquence of this, the affairs of different kingdoms
aii, cx.tn- becoming more fircquently as well as more inti-

mately connected, they were gradually accuflom-
ed to act in concert and confederacy, and were
i.iinfibly prepared for forming a system of poli-
cy, in ordcr to eftablifl or to preserve such a ba-
lance of power as was most consistent with the
general ficurity. It was during the reign of
Charles the fifil, that the ideas, on which this
ylftcm is foi-uidd, first came to be fully under-
ltooc. It was thcn, that the maxims by which it

hias

has been uniformly maintained since that ara SFCT. IT.
were universally adopted. On this account, a . r-
view of the causes and events which contributed
to establish a plan of policy more salutary and ex-
tensive than any that has taken place in the con-
due of human affairs, is not only a neceflary in-
troduction to the following work, but is a capital
object in the history of Europe.

THE firfl event, that occasioned any confidera- Trle ,f. of

ble alteration in the arrangement of affairs in Eu- tlt l.-,, -
rope, was the annexation of the extensive territo- ing the Eng-
ries, which England possessed on the continent, tlieoftc'
to the crown of France. While the Englifll were on the con-
masters of several of the most fertile and opulent tinlct.
provinces in France, and a great part of its most
martial inhabitants were bound to follow their
standard, their monarchs confidered themselves
rather as the rivals, than as the vaflals of the fove-
reign of whom they held. The Kings of France,
circumscribed and thwarted in their schemes and
operations by an adversary no less jealous than
formidable, durst not venture upon any enter-
prize of importance or of difficulty. The Engiilh
were always at hand, ready to oppose them. They
disputed even their right to their crown, and be-
ing able to penetrate, with ease, into the heart of
the kingdom, could arm against them thole very
hands which ought to have been employed in
their defence. Timid counsels, and feeble efforts
\were natural to monarchs in such a situation.
Idrance, difimembred and over-awed, could not
attain its proper station in the system of Europe.
But the death of Henry of England, happily for
France, and not unfortunately for his own coun-
try, delivered the French from the calamity of
having a foreign master scated on their throne.
Tile eaknefs ot a long minority, the diflcniions

in

SECT. II. in the Englifhl court, together with the unsteady
'-^~~~ and languid conduct which tllelfe ccalioned, as-

forded the French a favourable opportunity of
recovering the territories which they had loft.
The native valour of the nobility of France height-
ened to an entlhufiaftick confidence, by a fuppoied
interposition of heaven in their behalf; conducted
in the field by skilful leaders; and directed in the
cabinet by a prudent monarch ; was exerted with
such vigour and success, during this favourable
juncture, as not only wrested from the English
their new conquefls, but script them of their an-
cient poflicllios, and reduced them within the
narrow precindts of Calais, and its petty territory.

Theeffet As Coon as so many considerable provinces were
of this on re united to their dominicans, the Kings of France,
tle owerof conflious of this ..:q;lifitiol of strength, began
the Frcnch to form bolder ic:lernes of interior policy, as well
monaChly. as of foreign operations. They immediately be-

came formidable to their neighbours, who began
to fix their attention on their measures and moti-
ons, the importance of which they fully perceived.
From this ara, France, poffefied of the advanta-
ges which it derives from the situation and conti-
guity of its territories, as well as from the numt
ber and valour of its people, rose to new influence
in Europe, and was the first power in a condition
to give alarm to the jealousy or fears of the flates
around it.

oin tle nat NOR was France indebted for this increase of
,1,,l ,1,,n.' importance merely to the re-union of the provin-
i.i. i.l.iun. Ccs which had been torn from it. A circurntlance

attended the recovery of these, which, though
less considerable, and lcfs observed, contributed
not a little to give additional vigour and decision
to all the efforts of that monarchy. During theob-
ftinatc flruggles between France and England, all

tlth

the defects of the military fyflem under the feu- S cr. II.
dal government wlee lenfibly felt. A war of long '
continuance languifled, when carried on by troops
bound and accustomed to keep tie field only for
a few weeks. Armies, composed chiefly of hea-
vy armed cavalry, were unfit either for the at-
tack or the defence of the many towns and caC-
ties, which it became necessary to guard or to re-
duce. In order to obtain such permanent and es-
fetive force, as became requisite during theie
lengthened contests, the Kings of France took in-
to their pay considerable bands of mercenary fol-
diers, levied sometimes among their own fubjests,
and Sometimes in foreign countries. But as the
feudal policy provided no sufficient fund for such
extraordinary service, there adventurers were dif-
miffed at the close of every campaign, or upon
any profped of accommodation; and having been
little accustomed to the restraints of di fcipline, they
frequently turned their arms against the country
which they had been hired to defend,and desolated
it with no less cruelty than its foreign enemies.

A BODY of troops kept constantly on foot, and It occasion

regularly trained to military subordination, would t' i^,ntr
have supplied what was wanting in the feudal con- ainuifi.g r.
ftitution, and have furnished Princes with the m""
means of executing enterprizes, to which they
were then unequal. Such an efiablilhment, how-
ever, was so repugnant to the genius of feudal
policy, and so incompatible with the privileges
and pretentions of the nobles, that during fevcral
centuries no monarch was either to bold, or f(
powerful, as to venture on any ftep towards in-
troducing it. At last, Charles VII. availing him-
self of the reputation which lie had acquired by
his successes against the Englill, and taking ad-
vantage of the impreflions of terror which lfich a
formidable enemy had left upon the minds. of

11is

C""rJ durst not attempt. Under pretence of keeping al-

ways on foot a force filfficient to defend the king.
dom agaiift any sudden invasion of the English,
A. D. 1445. he, at the time when he disbanded his other

troops, retained under arms a body of nine thou-
fTnd cavalry, and of sixteen thouland infantry.
He appropriated funds for the regular payment
of thele; he flationed them in different places of
the klilgdom, according to his pleasure ; and ap-
pointed the officers, who commanded and diici-
plined them. The prime nobility courted this
service, in which they were taught to depend on
their sovereign, to execute his orders, and to look
up to him as thejudge and rewarder of their me-
rit. The feudal militia, composed of the vassals
whom the nobles could call out to follow their
flandard, as it was in no degree comparable to a
body of soldiers regularly trained to war, funk
gradually in reputation. The strength of armies
came to be estimated only by the number of dif-
ciplined men which they contained. In less than
a century, the nobles and their military tenants,
though sometimes iummoned to the field, accord-
ing to ancient form, were confidered as an incum-
brance upon the troops with which they adted;
and were viewed with contempt by soldiers ac-
customed to the vigorous and ftcady operations
of regular service.

The (.Cfel THUS the regulations of Charles the feventli,
0 til'"l by eflablilhing the firfl standing army known in

Europe, occalioned an important revolution in its
affTirs and policy. By deprivingr the nobles of
that direction of thle military force of the ilatc,
which had railed them to Itlch hiigh autl!7li ity and
implortance, it gave a deep wotlnd tuo lie fc.11ul.
alillocracy, in that iart Lvhcre its [ tjcr leliiul
to be molt compIlcte.

l/ l ~In jS

A-VIEW OF THE
94

FRANCE, by forming this body of regular SECT. tI

troops, at a time when there was tcarce a Iqua- _
dron or company kept in constant pay in any other
part of Europe, acquired such advantages, either
for attack or defence, over its neighbours, that
felf-prefervation made it necessary for them to imi-
tate its example. Mercenary troops were intro-
duced into all the considerable kingdoms on the
continent. They gradually became the only mili-
tary force that was employed or trusted. It has
long been the chief object of policy to increase
and to support them, and the great aim of Prin->
ces or ministers to discredit and to annihilate all
other means of national activity or defence.

As the Kings of France got the flart of other Thno-

powers in establishing in.their dominions a mili- Frnch,,
tary force, which enabled them to carry on so- couraged to
reign operations with more vigour, and to great- 'progliL
er extent, so they were the first who effectually
broke the feudal aristocracy, and humbled the
great vassals of the crown, who by their exorbi-
tant power had long circumscribed the royal pre-
rogative within very narrow limits, and had ren-
dered all the efforts of the monarchs of Europe
inconsiderable. Many things concurred to under-
mine, gradually, the power of the feudal ariflo-
cracy in France. The wealth and property of the
nobility were greatly impaired during the long
wars, which the kingdom was obliged to main-
tain with the English. The extraordinary zeal
with which they exerted themselves in defence of
their country against its ancient enemies, exhaust-
cd the fortunes of tome great families. As al-
most every province in the kingdom was, in its
turn, the feat of war, the lands of others were
exposed to'the depredations of the enemy, were
ravaged by the mercenary troops which thcir
fuoereig.ns hired occasionally, but could not pay,

or

SECT. II. or were desolated with rage flill more deftru.tiv,
~ -.---', by the 'pcafants, in their different infiurrections

At the fame time, the necessities of governinei
having forced their Kings upon the desperate ex
pedient of making great and sudden alteration:
in the current coin of the kingdom, the fines
quit-rents, and other payments, fixed by ancien
cuifom, funk much in value, and the revenue
of a fief were reduced far below the fum whicl
it had once yielded. During their contests with
the English, in which a generous nobility courted
every flation where danger appeared, or hon(ui
could be gained, many families of note became
extinc.t, and their fiefs were reunited to the
crown. Other fiefs, in a long course of years, fell
to female heirs, and were divided among them;
were diminilhed by profuse donations to the
church, or were broken and spilt by the fuccef-
lion of remote collateral heirs a.

The pro- ENCOURAGED by these manifest fymproms of
grei. of the decline in that body which he wilhed to depress,
royal power
under Charles VII. during the firfl interval of peace
ChalesVIl. with England, made several efforts towards ella-

blifhing the regal prerogative on the ruins of the
aristocracy. But his obligations to the nobles
were so many, as well as recent, and their ler-
vices in recovering the kingdom so splendid, as
inale it neceifary for him to proceed with mode-
ration and caution. Such, however, was the au-
thority which the crown had acquired by the pro-
grcls of its arms against the English, and 1"
much was the power of the nobility dimininffd,
that, without any oppoftion, he fbon made inin)-
vations of great conlequcnce in the confiirutioln
I-le not only ftablilhr d that fornlidille body ct
regular troops, which has been menltioned, but
hl was the first monlarch of Fraince, who, by
a B auulavillics H-ilt lr'ei die . Guvriii'iIt Jde 1,'l n;c,l.ct -l' X;.

Ili:,

his royal edict, without the concurrence of the Sr CT. II.
States-general of the kingdom, levied an extraor- ,--- -
dinary subsidy on his people. He prevailed like- A D. 440.
vilfe with his fubjedts, to render several taxes
perpetual, which had formerly been imposed oc-
cafionally, and exacted during a short time. By
means of all these, he acquired ifch an increase
of power, and extended his prerogative so far
beyond its ancient limits, that, from being the
most dependant Prince who had ever fit upon
the throne of France, he came to possess, du-
ring the latter years of his reign, a degree of
authority which none of his predecessors had en-
joyed for several ages .

THAT plan of humbling the nobility which n,,,er

Charles formed, his son Louis XI. carried on Loui Xl.
with a bolder spirit, and with greater success.
Louis was formed by nature to be a tyrant ; and
at whatever period he had been called to alcend
the throne, his reign must have abounded with
schemes to oppress his people, and to render his
owvn power absolute. Subtle, unfeeling, cruel;
a stranger to everiy principle of integrity, and
regardless of decency, he scorned all the reft- aints
Iwlich a fenle of honour, or the desire of fame,
imnpoe even on ambitious men. Sagacious, at
the fame time, to diliern his true interest, and
ii.fluenced by th:t alone, he was capable of 'ur-
li::g it with a pcrlevering incluftry, and of ad-
lerinig to it with a sy' ftematic tifirit from which
J1c, ,lcC-ti could divert, and no danger cuuld de-
t:r lin).

'IH' maixims (,f his adminifisratioa were as Hi ;,,n.

ipr'lu;nd as tl-cy were fatal to the i rvileCges ofr i":I . .
r,

':,r

. , 1,il %CV. t L hu iiii t

b llii:o;c de Iranc~ D:r Vc I v &I \Villa,'ct, ton,1 xv. 3 I, b':c .

:o 13.

itl |( ,
\'ou. I. H the

SECT. II. the nobility. He filled all the departments of
L-'V'^ government with new men, and often with per.

sons, whom he called from the lowest as well as
most despited funEtions in life, and raised at plea.
sure to stations of great power or trust. These
were his only confidents, whom he consulted in
forming his plans, and to whom he committed
the execution of them : While the nobles, accuf.
tomed to be the companions, the favourites, and
the ministers of their sovereigns, were treated
with such studied and mortifying neglect, that if
they would not submit to follow a court, in which
they appeared without any shadow of their anci-
ent power, they were obliged to retire to their
castles, where they remained unemployed a.d
forgotten. Not satisfied with having rendered
the nobles of less consideration, by taking out of
their hands the sole direction of affairs, Louis ad.
ded insult to neglect;. and by violating their most
valuable privileges, endeavoured to degrade the
order, and to reduce the members of it to the
fame level with other fubjets. Persons of the high.
eft rank among them, if so bold as to oppose his
schemes, or so unfortunate as to awaken tie jca-
lousy of his capricious temper, were prosecuted
with rigour, from which all who belonged to the
order of nobles had hitherto been exempt; they
were tried by judges who had no right to take
cognizance of their actions; and were tilbjted
to torture, or condemned to an infamous death,
without regard to their birth or condition. The
pIople, accnftomed to fee the blood of the mi(ll
illustrious personages shed by the hands of the
comtn0on executioner, to behold them flutt up i1i
dungeons, and carried about in cages 6f iron, le.
gan to view the nobility with ]ls reverence thai'
iformerly, and looked up with terror to the r(!;
authority, which seemed to have humbled or a:i
nihilated every other power in the kingdom..

AT the fame time, Louis, being afraid that SECT. TI.
opposition might rouze the nobles, whom the ri- -

And of divi-

gour of his government had intimidated, or that ding them.
itlf-prefervation might teach them, at last, to u-
nite, dexterously scattered among them the feeds
of discord; and industriously fomented those anci-
ent animofities between the great families, which
the fptirit ofjealoufy and emulation, natural to the
feudal government, had originally kindled and
frill kept alive. To accomplilh this, all the arts
of intrigue, all the myfleries and refinements of
his fraudulent policy were employed, and with
such fuccels, that at a jundcure which required
the most ftrenuoius efforts, as well as the most per-
fedt union, the nobles never adted, except during
one Ihort sally of resentment at the beginning of
his reign, either with vigour or with concert.

As he ifripped the nobility of their privileges, He adds to

he added to the power and prerogative of the thef ,lld
crown. In order to have at command such a bo- forces.
dy of soldiers as might be-fufficient to crush any
force that his difaffeded filbjeds could draw to-
gether, he not only kept on foot the regular
troops which his father had raised, but took in-
to his pay fix thousand Swiss, the best disciplined
and moil: formidable infantry, at that timie in Eu-
rope L. From thejealoutfy natural to tyrants, he
confided in these foreign mercenaries, as the mot:
devoted infiruments of opprei-ion, and the moi l
fiitiliul guardians of the power which he had ac-
qui red.

GREAT funds were requisite, not only to de- Hc aug-

fiay tile cxplece of this aidditional eRailbliflmient, nevl hesE
but to fiuplly thle fums ciploycd in the various the crown.
ctctrririzcs which the relllels activity of his geni-

c !. i(1ll tic Comincs, torn. i. 367. Da. 1 lil. de la Milice
Pr;ctiiii t3, , ',:. i. iS2.

II z

us

SECT. II. US prompted him to undertake. But the prero
'-3 - gative that his father had assumed of levying tax

es, without the concurrence of the flates-general
which he was careful not only to retain but ex
tend, enabled him to provide in some measure foi
the increasing charges of government.

His addres WHAT his prerogative, enlarged as it was
in manag- could not furnish, his address procured. HI
femhby of was the first monarch in Europe who discoverec
Aates. the method of managing those great afiemblies

in which the feudal policy had vested the powel
of granting subsidies and of imposing taxes. He
first taught other Princes the fatal art of begin.
ning their attack on publick liberty, by corrupt
ing the source from which it should flow. By ex.
erting all his power and address in influencing the
election of representatives, by bribing or overaw
ing the members, and by various changes which
he artfully made in the form of their deliberati-
ons, Louis acquired such entire direction of there
assemblies, that, from being the vigilant guardi.
ans of the privileges and property of the people,
he rendered them tamely subservient, in promo.
ting the most odious measures of his reign d. As
no power remained to set bounds to his exations,
he not only continued all the taxes imposed by
his father, but made immense additions to them,
which amounted to a fum that appeared astonish-
ing to his contemporaries .. *

d Mem. de Conlin. ton. i. 136. Chron. Scandal. ibid.
toi. ii. p. 71.

c Mein de Coin. torn. i. 334.
* Chalis Vll. levied taxes to the amount of 1,Soo,ooo

fiacs; ; I,uuis XI. ailed 4,700 000. The tolil)ir hatl il
pry 9000 cIvally, and 16,oo infantry. The latter atIg-
onited tile cavally to i 5,0oo, and the infantry lu 25 co0.
l\Icin. t!c Coiin.lb, i 38 I. During the laulcr yetia o0 I'}i
le'gi, lit kept the gleiclr pnit t of lthie 0n.Tlft i pc d il' O'e
I.lc;c, and ria)ly to 1iatchi on thie lnortilt warning. Illil.=1S.

NOR

NOR was it the power alone or wealth of the SECT. II.
crown that Louis increased; he extended its ter- Hla e

He enlarges

ritories by acquisitions of various kinds. He got the bounds
possession of Roufillon by purchase; Provence ofthe

French mo-

was conveyed to him by the will of Charles de narchy.
Anjou; and upon the death of Charles the Bold,
he seized with a llrong hand Burgundy and Ar-
tois, which had belonged to that Prince. Thus,
during the course of a single reign, France was
formed into one compact kingdom, and the steady
unrelenting policy of Louis XI. not only subdued
the haughty spirit of the feudal nobles, but efta-
blilhed a species of government, scarce lets abfo-
lute, or lets terrible, than eastern despotism.

BUT fatal as his administration was to the li- By allthere

berties of his fubjets, the authority which he gohernment
acquired, the resources of which he became ma- rendered

mote active

fter, and his freedom from refiraint both in con- and enter-
certing his plans and in executing them, render- prizin.
ed his reign adive and enterprizing. Louis nego-
ciated in all the courts of Europe; he observed
the motions of all his neighbours; he engaged,
either as principal, or as an auxiliary, in every
great transaction; his resolutions were prompt;
his operations vigorous; and upon every emer-
gence he could call forth into action the whole force
of his kingdom. From the ara of his reign, in-
fiead of the feeble efifrts of monarchs fettered
and circumscribed by a jealous nobility, the Kings
of France, more maftcrs at home, have exerted
themselves more abroad, have firme.d more ex-
teufive fchemcs of foreign concquefts, and have
carried on war with a lpiit and vigour long un-
known in Europe.

THE example which Louis let Was too inviting St'i- tken

not to be imitated by othler P' inccs. Henry VIA. t, ',,,th:
as loon as he was lIatedl onil t thronc of Eng- r,',"' .,tl.

. , 1-1 3C0111 in
1'1 ,3 lined, i.,,,~l,,d.

10{

SECT. II. land, formed the plan of enlarging his own pre
'^TV rogative, by breaking the power of the nobility,

The circumstances under which lie undertook tc
execute it, were lets favourable than those under
which Charles VII. had made the fame attempt;
and the spirit with which he conducted it, was
very different from that of Louis XI. Charles,
by the success of his arms against the English, by
the merit of having expelled them out of so ma-
ny provinces, had eflablifhed himself lb firmly in
the confidence of his people, as encouraged him
to make bold encroachments on the ancient con-
tfitution. The daring genius of Louis broke
through every barrier, and eideavoured to over-
turn or to remove every obstacle that stood in his
wvay. But Henry held the sceptre by a disputed
title; a popular faction was ready every moment
to take arms against him; and after long civil
wars, during which the nobility had often dif:
played their power in creating and deposing Kings,
he felt that the regal authority had been lo much
relaxed, and that he entered into poffcflion of a
prerogative so much abridged, as made it nccef-
fary to carry on his measures deliberately, and
without any violent exertion. He endcavoured to
undermine that formidable structure, wich lihe
durst not attack with open force. His fchenes,
though cautious and flow in their operation, were
prudent, and productive in the end of great cf-
flcts. By his laws, permitting the barons to break
the entails of their cftates, and to exp)ole them o
{ale; by his regulations to prevent the nobility
si'on keeping in their service thofc numerous
bands of retainers, which rendered them formi-
dable, and turbulent ; by nlcoluraging populani-
(,Xi, agriculture and conmmerce by fe:ciring to
his uibjeets, during a long reign, the enjoyment
of the bleflings which flow fiomn the arts of
peace; by accuftooming them to an adiiniilit atioln

of

of government, under which the laws were exe- SECT. II.
cuted with fleadinefs and vigour; he made im- ---
perceitibly fich alterations in the English confti-
tlti(oo, that he transmitted to his successor autho-
rity so extensive, as rendered him one of the
mi;st ablolute Monarchs in Europe, and capable
of the greatest and most vigorous efforts.

IN Spain, the union of all its crowns by the Andin

marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella; the glory s5,'a"
that they acquired by the conquest of Granada,
which brought the odious dominion of the Moors
to a period; the command of the great armies
which it had been necessary to keep constantly on
foot, in order to accomplish this; the wisdom
and steadiness of their administration; and the
address with which they availed themselves of
every incident to humble the nobility, and to ex-
tend their own prerogative, conspired in raising
there monarchs to such eminence and authority,
as none of their predecessors had ever enjoyed.
Though several causes, which shall be explained
in another place, prevented their attaining the
fame extensive powers with the Kings of France
and England, and preserved the feudal conffitu-
tion in Spain longer entire, their great abilities
ins plied the dcfcdts of their prerogative, and im-
1'rov(d with such dexterity all the advantages
which they possessd, that Ferdinand carried on
all his foreign operations, which were very ex-
tenlive, with extraordinary vigour and effet.

\W'HITLE these Princes were thus enlarging the Events hap-

boundaries of prerogative, and taking filch fleps ['tcI''ih','1
towards rendering their kingdoms capable of ad- veil ol-
i:'g \ith union and with force, events occurred, arcl't to

'l
which called them forth to exert the new powers pon,'els

1-1 4 v, which Wl they

rci.

o03

SECT. II. which they had acquired. These engaged them
G-Y- in such a series of enterprizes and negociations,

that the affairs of all the considerable nations il
Europe came to be insensibly interwoven , ith eacll
other; and a great political system was gradually
formed, which grew to be an object of univcrial
attention.

Thefirftof THE first event which merits notice, on ac-
there events

as "the count of its influence in producing this change in
marriage of the ifate of Europe, was the marriage of the
the heurfeof daughter of Charles the Bold, the iole hcirells
Burgundy. of the house of Burgundy. For fomne years be-

fore her father's death, she had been conlfiered
as the apparent fucceflbr to his territories, and
Charles had made proposals of marrying her to
several different Princes, with a view of alluring
them, by that offer, to favour the schemes which
his refilels ambition was continually forming.

The imrr- THIS rendered the alliance with her an obje&
tanceof this f general attention; and all the advantages of
to the slate . .. . .
of Europe. acquiring pofe!ion of her territories, the mnlt

opulent at that time and best cultivated of any on
this fide of the Alps, were perftt!ly underitood.
As soon, then, as the untimely death of Charles
opened the ficceflion, the eyes of all the Princes

A D. 1477. in Europe were turned towards Mary, and they
JaUuary 5. felt tliemfelvcs d(Ic>ly interclted iln lihe clI

which file was about to make of the p,erlton, on
whoIm lhe wuuld bellow that rich iiiii ritance.

vi;ew or Louis XI. from x\ hole kii:gdom several of the
liTh ,.c a provinces which llie potlfi'cl lhad bIei dili111m-
toIt. bered, and whiofe doininions stretched along tlhe

frontier of h er teitories, had every il;duccmenl
to cuurt her allia;ce. Il had, likcwiiC, a goud

tiLde
104

title to expect the favourable reception of any rea- SeCT. 1.
Ionable proposition he should make, with refped to
the dilpofal of a Princess, who was the vaflal of
his crown, and descended from the royal blood of
France. There were only two propositions, how-
ever, which he could make with propriety. The
one was the marriage of the Dauphin, the other
that of the Count of Angouleme, a Prince of the
blood, with the heiress of Burgundy. By the
former, he would have annexed all her territo-
ries to his crown, and have rendered France at
once the most refpetable monarchy in Europe.
But the great disparity of age between the two
.arties, Mary being twenty, and the Dauphin on-
ly eight years old; the avowed resolution of the
Flemings, not to choose a master possessed of
ilch power as might enable him to form schemes
dangerous to their liberties; together with their
dread of falling under the odious and oppreflive
government of Louis, were obstacles in the way
of executing this plan, which it was vain to think
of surmounting. By the latter, the accomplish-
ment of which might have been attained with
eale, Mary having discovered some inclination to
a match with the Count of Angouleme t, Louis
ounld have prevented the dominions of the houie
0l Burgundy from being conveyed to a rival pow-
er, and in return for such a splendid etfabliflment
lI)r the Count of Angouleme, he must have ob-
tained, or would have extorted from him con-
cellions highly beneficial to the crown of France.
Cut Louis had been accustomed so long to the in-
tricacics of a crooked and insidious policy, that
he could not be satisfied with what was obvious
and simple ; and was so fond of artifice and refine-
ment, that he came to confider thete as his ulti-
mate objc&t, not as the means only of conduding
atlairs. From this principle, no less than from

f iMel. dc Coiiillis, i. 358.

his

Secr. TI. his unwillingness to aggrandize any of his own
a-v~-1 fubjefts, or from his desire of oppressing the

house of Burgundy, which he hated, he negleEt-
ed the course which a Prince less able and artful
would have taken, and followed one more suited
to his own genius.

Thefinggnar HE proposed to render himself master, by force
nr.feikich of arms, of those provinces, which Mary held of

the crown of France, and even to pulh his con-
quests into her other territories, while he arnufed
her with infifiing continually on the impracticable
march with the Dauphin. In profecutingthisplan,
he displayed wonderful talents and industry, and
exhibited such scenes of treachery, falfchood and
cruelty, as are amazing even in the history of
Louis XI. Immediately upon the death of Charles,
he put his troops in motion, and advanced towards
the Netherlands. He corrupted the leading men
in the provinces of Burgundy and Artois, and fe-
duced them to desert their sovereign. He got
admiflion into some of the frontier towns by bri-
bing the governors; the gates of others were
opened to him in conlfequence of his intrigues
with the inhabitants. He negociated with Mary;
and, in order to render her odious to her filbjects,
lie betrayed to theml her mcft important secrets.
1H carried on a private correspondence with the
two minificrs whom fil chie'fly trufled, and then
(omlmunicatcd the letters which he had received
frorm them to the i;ltes of Slanders, who, enraged
at thcir perfidy, brought them immediately to
trial, tor'tucd themi with moll extreme cruelty,
and, unnlovted by the tears and intreatics of their
fovrcign, who klnew and approved of all tlat
the iniifters had done, they beheaded thcrm in
her presence '.

E Men). dc Cobeiiiics , liv. v. ch. 15. p. 309, &c.

WmtHIL.
lo6

MWHILE Louis, by this condut, unworthy of a SECT. II.
great monarch, was iecuring the pofllifon (t Bur- ~'""~

The TC ste e

oundy, Artois, and the towns on the Somme, the of thi,, the
tbates of Slanders carried on a negociation with ra.-riaze of

Ma~.yx;m-ilian

thi Emperor Frederick III. and concluded a trea- ,,ith the
rt of marriage between their sovereign and his son heil-eG of
Mlaaximilian, Archduke of Austria. The illuftri- AD. ). 47.
ous birth (f that Prince, as well as the high dig-
nity of which he had the prospect, rendered the
alliance honourable for Mary, while, from the dif-
tance of his hereditary territories, and the fcanti-
ness of his revenues, his power was so inconfide-
rable as did not excite thejealouty or fear of the
Flemings.

THUS Louis, by the caprice of his temper, and The inu-
the excess of his refinements, put the houle of elceo' ,leat

thon h slate

Austria in pofiellion of this noble inheritance. By ot Europe.
this acquisition, the foundation of the future gran-
deur of Charles V. was laid; and he became ma-
ser of those territories, which enabled him to car-
ry on his most formidable and decisive operations
against France. Thus, too, the fame monarch
who first united the interior force of France, and
established it on such a footing as to render it for-
midable to the reft of Europe, contributed, far
contrary to his intention, to raise up a rival power,
which, during two centuries, has thwarted the
mealures, opposed the arms, and checked the pro-
grefs of his fucceflors.

THE next event ofconfequence in the fifteenth Thll nt

century, was the expedition of Charles VIII. into os,,id,,ail
Italy. This occasioned revolutions no lels m1emo thL ...,J."n
ralle; produced alterations, which wcre more im- (l ,,l,!',:l'l.
mcdiately perceived, both in the military and A. . 1.94.
Political fyitem; rouzed the states of Europe to
bolder efiorts; and blended their affairs and in-
terests more closely together. The mild admiri-

itratiun

SECT. II. ftration of Charles, a weak but generous Prince,
`-ot--` seems to have revived the spirit and genius of the
&l this French nation, which the rigid despotism of his

father had depressed, and almost extinguilhed.
The ardour for military service, natural to the
French nobility, returned, and their young mo.
narch was impatient to distinguish his reign by
some splendid enterprize. While he was uncer-
tain towards what quarter he should turn his arms,
the follicitations and intrigues of an Italian politi-
cian, no less infamous on account of his crimes,
than eminent for his abilities, determined his
choice. Ludovico Sforza, having formed the de-
lign of depofirng his nephew the duke of Milan,
and of placing himself on the ducal throne, was lo
much afraid of a combination of the Italian pow-
ers to thwai t this measure, and to support the in.
jured Prince, with whom most of them were con-
neded by blood or alliance, that he saw the ne-
ceflity of securing the aid of some able protector.
The King of France was the person to whom he
applied; and without disclosing to him his own
intentions, he laboured to prevail with him to
march into Italy, at the head of a powerful army,
in order to seize the crown of Naples, to which
he had pretensions as heir of the house of Anjou.
The right to that kingdom, claimed by the An-
gevin family, had been conveyed to Louis Xl. by
Charles of Anjou, count of Maine and Provence.
Eut that sagacious monarch, though he took im-
nmcdiate poffcslion of thote territories of which
Charles was really master, totally difrcgarded his
ideal titlc to a kingdom, over which another Prince
reigned in tranquillity i ald uniibrmly declined in-
volving limfldf in the labyrinth of Italian poli-
ticks. His son, more adventurous, or more in-
conlfidcrate, emnbaiked eagerly in this enterprize;
aL,d contclnning all the remollnranccs of his minft

experiencal

experienced counsellors, prepared to carry it on SECT. I .
with the utmost vigour.

CHARLES wanted not power equal to such a great His refror.
undertaking. His father had tranimitted to him ccFori£,
such an ample prerogative, as gave him the en-
tire command of his kingdom. He himself
had added considerably to the extent of his
dominions, by his prudent marriage with the
heiress of Bretagne, which rendered him ma-
ser of that province, the last of the great fiefs
that remained to be annexed to the crown. He
soon assembled forces which he thought fufiici-
ent; and so impatient was he to enter on his ca-
reer as a conqueror, that sacrificing what was real,
for what was chimerical, he restored Roufillon to
Ferdinand, and gave up part of his father's ac-
quifitions in Artois to Maximilian, with a view of
:ducing there Princes not to moleit France, while
nle was carrying on his operations in Italy.

BUT so different were the efforts of the States Hi; ricarp-

of Europe in the fifteenth century, from those tia t.
which we shall behold in the course of this hifto-
ry, that the army, with which Charles under-
took this great enterprize, did not exceed twenty
thousand men. The train of artillery, however,
the ammunition, and warlike stores of every kind
provided for its use, were so great as to bear
Itme resemblance to the immense apparatus of
modern war g.

WHEN the French entered Italy, they met with it, r.ccfr.

nothing able to refil them. The Italian powers
having remained, during a long period, undi-
flurbed by the invasion of any foreign enemy,
had formed a fyflem with refpec to their afflirs,

C MvACi'1 Jllll. twi. ii 777

bthl

o109

Sl.cr TI. both in peace and war, peculiar to themselves.
'v-v- In order to adjust the interests, and balance the

power of the different flates into which Italy was
divided, they were engaged in perpetual and end-
less negociations with each other, which they con-
duted with all the subtlety of a refining and de-
ceitful policy. Their conrtefls in the field, when
they had recourse to arms, were decided in mock
battles, by innocent and bloodlcfs viteories. Upon
the first appearance of the danger which jow im-
pended, they had recourse to the arts which they
had studied, and employed their utmost fidll in
iltrigue in order to avert it. But this proving
ineffietual, their effeminate mercenaries, the only
military force that remained in the country, be-
ing fit only for the parade of service, were terri-
sied at the aspect of real war, and shrunk at its
approach. The impetuosity of the French va-
lour appeared to them irresistible. Florence, Pi-
fa, and Rome opened their gates as the French
army advanced. The profpecl of this dreadfil
invasion firuck one king of Naples with fiuch pa-
nic terror, that he died (if we may believe hifto-
rians) of the fright. Another abdicated his throne
from the iame pusillanimous spirit. A third fled
(out of his dominions, as soon as the enemy ap-
peared on the Neapolitan fiontiers. Charles, as-
ter marching thither from the bottom of the Alps.
with as much rapidity, and almost as little oppo-
fition, as if he had been on a progress through
liis own dnominicros, took quiet pullk'llion of tlil
throl e of Naples, and intimidated or gave law
to every power in Itaily.

itCn ffas, Su'CH was the conclusion of this expeditic!n1
u l,,s,,lI. xviich mull be confidtlid as lhe iill ilgreat (cXC-

,tlh

l l-. I titll) (js tiil c

I('\V pOI':

w S \wVhicl tIl' pIcilC (,I

I.,.., ,,i . . ..

b.l.,,. h L' 'I :ii()ijt1 litd acquirid, ai.d now began to excia'lt
PU cI, It
110

Its effets were no less considerable than its fuc- SECT IL
cess had been astonishing. The Italians, unable ' '
to resist the impression of the enemy which broke
in upon them, permitted him to hold on his
course undisturbed. They quickly perceived that
no tingle power, which they could rouze to adli-
on, was an equal match for a monarch, who ruled
over such extensive territories, and was at the
head of such a martial people ; but that a confe-
deracy might accomplish what the separate mem-
bers of it durst not attempt. To this expedien;t,
the only one that remained to deliver or to pre-
serve them from the yoke, they had recourse.
While Charles inconsiderately wafted his time at
Naples, in festivals and triumphs on account of
his palt successes, or was fondly dreaming of fu-
ture conquests in the East, to the empire of which
he now a(pired, they formed againit him a pow-
erful combination of almost all the Italian states,
supported by the Emperor Maximilian, and Ser-
dinand King of Aragon. The union of so many
powers, who suspended or forgot all their parti-
cular animofities, that they might a& with con-
cert against an enemy who had become formida-
ble to them all, awakened Charles from his
thoughtless security. He law now no profp[ec of
safety but in returning to France. An army of
thirty thousand men, afiembled by the allies, was
ready to obftrut his march; and though the
French, with a daring courage, which more than
counterbalanced their inferiority in number, broke
through that great body, and gained a victory,
which opened to their monarch a lase ;l:aii , i';-
to his own territories, he was firipped ot all his
conquests in Italy in as short a time as it had c,)tt
him to acquire them ; and the political fyrtem in
that country relnemd the f .ame apcilral.c as be-
fore his invaliou.

TI-Rl

Ill

SECT. II. THE sudden and decisive effet of this confede-
'vs be-J racy seems to have inftrufted the Princes and
comesthe statesmen of Italy as much, as the irruption of

'ieat objea the French had disconcerted and alarmed them,

of policy,
firt in Italy, They had now extended to the aifairs of Europe,
and theni the maxims of that political science which had

hitherto been applied only to regulate the opera.
tions of the petty flates in their own country.
They had discovered the method of preventing
any monarch from rising to fich a degree of pow-
er, as was inconsistent with the general liberty;
and had manifested the importance of attending
to that great secret in modern policy, the prefer-
vation of a proper diitribution of power among
all the members of the system into which the
states of Europe are formed. During all the wars
of which Italy now became the theatre, and
amidst the hostile operations which the impru-
dence of Louis XII. and the ambition of Ferdi-
nand of Aragon, carried on in that country, with
little interruption, from the close of the fifteenth
century, to that period at which the subsequent
hifftory commences, the maintaining a proper ba-
lance of power between the contending parties
became the great object of attention to the states-
men of Italy. Nor was the idea confined to them.
Sclf-prefcrvati6n taught other powers to adopt it.
It giew to be falhionable and universal. Froml
this azra we call trace the progress of that
intcrcourle between nations, which has liikcd the
pow crs of Europe so closely togetlier; and can
dilcern the opcrations of that provident policy,
vwliich, cltring iane, guards agailAl remote ail
conti:. ?;ti t (lalgcls ; wIich, in \war, hathli I:C-
vcUiinl r;I..id ;aI di.lh uliVC COII(IIqufs.
T'hr wal, in l-'l Is wS:l not the onlv crfiel o f theC operations

,lli,.tllc- . liic1 tli- Il. trilt

(, \\CIs ( o Evurope c;rried( on il

Li'i. gu,- taly..

'1 i<-) culi il' i tid o l r ii a lchal^,)
r.11 . ' ill

as the French had begun to make in the Rfate of SECT. 11,
their troops, general; and obliged all the Prin- -v
ces, who appeared on this new theatre of acion,
to eftablifli the military force of their kingdoms
on the fame footing with that of France. When
the feat of war came to be remote from the coun-
tries which maintained the contest, the service
of the feudal vassals ceased to be of any use; and
the neceflity of employing troops regularly train-
ed to arms, and kept in constant pay, came at
once to be evident. When Charles marched in-
to Italy, his cavalry was entirely composed of
those companies of Gendarmes, embodied by
Charles VII. and continued by Louis XI. his in-
fantry consisted partly of Swiss, hired of the
cantons, and partly of Gascons, armed and difci-
plined after the Swiss model. To there Louis
XII. added a body of Germans, well known in
the wars of Italy by the name of the Black Bands.
But neither of thefie monarchs made any account
of the feudal militia, or ever had recourse to
that military force which they might have com-
manded, in virtue of the ancient institutions in
their kingdom. Maximilian and 'Ferdinand, as
Coon as they began to at in Italy, employed the
fame instruments, and trusted the execution of
their plans entirely to mercenary troops.

THIS innovation in the military system was Teachthe

quickly followed by another, which the custom tile luterior
us cmlloyilng Swils in the Itraian wars, was the impotLnca
occalion of introducing. The arms and difci- of infnt

ill war.

Iline of the Swiss were different from those of o-
ther European nations. During their long and
violent firuggles in defence of their liberties a-
gainfl the house of Austria, whfle armies like
thole of other considerable Princcs, confifled
chiefly of heavy armed cavalry, the Swilfs Ibund
liat their poverty, and the finall number of gcn-
tlilnti r.Lfidilig in their country, at that tilme

\vl... 1. 1 barrien

I13

SECT. 11. barren and uncultivated, put it out of their pow.

er to bring into the field any body of horse capa.
ble of facing the enemy. Neceflity compelled
them to place all t r;cir confidence in infantry; and
in order to render it capable of withflanding the
shock of cavalry, they gave the soldiers breast-
plates and helmets as defnfive armour; together
with long spears, halberts, and heavy fvords as
weapons of offnce. They formed them into
large battalions, ranged in deep and close array,
so as to present on every fide a formidable front
to the enemy h. The men at arms could make
no imnpreflion on the solid strength of luch a body.
It repulscd the Aul-rians in all their attempts to
conquer Swifferland. It broke the Burgundian
Gendarmerie, which was scarce inferior to that
of France, either. in number or reputation: And
when first called to at in Italy, it bore down by
its irresistible force every enemy that attempted
to oppose it. These repeated proofs of the deci-
five effec of infantry, exhibited on such confpi-
cuous occasions, restored that service to reputa-
tion, and gradually re-established the opinion,
which had been long exploded, of its fiuperior im-
portance in the operations of war. But the glory
which the Swiss had acquired, having inspired
them with such high ideas of their own prowess
and consequence, as rendered them mutinous and
insolent, the Princes who employed them became
weary of depending on the caprice of foreign
mercenaries, and bIrgan to turn their attention to-
wards the improvement of their national infantry.

Natinal in- TI,: German powers having the command
'r.,li;ia- or i, whom nature has endowed with that
iinjiy. ftlc.dy coulrage, and perlivering strength, which

forms them to be soldiers, Toon modelled their
trools iin Ilch a manner, that they vied with the
Swils lithu i : dilcipline and valour.

b. MILJis,;l ArL oF War, b. ii. clIAp. ii. p. 451. T

THE

THI French monarchs, though more slowly, SEcT. 11.
a3d with greater difficulty, accustomed the im- nS nJ
pctuous spirit of their people to subordination and
discipline; and were at tfch pains to render their
national infantry refptCtable, that as early as the
reign of Louis XII. several gentlemen of high
ra:;k had so far abandoned their ancient ideas, as
to condescend to enter into that service i

THE Spaniards, whose situation made It diffi- In Spin,

cult to employ any other than their own national
troops, in the southern parts of Italy, which was
the chief scene of their operations in that country,
not only adopted the Swiss discipline, but impro-
ved upon it, by mingling a proper number of fol-
diers armed with heavy muskets in their battali-
ons; and thus formed that famous body of infan-
try, which, during a century and a half, was the
admiration and terror of all Europe. The Itali-
an states gradually diminished the number of
their cavalry, and, in imitation of their more
powerful neighbours, brought the strength of
their armies to consist in foot soldiers. From this
period the nations of Europe have carried on war
with forces more adapted to every lpecies of ser-
vice, more capable of ating in every country,
and better fitted both for making conquelts, and
obr preserving them.

As their efforts in Italy led the people of Eu- rhe Italian

rote to these improvements in the art of war, wars otcaf
they gave them likewifi the first idea of the ex- crafei of
pence which accompanies great and continued o- te,,uelci
cr;tions, and accullomed .them to the burden of Luropc.
Iilofe impolitions, wlich are necefiia-y for ulp-
purting them. While the feudal policy fubfifled
in full vigour, while armies were compol)fed of
military vafhils called forth to attack sbme neigh-
.i iaintoi., toii. x. p.18 VleMr . de Fl1curanl s, 141.

I l. bouring

II5

SECT. Il. bouring power, and to perform, in a short cam-
'VY-' paign, the services which they owed to their so.

vereign, the expence of war was extremely mo.
derate. A small fulbfidy enabled a Prince tobe.
gin and to finifi his greattft operations. Blt
when Italy became the theatre on which the pow.
ers of Europe contended for fiuperiority, the
preparations requisite for such a distant expediti-
on, the pay of armies kept constantly on foot,
their fubfiftance in a foreign country, the sieges
to be undertaken, and the towns to be defend-
ed, (welled the charges of war immensely, and
by creating demands unknown in less aCtive
times, multiplied taxes in every kingdom.
The progress of ambition, however, was so ra-
pid, and Princes extended their operations so
fast, that it was impoflible at first to eftablilh
funds proportional to the increase of expence
which these occasioned. When Charles VIII.
invaded Naples, the fiums requisite for carrying
on that enterprize so far exceeded those which
France had been accustomed to contribute, that
before he reached the frontiers of Italy, his
treasury was exhausted, and the domeftick re-
fburces, of which his extensive prerogative gave
him the command, were at an end. As he
durst not venture to lay any new imposition on
his people, oppressed already with the weightd
unusual burdens; the only expedient that re-
mained was, to borrow of the Genoese as much
money as would enable him to continue his
march. But he could not obtain the fum that
was requlifite, without contenting to pay annual-
ly the exorbitant interest of forty-two livres fol
every hutndred that he received k. We may
observe the lame disproportion between the es-
forts and revenues of other Princes, his contem-
porarits. IFrom this period, taxes went on in-

It le, ll de Coulineu, lib. vii c. 5. p. 440.

creasing;

creating; and during the reign of Charles V. SecT. II.
filch fumsr were levied in every state, as would J
have appeared prodigious at the close of the sis-
teenth century, and gradually prepared the way
for the more exorbitant exadions ofmodern times.

THE last tranfation, previous to the reign of The league

Charles V. that merits attention on account of afotherbm
its influence upon the slate of Europe, is the portantoc-
league of Cambray. To humble the republick currenc
of Venice, and to divide its territories, was the
objeft of all the powers who united in this con-
federacy. The civil confitution of Venice,
stablished on a firm basis, had fiffered no con-
fiderable alteration for several centuries ; during
which, the state conduced its affairs by maxims
of policy no less prudent than vigorous, and ad-
hered to there, with an uniform confidfent spirit,
which gave that commonwealth great advantage
over other states, whose views and measures
changed as often as the form of their govern-
ment, or the persons who adminifiered it. By
there unintermitted exertions of wisdom and va-
lour, the Venetians enlarged the dominions of
their commonwealth, until it became the most
considerable power in Italy. While their exten-
five commerce, the useful and curious manu-
faftures which they carried on, together with
their monopoly of the precious commodities of
the Eafs, rendered Venice the most opulent
state in Europe.

THEIR power was the objeEt of terror to their iie no-

Italian neighbours. Their wealth was viewed tivsofit.
with envy by the greatest monarchs, who could
not vie with their private citizens in the magni-
ficence of their buildings, in the richness of
their dress and furniture, or in splendor and ele-
gance of living '. Julius II. whole ambition
I Heliani oratio apud Goldaltuui in polit. Imperial. p. oso.

1 3 Vtb;S

SE CT. II. was superior, and his abilities equal, to those of

any Pontiff who ever fat on tile Papal throne,
formed the idea of this league against the Vene-
tians, and endeavoured, by applying to there
passions which I have mentioned, to perfuadeo.
ther Princes tojoin in it. By working upon the
fears of tie Italian powers, and upon tile ava.
rice of the monarchs beyond the Alps,he induced
them, in concurrence with other causes, which
it is not my province to explain, to form againfI
there haughty republicans one of the most ex,
tensive confederacies Europe had ever beheld.

The rapid THE Emperor, the King of France, the
rheg eff King of Aragon, the Pope, were principals in
rates. the league of Cambray, to which almost all thi

Princes of Italy acceded, the least considerable
of them hoping for Come share in the spoils of a
slate, which they already deemed to be devoted
to destruction. The Venetians might have di
verted this florm, or have broken its force; bui
with a prefurnptuous rashness, to which there i
nothing similar in the course of their history, the.e
waited its approach. The impetuous valourol
the French rendered ineffetual all their precan
tions for the safety of the republick ; and the fa.
tal battle of Ghiarradadda entirely ruined the ar
my, on which they relied for defence. Julius
fcized all the towns which they held in the eccle-
fiattical territories. Ferdinand re-annexed the
towns of which they had got possession on the
coast of Calabria, to his Neapolitan dominions,
Maximilian, at the head of a powerful army,
advanced tovards Venice on the one fide. The
French pushed their conquests on the other
The Venetians, surrounded by fn many enemies,
nrd left without one ally, fink from the height
f preftimption to the depths of despair; aba)n-
doncd all their territories on the continint;

and
tx8

.nd shut themselves up in their capital, as their SS cr. II.
last refuge, and the only place which they hoped V
to preserve.

THIS rapid success, however, proved fatal to the ni: ion
confederacy. The members of it, united while arice mo'g
engaged in seizing their prey, began to feel their
ancientjealoufy and animofities revive, as soon as
they had a prospect of dividing it. When the Ve-
netians observed there symptoms of alienation and
distrust, a ray of hope broke in upon them; the
spirit natural to their councils returned ; they re-
lumed filch wisdom and firmness, as made some
atonement for their former imprudence and de-
jeftion; they recovered part of the territory which
they had loft; they appeased the pope and Ser-
dinand by well-timed concellions in their favour;
and at length dissolved the confederacy, which
had brought their commonwealth to the brink of
ruin.

JULIUS, elated with beholding the effcets of a N,, oije

league which he himself had planned, and ima- ', ther P.oi' -
gining that nothing was too arduous for mirn to biion.
undertake, conceived the idea of expeiiing every
foreign power out of Italy, and bent all the force
of his mind towards executing a scheme so well
suited to his vast and entr: :izing genius. Ile di-
rcEted his first attack againfl the Frelclh, wlho, on
many accounts, were more odious to ilie Italians,
than any of the foreigners who had acquired do-
minion in their country. By his activity and ad-
dress, lie prevailed un most of the powers, who
had joined in the league of Ciamii;ay, to turn
their arms againfl: the King of France, their for-
mer ally; and engaged Henry V11. who had late-
ly ascended the throne of England, to favour their
operations by invading France. Louis Xll. rcifl -
ed all the cflirts of this formidable and uncxFpct

1 4 cd

SEcT. 1I. ed confederacy, with undaunted fortitude. Hofti.
1."V ' lities were carried on, during several campaigns,

in Italy, on the frontiers of Spain, and in Picardy,
with alternate success. Exhausted, at length, by
the variety as well as extent of his operations; un.
able to withstand a confederacy which brought a.
gainfl him superior force, conduted with wisdom,
and acting with perseverance; he found it necef.
fary to conclude separate treaties of peace with his
enemies; and the war terminated with the loss of
every thing which the French had acquired in Ita.
ly, except the castle of Milan, and a few incon-
fiderable towns in that dutchy.

By this the THE various negociations carried on during this
amonTgthe busy period, and the different combinations form.
European ed among powers hitherto little connected with
reafes. i each other, greatly increased that intercourse be.

tween the nations of Europe, which I have men
tioned as one effect of the events in the fifteentl
century. While the greatness of the objects a
which they aimed, the distant expeditions whict
they undertook, as well as the length and obfti
nacy of the contests in which they engaged, obli
ged them to exert themselves with a vigour an(
perseverance unknown in the preceding ages.

T'hey are THOSE active scenes which the following Hilto

eprelrd for ry will exhibit, and the variety and importance o

the tranfac- r
ions of the those transactions winch ditinguifl the period t(
sixteenth which it extends, are not to be ascribed solely t(
ntui Y. the ambition, to the abilities, or to the rivalnhi[

of Charles V. and of Francis I. The kingdomn
of Europe had arrived at such a degree of im
provement in the internal administration of go
vernment, and Princes had acquired such corn
mand of the national force which was to be exert
ed in foreign wars, that they were in a conditiol
to enlarge e
the sphere of their operations, and tL

incrcafi
120

increase the vigour of their efforts. Their con- SECT. IL.
tefis in Italy, which led them first to try the ex-
tent of the power that they had acquired, gave
rife to so many opposite claims and pretensions,
excited such a spirit of discord and rivalfhip be-
tween nations, and laid the foundation of so many
quarrels, as could not fail of producing extraor-
dinary convulsions in Europe; and the sixteenth
century opened with the certain profpet of its
abounding in great and interesting events.

A VIEW

## SECTION III. View of the political Constitution of the principal States in Europe, at the Commencement of the sixteenth Century.

A
V I E W.

O F THE
PROGRESS OF SOCIETY

I N
EUROPE,

FROM THE
SUBVERSION OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE,

TO THE
,BEGINNING OF THE SIXTEENTH CENTURY.

S E C T I O N III.
l'iitw rs te politial Conl#/itution of the prinl;ip

Slates in Europe, at the Co.mmencement of' the ix.
leentl Ccnltuy.

rc(T.lr. TT AVING thus enumeratcd the princi.al
tsN 11 caules and events, the influence of wh\lic
-A confidceia-
b laricty extended to all the flates in Europe, and contli-
in tIe ,oil- buted either to improve their internal governmenc
ilc .linil-ent and police, or to enlarge thlle ie

ihle (1 til:ir adi
nutio. of vity, and to auginent their national force; nw

t ilhing remains, in order to prepare mny readers inr
etc.trin . w'ithi full information upon perusing ihe

Hiilory

History of the Reign of Charles V. but to give SECT. ill.
fIme view of the particular conflitution and form '---
of civil government, in each of tile nations which
aaed any considerable part during that period.
While these institutions and occutrrences, \xhlich I
have mentioned, formed the peoplc of Europe to
resemble each oltier, and conducted them from
barbarism to refinement, in the fame path, and
with almost equal fteys, there were other circum-
stances which occasioned a difference in their po-
litical cftabliflrments, and gave rife to tlhofe pecu-
liar modes of government, which have produced
such variety in the charadler and genius of nati-
on:s.

IT is no less neceiTary to become acquainted Neceitary to

with the latter, than to have contemplated thee for- :e os-e teh
mer. The view which I have exhibited of the whcn
causes and events, lwhoe influence was universal, Cbean hi'
will enable my readers to account for the firpri- reign.
zing resemblance among the nations of Europe in
their interior police, and foreign operations. But,
without a diftinat knowledge of the peculiar form
and genius of their civil government, a great part
of their tranfandions mull appear altogether my-
flerious and inexplicable. The hilforia::s of par-
ticular States, as they seldom extended their vicve.s
farther than to th u amitmnt or inirudtion of
their fellow-citizens, by whorm they might pre-
iunme that all domcftic! culloms and inflitutions
were perfedtly understood, have often neglected
to descend into fucli details wiith ef)ece to these,
as are Ililficient to convey to foreiglners full light
and information concerning the occurrcccs '.which
they relate. But a history, which comprichcndl
the tranfadions of f( many difi'ret:t countrivs,
would be extremely imperlct', withlont a previ-
ous lurvey of their conflitutiion and pu!itic:l falue.
It is from his knowlcdge of the-!:, tl':!t lie readler

m ult

123

SECT. I1. mutt draw those principles; which will enable him

v--'- to judge with discernment, and to decide with

certainty concerning the conduct of nations.

A MINUTE detail, however, of the peculiar

forms and regulations in every country, would lead
to deductions of immeasurable length. To sketch
out the great lines which distinguish and charac-
terize each government, is all that the nature of
my present work will admit of, and all that is
necessary to illustrate the events which it re-
cords.

TheStateof AT the opening of the sixteenth century, the
Italy. political face of Italy was extremely different from

that of any other part of Europe. Instead of those
extensive monarchies, which occupied the reft of
the continent, that delightful country was parcel-
led out among many small states, each of which
possessed sovereign and independant jurifdiAion.
The only monarchy in Italy was that of Naples.
The dominion of the Popes was of a peculiar fpe-
cics, to which there is nothing similar either in an-
cient or modern times. In Venice and Florence,
a republican form of government was established.
Milan was tlbject to sovereigns, who had assumed
no higher title than that of Dukes.

ThePapi THIE Pope was the first of there powers in dig-
odinity the nity, and not the least considerable by the extent
highell in
Fuiopc. of his territories. In the primitive church, the

jlu'ifdiCtion of bishops was equal and co-ordinate
They derived, perhaps, tome degree of confide
ration from the dignity of the See in which they
prelided. They poflctlcd, however, no real au-
thority or pre-eminence, but what they acquired
by filperior abilities, or (uperior fandtity. As Rom-
Il;d lo long been the scat of Empire, and capital

ni

of the world, its bishops were on that account en- SE CT. III.
titled to refped; they received it; but during -,V '

Origin and

several ages they claimed and received nothing progress of
more. From there humble beginnings, they ad- the Papal
vanced with such an adventurous and well-diret- power.
ed ambition, that they eflablifhed a spiritual do-
minion over the minds and sentiments of men, to
mwhich all Europe submitted with implicit obedi-
ence. Their claim of universal jurifdition, as
heads of the church, and their pretensions to in-
fallibility in their decisions, as successors of St.
Peter, are as chimerical, as they are repugnant
to the genius of the Christian religion. But on these
foundations, the superstition and credulity of man-
kind enabled them to erect an amazing super-
structure. In all ecclesiastical controversies, their
decisions were received as the infallible oracles of
truth. Nor was the plenitude of their power con-
fined to there alone; they dethroned monarchs;
dilpofed of crowns; absolved fubjets from the
obedience due to their Sovereigns; and laid king-
doms under interdicts. There was not a state in
Europe which had not been disquieted by their
ambition. There was not a throne which they
had not shaken ; nor a Prince, who did not trem-
ble at their power.

NOTHING was wanting to render this Empire Thcterrito-

abfulute, and to establish it on the ruinis of all ci- op'cliae. -
vil authority, but that the Popes should have pof- quateto up-
sessed such a degree of temporal power, as was I-ipttuI j,-
fuflicient to second and enforce their spiritual de- rifdicici.
crees. Happily for mankind, while their fpiri-
tual juricditlion was most extensive, and at its
greatell height, their temporal property was ex-
tremely limited. They were powterful Pontilts,
formiidable at a distance ; but they were petty
Princes, without any conliderable doneltick force.
'hlley had early eudeavoured, indeed, to acquire

tcrlritory

SECT. TJ. territory by arts, similar to those which they had
-'"-- ' employed in extending their jrifdiction. Under

pretence of a donation from Constantine, and of
another from Charlemagne or his father Pepin,
they attempted to take poffeflioi of some towns
adj]ice;t to Rome. But there donations were sic-
titious, and availed them little. The benefhai-
ons, for v.hich they were indebted to the credu-
liry of the Norman adventurers, who conquered
Naples, and to the fuperflirion of the countels
MPatilda, were real, and added ample domains tu
the Holy See.

Th-er nu- EuT the power of the Popes did not ?ncreafe in
tirlit 1w proortion to the extent of territory which they
tfrrikolieb had acquired. In the dominions annexed to the

i ittdl Holy See, as well as in those subject to other Prin-

ces in Itrly, the sovereign of a slate was far from
having the command ot the force which it con-
tained. During the turbulence and confusion of
the middle ages, the powerful nobility or leadcrs
of popular factions in Italy, had seized the govern-
ment of different towns; and after strengthening
their fortifications, and taking a body of merce-
naries into pay, they set up for independancc.
The territory which the church had gained, was
filled with fich petty tyrants, who left the Pope
hardly the shadow of dominion.

It .cir-' As tl hee urufrpations almoff annihilated thePapal
Ity (n, .,Ii- power in the greater part of the towns lihbjed to
ti,,no ifl tile church, the Roman barons frequently dil:
Rto'man ba-
trosl; 1puted the authority of tile Popes, even in Rome

itself. In the twelfth century, an opinion beganl
to be lpropagated " That as the fundion ot ec-
cl fi;i ics as .piii ly Ili uitual, they ought to pof
t( s io li'ri .ity, and to claiin no temporal juril'
dlidion ; Ibn, accordling to the laudable example
of tli cir lp;ri J 'cd.il i ithei rim itive church, fhoukl

fuhblilt

filbfift wholly upon their tithes, or upon the vo- SECT.II L
lintary oblations of the people 1. This doctrine
being addressed to men, who had beheld the scan-
dl:ous manner in which the avarice and ambition
of the clergy had prompted them to contend for
wealth, and to exercise power, they listened to it
with fond attention. The Roman barons, who had
felt most fenlibly the rigour of ecclesiastical op-
irellion, adopted these ienriments with such ar-
dour, that they set themlelves inflantly to shake
off the yoke. They endeavoured to restore rome A. D. 1143.
image of their ancient liberty, by reviving the in-
tfitution of the Roman ienate, in which they vest-
ed fupretne authority; committing the executive
power rometimes to one chief fenaror, sometimes
to two, and rometimes to a magistrate dignified
with the name of The Patrician. The Popes ex-
erted themselves with vigour, in order to check
this fatal encroachment on theirjurildiaion. One
of them, finding all his endeavours ineffedual,
was so much mortified, that extreme grief cut
short his days. Another, having ventured to at-
tack the lenators at the head of some armed men,
was mortally wounded in the fray b. During a
considerable period, the power of the Popes, be-
fore which the greatest monarchs i;r Europe trem-
bled, was circumscribed within licli narrow li-
mits in their own capital, that they durfi: scarce
exert any adt of authority without the permiflion
a.ld concurrence of the senate.

ENCROACHMENTS were made upon the Papal and by thi

authority, not only by the ufrlipations of the Ro- of the Ro-ll
man nobility, but by the mutinous f iriit of the maln i'loi'I,
people. During seventy years of the fourteenth A. D. 130o.
century, the Popes fixed their relidence in Avig- . to

a Otto Frifingenfis id GeCtis Slider. Imp. lil). ii cap. 2o.
h Otto Srising. Chron. lib. vii cap. 2z, 3' . 1!. i!e (;c.ll
Frid, lib. i. c, 27. lMuratQri Annali d' Italia, vul, it. ;9S 4)o .

lio)].

SECT. III. non. The inhabitants of Rome, acciftomed to
~'l.^.. confider themselves as the descendants of the peo-

ple who had conquered the world, and had given
laws to it, were too high-fpirited to submit with
patience to the delegated authority of those per-
sons, to whom the Popes committed the govern-
ment of the city. On many occasions, they op-
posed the execution of the Papal mandates, and
on the slightest appearance of innovation or op-
preilion, they were ready to take arms in defence
of their own immunities. Towards the middleof
the fourteenth century, being instigated by Nico-
las Rienzo, a man of low birth and a leditious
flirit, but of popular eloquence, and an enterpri.
zing ambition, they drove all the nobility out of
the city,eftablifhed a democratical form of govern-
ment, elected Rienzo Tribune of the people, and
inverfed him with extensive authority. But though
the frantick proceedings of the tribune Coon over-
turned this new system; though the government
of Rome was reinstated in its ancient form; yet
every fresh attack contributed to weaken the pa-
pal jurisdiction ; and the turbulence of the people
concurred with the spirit of independance among
the nobility, to circumscribe it within very nar-
row bounds '. Gregory VII. and other domineer-
ing Pontiffs, accomplished those great things which
rendered them so formidable to the Emperors
with whom they contended, not by the force of
their arms, or by the extent of their power, but
by the dread of their spiritual censures, and by the
effcd of their intrigues, which excited rivals, and
called forth enemies agaiuft every Prince, whom
they wished to depress or to destroy.

c Hirorie lPiorentine de Giov. VilIani, lib xi. C. .89.04

ap. Murat. Script. Reruin I1.al. vol. xiii Vita tie Cola dli 1i-
c1)pz, ip. viurat. Antiq. tal vol iii. p. 399, &c. HIill. e
Nic. fienzy, par M di . lluili)raetux, Ip. 9t, &d.

MAN\
T28

MANY attempts were made by the Popes, not S CT. III.
only to humble there usurpers, who lorded it 'iAder
over the cities in the ecclesiastical state, but to Vl.andJuli-
break the turbulent spirit of the Roman people. u I. .rens e
There were long unsuccessful. At last Alexan- considerable
der VI. with a policy no less artful than flagitious, vPinccs
subdued and extirpated most of them, and ren-
dered the Popes maiters of their own dominions.
The enterprizing ambition of Julius II. added
conquests of no inconsiderable value to the patri-
mony of St. Peter. Thus the Popes, by degrees,
became powerful temporal Princes. Their ter-
ritories, in the age of Charles V. were of greater
extent than at present; their country was better
cultivated, and more populous; and as they
drew large contributions from every part of Eu-
rope, their revenues far exceeded those of the
neighbouring powers, and rendered them capa-
ble of more sudden and vigorous efforts.

THE genius of the Papal government, how- Defea.in
ever, was better adapted to the exercise of fpiri- theleitUca,
tual dominion, than of temporal power. With doniaioa.
refpeat to the former, all its maxims were steady
and invariable. Every new Pontiffadopted the
plan of his predecessor. By education and habit
Ecclesiastics were so formed, that the character
of the individual was funk in that of the profelli-
an; and the passions of the man were sacrificed
to the interest and honour of the order. The
hands which held the reins of administration
nlight change; but the spirit which conducted
them was always the fame. While the measures
of other governments fluctuated, and the objects
a't which they aimed varied, the church kept
'n)e end in view; and to this unrelaxing constancy
'tf pursuit, it was indebted for its success in the
M)Ideit attempts ever made by human ambi-
~i!' . U

129
K

B 1rT

CT.1- BUT in their civil administration, the Pope3
. v foliowed no 'uch uniform or confitent plan,

There, as in other governments, the charafter,
the passions, and the interests of the person who
had the fiipreme direAion of affairs, occafioneda
variation both in objects and measures. As few
'Prelates reached theifummit ofecclefiaftical digni-
ty, until they were far advanced in life, a change
of masters was more frequent in the Papal domi
nions'than in other states, and the political system
was, of course, less flable and permanent. Every
'Pope was eager to make the' moif of the (hort
.period, during which he had the profped of en-
joying power, in order to aggrandize his family,
and to attain his private ends; and it was often
the first bufhnefs of his successor to undo all that
he had done, and to overturn what he had efta.
'bli(hed.

As ecclefiafticks were trained to pacifick artS

and early initiated. in the myRteries of that policy,
by -which the court of Rome extended or sup
ported its spiritual dominion, the Popes were apt
,to conduEt their temporal affairs with the fame
.spirit; and in all their measures were more read)
to employ thie refinements of intrigue, than the
force of arms. It.was in the Papal court that ad.
dress and subtlety in negociation first became
science; and during the sixteenth century, Rom,
was confidered as the school in which it could b
best acquired.

As the decorum of their ecclefiaflical charade

.prevei te'ihe Popes fiom placing themfelvesa
the head of their armies, or taking the command
in peribn, of the military force in their domin;
ons, they were afraid to arm their subje&s; an
in all their operations, whether offensive or defer
five, they trusted entirely to mercenary troops.

As their power and dominions could not de- SeCT. II..

scend to their posterity, the Popes were less folli- -
citous than other Princes to form or to encourage
schemes of publick utility and improvement.
Their tenure was only for a short life; present
advantage was all that they attended to, to
squeeze and to amass, not to melliorate, was their
obje&. They erected, perhaps, some work of
ostentation, to remain as a monument of their
Pontificate; they found it necessary, at some
times, to establish useful inflitutions, in order to
tooth and silence the turbulent populace of Rome;
but plans of general benefit to their fubjets, and
framed with a view to futurity, were rarely ob-
je&s of attention.in the Papal policy. The patri-
mony of St. Peter was worse governed than any
part of Europe; and though a generous Pontiff
might suspend for a little, or counter-a.t the es-
fe&s of those vices which are peculiar to the ad-
ministration of ecclefiafticks; the disease not on-
ly remained incurable, but has even gone on in-
creafing.from age to age; and the decline of.the
state has kept pace with its progress.

ONE circumstance, farther, concerning the ThePope

Papal government, is so singular, as to merit at- derivc tome
.tentioi. As the spiritual supremacy and tempo- from the
ral power were united in one person, and uni- union ot

their rpiritu-

formly aided each other in their operations, they ai and tem-
became so blended together, that it was difficult poral au"t"'
to separate them, even in imagination. The po- ry
tentates who found it necefiary to oppose the
measures which the Popes pursued as temporal
Princes, could not divest themselves of the reve-
rence which they imagined to be due to them as
heads of the church, and vicars of Jefis Christ.
It was with reluctance that they could be brought
to a rupture with them; they were averse to pufl
iheir operations against them to extremity ; they

K a listened

listened eagerly to the first overtures of accom.
modation, and were willing to procure it almoR
upon any terms. Their consciousness of this en.
couraged the enterprizing Pontiffs, who filled the
Papal throne about the beginning of the sixteenth
century, to engage in schemes seemingly the
most extravagant. They trusted, that if their
temporal power was not sufficient to carry them
through with success, the refpet paid to their
tfIiritual dignity would enable them to extricate
themselves with facility and with honour d. But
when Popes came to take part more frequently in
the contests among Princes, and to engageas
principals or auxiliaries in every war kindled in
Europe, this veneration for their sacred charac-
ter began to abate; and striking instances will
occur in the following history, of its being al-
most totally extinct.

OF all the Italian powers, the republickof
Venice, next to the Pope, was most connected

d The manner in which Louis XII. of France undertook

and carried on war against Julius II. remarkably illustrates this
observation. Louis foleinnly consulted the clergy of France,
whether it was lawful to take arms against a Pope, who
had wantonly kindled war in Europe, and whom neither the
faith of treaties, nor gratitude for favours received, nor the
decoumn of his character, could restrain from the most vio-
lent aaions, to which the lust of power prompts ambitious
Princes. Though his clergy authorized the war, yet Allne
of Bretagne, his Queen, entertained scruples with regard to
the lawtulnefs of it. The King hiifnelf, from foine filper-
flition of the fame kind, carried it on faintly ; and, upon eve-
ly Irelh advanltage, reneved his propufitions of peace. Mec
zcray, -lift. de France, fol. edit. 1685. tons. i. 85z. 1 alla
piodutce alnothes proof of this reverence for the Papal chaiac-
ie: iill ou1 c firiking. Guicciasdini, the most sagacious. per-
lhmp, of all inlll(( n historians, and the boldest in painting the
vites and ambition of the Popes, rcprcfents the death ot
Niigliau. a Spalill officer, who was killed during the siege of
Naples, as a puiililllnent inflicted on him by heaven, on sC
c,.,)ullt ( l. Ii. hav:ng opposed the setting oftCleilcnt VII. at ii.
Ltrty. Gulic.Hiltoriad'ltalia, Genev. t645 vol.ii.lib.8 p 4671

with

132
SECT.Ill

Conflitution
ofthe repub-
lick of Ve-
nice, with
its rife and
progress.

with the reft of Europe. The rife of that corn- SiCT. Ill.
monwealth, during the inroads of the Huns in '" '
the filth century; the singular situation of its
capital in the small ifics of the Adriatick gulf;
and the more singular form of its civil conflitiu-
tion, are generally known. If we view the
Venetian government as calculated for the order
of nobles alone, its inltitutions are so excellent;
tile deliberative, legislative and executive pow-
ers are so admirably distributed and adjusted,
that it muilt be regarded as a perfet model of
political wisdom. But if we confider it as form-
ed for a numerous body of people subject to its
j.irirdiction, it will appear a rigid and partial
aristocracy, which lodges all power in the hands
of a few members of the community, while it
degrades and oppresses the reft.

THE spirit of government, in a common- refrea,;

wealth of this species, was, of course, timid ent, part-
and jealous. The Venetian nobles distrusted cularly ith
their own fubje'ts, and were afraid of allowing mlitary
them the use of arms. They encouraged among operations.
th'em the arts of industry and commerce; they
employed them in manufatiures and in navigi-
tion; but never admitted them into the troops
vhich the slate kept in its pay. The military
force of the republick confided entirely of foreign
mercenaries. The command of thle was never
trulled to noble Venetians, left they should ac-
quire such influence over the army, as might
cidanger the publick liberty ; or become accuf-
tomed to the exercise of fich power, as would
make them unwHiling to return to the condition
of private citizens. A foldlier of fortune was
placed at the head of the armies of the common-
wealth; and to obtain that honour, was the
great object of the Italian Conotitteri, or leaders
us bands, hllo,h in the filteenth and sixteenth

K 3 centuries,

SecT. II. centuries, made a trade of war, and raised and
-'.r., hired out soldiers to different states. But the

fanme suspicious policy, which induced them to
employ these adventurers, prevented their pla.
cing entire confidence in therri. Two noblemen
appointed by the senate, accompanied their ar.
fny when it took the field, with the appellation
of Proveditori, and like the field-deputies of the
Dutch republick in later times, observed all the
motions of the general, and checked and con.
trouled him in all his operations.

A REPUBLICK, with such civil and military

inflitutions, was not formed to make conquefis,
While its fubjeds were disarmed, and its nobles
excluded from military command, it carried on
its warlike enterprizes with great disadvantage
This ought to have taught the Venetians to
make felf-prefervation, and the enjoyment of
domefRick security, the objeAs of their policy.
But republicks are apt to be reduced by the fpiit
of ambition, as well as Princes. When the
Venetians so far forgot the interior defects in
their government, as to aim at extensive con.
quests, the fatal blow, which they received in
the war excited by the league of Cambray, con-
vinced them of the imprudence and danger of
making violent efforts, in opposition to the genil
us and tendency of their constitution.

EYtcllenc IT is not, however, by its military, but by
of it aval its naval and commercial power, that the im-
inflhitutiolnl.

portance of the Venetian commonwealth mill
be estimated. In the latter, the real force and
nerves of the state consisted. The jealoify of
government did not extend to this department.
N.thing was apprehended from this quarter,
that could prove formidable to liberty. The
senate encouraged the nobles to trade, and to

serve

-_ __ _ _ _I
_

serve on board the fleet. They became mer- SE'cT.I1T.
chants and admirals. They encreafed the wealth -
of their country by their induflry. They added
to its dominions, by the valour with which they
conducted its naval armnaments.

THE Venetian commerce was an inexhaustible The extent
source of opulence. All the nations in Europe de- ofts"'
pended upon them, not only for the commodities
of the East, but for various manufactures fabri-
cated by them alone, or finified with a dexterity
and elegance unknown in other countries. Fromi
this extensive commerce, thle slate derived fucl
immense supplies, as concealed these vices in its
constitution, which I have mentioned; and en-
abled it to keep on foot such armies, as were not
only an over-match for the force which any of its
neighbours could bring into the field, but were
sufficient to contend, for Come time, with the pow-
erful monarchs beyond the Alps. During its
struggles with the Princes united against it by the
league of Cambray, the republick levied fums
which, even in the present age, would be deenm-
ed considerable; and while the King of France
paid the exorbitant interest which 1 have menti-
oned for the money advanced to him, and the
Emperor eager to borrow, but destitute of credit,
was known by the name of Miaxzimilan the Money-
lefi, the Venetians raised whatever rums they
pleated, at the moderate premium of five in the
hundred ·.

THE conffitution of Florence was rerfedly the The coniti.
reverse of that of Venice. It partook as much of tti of

Florence.

tlic democratical turbulence and licentioulihefs, as
the other of ariftocratical rigour. Florence, how-
ever, was a commercial, not a military democra-

e Hlif. de In ligue raite a Camnbray par M. l'Ab1d le Bos.
lib. v. Sandi. Stia Civil Vlne.iana, lib. viii, c. 6.p. t i., &c.

K 4 cy.

SECT.III. Cy. The nature of its institutions were favour.
"^-xV' able to commerce, and the genius of the people

was turned towards it. The vast wealth which
the family of Medici had acquired by trade; ad.
ded to the magnificence, the generosity, and the
virtue of the firtt Cosmo, gave him such an afcen.
dant over the affections as well as the councils of
his countrymen, that though the forms of popu.
lar government were preserved, though the va.
rious departments of administration were filled by
magistrates distinguished by the ancient names,
and elected in the usual manner, he was in reality
the head of the commonwealth, and in the ftati-
on of a private citizen he pofleffed supreme autho.
rity. Cosmo transmitted a considerable degree
of this power to his descendants; and during the

reater part of the fifteenth century, the political
fate of Florence was extremely singular. The
appearance of republican government subsisted,
the people were paflionately attached to it, and on
some occasions contended warmly for their privi-
leges, and yet they permitted a single family to
aflume a direction of their affairs, almost as abfo.
Jute as if it had been formally invested with fove-
reign power. Thejealoufy of the Medici concur-
red with the commercial spirit of the Florentines,
in putting the military force of the republick up-
on the fame. footing with that of the other Italian
states. The troops, which the Florentines em-
ployed in their wars, consisted almost entirely of
mercenary soldiers, furnished by the Condottieri, or
leaders of bands, whom they took into their pay.

The confi- IN the kingdom of Naples, to which the fove-
the kingdom reignty of the island of Sicily was annexed, the
of Naples. feudal government was established in the fame

form, and with the fame defeds, as in thle other
nations of Europe. The frequent and violent
revolutions which happened in that monarchy,

had

had confiderahly increared there defects, and SEcTr.ll.
rendered them more intolerable. The flccef- --r
sion to the crown of Naples had been so often in-
terrupted or altered, and so many Princes of so-
reign blood had taken poffeffio of the throne,
that the Neapolitan nobility had loft, in a great
measure, that attachment to the family of their
sovereigns, as well as that reverence for their per-
foils, which, in other feudal kingdoms, contri-
buted to set fume bounds to the encroachments of
the barons upon the royal prerogative and power.
At the fame time, the different pretenders to the
crown, being obliged to court the barons who ad-
hered to them, and on whose support they de-
pended for the success of their claims, they aug-
mented their privileges by liberal concefions, a.;d
connived at their boldest usurpations. Even when
feated on the throne, it was dangerous for a Prince,
who held his sceptre by a disputed title, to ven-
ture on any ftep towards extending his own pow-
er, or circumscribing that of the nobles,

FROM all these causes, the kingdom of Naples
was the most turbulent of any in Europe, and the
authority of its Monarchs the least extensive.
Though Ferdinand I. who began his ieign in the
year one thousand four hundred and lixty-eighr,
attempted to break the power of the aristocracy;
though his son Alfonso, that he might crush it at
once by cutting off the leaders of greatest repu-
tation and influence among the Neapolitan barons,
ventured to commit one of the most perfidious
and cruel actions recorded in hiflory; the crder A. r. 1487.
of nobles was neverthelels more exalperattd than
humbled by the blow t. The resentment u hich
there outrages excited was so violent, and the
power of the malecontent nobles was still ib for.
f Giannone, book xxviii, char. 2, vol ii. p.l in, &c.

mlidable,

SET III. midable, that to these ma'y be ascribed, in agreat

JV~ degree, the ease and rapidity with which Charles

VIII. conquered the kingdom of Naples g.

State of the THE event that gave rife to the violent contests
dispute con- concerning the licceflion to the crown of Naples
cerning the
,ight of and Sicily, which brought so many calamities up-
fcceffion to on there kingdoms, happened in the thirteenth

century. Upon the death of the Emperor Fre-
derick II, Manfred his natural son rafpiring to the
A.D. 1254. Neapolitan' throne, murdered (if we may believe

contemporary historians) his brother the Empe-
ror Conrad, and by that crime obtained poffeflion
of it h. The Popes, from their implacable en-
mity to the house of Swabia, not only refuted to
recognize Manfred's title, but endeavoured to
excite againfr him some rival capable of wresting
the sceptre out of his hand. Charles Count of
Anjou, the brother of St. Louis King of France,
undertook this; and he received from the Popes,
the inveffiture of the kingdom of Naples and Si-
cily as a fief held of the holy See. The Count
of Anjou's efforts were crowned with success;
Manfred fell in battle and he took poffeflion of
the vacant throne. But soon after, Charles sullied
the glory which he had acquired, by the injustice
and cruelty with which he put to death, by the
hands of the executioner, Conradin, the last Prince
of the house of Swabia, and the rightful heir of
the Neapolitan crown. That gallant young Prince
asserted his title, to the last, with a courage,
worthy of a better fate. On the scaffold, he de-
clared Peter, at that time Prince, and soon after
King of Aragon, who had married Manfred's

g Ginnone, ibid. p 4'4.
h Struv. cori . hill. Ceini. i. 481. Giannone, book xviii.
ci. 5.

only

only daughter, his heir; and throwing his glove S cr.TII.
among the people, he entreated that it might be --'
carried to Peter as the symbol by which he con-
veyed all his rights to him i. The desire of a-
venging the insult offered to royalty by the death
of Conradin concurred with ambition, in prompt-
ing Peter to take arms in support of tle title,
which he had acquired. From that period, during
almost two centuries, the houses of Aragon and
Anjou contended for the crown of Naples. Amidfl
a fucceflion of revolutions more rapid, as well as
of crimes more atrocious, than what occur in the
history of almost any other'kingdom, Monarchs
sometimes of the Aragonefe line, and sometimes
of the Angevin were feated on the throne. At
length the Princes of the house of Aragon obtain- A. D. 1434.
ed such firm possession of this long-difputed inhe-
ritance, that they transmitted it quietly to a ba-
ftard branch of their family k.

THE race of the Angevin Kings, however, was Pretenrions
not extinct; nor had they relinquished their title ofrthe nd

French and

to the Neapolitan crown. The count of Maine Spaliilh mo-
and Provence, the heir of this family, conveyed na!chs.
all his rights and pretensions to Louis XI. and to
his successors. Charles VIII. as I have already re- A. D. 1494
lated, crossed the Alps at the head of a powerful
army in order to prosecute his claim with a de-
gree of vigour far superior to that, which the
Princes from whom he derived it, had been ca-
pable of exerting. The rapid progress of his
arms in Italy, as well as the short time during
which he enjoyed the fruits of his ficcefs, are well
known. Frederick the heir of the illegitimate
branch of the Aragonefe family, soon recovered

i Giannone, book xix. ch. 4. § 2.
k Giannone, book xxvi. ch. z.

[he

1?9

SEcT. 11. the throne of which Charles had difpoffeflcd him.

,.- Louis XII. and Ferdinand of Aragon united againtl

this Prince, whom both, though for differett
reasons, confidered as an usurper, and agreed to
A. D.1soi. divide his dominions between them. Frederick,

unable to refitl the combined Monarchs, each of
whom was far his superior in power, religned his
sceptre. Louis and Ferdinand, though they had
concurred in making the conquest, differed about
the division of it; and from allies became ene-
nies. But Gonfalvo de Cordova, partly by the
exertion of such military talents as gave him a
just title to the appellation of the Great Captain,

'which the Spanish historians have bestowed upon
him; and partly by lfch shameless and frequent
violations of the most solemn engagements, as
leave an indelible stain on his memory ; stripped
the French of all that they pofeifled in the Nea-
politan dominions, and secured the peaceable pol-
Iefion of them to his master. These, together
vith his other kingdoms, Ferdinand tranfiitted
to hi- grandtbn Charles V, whoei right to pofelfs
t'lcn, if not altogether uncontravertible, leems,
at leal:, to be as well founded as that, which the
Klings of Fralnce let in oliofition to it .

State of te THERE is nothing in the political confltition,
ulchy of 0or interior gove rnment of the dutchy of Milan lo
tillhe rtro remnarkable, as to require a particular explanati-
tcc
liit LO on. 3But as the right of filccetiion to that fertile

province was the catuie or the pretext of almost
all tlhe vwars carried on in Italy during the reign
of Charles V, it is neceflary to trace thele dii:
.utc s to their lource, a::d to inquire into the prc-
cliuions ot the variuus competitors.

I Dic:is des Rots !d Flrance au Rovaumce de Sicile. Mem.
e! .',, i:,. elit, : r tl")i, , loil. iv. . i: ii. p. 5.

DURI Nt

DURING the long and fierce conteffs excited in S. c-r. I!.
Italy by the violence of the Guelf and Ghibelline '',--.

Rife and

factions, the family of Visconti rose to great emi- progress of
nence among their fellow-citizens of Milan. As the disputes
the Visconti had adhered uniformly to the Ghibel- tli..t
line or Imperial interest, they by way of recom- A.D. i3<4.
pence, received, from one Emperor, the dignity
of perpetual vicars of the Empire in Italy m. They
were created by another, Dukes of Milan, and
together with that title. the possession of the city A. D. 1395.
and its territories, was bestowed upon them as an
hereditary fief ". John King of France, amor.ng
other expedients for raising money, which the ca-
lamities of his reign obliged him to employ, con-
descended to give one of his daughters in mar-
riage to John Galeazzo Visconti the first Duke of
Milan, from whom he had received considerable
films. Valentine Visconti one of the children of
this marriage married her cousin, Louis Duke of
Orleans, the only brother of Charles VI. In their
marriage-contract which the Pope confirmed, it
was stipulated that, upon failure of heirs-male in
the family of Visconti, the dutchy of Milan flould
descend to the posterity of Valentine and the Duke
of Orleans. That event took place. In the year
o!e thousand four hundred and forty-feven, Philip
Maria the last Prince of the ducal family of Vis-
conti died. Various competitors pretended to the
fuccelfion. Charles Duke of Orleans pleaded his
right to it, founded on the marriage-contraa of
hils mother Valentine Visconti. Alfonso King of
Naples claimed it in consequence of a will made
by Philip Maria in his favour. The Emperor
contended that upon the extinction of male iflue
in the family of Visconti the fief returned to the

rn retinrrchcpift ap Stiuv corp. i. 625.
" Leibiiit. cod jur. gean. Jiphl i. vol. i .:-.

P nrin.r

SECT. ITI. ftipetiior Lord, and ought to be re-annexed to the
~'-- - Empire. The people of Milan fiitten with tha

love of liberty which prevailed among the Italiai
States, declared against the dominion of any ma
iter, and established a republican form of govern
ment.

BUT during the struggle among so many corn

petitors, the prize for which they contended wa!
seized by one from whom none of them appre
hended any danger. Francis Sforza, the natura
otn of Jacomuzzo Sforza, whom his courage anc
abilities had elevated from the rank of a peafan
to be one of the moul eminent and powerful o
the.Italian Condottieri, having succeeded his fathel
in the.command of the adventurers who followed
his standard, had married a natural daughter ol
.the last Duke of Milan. Upon this shadow of i
,title Francis founded his pretensions to the dut
chy, which he supported with such talents anc
valour as;placed him .at last on the ducal throne
The virtues as well as abilities with which hego
verned, inducing his fubjets to forget the de
..sets inl his title, he trinfmitted .his dominion!
.quietly to his ,on,; from whom they descendec
to his grandson. He was murdered by his grant
uncle ,Ludovico, surnamed the Moor, who took
poflellion of the dutchy; and,his right to it was
confirmed by the invetiture of the Emperor Max
imilian in the year one thoufand.four hundrec
and ninety-four .

0 Rip in. hist. Mediol, Ilib vi, 654 p, Struv corp,
930. Du Mont CorpD Liplouin. tom. iii. p ii. 33.3. ibil.

1,ouIS

Louis XI. who took pleasure in depressing the SEcrT. li.
Princes of the blood, and who admired the po- '--
litical abilities of Francis Sforza, would not per-
mit the Duke of Orleans to take any ftep in pro-
fecution of his right to the dutcly of Milan. Lu-
dovico the Moor kept up such a close connection
with Charles VIII. that during the greater part
of his reign, the claim of the family of Orleans
continued to lie dormant. But when the crown
of France devolved to Louis XII. Duke of Or-
leans, he inflantly asserted the rights of his fami-
ly with the ardour which it was natural to expet.
Ludovico Sforza, incapable of contending with
such a rival, was firipped of all his dominions in
the space of a few days. The King, clad in the
ducal robes, entered Milan in triumph; and soon
after,,Ludovico having been betrayed by the Swiss
in his pay, was sent a prisoner into France, and
(hut up in the castle of Loches, where he lay un-
pitied during the remainder of his days. In con-
sequence of one of the singular revolutions which
occur so frequently in the histor.y of the Milanese,
his son Maximilian Sforza was placed on the ducal
throne, of which he kept pofleflion during the
reign of Louis XII. His successor Francis I. waS A. D. Xsx.
too high-fpirited and enterprizing tamely to relin-
quilh his title. As soon as he was feated upon
the throne, he prepared,to invade the Milanese;
and his right of fucceflion to it, appears from this
detail, to have been not only more natural but
more just than that of any other competitor.

IT is unneceflary to enter into any detail with

rcfper to the form of government in Genoa, Par-
nla, Modena, and the other inferior States of Ita-
ly. Their names, indeed, will often occur in the
tollowing hiltory. But the power of tllile States

thcmlflvcs

ScCT. TIT. themrelves was so inconsiderable, that their fate
'-'"- depended little upon their own efforts; and the

frequent revolutions which they underwent, were
brought about by the operations of the Princes
who attacked or defended them, rather than by
any thing peculiar in their internal constitution.

The confi- OF the great kingdoms on this fide of the
ut;on and Alps, Spain is one of the most considerable; and
*,vernment
of Spain. as it was the hereditary domain of Charles V, as

well as the chief source of his power and wealth,
a diflind knowledge of its political constitution is
of capital importance towards understanding the
tranfadtions of his reign.

Conquered THE Vandals and Goths, who overturned the
by the Van- Roman power in Spain, established a form of go-

vernment in that country, and brought in cuRtoms
and laws, perfectly limilar to thole which were
introduced into the reft of Europe, by the other
vitorious tribes which acquired settlements there.
For Come time, society advanced, among the new
inhabitants of Spain, by the fame steps, and
seemed to hold the fame course, as in other Eu-

A. D. 71. ropean nations. To this progress, a sudden flop
,and by the was put by the invasions of the Saracens or Moors.
Moor'. The Goths could not withstand the efforts of their

enthufiaftick valour, which subdued Spain, with
the fame impetuous rapidity that distinguishes all
the operations of tJheir arms. The conquerois
introduced into the country in which they fettled
the Mahometan religion, the Arabick language,
the manners of the Elalt, together with that ratte
for the arts, and that love of elegance and fplen-
dour, which the Caliphs had begun to cultivate
amjiong their llbj cts.

SUCH Gothick nobles, as disdained to submit SECT. III.
to the moorish yoke, fled for refuge to the inac- Te ri ;-
ceflible mountains of Asturias, and comforted ns grdual-
themselves with enjoying there the exercise of lyrecover

_, .„ . ,. .

- - '-', . , . . . , dominion ia

the Christian religion, and with maintaining the spain
authority of their ancient laws. Being joined
by many of the boldest and most warlike among
their countrymen, they sallied out upon the ad-
jacent settlements of the Moors, in small parties;
and making short excursions, were satisfied with
plunder and revenge, without thinking of con-
quest. By degrees, their strength increased,
their views enlarged, a regular government was
established among them, and they began to aim
at extending their territories. While they
pushed on their attacks with the unremitting ar-
dour excited by zeal for religion, by the desire
of vengeance, and by the hope of rescuing their
country from oppression; while they conducted
their operations with the courage natural to men
who had no other occupation but war, and who
were strangers to all the arts which corrupt or
enfeeble the mind, the Moors gradually loft ma-
ny of the advantages, to which they had been
indebted for their first success. They threw off
alliependance on the Caliphs * ; they negledt-
ed to preserve a close connection with their
countrymen in Africa; their Empire in Spain
was split into many small kingdoms; together
with the arts which they cultivated, the luxury
to which these gave rife, relaxed, in rome mea-
sure, the force of their military institutions, and
abated the vigour of their warlike spirit. The
Moors, however, continued still to be a gallant
people, and possessed great resources. Accord-
ing to the magnificent stile of the Spanihf hifto-
rians, eight centuries of almost uninterrupted

Jos. Sir. Affinanlus H-iftlor.Ital.Scriptores. Vol.iii.p. 13 5.
Vole. . L war

SECT. II. war elapsed, and three thousand seven hundred

9'"-" battles were fought before the last of the Moor.

4 ilhi kingdoms in Spain fubnmitted to the Chrifian

arms.

The union As the Christians made their conquefls upon
of its vari-
ous king-i the ilahonietans at various ptriods, and under
doms. different leaders, each formed the territory

which ihe had wrested from the common enemy,
into an independant State. Spain was divided
into as many separate kingdoms, as it contained
provinces, and in each city of note, a petty
Monarch established his throne, and afTiumed all
the ensigns of royalty. In a series of years,
however, by the ufial events of intermarriages,
or legal fucceflion, or conquefl, all thele intri.
or principalities were annexed to the more pow-
crful kingdoms of Castile and of Aragon, and at
length by the fortunate marriage of Ferdinand
and Isabella, the former the hereditary Mo.
narch of Aragon, and the latter railed to the
throne of Castile by the assertion of her fubjeds,
481,. all the Spanish crowns were united, and descend-

ed ir the fame line.

Their anci- FROM this period, the political confiitution of
-ndnl -

re Spain began to assume a regular and uniform

served a- appearance; the genius of government may be
theirreolu- delineated, and the progress of its laws and
tiuoii; manners may be treated with certainty. Not

withstanding the singular revolution which had
happened in Spain, and the peculiarity of its
fate, its being to long fubjeded to the Mahome.
tan yoke, the cutfoms introduced by the Van
dals and Gotls had taken such deep root, and
were (o thoroughly incorporated with the fiame
of its government, that in every province which
the (:hiitban.s recovered from the Moors, we
find the condition of individuals, as well as the

political

political conftiturion, nearly the fame as in Secr. m.
other nations of Europe. Lands were held by "- '

, which ren-

rlie fame tenurre; justice was dispensed in tie ders their
fame form; the fame privileges were claimed by late in
the nobility; and the fame power ekercifed fmilarto
by the Cortes, or general assembly of the king- that of o-

ther nations

dom. Several circumstances contributed to fe- of Europe.
cure this permanence of the feudal institutions in
Spai, nrotwithftanding the conquest of the
Moors, which seemed to have overturned them.
Such of the Spaniards, as preserved their inde-
pendance, adhered: to' their ancient cuffom's not
only from attachment to them, but out of anti-
athy t'o the Moors, to whose ideas concerning
property ahd government t'hese cuffoms were ob
totally rep itgnant. Even' among the Chriffiaai,
iho' fiulritt'ed' to th'e Moorish conquerors, and
corifented' to become their fubjecss, ancient cuf-
tobtri were not entirely abolished. They wete
permitted to retain their religion; their laws
concerning private property; their forms of ad-
tniniftering justice and their mode of levying
tares. The followers of Mahomet are the only
enthufiaffs, who have united the' spirit of tolrax-
tiorn with' zeal for making proselytes, and' who,
at the fame time that they took arms to propa-
gate the doctrine of their prophet, permitted
filchs as would not embrace it to adhere to
their own tenets and to praftife their own
rites. To this' peculiarity in. the genius of the
M:.homettan religion, as well as to the desire
of the Moors to reconcile the Christians to their
yoke, it was owing that the ancient manners and
laws in Spain fitrvived' the violent fliock of a
conqtteft, and continued to subsist, notwith-
fltiading the introduction of a new religion and
a new form of government into that country. It
is obviouis from all these particulars, that the
lihrittianis must have folund it extremely easy to

L 2 re-cft;ibli(h

P47

SECT III. re-eflablifl manners and government on their

V ancient foundations, in those provinces of Spain,

which they wreflted filcceflively from the Moors.
A considerable part of the people retaintd such a
fondness for the cultoms, and such a reverence
for the laws of their anceflors, that they wished
to fee them reflored with full authoiity, and
were not only willing but eager to observe the
former, and to recognize the authority of the
latter.

Certainpe- BUT though the feudal form of government,
thleirnfti-n with all the Institutions that charalterize it, was
tution and thus preserved entire in Castile and Aragon, as
laws. well as in all the kingdoms which depended on

there crowns, there were certain peculiarities in
their political constitutions which diftinguifl
them from those of any other country in Europe.

The prero- The regal prerogative, extremely limited in eve-

tivemorednd ry feudal kingdom, was circumscribed, in Spain,
the immu- within such narrow bounds, as reduced the pow.
peoplesmore er of the sovereign almost to nothing. The
extensive. privileges of the nobility were valt in proportion,

and extended so far as to border on ablolute in-
dependance. The immunities of the cities
were great, they possessed considerable influence
in the Cortes or supreme assemblies of the nati-
ons, and they aspired at obtaining more. Such
a state of Society, in which the political machine
was so ill adjulted, and the fcveral members of
the legiflaitre so improperly balanced, produced
interior dilolrdcrs in the kingdoms ot Spain,
which role beyord the pitch of turbulence and
atlltlrhy, ufiial uInder the feudal government.
'J'lh whole tenor of the Spanilh history confirms
tlih truth of this offcrvation ; and when the mu-
tiniius ipitit, to which the genius of their policy
g.ve Lrihli and vigour, was not reflrained and
ovcr:t cl.d Iby the immediate dread of thle Moor-

ifil

ifh arms, it broke out into more frequent infilr- SECT. III.
retions againit the government of their Princes, v
as well as more outrageous infilts on their dig-
nity, than occur in the annals of any other coun-
try. There were accompanied at some times
with more liberal sentiments concerning the
rights of the people, at other times with more
elevated notions concerning the privileges of the
nobles, than were common in other nations.

IN the principality of Catalonia, which was Infiancesof

annexed to the kingdom of Aragon, the impati- this.
ence of the people to obtain the redress of their
grievances having prompted them to take
arms againift their Sovereign John II, they, by a A. D. 1462.
solemn deed, recalled the oath of allegiance
which they had sworn to him, declared him and
his posterity to be unworthy of the throne P, and
endeavoured to establish a republican form of
government, in order to secure the perpetual
enjoyment of that liberty, after which they afpi-
red q. Nearly about the fame period, the in-
dignation of the Castilian nobility against the
weak and flagitious administration of Henry IV.
having led them to combine against him, they
arrogated as one of the privileges belonging to
their order, the right of trying and of passing fen-
tence on their sovereign. That the exercise of
this power might be as publick and solemn, as
the pretension to it was bold, they summoned AD. ,1455
all the nobility of their party to meet at Avita,
a spacious theatre was erected in a plain with-
out the wallsof the town, an image represent-

P Zurita Anales de Arag. torn. iv. 13, I, 5, &c.
q Fcrreras hit. d' El(jigne, toni. vii. p. 92. P. Orleans

icvol, d' Erpagne, tomI. iii. p. 5 I... . lnrinaus Siculus
de [eb. Hifpan. apud Schotti script. IHi'pan, vol. 429.

L 3 ing

SECT.I1.I. ing the King, was feated,on a ,throne clad i,
.'..' raoyal ,robes, with a .crown on its head, .a sceptre

in i,ts.hand, and thef,word of justice by its,fide,
The accusation againl ,the Kring wasread, and
-the sentence .of depoftion was pronounced, in
:presence of a .puumerous.affembly. At the ,clo(
of the fir.R article of,the charge, thearchbifhlo
-of Toledo advanced, and .tore the.crown from
the head of the image; atthe cofe of.the second,
the Conde de Placentia thatched the sword ol
,justice firm its 'fide,; at the le of f the third,
the,Conde de Beneveoite wrestel ,the fceptrefrorn
its hand; ,at ,the close, of -the last, Don Diegc
JLopez de Stuniga .tumbled it,headlong from.the
tlrone. At ,the fame instant, Don Alfonso,
,Her,y's brother, was proclaimed Jing of.Cal
tile .nd !Leon in his Rtead r.

T,E .most daring leaders of s'£tion would

n.ot,have veptured on -these ,mea;sures, nor have
condu4ted them with such publi.ck.ceremony, .il
,the fqntiments of .the people concerning the roy.
,al dignity, had -nt been . fofqrmed by the lawi
anLd ,policy, ,to .which they were iaccuftonec
,both in Castile and .Aragor, a$ prepared ,then
,to approve of f.ch extraordirwy prqceedings,
or to acquiefce,in them.

The conffi- IN Aragon, the'form ,of.government :was mo.
.eutionnd narchical, but the genius .apd .taxims of il
.gomernment .lr .axims 'of
of Aragon. were purely republican. The lirngs, who.were

lotnge:letive, xretained only tle ,flhadow of pow'
,er; the real exercise of it .was in the Cartes 01
parliament of the kingdom. This supreme al:
fembly was composed of four different arms o0

r Marian. hist. lib. xxiii. c. 9.

members,

members. The nobility of the first rank. The SecT. 1I.
Equestrian order, or nobility of the second class. '-v-
The representatives of the cities and towns,
whose right to a place in the Cortes, if we may
give credit to the historians of Aragon, was coe-
val with the constitution. The ecclesiastical or-
der, composed of the dignitaries of the church,
together with the representatives of the inferior
clergy '. No law could pats in this assembly
without the assent of every lingle member
who had a right to vote t. Without the permif-
sion of the Cortes, no tax could be imposed; no
war could be declared ; no peace concluded ; no
money could be coined; nor any alteration be
made in the current specie ". The power of
reviewing the proceedings of all inferior courts,
the privilege of inspecting every department of
administration, and the right of redrefling all
grievances belonged to the Cortes. Nor did
'hose who conceived t.hemselves to be aggrieved
address the Cortes in the humble tone of fuppli-
cants, and petition for redress; they demanded
it as the birth-right of free-men, and required
the guardians of their liberty to decide with ref-
pet'to the points which they laid before them .
This sovereign court was held, during several
centuries, every year; but, in confeqrience of a
regulation introduced about the beginning of the
fourteenth century, it was convened from that
period only once in two years. After it was a(-
fembled, tlie King had no right to prorogue or
diltllve it without its own conlent; and the fef-
lion continued forty days Y.

a Forma de clebhrr Cortes en Aragon. par G,.ron. Martel.
.t telaltd. ibid..p. 2.
U Ilier. B3lllnca coiiimn ent. icr. Araigion ap. Schut. fulipt.
-lilpan. vol. iii. p. 750.

x Mattcl. Fuoriia de cclcbr. p. .z
Y 1lier. [tlanca colnmenr. 76 ;.

L 4

Nor

SECT..III. NOT satisfied with having erected there barri
0'v'~ ers against the encroachments of the royal prero
Office and
jrirdiaion gative, nor willing to rely for the prefervatior
of the Juif- of their liberties on the vigilance and authorit)

of an assembly, similar to the diets, states gene.
ral, and parliaments, in which the other feudal
nations placed so much confidence, the Arago.
nefe had recourse to an institution peculiar to
themselves, and elected a Ju/?iza or fuipreme
judge. This magifsrate, whose office bore rome
resemblance to that of the Ephori in ancient
Sparta, aded as the guardian of the people, and
the comptroller of the Prince. The person of
the Juftiza was sacred, and his power andjurif-
diction almofft unbounded. He was the supreme
interpreter of the laws. Not only inferior jud.
ges, but the Kings themselves were bound to
consult him in every doubtful cafe, and to re-
ceive his responses with implicit deference
An appeal lay to him from the royal judges, as
well as from those appointed by the barons
within their refpedive territories. Even when
no appeal was made to him, lie could interpose
by his own authority, prohibit the ordinary
judge to proceed, take immediate cognizance of
the cause himself, and remove the party accused
to the Manife/lation or prison of the slate, to
which no person had access but by his permilii-
on. His power was exerted with no less vigour
and effect in superintending the adminifiration of
government, than in regulating the courle of
justice. It was the prerogative of the Jufliza to
infpet the conduct of the King. He had a title
to review all the royal proclamations and pa-
tents, and to declare whether or not they were
agreeable to law, and ought to be carried into

* Blanca has preserved two responses of the Jultiza t

James II. who reigned towards the close of the thi recuth
century, Blanca 748.

execution.

execution. He, by his sole authority, could SECT. Ill.
exclude any of the King's ministers from the -'
conduct of affair%, and call them to answer for
their mal-adn-iniflration. He himself was ac-
countable to the Cortes alone, for the manner in
which he discharged the duties of this high of-
fice, and performed funCtions of the greatest im-
portance that could be committed to a sub-
jec [GG] z.

IT is evident from a bare enumeration of the Theregal
privileges of the Aragonefe Cortes, as well as l,"`,b'
of the rights belonging to the Juftiza, that a withinnar-
very small portion of power remained in the row irits.
hands of the King The Aragonefe seem to
have been follicitous that their Monarchs should
know and feel this state of impotence, to which
they were reduced. Even in swearing allegi-
ance to their sovereign, an at which ought, na-
turally, to be accompanied with profeflions of
submission and refpet, they devised an oath, in
such a form, as to remind him of his depen-
dance on his fubjeas. " We," said the Jufti-
za to the King in name of his high-fpirited
barons, "' who are each of us as good, and who
are altogether more powerful than you, promire
obedience to your government, if you maintain
our rights and liberties; but if not, not." Con-
formably to this oath, they eftablifled it as a
fundamental article in their conflitution, that if
the King should violate their rights and privile-
ges, it was lawful for the people to disclaim him
as their sovereign, and to elect another in his
place a. The attachment of the Aragonefe to
this singular conffitution of government, was ex-
treme, and their relped for it approached to

z Hier. Blanca Comment. p. 747-7 ;,.
[GG] NOTE XXX. 1l1icr. Blanca Comment. -20.

luperftitious

C-V` " blte ,to one of their laws, they declare that such

was the barrenness of.their country, and the po.
verty .of the in:habitants, that if it were not ol1
account of tle liberties by which .they .were dif
tinguilied from o.ther nations, tile people would
abandon it, and go in quefl of a Iettfiement to
tome imore fiuitful region b

Conflitution IN Castile, there were not fiuch peculiarities
ndnowern, in the form of government, as to eflablifh.any
ment of
,Canfie. remiarkable diftindion between it, and .that of

:the other European nations. The .executive
part of.government was committed to the King,
but with a prerogative extremely limited. The
legislative authority refidtd in.the Cortes, which
.was.compoled.of the nobility, ,the dignified ec-
clefiaftiiks, and the representati.ves of the cities.
The assembly of .the Cor.tes in Castile was very
ancient, and feems.to ,have heen coeval with.the
conflitution. The members.of ,he three.diffe-
rent orders, who had a 'ight of suffrage, .met
in one place, and deliberated as one collective
body ; the dc-cilions of which were regulated.!by
the lentiments of the majority. The right of
imprOing taxes, of.ena6ting ;laws, .and of redrel:
iing grityvances.belonged to this assembly; and
in order to .lecure .the .aflent of the King to such
.ltalut-s rind regtlations, as were deemed .Ihluta-
ry or beneficial .to the kingdom, .it was uliial in
tlle Cortes, to take no flop towards granting no-
ney, unti all

a bliuiifs relativ.e .to the publick

wellart was concluded 'Ihe reprelientatives of
cilit s icem to h;ive obtained a feat .very .early in
thel Cortes of Castile, aid fooon acquirtd lilch

[I1] N '' E XXXI. ' Hlicr. Blanca Corn p. 75'i,

influence

A VIEW OF THE
1,54

influence and credit, as were very uncommon, SEc-.tl .
at a ,perid when :the (plendotir and pre-eii- "-
nence of the nobility had eolipfed or annihilated
all other orders ofmen. The number of mem-
bers from cities bore filch a proportion to that of
the whole collective body, as rendered them ex-
tremely ·re.fpedable in the Cortes [IIj The de-
gree of conlideration, which they pofferied in
the state, may be eftimattd.by one.ev.ent. Up-
on the death of John 1, a.council of regency was A. D. 190.
appointed to govern th.eki.ngdom duritng the mi-
nority of his (on. It was cornpofed of an equal
number of noblemen, and of deputies cholen
by the cities; the latter were admitted to the
·fame rank, and inverted with ,the fame.powers,
as prelates and grandees of the-firft order . But
.though the mernbers of communities in Castile
.were.elevated above the condition wherein they
were placed in other kingdoms of Europe;
-though they had attained to such political im-
:portance, that.even the proud and jealous Ipirit
of the feudal aristocracy could not excludethem
from rome share of government; yet the nobles,
notwitftanding thele acquisitions of the com-
.mons, continued to assert the privileges of their
order, in opposition to the crown, in a tone ex-
.tremely high. Tlcre was not any body of no-
bility in ,Europe more diflinguifhed for indepen-
dance ds spirit, ilaughtinfcis of deportmcnt, and
bold pr.tenfions, than that of Cafile. The
hliflory of that monar:chiy affTords the mouf ftrik-
ing examples of the vigilance with wvhich they
obherved, and of the vigour with which they op-
pol:ed every scheme of their Kings, that tended
to encroach on ,their j:.rifdidion, ,to diminifli
tlieir dignity, or to abridge their power. Even
inl their ordinary intercourse with their Mo-

[11] NOTE XXXII, c Maria. hil, lib.i 8. c.i .

narchs,

SECT III. narchs, they preserved such a consciousness of

- their rank, that the nobles of the first order

claimed it as a privilege to be covered in the
royal presence, and approached their fovereigs
rather as equals than as subjects.

THE conflitution of the subordinate monar-

chies, which depended on the crowns of Cauilc
and Aragon, nearly resembled that of the king-
dom to which they were annexed. In all of
them, the dignity and independance of the no-
bles were great; the immunities and power of
the cities were considerable.

Various AN attentive obrervation of the singular fitua-
auesof the ion of Spain, as well as of the various events
limited au-
thority of which occurred there, from the invasion of the
toe Spani Moors to the union of its kingdoms under Ser-

dinand and Isabella, will discover those causes,
to which all the peculiarities in its political con-
flitution, that I have pointed out, ought to be
ascribed.

As die provinces of Spain were wrefred from

the Mahomnerans gradually and with difficulty,
the nobles, who followed the standard of any
eminent leader in these wars, conquercd not for
him alone, but for themselves. They claimed
a Ihare in the lands which their valour had torn
from the enemy, and their prosperity and pow-
er increased, in proportion as the territory of the
Prince extended.

D)uR ING their perpetual wars with the Moors,

the Monarchs of Spain depended so much on
their nobles, that it became ncceflhry to conci-
liate their good will by fucceliive grants of new

hllonours
x56

honours and privileges. By tile time that any SECT. III.
prince could establish his dominion in a conquer- -'
ed province, the greater part of the property
was parcelled out by him among his batons, with
fuchjurifdition and immunities as railed them
almost to sovereign power.

AT the fame time, the kingdoms erected in so
many different corners of Spain were extremely
inconsiderable. The petty Monarch was but lit-
tle elevated above his nobles. They, feeling
themselves to be almost his equals, ated as such.
The Kings of such limited domains could nei-
ther command much refped, nor poflls great
power; and noblemen, ib nearly on the lame
level, could not look up to them with that reve-
rence, with which the Sovereigns of the great
monarchies in Europe were viewed by their sub-
jets [KK].

THESE circumstances concurred in exalting

the nobility, and in depressing the royal autho-
rity; there were others, which raised the cities
in Spain to consideration and power.

As the open country, during the wars with the

Moors, was perpetually exposed to the excurfi-
ons of the enemy, with whom no peace or truce
was To permanent as to prove any lasting fecu-
rity, felf-prefervation obliged persons of all ranks
to fix their residence in places of strength. The
caffles of the barons, which, in other countries,
afforded a commodious retreat from the depre-
dations of banditti, or from the transient vio-
lence of any interior commotion, were unable

[KK] NOTI. XXXIII.

to

SEc T. III. to refi4 an enemy whbFe operations' were condut.

ed with regular and perseveri:ng vigour. Cities,
in which great numbers united' for their mutual
defence, were the only places to which people
could retire with any profpedt of safety. To
this was owing the rapid growth of those cities in
Spain of which the Chrifltians recovered polfelli-
on. All who fled fronm the Moorifhi yoke retort-
ed to them, as to an asylum; and there, the
greater part of those, who took the field against
the Mahomretans, established their families.

EACH of these cities, during a longer or short-

er courle of years, was the capital of a little
sta.te, aind enjoyed all the advantages, which ac-
celerate the nmcreafe of inhabitants in every place
that is the feat of government.

THE number of cities in Spain, at the begin-

ning of the fifteenth century, was considerable,
and' they were peopled far beyond the proportion
whliich was common, in other parts of Europe,
except iMn Italy and' the Low-Countries. The
Moors had introduced marufadtures intothele
cities, while under their dominion. The Chri-
tian's, who - by intermixture with' them, had
learned their arts, continued to cultivate there.
The trade of several of the Spanilh towns appears
to have been considerable; and the spirit of
commerce continued to preserve the number
of their inhabitants, as the sense of danger had
firfst induced them to crowd together.

As the Spaniflh cities were populous, many of

the inhabitants were of a rank fitperior to tlofe
.wh, rcliiJcd in tuJ \nS 1l (tiller countries of rFl-

rope.

rope. That cause, which contributed chiefly to SECT. II.
their population, asseted equally persons of ""'
every condition, who flocked thither promifcu-
nufly, in order to find fnelter, or in hopes of
making a fland there against the enemy, with
greater advantage than int any other station. The
persons elected as their rcprelentatives in the
Cortes by the cities, or promoted to offices of
irtuf and dignity in the government of the com-
munity, were often, as will appear from tranf-
actions which I shall hereafter relate, of iichi
considerable rank in the kingdom, as reflectcd
lutre on their conflituents, and on the stations
wherein they were placed.

As it was impoflible to carry on a continual

war against the Moors, without some other mili-
tary force, than that which the barons were
obliged to bring into the field, in consequence
of the feudal tenures, it became necessary to have
some troops, particularly a body of light cavalry,
in confrant pay. It was one of the privileges of
the nobles, that their lands were exempt from
the burden of taxes. The charge of supporting
the troops requisite for the publick safety, fell

lwholly upon the cities; and their Kings, being
obliged frequently to apply to them for aid,
found it neceflary to gain their favour by concel-
lions, which extended their immunities, and ad-
ded to their wealth and power.

WHEN the influence of all there circumftan-

ces, peculiar to Spain, is added to the general
and common causes, which contributed to ag-
grandize cities in other countries of Europe, this
w'ill fully account for the extenlive privileges

win ici

SECT IIr . whlich they acquired, as well as the extraordi.

nary consideration to which they attained, in all
the Spaniffi kingdoms [LL].

Meafcres of By these exorbitant privileges of the nobility,
'piflre, n and this unuiual power of the cities in Spain, the
oreiertoex- royal prerogative was hemmed in on every hand,
eWnd heir and reduced within very narrow bounds. Senli-
particularly ble of this, and impatient of such restraint, dif-
asnd and ferent Monarchs endeavoured, at various junc-
Ifabelia. tllres, to enlarge their own ituifdiai.o!, and to

circinmfcribe tha.t of their !iu.jets. Thlcir pc)lw-
er, howetvr, or tl'eir abilities were ;f unequal
to ihe lrnd.:rtliakiiln, tI;;t their efforts w,:re attend-
ed w.ith little iucctis. Put hen Feurinand and
Ifahella found themft lves at the head of all the
united okingdlons of S.,ain, and delivered from
the danger and inrterr l-ptiof of domeftick wars,
they were not only in a conditron to resume, but
were able to prosecute with advantage, the
schemes of extending tlhe prerogative, which
their ancefiors had attempted in vain. Ferdi-
nand's profound lagacity in concerting his mea-
fures, his persevering induflry in conducing
them, and his uncommon address in carrying
them into execution, fitted him admirably for
an undertaking which required all there talents.

Ferdinand't As the overgrown power, and high pretenfi-
fcllemci ; , ons of the nobility were what the Monarchs of
abridging Spain felt most sensibly, ari bore with the
tes ''reil greatefl inpatience, the great object of Ferdi-
powerIofthe nand's policy was to reduce these within more
obility. nmoderate bounds. Under various pretexts,

sometimes by violence, more frequently in con-
I:quencec of decrees obtained in the courts of law,

[LLJ NOTl' :XXIV'.

he

he wrested from the barons a great part of the SECT. III.
lands, which had been granted to them by the ' '
inconsiderate bounty of former Monarchs, par-
ticularly during the feeble and, profuse reign of
his predecessor Henry IV. He did not give the en-
tire condua of affairs to persons of noble birth,
who were accustomed to occupy every department
of importance in peace or in war, as if it had been
a privilege peculiar to their order, to be em-
ployed as the sole counsellors and ministers of the
crown. He often tranfated business of great
consequence without their intervention, and com-
mitted many offices of power and trust to new
men, devoted to his interest d. He introduced a
degree of slate dignity into his court, which being
unknown in Spain, while it remained split into
many small kingdoms, taught the nobles to ap-
proach their sovereign with more ceremony, and
gradually rendered him the objeEt of greater de-
ference and refpeEt.

THE annexing the masterships of the three Particular
military orders of St. Jago, Calatrava, and ly by an-

nexing the

Alcantara, to the crown, was another expedient, grandi-ma-
by which Ferdinand greatly augmented the ,rherp'sof
revenue and power of the Kings of Spain. orders to
TheSe orders were inflituted in imitation of those the cr',vn;
of the Knights Templars and of St. John of Je-
rufalemr, on purpose to wage perpetual war with
the Mahometans, and to protet the pilgrims
who visited Compoftella, or other places of emi-
nent fanqity in Spain. The zeal and fiuper-
ftition of the ages, in which they were founded,
prompted persons of every rank to bestow fiuch

1 Zuritn anales de Arag. tom. vi p. 22.

liberal
M

SECT. II. liberal donations on these holy warriors, that, in
G'^' a short time, they engrossed a considerable ihare

in the property and wealth of the kingdom. The
mafterifhips of these orders came to be stations
of ihe greatest power and opulence to which a
Spaniifh nobleman could be advanced. Theef
high dignities were in the disposal of the Knights
of 'he Order, and placed the persons on whom
they conferred them almost on a level with their
sovereign [MM]. Ferdinand, unwilling that
the nobility, whom he confidered as already too
formidable, should derive fich additional credit
and influence from poffefling the government of
there wealthy fraternities, was Iblicitous to wrest
it out of their hands, and to vest it in the crown,

A. D. 1476. His measures for accomplishing this, were wifely
and 493. planned, and executed with vigoure. By ad-

dress, by promises, and by threats, he prevailed
on the Knights of each Order to place Isabella
and him at the head of it. Innocent VIII. and
Alexander VI. gave this election the fantion of
papal authoritys; and subsequent Pontiffs ren.
dered the annexation of these masterships to the
crown perpetual.

Andbycir- WHILE Ferdinand, by this measure, dimi.
cumfcrib- nifhed the power and influence of the nobility,
rlfdieion of and added new lustre or authority to the crown,
the nobility, he was taking other important steps with a

view to the fame objet. The sovereign
jurifdidion which the feudal barons exercised
within their own territories, was the pride and
diftintion of their order. To have invaded

[MM] NOTE XXXV.
e Marian. hist lib. xxv. c. 5.
r Zurita anales toin. v. p. zz. .Elii. Anton. Nebrifltnfl

rerum a Ferdinand & Elizabe geftarum decades. ii. apud
Schot. script. Hifpan. i. 860.

opecly

openly a privilege which they prized so highly, SECT. 1I1.
and in defence of which they would have run so ' '
eagerly to arms, was a measure too daring for a
Prince of Ferdinand's cautious temper. He took
advantage, however, of an opportunity which the
slate of his kingdoms and the spirit of his people
presented him, in order to undermine what he
durst not assault. The incessant depredations of
the Moors, the want of discipline among the
troops which were employed to oppose them, the
frequent civil wars between the crown and the no-
bility, as well as the undifcerning rage with which
the barons carried on their private wars with each
other, filled all the provinces of Spain with difor-
der. Rapine, outrage, and murder, became so
common, as not only to interrupt commerce, but
in a great measure to suspend all intercourse be-
tween one place and another. That security and
protection which men expeCt from entering into
civil society, ceased almost totally. Interior order
and police, while the feudal institutions remained
in vigour, were so little objects of attention, and
the administration ofjuftice was so extremely fee-
ble, that it would have been vain to have expected
relief from the established laws or the ordinary
judges. But the evil became so intolerable, and
the inhabitants of cities, who were the chief sus-
ferers, grew so impatient of this anarchy, that
felf-prefervation forced them to have recourse to
an extraordinary remedy. About the middle of ,z6o.
the thirteenth century, the cities in the kingdom
ofAragon, and after their example those in Castile,
formed themselves into an association, diftin-
guifled by the name of the Holy Brotherhood.
They exated a certain contribution from each of
the aflociated towns; they levied a considerable
body of troops, in order to protect travellers, and
to pursue criminals; they appointed judges, who
opened their courts in various parts of the king-
dom. Whoever was guilty of murder, robbery,

M 2 or

i63

SeCT. II. or of any at that violated the publick peace

L-~~^ and was seized by the troops of the Brotherhood

was carried before their own judges, who, with.
out paying any regard to the exclusive and fove.
reign jurifdition which the lord of the place
might claim, tried and condemned the criminals.
By means of this, the prompt and impartial ad-
ministration ofjuftice was restored; and together
with it, internal tranquillity and order began to
return. The nobles alone murmured at this fa-
lutary institution. They complained of it as an
encroachment on one of their most valuable pri-
vileges. They remonstrated against it in an high
tone; and, on some occasions, refused to grant
any aid to the crown, unless it were abolished.
Ferdinand, however, was sensible not only of the
good effects of the Holy Brotherhood with re-
sped to the police of his kingdoms, but perceiv-
ed its tendency to abridge, and at length to anni-
hilate the territorial jurifdition of the nobility.
He countenanced the inflitution on every occasion.
He supported it with the whole force of royal au-
thority; and besides the expedients employed by
him in common with the other monarchs of Eu-
rope, he availed himfelfof this institution, which
was peculiar to his kingdom, in order to limit and
abolish that independantjurifdiction of the nobi-
lity, which was no less inconsistent with the au-
thority of the Prince, than with the order of so-
ciety [NNJ.

Notwith- BUT though Ferdinand by these measures

iar"dig al considerably enlarged the boundaries of prero-
go ernmcnt gative, and acquired a degree of influence and
o'Si ni'yi1 power far beyond what any of his predecessors had
fcce. enjoyed, yet the limitations of the royal autho-

rity, and the barriers against its encroachments,
continued to be many and firong. The spirit of
liberty was vigorous among the people of Spain;

[NNJ NOTE XXXVI.

the

the spirit of independance was high among the SECT. II.
nobility; and though the love of glory, peculiar
to the Spaniards in every period of their history,
prompted them to support Ferdinand with zeal
in his foreign operations, and to afford him such
aid as enabled him not only to undertake but to
execute great enterprizes; he reigned over his
fubjets with a jurisdiCtion less extensive than that
of any of the great monarchs in Europe. It will
appear from many passages in the following hifto-
ry, that, during a considerable part of the reign
of his successor Charles V. the prerogative of the
Spanish crown was equally circumscribed.

THE ancient government and laws in France Conftitu-
so nearly resembled those of the other feudal tionand go-
kingdoms, that such a detail with refpet to them of France.
as was necessary, in order to convey rome idea of
the nature and effets of the peculiar institutions
which took place in Spain, would be superfluous.
In the view which I have exhibited of the means
by which the French monarchs acquired such
full command of the national force of their king-
dom, as enabled them to engage in extensive
schemes of foreign operation, I have already
pointed out the great steps by which they advan-
ced towards a more ample poffeflion of political
power, and a more uncontrouled exercise of their
royal prerogative. All that now remains is to
take notice of such particulars in the constitution
of France, as serve either to distinguish it from
that of other countries, or tend to throw any light
on the tranfadions of that period to which the
following history extends.

UNDER the French monarchs of the first race, Power of
the royal prerogative was very inconsiderable. The the G"neral

A/'esllcm iieh

General Assemblies of the nation, which met annu- unL;er the
ally at flated seasons, extended their authority to iit race ot
every department of government. The power of

M 3 clckting

165

SECT. III. eleEting Kings, of enacting laws, of redressing

.--.' grievances, of pafling judgment in the last resort,

with refpe& to every person and to every cause,
and of conferring donations on the Prince, resided

Unler the in this great convention of the nation. Under
Iccond. the second race of Kings, notwithfianding the

power and splendour which the conquests of
Charlemagne added to the crown, the general
assemblies of the nations continued to possess ex-
tensive authority. The right of determining which
of the royal family should be placed on the throne
was vested in them. The rmonarchs eleEted by
their suffrage were accustomed regularly to call
and to consult them with refped to every affair
of importance to the state, and without their con-
sent no law was passed, and no new tax was levied.

Under the BuT, by the time that Hugh Capet, the
third. father of the third race of Kings, took possession

of the throne of France, such changes had hap-
pened in the political state of the kingdom, as
considerably affected the power and jurifdition
of the general afiembly of the nation. The
royal authority in the hands of the degenerate
posterity of Charlemagne, had dwindled into
insignificance and contempt. Every confider-
able proprietor of land had formed his ter-
ritory into a barony, almost independant of
the sovereign. The dukes or' governors of
provinces, the counts or governors of towns
and small difirids, and the great officers of
the crown, had rendered there dignities, originally
granted only during pleafiure or for life, hereditary
in their families. Each of there had usurped all
the rights which hitherto had been deemed the
diftindtions of royalty, particularly the privileges
of dispensing justice within their own domains,
of coining money, and of waging war. Every
diftridt was governed by local customs, acknow-
ledged a diftind lord, and pursued a fepa-

rate
i66

rate interest. The formality of doing'homage SecT. 11I.
to their sovereign, was almost the bnly at of 6f
fubjetion which haughty barons would perfdrm,
and that bound them no farther than they were
willing to acknowledge its obligation [00].

IN a kingdom broken into so many indepen- The power
dant baronies, hardly any common principle of 'nerl As-
union remained; and the general assembly in its fembly less

considerable

deliberations could scarce confider the nation as and exten-
forming one body, or establish common reguia- fve.
lions to be of equal force in every part. With-
in the immediate domains of the crown the King
might publi(h laws, and they were obeyed, be-
cause there he was acknowledged as the only lord.
But if he had aimed at rendering these general,
that would have alarmed the barons as an en-
croachment upon the independance of their jurif-
didtion. The barons, with no less care, avoided
the enacting of general laws, because the exe-
cution of them must have been vested in the
King, and would have enlarged that paramount
power which was the object of their jealousy.
Thus, under the descendants of Hugh Capet,
the States General (for that was the name by
which the supreme aflembly of the French nation
came then to be diflinguifhed) loft their legifla-
tive authority, or at least entirely relinquished
the exercise of it. From that period, the jurif-
didion of the States General extended no farther
than to the imposition of new taxes, the deter-
mination of questions with refpe&t to the right
of ucceflion to the crown, the Lettling of the
regency when the preceding monarch had not
fixed it by his will, and the presenting remon-
Rtrances enumerating the grievances of which
the nation wished to obtain redress.

[OO] NOTE XXXVII.

M4 As,

SECT. III. As, during several centuries, the monarchs ol

C-v"- Europe seldom demanded extraordinary fubfidier

of their fubjeds, and the other events which re.
quired the interposition of the States, rarely oc.
curred, their meetings in France were not fre.
quenr. They were summoned occafionaily by
their Kings, when compelled by their wants or
by their fears to have recourse to their aid; but
they did not, like the Diet in Germany, the
Cortes in Spain, or. the Parliament in England,
form an essential member of the conflitution,
the regular exertion of whose powers was requi-
site to give vigour and order to government.

Thecro'vn WHEN the States of France ceased to exercise
begins to
acquire le- legiflarive authority, the Kings began to aflume
gtiyve"u- it. They ventured at first on ads of legislation

with great reserve; and after taking every pre-
caution that could prevent their fubjeds from be-
ing alarmed at the exercise of a new power. They
did not at once issue their ordinances in a tone
of authority and command. They treated with
their fubje&ts; they pointed out what was belt;
and allured them to comply with it. By de-
grees, however, as the prerogative of the crown
e:rtended, and as the fupremejurifdiEtion of the
royal courts came to be eflablifhed, the Kingsof
France assumed more openly the flile and autho-
rity of law-givers, and before the beginning of
the fifteenth century, the complete legislative
power was vested in them [PP].

and the HAVING secured this important acquisition,
evyin'g the steps that led to the right of impofllg
taxcs. taxes were rendered few and easy. The peo-

ple, accustomed to fee their lbvereigns, by their
sole authority, ifiue ordinances which regulat-
ed points of the greatest consequence with ref-
ped to the property of their subjeCts, were not

[11I'] NOTE XXXVIII,

alarmed

alarmed when they were required, by the royal SECT. Il1.
edits, to contribute certain tums towards sup- o ''
plying the exigencies of government, and car-
rying forward the measures of the nation. When
Charles VII. and Louis XI. first ventured to ex-
ercife this new power, in the manner which I
have already delcribed, the gradual increase of
the royal authority had so imperceptibly pre-
pared the minds of the people of France for this
innovation, that it excited no commotion in the
kingdom, and teems scarce to have given rife to
any murmur or complaint.

WHEN the Kings of France had thus engrof- Govcrn-

fed every power which can be exerted in govern- France be-
ment; when the right of making laws, of levy- comespure-
ing money, of keeping an army of mercenaries tlil"ar-
in constant pay, of declaring war and ,of con-
cluding peace centered in the crown, the confti-
rution of the kingdom, which, under the first
race of Kings, was nearly democratical, which,
under the second race, became an aristocracy,
terminated, under the third racey in a pure mo-
narchy. Every thing that tended to preserve the
appearance, or revive the memory of the ancient
mixed government, teems from that period to
have been industriously avoided. During the
long and ative reign of Francis 1. the variety as
well as extent of whose operations obliged him
to lay many heavy impolitions on his llbjets,
the Stares General of France were not once
assembled, nor were the people once allowed to
exert the power of taxing themselves, which,
according to the original ideas of feudal govern-
menlt, was a right eflential to every free-man.

Two things, however, remained, which T'he exr,

moderated the exercile of the regal preroga- rogative re-
tive, and retrained it within filch bounds tained, 'by

as leges of the

nubility

8ecr. III. as preserved the constitution of France from dc-

generating into mere despotism. The rights and
privileges claimed by the nobility must be con-
fidered as one barrier against the absolute domi-
nion of the crown. Though the nobles of
France had loft that political power which was
vested in their order as a body, they still retain-
ed the personal rights and pre-eminence which
they derived from their rank. They preserved a
consciousness of elevation above other classes of
citizens; an exemption from burdens to which
they were subject; a contempt of the occupations
in which they were engaged; the privilege of
assuming ensigns that indicated their dignity; a
title to be treated with a certain degree of defe-
rence during peace; and a claim to a various di.
ftindtions when in the field. Many of these pre-
tensions were not founded on the words of fla-
tutes, or derived from positive laws; they were
defined and ascertained by the maxims of honour,
a title more delicate, but no leTs sacred. These
rights, established and protedAed by a principle
equally vigilant in guarding, and intrepid in de-
fending them, are to the Sovereign himself ob-
jects of refpeet and veneration. Wherever they
stand in its way, the royal prerogative is bound-
ed. The violence of a Despot may exterminate
such an order of men; but as long as it subsists,
and its ideas of personal diflinction remain entire,
the power of the Prince has limits g.

As in France, the body of nobility was very

numerous, and retained an high sense of their own
pre-eminence, to this we may ascribe, in a great
measure, the mode of exercising the royal pre-
rogative which peculiarly distinguishes the go..
vernment of that kingdom. An intermediate
order was placed between the Monarch and his

g Des Etprits des Loix, liv. ii. c. 4, Dr. Ferguson's
EllI'iy on the Hill. of Civil Society, part. i. iec. ,o.

other

other fubjeats, and in every aEt of authority SecT. II.
it became necessary to attend to its privileges, and '-
not only to guard against any real violation of
these, but to avoid any suspicion of its being pof-
fible that they might be violated. Thus a species
of government was established in France, un-
known in the ancient world, that of a monarchy,
in which the power of the Sovereign, though un-
confined by any legal or constitutional restraint,
has certain bounds let to it by the ideas which
one class of his fubje&ts entertain concerning their
own dignity.

THE jurifdiEion of the Parliaments of France, And by the

1 11j r r> * i i « *

~ jurildiaion

particularly that of Paris, was the other barrier of the par-
which served to confine the exercise of the royal llaments,
prerogative within certain limits. The parlia- that of
ment of Paris was originally the court of the Paris
Kings of France, to which they committed the
supreme administration ofjuftice within their own
domains, as well as the power of deciding with
refpeft to all cafes brought before it by appeals
from the courts of the barons. When the time
and place of its meeting were fixed, when not
only the form of its procedure, but the principles
on which it decided, were rendered regular and
confilent, when every cause of importance was
finally determined there, and when the people
became accustomed to resort thither as to the
supreme temple ofjuftice, the parliament of Paris
role to high estimation in the kingdom, its mem-
bers acquired dignity, and itsdecrees were submit-
ted to, with deference. The Kings of France, when
they first began to assume the legislative power, in
order to reconcile the minds of their people to
this new exertion of prerogative, produced their
edids and ordinances in the parliament of Paris,
that they might be approved of and registered '
there, before they were published and declared to ,
be of authority in the kingdom. During the

intervals

SECT. III. intervals between the meetings of the States Ge.
'~""' neral of the kingdom, or under those reigns when

the States General were not assembled, the Mo-
narchs of France were accustomed to consult the
parliament of Paris with refped to the molt ar-
duous affairs of government, and frequently re-
gulated their condu& by its advice, in declaring
war, in concluding peace, and in other tranf-
adtions of publick concern. Thus there was
erected in the kingdom a tribunal which became
the great depository of the laws, and by the
uniform tenor of its decrees it eftablilhed prin-
ciples of justice and forms of proceeding which
were confidered as so sacred, that even the fove-
reign power of the Monarch durst not venture
to disregard or to violate them. The members
of this illniftrious body, though they neither pof-
fess legislative authority, nor can be confidered
as the representatives of the people, have availed
themselves of the reputation and influence which
they had acquired among their countrymen, in
order to make a stand to the utmost of their abi-
lity against every unprecedented and exorbitant
exertion of the prerogative. In every period of
the French history, they have merited the praise
of being the virtuous but feeble guardians of the
rights and privileges of the nation [ QQJ.

Conflitu- THE kingdom extends to the confines of the
tion and go- German Empire, from which Charles V. derived
of the Ccr- his title of highest dignity. In explaining the poli-
man Em- tical constitution of this vast and complex body at

the beginning of the sixteenth century, 1 shall
avoid entering into luch a detail as would involve
my readers in that inextricable labyrinth,
which it formed by the multiplicity of its
tribunals, the number of its members, their

[ Q..Q NOTE XXXIX.

inter-

interfering rights, and by the endless discussions SECT. III.
or refinements of the publick lawyers of Ger- -
many with respect to all these.

THE Empire of Charlemagne was a ftruiture rts ftatc ,t-

ereated in so short a time that it could not be d ',ImgLnd
permanent. Under his immediate successor it hii drce
began to totter; and it loon fell to pieces. The d"'1''
crown of Germany was separated for ever from
that of France, and the descendants of Charle-
magne established two great monarchies To fituat-
ed as to give rife to a perpetual rivalfhip and
enmity between them. But the Princes of the
race of Charlemagne who were placed on the
Imperial throne, were not altogether so degene-
rate, as those of the fame family who reigned
in France. In the hands of the former the
royal authority retained some vigour, and the
nobles of Germany, though possessed of exten-
five privileges as well as ample territories, did
not To early attain independance. The great
offices of the crown continued to be at the dif-
pofal of the sovereign, and during a long period,
fiefs remained in their original state, without
becoming hereditary and perpetual in the fami-
lies to which they had been granted.

AT length the German branch of the fa- Othcrfami-

mily of Charlemagne became extinct, and his .,i , ,',,.
feeble descendants who reigned in France had 1.ri- ill
funk into fich contempt, that the Germans, iis"i'Y
without looking towards them, exercised the
right inherent in a free people; and in a ge-
neral assembly of the nation elected Con-A , . 0,,.
rad Count of Franconia Emperor. After
him Henry of Saxony, and his descendants
the three Othos, were placed, in fucceflion,

on

*

SECT. III. on the Imperial throne, by the suffrages of their
x..-.. countrymen. The extensive territories of the

Saxon Emperors, their eminent abilities and
enterprizing genius not only added new vigour
to the Imperial dignity, but railed it to higher
A.D. 95. power and pre-eminence. Otho the Greal

marched at the head of a numerous army into
Italy, and after the example of Charlemagne,
gave law to that country. Every power there
recognized his authority. He created Popes and
deposed them by his sovereign mandate. He an.
nexed the kingdom of Italy to the German Em.
pire. Elated with his success, he assumed the
title of Coefar Auguftush; and a Prince born ir
the heart of Germany pretended to be the fuc
ceffor of the Emperors of ancient Rome, anc
claimed a right to the fame power and prerogative

TheGer- BUT while the Emperors, by means of these
t acquire new titles, and new dominions, gradually ac.
independant quired additional power and splendour, the no
rign au- bility of Germany went on at the fame time ex.
thority. tending their privileges and jurifdidion. The

situation of affairs was favourable to their at.
tempts. The vigour which Charlemagne hac
given to government quickly relaxed. The
inability of some of his fuccefiors was such, a!
would have encouraged vassals less enterprizing
than the nobles of that age, to have claimec
new rights and to have aflumed new powers
The civil wars in which other Emperors were
engaged, obliged them to pay perpetual court tc
their subjeCts on whose support they depended
and not only to connive at their ufiurpations, bu
to permit and even to authorize them. Fiefi
became gradually hereditary. They were trani
mitted not only in the diret, but in the collatera
line. The investiture of them was demanded no

h Annalifta Saxo, &c. ap. Struv. Corp. vol. i. p. 246.

on'l

175

only by male but by female heirs. Every baron SECT. II.
began to exercise sovereign jurisdiction within T^ v
his own domains; and the Dukes and Counts
of Germany took wide steps towards rendering
their territories diftint and independant States i.
The Saxon Emperors observed their progress, TheGer-
and were aware of its tendency. But as they fiaflicks
could not hope to humble vassals already grown rai!edto tle
too potent, unless they had tnrned their whole lcw.
force as well as attention to that enterprize,
and as they were extremely intent on their ex-
peditions into Italy, which they could not under-
take without the concurrenceof their nobles,
they were follicitous not to alarm them by any
direc attack on their privileges and jurifddici-
ons. They aimed, however, at undermining
their power, and inconsiderately bestowed addi-
tional territories, and accumulated new honours
on the clergy, in hopes that this order might
serve as a counterpoise to that of the nobility in
any future struggle k.

THE unhappy effeats of this fatal error in The fatal

policy were quickly felt. Under the empe- ega'sdof.
rors of the Franconian and Swabian lines, ingthe
whom the Germans by their voluntary election 'lerDy4
placed on the Imperial throne, a new face of
things appeared, and a scene was exhibited in
Germany, which astonished all Christendom at
that time, and which in the present age ap-
pears almost incredible. The Popes, hitherto
dependant on the Emperors, and indebted
for their power as well as dignity to their bene-
ficence and protection, began to claim a fu-
perior jurisdiction; and in virtue of authority
which they pretended to derive from heaven,

i Pfeffel. abrege, p. 20, 5z. Lib. Feudor, tit. i.
k Pfeffcl. abrege, p. 154.

tried,

SECT. III. tried, condemned, excomunicated and deposed

v their former masters. Nor is this to be confider.

ed merely as a frantic sally of paflion in a pontiff
intoxicated with high ideas concerning the ex.
tent of priestly domination, and the plenitude
of papal power. Gregory VII. was able as well
as daring. His presumption and violence were
accompaned with political discernment and laga-
city. He had observed that the Princes and
nobles of Germany, had acquired such confider.
able territories and such extensive jurisdiction as
rendered them not only formidable to the Empe-
rors, but disposed them to favour any attempt
to circumscribe their power. He foresaw that
the ecclefiafticks of Germany, raised almost to
a level with its Princes, were ready to support
any person who would stand forth as the protec-
tor of their privileges and independance. With
both of these Gregory negociated, and had fecur-
ed many devoted adherents among them, before
he ventured to enter the lifts against the head of
the Empire.

The con- HE began his rupture with Henry IV. upon a
tests be-
tween the pretext that was popular and plausible. He com-
Popes and plained of the venality and corruption with which
Emperors,
and hecn- the Emperor had granted the investiture of be.
sequences nefices to ecclefiafticks. He contended that this

f the right belonged to him as head of the church ; he

required Henry to confine himself within the
bounds of his civil jurifdidtion, and to ahifain
for the future from such sacrilegious encroach-
ment on his spiritual dominion. All the cen-
fures of the church were denounced against
Henry, because he refused to relinquifih those
powers which his predecessors had uniformly
exercised. The molt considerable of the German
Princes and ecclefiafticks were excited to take
arms against him. His mother, his wife, his

fLns

A
176

sons were wrought upon to disregard all the ties SECT. III.
of blood as well as of duty, and to join the par- "Vr'
ty of his enemies k. Such were the successful
arts with which the court of Rome inflamed the
superstitious zeal and conducted the factious spirit
of the Germans and Italians, that an Emperor,
distinguished not only for many virtues, but
possessed of considerable talents, was at length
obliged to appear as a supplicant at the gate of
the cattle in which the Pope resided, and to
stand there, three days, barefooted, in the depth
of winter, imploring a pardon, which at length A. D. 1e77.
he obtained with difficulty [RR].

THIS at of humiliation degraded the Impe-
rial dignity. Nor was the depression only mo-
mentary. The contest between Gregory and
Henry gave rife to the two great fations of the
Guelfs and Ghibellines; the former of which
supporting the pretensions of the Popes, and the
latter defending the rights of the Emperor, kept
Germany and Italy in perpetual agitation during
three centuries. A regular system for hum-
bling the Emperors and circumscribing their
power was formed, and adhered to uniformly
throughout that period. The Popes, the free The Impe-
States in Italy, the nobility and ecclefiafticks of ri lutho-
Germany, were all interested in its success; and ally de-
notwithstanding the return of some short inter- clines.
vals of vigour, under the administration of a
few able Emperors, the Imperial authority con-
tinued to decline. During the anarchy of the A. D. 256.
long interregnum subsequent to the death of
William of Holland, it dwindled down to no-
thing. Rodulph of Hapfburgh, the founder A. D. 173.
of the house of Austria, and who first opened
the way to its future grandeur was at length

k Annal. German. ap. Struv. i. p. 325.
[RRI NOT E XL.

N

elected

SECT. IH. eleaed Emperor, not that he might re-eftablijh

"' "'. and extend the Imperial authority, but because

;his territories and influence were so inconfidera.
bleas not to excite the jealousy of the German
Princes, who were willing to preserve the forms
of a constitution, the.power and vigour of which
they had destroyed. Several of his successors
were placed on the Imperial throne from the
fame .mrtive; and almost every remaining pre.
rogative was wrested out of the hands of feeble
:Princes unable to exercise or to defend them.

A total DURING this period of turbulence and confu.
the np,;tcal sion the constitution of the Germanick body un.
constitution derwent a total change. The ancient names of
othe Em- courts and magistrates, together with the origi.

nal forms and appearance of policy were pre-
served; but such new privileges and jurifdition
were assumed, and f6 many various rights efa-
blifhed, that the fame species of government no
longer subsisted. The Princes, the great nobi-
lity, the dignified ecclefiafticks, the free cities
had taken advantage of the interregnum, which
I have mentioned, to establish or to extend their
usurpations. They claimed and exercised the
right of governing their refpedive territories
with full sovereignty. They acknowledged no
superior with respect to any point, relative to
the interior administration and police of their
domains. They enated laws, imposed taxes,
coined money, declared war, concluded peace,
and exerted every prerogative peculiar to inde-
pendant States. The ideas of order and politi-
cal union which had formed the various pro-
vinces of Germany into one body were en-
tirely loft; and the society must have diffolv-
ed, if the forms of feudal subordination had not
preserved such an appearance of connection or

dependance

& 1 A 1 U VP , U K U k E. 179

dependance among the various members of the SECT. III.
community, as preserved it from falling to pieces. '''

THIS bond of union, however, was extreme- Expedient,
ly feeble and no principle remained in the Ger- fn' Pd"tt
man constitution of sufficient force to maintain this states
publick order, and hardly to ascertain personal a"rchy.
security. From the accession of Rodulph of
Hapfburgh, to the reign of Maximilian, the im-
mediate predecessor of Charles V. the Empire
felt every calamity which a slate must endure
when the authority of government is so much
relaxed as to have loft all vigour. The causes
of diflention among that vast number of mem-
bers which composed the Germanick body, were
infinite and unavoidable. These gave rife to
perpetual private wars, carried on with all the
violence of resentment when unrestrained by
superior authority. Rapine, outrage, exations,
became universal. Commerce was interrupted;.
industry suspended; and every part of Germany
resembled a country which an enemy had plun-
dered and laid desolate . The variety of expe-
dients employed with a view to restore order and
tranquillity, prove that the grievances occasioned
by this state of anarchy had grown intolerable.
Arbiters were appointed to terminate the diffe-
rences among the several flates. The cities unit-
edin a league, the objeet of which was to check
the rapine and extortions of the nobility. The
nobility formed confederacies, on purpose to
maintain tranquillity among their own order.
Germany was divided into several Circles, in
each of which a provincial and partial jurifdition
was established, to supply the place of a publick
and common tribunal m.

I See above, page 45 and note xxi. Datt. de pace pub-

lica Imper. p. z2, no. 53. P. 28, no. 26. p. 35, no. 1i.
" Datt. paflim. Struv. Corp. Hist. i. So, &c.

BUT

SECT. III. BUT all these remedies wete so fruitless, that

-.. / they sered ohly to deinmodftrate the violene of

ly by the that anarchy which prevailed, and the inefficacy
Institution of the means employed to corre't it. At length
oF the Im-
peral Maximilian, by inflituting the Imperial chamber
Chamber. a tribunal composed of judges named partly by
A.D. 1495. the Emperor, partly by the several States, and

vesttd with authority to decide finally concerning
all differences among the members of the Ger.
manick body, re-established publick order in the
A. D.1512. Empire. A few years after, by giving anew

form to the Aulick council, which takes cogni.
zance of all feudal causes, and such as belong
to the Emperor's immediatejurifdition, he re.
stored Come degtee of vigour to the Imperial
authority.

At the be- BUT notwithitanding the salutary effecs of
the nof these regulations and improvements, the political
teenth cen- constitution of the German Empire, at the com-
tury, the
Empire an mencement of the period of which I propose to
association write the history, wasof a species so peculiar, as
of lovereign to r n
tates. not to'refemble perfectly any form of govern.

ment known either in the ancient or modern
world. It was a complex body, formed by the
association of several States, each of which pof
fefled Covereign and independantjurifdiaion with.
in its own territories. 'Of all the members which
composed this united body, the Emperor was the
head. In his name, all decrees and regulations
with refped to points of common concern, were
issued; and to him the power of carrying them
into execution was committed. But this ap-
pearance of monarchical power in the Emperor
was more than counterbalanced by the influ-
ence and authority of the Princes and States
of the Empire in every at of adminiftrati-
on. No law extending to the whole body
could pass, no resolution that affeced the ge-
neral interest could be taken, without the ap-

probation

robation of the Diet of the Empire. In this as- SECT;. III.
fembly, every sovereign Prince and State of the '.' '
Germanick body had a right to be present, to de-
liberate, and to vote. The decrees or Recedes of
the Diet were the laws of the Empire, which the
Emperor 'was bound to ratify and enforce.

UNDER this afpedt the constitution of the Peculiari-
Empire appears a regular confederacy, similar to iaet inthe
the Achaean league in ancient Greece, or to that this a(rocia-
of the United Provinces and of the Swiss can- tion
tons in miodern times. But if viewed in another
light, firiking peculiarities in its political state,
present themselves. The Germanick body was
not formed by the union of members altogether
diftint and independant. All the Princes and
States joined in this association, were originally
fubje& to the Emperors, and acknowledged them
as sovereigns. Besides this, they originally held
their lands as Imperial fiefs, and in consequence
of this tenure dwed the Emperors all those fervi-
ces which feudal vassals are bound to perform to
their liege lord. But though this political sub-
jetion was entirely at an end, and the influence
of the feudal relation much diminished, the an-
cient forms and inflitutions introduced when the
Emperors governed Germany with authority, not
inferior to that which the other monarchs of Eu-
rope pofleffed, frill remained. Thus an oppofi-
tion was established between the genius of the
government, and the forms of adminiltration in
the German Empire. The former confidered the
Emperor only as the head of a confederacy, the
members of which, by their voluintary choice,
have raised him to that dignity; the latter seemed
to imply, that he is really invested with sovereign
power. By this circurmfance, such principles of Thc dcicas
hostility and discord were interwoven in the frame i lthc -o-

N 3itution of mpir
N 3 of thl Empire.

18»

SECT. III. of the Germanick body, as asseted each of its

-
-- members, rendering their interior union incom.

plete, and their external efforts feeble and irre.
gular. The effets of this vice or disorder inhe.
rent in the constitution of the Empire are focon.
fiderable, that, without attending to them, it is
impossible to comprehend many tranfadionsin
the reign of Charles V. or to form just ideas con.
cerning the genius of the German government.

Arising THE Emperors of Germany, at the beginning
from the of the sixteenth century, were distinguished by
limited
power of the most pompous titles, and by such ensigns of
thSeEmpe- dignity as intimated their authority to be superior

to that of all other monarchs. The greatest
Princes of the Empire attended and served them
on some occasions, as the officers of their houf.
hold. They exercised prerogatives which no
other sovereign ever claimed. They retained
pretensions to all the extensive powers which
their predecessors had enjoyed in any former age.
But at the fame time, instead of possessing that
ample domain which had belonged to the ancient
Emperors of Germany, and whichftretched from
Basil to Cologne, along both banks of the Rhine',
they were stript of all territorial property, and
had not a single city, a single castle, a tingle foot
of land, that pertained to them as heads of the
Empire. As their domain was alienated, their
stated revenues were reduced almost to nothing;
and the extraordinary aids which on a few oc-
cafions they obtained, were granted Sparingly,
and paid with reluctance. The Princes and
States of the Empire, though they seemed to
recognize the Imperial authority, were fubjels
only in name, each of them poffefling acompleat
municipal jurifdition within the precincts of his
own territories.

n Pfeffcl. Abrege, &c. p. 24r.

FROM

FROM this ill-compacted frame of govern- SECT. II.
ment, effets that were unavoidable resulted. -r
The Emperors, dazzled with the splendour of nte of
their titles, and the exterior signs of valf autho their title

and preten-

rity, were apt to imagine themselves to be the sions.
real sovereigns of Germany, and were led to
aim continually at recovering the exercise of those
powers and prerogatives which the forms of the
constitution seemed to vest in them, and which
their predecessors Charlemagne and the Otho's
had actually enjoyed. The Princes and States,
aware of the nature as well as extent of their pre-
tensions, were perpetually on their guard, in or-
der to watch all the motions of the Imperial
court, and to circumscribe its power within limits
Rill more narrow. The Emperors, in support
of their claims, appealed to ancient forms and in-
ftitutions, which the States held to be obsolete.
The States founded their rights on recent prac-
tice and modern privileges, which the Emperors
confidered as usurpations.

THIS jealousy of the Imperial authority, toge- From the
ther with the opposition between it and the rights manner in

which they

of the States, increased considerably from the were
time that the Emperors were elected, not by the clo'ed.
collective body of German nobles, but by a few
Princes of chief dignity. During a long period,
all the members of the Germanick body aflem-
bled, and made choice of the person whom they
appointed to be their head. But amidst the vio-
lence and anarchy which prevailed for several
centuries in the Empire, seven Princes who pof-
sessed the moi extenfivw territories, and who
had obtained a hereditary title to the great of-
sices of the State, acquired the exclusive pri-
vilege of nominating the Emperor. This right
was confirmed to them by the Golden Bull;
the mode of exercising it was ascertained, and
they were dignified with the appellation of Elec-

N 4 tors.

SECT. III. tors. The nobility and free-cities being thus
'V' stripped of a privilege which they had once en-

joyed, were less connected with a Prince, towards
whose elevation they had not contributed by their
fuffirages, and came to he more apprehenfiveof
his authority. The Electors, by their extensive
power, and the diftinguilhing privileges which
they possessed, became formidable to the Em.
perors, with whom they were placed almost on
a level in several ats ofjurifdi&ion. Thus the
introduction of the EleCtoral.college into the Em-
pire, and the authority which it acquired, inltead
of diminishing, contributed to strengthen the
principles of hostility and discord in the Germa-
nick constitution.

from the THESE were further augmented by the various
Different and repugnant forms of civil policy in the feyeral
forms of
government States which compefed the Germanick body. It
inthlstahes is no easy matter to render the union of inde-
which corn- pendant States perfect and entire, even when the
Cemanikth genius and forms of their respective governments
body. happen to be altogether fimiliar. But in the

German Empire, which was a confederacy of
Princes, of Ecclefiafticks, and of free-cities, it
was impoflible that they could incorporate
thoroughly. The free-cities were small repub-
licks, in which the maxims and spirit peculiar
to that species of government prevailed. The
Princes and nobles to whom supreme jurifdicion
belonged, poffefled a fort of monarchical power
within their own territories, and the forms of
their interior administration nearly resembled thore
of the great feudal kingdoms. The intereits,
the ideas, the objects of States so differently con-
ftituted, cannot be the fame. Nor could their
common deliberations be carried on with the
fame spirit, while the love of liberty and attenti-
on to commerce were the reigning principles in
the cities i and ardour for military glory, together

will

with the desire of power, were the governing SECT. Il.
paflions of the Princes and nobility.

THE secular and ecclesiastical members of the From tht

Empire were as little fitted for union as the free- between
cities and the nobility. Vast territories were an- the ecular
nexed to several of the German bifopricks and attical
abbeys, and the dignified ecclefiafticks held some members
of the highest offices in the Empire by hereditary
right. The younger sons of noblemen of the fe.
cond order, who had devoted themselves to the
church, were commonly promoted to there (ta-
tions of eminence and power; and it was no finall
mortification to the Princes and great nobility to
fee persons railed from an inferior rank to the
fame level with themselves, or even exalted to
superior dignity. The education of these church-
men, the genius of their profeflion, and their
connecion with the court of Rome, rendered
their charater as well as interest different from
those of the other members of the Germanick
body, with whom they were called to at in
concert. Thus another source of jealousy and
variance was opened, which ought not to be
overlooked when we are searching into the na-
ture of the German conltitution.

To all there causes of dissention may be added From the

one more, arising from the unequal distribution fributLon of
of power and wealth among the States of the wealth and
Empire. The electors, and other nobles of the inmo, te
highest rank, not only possessed fovereignjurif- mcmbcrs.
dition, but governed such extensive, populous,
and rich countries, as rendered them great
Princes. Many of the other members, though
they enjoyed all the rights of sovereignty, ruled
over such petty domains, that their real power
bore no proportion to this high prerogative. A
well-compaded and vigorous confederacy could

not

SECT. IT. not be formed of such dissimilar fates. The

L"3 ' weaker were jealous, timid, and unable either to

aflert or to defend their just privileges. The
more powerful were apt to assume and to be.
come oppreflive. The Electors and Emperors
endeavoured by turns to extend their own autho.
rity, by encroaching on the rights of these fee-
ble members of the Germanick body; and they,
over-awed or corrupted, tamely gave up their
privileges, or meanly favoured the designs form-
ed against them [SS].

All these AFTER contemplating all these principles of
render the
Germanick disunion and opposition in the constitution of the
body inca- German Empire, it will be easy to account for
pable of
aaing with the want of concord and uniformity, conspicuous
igorand in its councils and proceedings. That flow, dila-

tory, diftruffiful and irresolute spirit, which cha-
racterizes all its deliberations, will appear natural
in a body, the junction of whose members was
so incompleat, the different parts of which were
held together by such feeble ties, and set at va-
riance by such powerful motives. But the Em-
pire of Germany, nevertheless, comprehended
countries of such vast extent, and was inhabited
by such a martial and hardy race of men, that
when the abilities of an Emperor, or zeal for any
common cause, could rouze this unwieldy body
to put forth its strength, it ated with irresistible
force. In the following hiffory we shall find, that
as the measures on which Charles V. was most
intent, were often thwarted or rendered abortive
by the spirit ofjealoufy and division peculiar to the
Germanick constitution; To it was by the influence
which he acquired over the Princes of the Empire,
and by engaging them to co-operate with him,
that he was enabled to make Come of the greatest
efforts which diflinguifl his reign.

[SS] NOTE XLI.

THr

THE Turkish history is so blended, during the SECT. II.

reign of Charles V. with that of the great nations -v-'-t'
in Europe, and the Ottoman Porte interposed so Tur ifni go
often, and with such decisive influence, in the wars ,errmTen
and negociations of the Christian Princes, that
some previous account of the state of government
in that great Empire, is no less necessary for the
information of my readers, than these views of
the constitution of other kingdoms whiqh I have
already exhibited to them.

IT has been the fate of the more southern and its origin,

fertile parts of Asia, at different periods, to be
conquered by that warlike and hardy race of men,
who inhabit the vast country known to the an-
cients by the name of Scythia, and among the
moderns by that of Tartary. One tribe of there
people, called Turks or Turcomans, extended its
conquests, under various leaders, and during fe-
veral centuries, from the shore of the Caspian to
the straits of the Dardanelles. Towards the mid-
dle of the fifteenth century, there formidable con-
querors took Constantinople by storm, and efta-
blifhed the feat of their government in that Im-
perial city. Greece, Moldavia, Walachia, and
the other provinces of the ancient kingdoms of
Thrace and Macedonia, together with part of
Hungary, were fubjeted to their power,

BuT though the feat of the Turkilh govern. It, defpo,.

ment was fixed in Europe, and the Sultans ob- genius.
tained possession of such extensive dominions in
that quarter of the globe, the genius of their policy
was purely Afiatick; and may be properly termed
a despotism, in contradiftincion to there monarchi-
cal and republican forms of government which we
have been hitherto contemplating. The supreme
power was vested in Sultans of the Ottoman race,
that blood being deemed so sacred, that no other

was

187

SecT.II . was thought worthy of the throne. From this
-*"-* elevation, there sovereigns could look down, and

behold all their fubjets reduced to the fame level
before them. The maxims of Turkish policy
admit not any of those institutions, which, in
other countries, limit the exercise, or moderate
the rigour of monarchical power. No great court
with conflitutional and permanent jurifdidion to
interpose both in the enactment and execution of
laws. No body of hereditary nobles, whose sense
of their own pre-eminence, whose confcioufiefs
of what is due to their rank and characer,
whose jealousy of their privileges circumscribe
the authority of the Prince, and serve not
only as a barrier against the excesses of his ca-
price, but stand as an intermediate order between
him and the people. Under the Turkish govern-
ment, the political condition of every subjed is
equal. To be employed in the service of the Sul-
tan, is the only circumstance that confers diftinc-
tion. Even this diftination is annexed so closely to
the stations in which persons serve, that it is scarce
communicated to those who are placed in them.
The highest dignity in the Empire does not give
any rank or pre-eminence to the family of him
who enjoys it. As every man, before he is raised
to any station of authority, must go through the
preparatory discipline of a long and servile obe-
dience o, the moment he is deprived of power, he
and his posterity return to the fame condition with
other fubjeas, and fink back into obscurity. It is
the diltinguifhing and odious charateriftick of
the Eastern despotism, that annihilates all other
ranks of men, in order to exalt the monarch; that
it leaves nothing to the former, while it gives
every thing to the latter; that it endeavours to
fix in the minds of those who are fiibjet to it,

* State of the Turkisl Empire by Rycaut, p. 2z,

the idea of no relation between men, but that of SECT. II.
a maiter and of a slave, the former destined to ^
command and to punish, the latter formed to
tremble and to obey [TT],

BUT as there are circumRtances which fre- Power of

quently obftrut or defeat the salutary effects of iteit Selt
the befl-regulated governments, there are others religion;
which contribute to mitigate the evils of the
most vicious forms of policy. There can, in-
deed, be no constitutional refiraints on the will
of a Prince in a despotic government; but there
may be such as are accidental. Absolute as the
Turkish Sultans are, they feel themselves cir-
cumfcribed both by religion, the principle on
which their authority is founded P. and by the
army, the instrument which they muff employ
in order to maintain it. Wherever religion in-
terpofes, the will of the Sovereign muff submit
to its decrees. When the Koran hath prescribed
any religious rite; hath enjoined any moral duty;
or hath confirmed, by its fan&ion, any political
maxim, the command of the Sultan cannot over-
turn that which an higher authority hath efta-
blifhed. The chief reftrition, however, on the
will of the Sultans, is imposed by the military
power. An armed force muff surround the and by the
throne of every Despot, to maintain his autho- military.
rity, and to execute his commands. As the
Turks extended their empire over nations,
which they did not exterminate, but reduce to
fubjetion, they found it necessary to render their
military establishment numerous and formidable.
Amurath, their third Sultan, in order to form origin of
a body of devoted troops, that might serve the Jania' .
as the immediate guards of his person and dig- A. D. 1362.
nity, appointed his officers to seize annually, as
the Imperial property, the fifth part of the

[TT] NOTE XLII. P Rycaut, p. 8.

youth

SECT. III. youth taken in war. Thefe,.after being inftrtued
.'--'~ in the Mahometan religion, inured to obedience by

.severe discipline, and trained to warlike exercises,
were formed into a body distinguished by the
name of Janizaries, or new soldiers. Every fen-
timent which enthusiasm can inspire, every mark
of diftinAion that the favour of the Prince could
confer, were employed in order to animate this
body with.martial ardour, and with a corici.
oufnefs of its own pre-eminence 9. The Janiza-
ries soon became the chief strength and pride of
the Ottoman armies; and. by their nwmber as
well as reputation, were distinguished above all
the troops, whose duty it was to attend on the
person of the Sultans [UUJ.

Their val THus, as the supreme power in every society
the Turki is;poffeffed by ihofe who have arms in their hands,
govern- this formidable body of soldiers, destined to be the

t instruments of enlarging the Sultan's authority,

acquired,' at the fame time, the means of con-
trouling it. -The Janizaries in Constantinople, like
the PraStoriap bands in ancient Rome, quickly
perceived all the advantages which they derived
from being Rationed in the capital; from their
union under one ,standard;. and from being ma-
fters of the person of the Prince. The Sultans
became no less sensible of their influence and im-
portance. The Capiculy, or soldiery of the Porte,
was the only power in the Empire that a Sultan or
his Vifier had reason to dread. To preserve the
fidelity and attachment of the Janizaries, was
the great art of government, and the principal
object of attention in the policy of the Otto-
man court. Under a monarch, whose abilities
and vigour of mind fit him for command,
they are obsequious instruments; execute what-

4 Prince Cantemir's History of the Othman Empire,
p. 87.

[UUJ NOTE XLIII,

ever

ever he enjoins; and render his power irresistible. SCTr. III.
Under feeble Princes, or such as are unfortu- v'
nate, they become turbulent and mutinous; as-
fume the tone of Masters; degrade and exalt Sul-
tans at pleasure; and teach those to tremble, on
whose nod, at other times, life or death depend.

FROM Mahomet II. who took Constantinople, Progreufkof

`the Turks

to Solyman, who began his reign a few months towards do-
after Charles V. was placed on the Imperial minion"
throne, a fucceflion of illustrious Princes ruled
over the Turkish Empire. By their great abili-
ties, they kept their fubjeats of every order,
military as well as civil, fubmiflive to govern-
ment; and had the absolute command of what-
ever force their vast Empire was able to exert.
Solyman, in particular, who is known to the
Christians chiefly as a conqueror, but is cele-
brated in the Turkish annals as the great law-
giver who eftablilhed order and police in their
Empire, governed during his long reign with
no less authority than wildom. He divided his
dominions into several diftrias; he appointed
the number of soldiers which each should fur-
nifh; he appropriated a certain proportion of the
lands in every province for their maintenance;
he regulated, with a minute accuracy, every
thing relative to their discipline, their arms, and
the nature of their service. He put the finances
of the Empire into an orderly train of admini-
itration; and though the taxes in the Turkish
dominions, as well as in the other despotic mo-
narchies of the East, are far from being confi-
derable, he supplied that defect by an attentive
and severe oconomy.

Advantage.

NOR was ib only under such Sultans as Soly- pofrerdCle
man, whose talents were no less adapted to vcrthe

Chrifiian

preserve interior order, than to conduct the ope- power, in
rations of war, that the Turkish Empire engaged theh ci

with tur.

SECT. I1. with advantage in its contests with the Chriffian
'- s ifates. The long fuccefflion of able Princes,

which I have mentioned; had given such vigour
and firmness to the Ottoman government, that
it seems to have attained, during the sixteenth
century, the highest degree of perfecion of
which its constitution was capable. Whereas
the great monarchies in Christendom were fill
far from that state, which could enable them
to aft with a full exertion of their force. Be-
fides this,' the Turkish troops in that age pof-
sessed every advantage which arises from fuperi
ority in military discipline. At the time when
Solyman began his reign, the Janizaries had
been embodied near a century and a half, and
during that long period the severity of their mi-
litary:difcipline had in no degree relaxed. The
soldiers drawn from the provinces of the Em-
pire had been kept almost continually under
arms, in the various wars which the Sultans had
carried on with hardly any interval of peace.
Against troops thus trained and accustomed to
service, the forces of the Christian powerstook
the field with great disadvantage. The most
intelligent as well as impartial authors of the
sixteenth century, acknowledge and lament the
superior attainments of the Turks in the military
art. [XX] The success which uniformly attend-
ed their arms in all their wars, demonfirates the
justness of this observation. The Christian ar-
mies did not acquire that superiority over the
Turks, which they now possess, until the long
establishment of standing forces had improved
military discipline among the former; and until
various causes and events, which it is not my
province to explain, had corrupted or abolished
their ancient warlike inflitutions among the
latter.

[XX] NOTE XLIV.

PROOFS

PROOF

s

AND

ILLUSTRATIONS.
VOL. I.

0

# PROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

PROOFS

AND
ILLUSTRATION S.

NOTE I. SECT. I. p. 2. [A].

HE consternation of the Britons, when
invaded by the Pidts and Caledonians
after the Roman legions were called

out of the island, may give some idea of the
degree of debatement to which the human mind
was reduced by long servitude under the Ro-
mans. In their supplicatory letter to Aetius,
which they call the groans of Britain, " We
know not (fay they) which way to turn us.
The barbarians drive us to the sea; and the Tea
forces us back on the barbarians; between which
we have only the choice of two deaths, either
to be swallowed up by the waves, or to be
butchered by the sword." Hiftor. Gilde. ap.
Gale. Hist. Britan. Script. p. 6.-One can scarce
believe this dastardly race, to be the defcen-
dants of that gallant people, who repulsed Caesar,
and defended their liberty so long against the
Roman arms.

NOTE II. SECT. P. 4.B].

THE barbarous nations were not only illite-

rate, but regarded literature with contempt.
They found the inhabitants of all the provinces
of the Empire flank ip effeminacy, and averse to

0 2 war.

war. Such a charater was the object of scorn
to an high-fpirited and gallant race of men.
" When we would brand an enemy," fays
Liutprandus, " with disgraceful and contume.
lious appellations, we call him a Roman; hoc
solo, id eft Romani nomine, quicquid ignobilita.
tis, quicquid timiditatis, quicquid avaritiz,
quicquid luxuriae, quicquid mendacii, immo
quicquid vitiomum eft comprehendentes." Li-
utprandi Legatio apud Murat. Scriptor. Italic
vol. ii. pars. i. p. 481. This degeneracy of
manners, illiterate barbarians imputed to their
love of learning. Even after they fettled in the
countries which they had conquered, they
would not permit their children to be inftruded
in any science; " for, (said they), inftrution
in the sciences tends to corrupt, enervate, and
depress the mind; and he who has been accuf.
tomed to tremble under the rod of a pedagogue,
will never look on a sword or spear with an un-
daunted eye." Procop. de bello Gothor lib.i.
p. 4. ap. Script. Byz. vol. i. A considerable
number of years elapsed, before nations so rude,
and so unwilling to learn, could produce hifto
rians capable of recording their tranfadions, or
of describing their manners and institutions.
By that time, all memory of their ancient con-
dition was loft, and no monument remained to
guide their first writers to any certain know-
ledge of it. If one expects to receive any fa-
tisfadory account of the manners and laws of
the Goths, Lombards, or Franks, during their
residence in those countries where they were ori-
ginally feated, from Jornandes, Paulus Warne-
fridus, or Gregory of Tours the earliest and
most authentick hifforians of there people, he
will be miserably dfllppointed. Whatever im-
perfeic view has been conveyed to us of their
ancient stare, we owe not to their own writers,
but to the Greek and Roman historians.

NOTE

NO TE III. SECT. I.. 5. [C].

A CIRCUMSTANCE related by Prifcus in his
history of the embassy to Attila, King of the
Huns, gives a striking view of the enthufiaftick
passion for war, which prevailed among the bar-
barous nations. When the entertainment to
which that fierce conqueror admitted the Ro-
man ambassadors was ended, two Scythians ad-
vanced towards Attila, and recited a poem in
which they celebrated his victories, and milita-
ry virtues. All the Huns fixed their eyes with
attention on the bards. Some seemed to be de-
lighted with the verses; others, remembering
their own battles and exploits, exulted with joy;
while those who were become feeble through
age, burst out into tears, bewailing the decay
of their vigour, and the state of inactivity in
which they were now obliged to remain. Ex-
cerpta ex hiftoria Prifci Rhetoris ap. Byzant.
Hiftor. Script. edit. Venet. v. i. p. 45.

NOTE IV. SECT. I. P. I. [D].

A REMARKABLE confirmation of both parts
of this reasoning occurs in the history of Eng-
land. The Saxons carried on the conquest of
that country with the fame deftruEtive spirit,
which distinguished the other barbarous nations.
The ancient inhabitants of Britain were either ex-
terminated; or forced to take shelter among the
mountains of Wales; or reduced into servitude.
The Saxon government, laws, manners and lan-
guage were of consequence introduced into Bri-
tain; and were so perfetly established, that all
memory of the institutions previous to their
conquest was abolished. The very reverse of,
this happened in a fiubfequent revolution. A
tingle victory placed William the Norman qn

0 3 the

197

the throne of England. The Saxon inhabitants
though oppressed, were not' exterminated.
William employed the utmost efforts of his
;power and policy to make his new subjeCts con.
form in every thing to the Norman standard;
but without success. The Saxons, though van.
quifhed, were far more numerous than thei
conquerors; when they began to incorporate,
their laws and manners gradually gained ground.
The Norman inffitutions were unpopular and
odious; many of them fell into disuse; and in
the English confritution and language, at this
day, many essential parts are manifestly of Sax.
an, not of Norman extrat.

NOTE V. SECT. Ip.1. [. E].

PROCOPIUS, the historian, declines, from a

principle of benevolence, to give any particular
derail of the cruelties of the Goths; " Left, fays
he, I should transmit a monument and example
of inhumanity to succeeding ages." Proc. de
bello Goth. lib. iii. cap. o0. ap. Byz. Script. vol.
i. 1 26. But as the change, which I have point-
ed out as a consequence of the settlement of the
barbarous nations in the countries formerly sub-
jec to the Roman Empire, could not have taken
place, if the greater part of the ancient inhabi-
tants had not been extirpated, an event of fuih
importance and influence merits a more particu-
lar illustration. This will justify me tor ex-
hibiting tome part of that melancholy fpeLdacle,
over which humanity prompted Procopius to
draw a veil. I shall not, however, ditfut
my readers by a long detail; but reft Iatil-
fled with collecing tome inflances of the de-
vaftations made by two of the many nations,
which fettled in the Empire. The Vandals

were
198

were the firt of the barbarians who invaded
Spain. It was one of the richest and most po-
pulous of the Roman Provinces, the inhabitants
had been diftingui(ied for couragei and h'ad de-
fended their liberty againffd the arms of Rome,
with greater obstinacy, and during a longer
course of years, than any nation in Europe. But
so entirely were they enervated by their subjec-
tion to the Romans, that the Vandals who en-
tered the kingdom A. D. 409. compleated the
conquest of it with such rapidity, that in the
year 411 , these barbarians divided it among
them by casting lots. the desolation occasioned
by their invasion is thus deferibed by -Idatius an
eye witness. "The barbarians wafted every
thing with hostile cruelty. The'peftilence was
no less deftruive. -A dreadfuf famine raged, to
such a degree, that the living were constrained to
feed on the dead bodies of their fellow citizens;
and all there terrible plagues desolated at once
the unhappy kingdoms." Idatii Chron. ap. Bi-
blioth. Patrum. vol. vii. p. 1233. edit. Lugd. 1677.
The Goths having attacked the Vandals in their
new settlements, a fierce war ensued; the coun-
try was plundered by both parties, the cities
which at first escaped were laid in ashes, and the
inhabitants exposed to susser every thing that the
wanton cruelty of barbarians could inflict. Ida-
tius describes there, ibid. p. 1235. b. 236. c. f.
A similar account of their devastations is given
by Ifidorus Hifpalenfis, and the contemporary
writers. Ifid. Chron. ap. Grot. hist. Goth. 732.
From Spain the Vandals passed over to Africa,
A. D. 428. Africa was, next to Egypt, the
most fertile of the Roman provinces. It was
one of the granaries of the Empire, and is call-
ed by an ancient writer, the oIul of the com-
monwealth. Though the army with which
they invaded it, did not exceed 30,000 fight-

0 4 ing

ing men, they became absolute maiters of the
province in less than two years. A contempo
rary author gives a dreadful account of the ha.
vock which they made: " They found a pro.
vince well cultivated, and enjoying plenty, the
beauty of the whole earth. They carried their
deftrutive arms into every corner of it; they
difpeopled it by their devastations; exterminat.
ing every thing with fire and sword. They did
not even spare the vines, and fruit trees, that
those to whom caves and inaccessible mountains
had afforded a retreat, might find no nourifb.
ment of any kind. Their hostile rage could not
be satiated, and there was no place exempted
from the effecs of it. They tortured their pri-
foners with the most exquisite cruelty, that they
might force from them a discovery of their hidden
treasures. The more they discovered, the more
they expeced, and the more implacable they
became. Neither the infirmities of age nor of
sex; neither the dignity of nobility, nor the fanc-
tity of the sacerdotal office, could mitigate their
fury; but the more illufirious their prisoners
were, the more barbarously they insulted them.
The publick buildings which refitted the vio-
lence of the flames, they levelled with the ground.
They left many cities without an inhabitant.
When they approached any fortified place, which
their undisciplined army could not reduce, they
gathered together a multitude of prisoners, and
putting them to the sword, left their bodies un-
buried, that the stench of the carcases might
oblige the garrison to abandon it." Vidtor
Vitenfis de perfecutione Africana. ap. Bibl. Pa-
trum. vol. viii. p. 666. St. AugufRin an A-
frican, and a contemporary author gives a fimi-
lar description of their cruelties, opera v. x.
p. 372. edit. 16x6. -About an hundred years
after the settlement of the Vandals in Africa,
Belisarius attacked and dirpoffeffed them. Pro.

copius,
200

copius, a contemporary historian, describes the
devastation which that war occasioned. " Afri-
ca, fays he, was so entirely difpeopled, that one
might travel several days in it without meeting
one man; and it is no exaggeration to fay, that
in the course of the war five millions of persons
perifed." Proc. hist. Arcana cap. 18. ap. Byz.
Script. vol. i. 3 5.-- I have dwelt longer upon
the calamities of this province, because they are
described not only by contemporary authors, but
by eye-witnesses. The present state of Africa
confirms their testimony. Many of the most
flourishing and populous cities with which it was
filled, were so entirely ruined, that no vestiges
remain to point out where they were situated.
That fertile territory which sustained the Roman
Empire lies in a great measure uncultivated; and
that province, which ViEtor in his barbarous
Latin called Speciofitas totius terre florentis, is now
the retreat of pirates and banditti.

WHILE the Vandals laid waste one part of the
Empire, the Huns desolated the reft of it. Of all
the barbarous tribes they were the fiercest and
most formidable. Ammianus Marcellinus a con-
temporary author, and one of the best of the la-
ter historians, gives an account of their policy
and manners. They nearly resemble those of
the Scythians described by the ancients, and of
the Tartars known to the moderns. In rome
parts of their character, and in several of their
customs, they resemble the savages in North
America. Their passion for war and action was
extreme. " As in polished fbcieties ((ays Am-
mianus) ease and tranquillity are courted, they
delight in war and dangers. He who falls in
battle is reckoned happy. They who die of old
age or of disease are deemed infamous. They

boast,

boast, with the utmost exultation, of the num.
ber of enemies whorr they have slain, and as
the most glorious of all ornaments, they salten
the scalps of those who have fallen by their
hand to the trappings of their horses." Ammian.
Marc. lib. xxxi. p. 477. edit. Gronov. Lugd.
I693.- Their incursions into the Empire be-
gan in the fourth century; and the Romans,
though no firangers, by that time, to the effeds
of barbarous rage, were astonished at the cruelty
of their devaflations. Thrace, Pannonia, and
Illyricum were the countries which they first laid
desolate. As they had no thoughts of fettling in
Europe, their inroads were frequent, and Proco.
pius computes that in each of these, at a medi-
um, two hundred thousand persons perilhed or
were carried off as slaves. Procop. hilt. Arcan.
ap. Byz. script. vol. i. 3 6. Thrace, the bes
cultivated province in that quarter of the Empire,
was converted into .a dcfert, and when Prifcus
accompanied the ambassadors sent to Attila,
there were no inhabitaats in some of the cities,
but a few miserable people who had taken lhelter
among the ruins of the churches; and the fields
were covered with the bones of those who had
fallen by the sword. Prifcus ap. Byz. Script. vol.
i. 34. Attila became King of the Huns, A. D.
434. He is one of the greatest and molf enter-
prizing conquerors mentioned in history. He
extended his Empire over all the vast countries,
comprehended under the general names of Scy-
thia and Germany in the ancient divilion of the
world. While he was carrying on his wars
againRf the barbarous nations, he kept the Roman
Empire under perpetual appreheniions, and ex-
torted vail fiubidies from the timid and effemi-
nate monarchs who governed it. In the year 451,
he entered Gaul, at the head of an army compos
ed of all the various nations which he had lib-

dued.
202

dued. It was more numerous than any with
which the barbarians had hitherto invaded the
Empire. The devaltations which he committed
were horrible; not only the open country, but
the most flourishing cities were desolated. The
extent and cruelty of his devaltations are deicrib-
ed by Salvianus de Gubernat. Dei. edit. Baluz.
Par. 1669. p. 139, &c. and by Idatius ubi supra
p. 235. Aetius put a flop to his progreis in that
country by the famous battle of Chalons, in which
(if we may believe the historians of that age) three
hundred thousand persons peri(hed. Idat. ibid.
Jornandes de rebus Geticis ap. Grot. hist. Gothor.
p. 671. Amis. 1665. But next year he resolved
to attack the centre of the Empire, and marching
into Italy, wafted it with rage, inflamed by the
sense of his late disgrace. What Italy suffered by
the Huns exceeded all the calamities which the
preceding incursions of the barbarians had brought
upon it. Conringius has collected several passages
from the ancient historians, which prove that the
devastations committed by the Vandals and Huns
in the countries situated on the banks of the
Rhine, were no leTs cruel and fatal to the human
race. Exercitatio de urbibus Germaniae. Opera,
vol. i. 489. But it is endless, it is shocking to fol-
low these destroyers of mankind through to many
scenes of horror, and to contemplate the havock
which they made of the human species.

BUT the state in which Italy appears to have

been, during several ages, after the barbarous
nations fettled in it, is the most decisive proof
of the cruelty as well as extent of their de-
vaftations. Whenever any country is thinly
inhabited, trees and shrubs spring up in the
uncultivated fields, and spreading by degrees

form

203

form large forests; by the overflowing of rivers,
and the stagnating of waters, other parts of it
are converted into lakes and marshes. Ancient
Italy, the feat of the Roman elegance and luxu-
ry, was cultivated to the highest pitch. But
so effectually did the devastations of the barba-
rians destroy all the effects of their indufRry and
cultivation, that in the eighth century Italy ap-
pears to have been covered with forests and
marshes of vati extent. Muratori enters into
a long detail concerning the situation and limits
of these; and proves by the most authentick
evidence, that great tracts of territory, in all
the different provinces of Italy, were either over-
run with wood, or laid under water. Nor did
there occupy parts of the country naturally bar-
ren or of little value, but were spread over di-
ftridts, which ancient writers represent as ex-
tremely fertile, and which at present are highly
cultivated. Muratori antiquitates Italicax medii
aevi dissert. xxi. v. ii. p. 149, 153, &c. A frong
proof of this occurs in a description of the city
of Modena, by an author of the tenth century.
Murat. script. Rerum Italic. vol. ii. pars. ii.
p. 691. The state of desolation in other coun-
tries of Europe seems to have been the fame.
In many of the most early charters now extant,
the lands granted to monasteries or to private
persons, are distinguished into such as are cul-
tivated or inhabited, and such as were eremm,
desolate. In many iniRances, lands are granted
to persons because they had taken them from
the desert, ab ereto, and had cultivated and
planted them with inhabitants. This appears
from a charter of Charlemagne, published by
Eckhart de rebus Franciae Orientalis. vol. ii. p.
864, and from many charters of his fucceflrs
quoted by Du Cange voc. Eremus.

MURATORI

MURATORI adds, that during the eighth and

ninth centuries, Italy was greatly infested by
wolves and other wild beasts; another mark of
its being destitute of inhabitants. Murat. Antiq.
vol. ii. p. 163. Thus Italy, the pride of the
ancient world for its fertility and cultivation,
was reduced to the state of a country newly
peopled, and rendered habitable.

I A M sensible, not only that rome of the de-

scriptions of the devastations which I have
quoted, may be exaggerated, but that the bar-
barous tribes proceeded in different manners, in
making their new settlements. Some of them
seemed to be bent on exterminating the ancient
inhabitants; others were more disposed to incor-
porate with them. It is not my province either
to enquire into the causes which occasioned this
variety in the conduct of the conquerors, or to
describe the state of those countries where the
ancient inhabitants were treated most mildly.
The fats which I have produced are sufficient
to prove that the deftrustion of the human fpe-
cies, occasioned by their hostile invasions of the
northern nations, and their subsequent fettle-
ments, was much greater than the generality
of writers seem to imagine.

NOTE VI. SECT. I. p. 13. [F].

I H AVE observed, Note II. that our only cer-

tain information concerning the ancient state of
the barbarous nations must be derived from the
Greek and Roman writers. Happily an account
of the institutions and customs of one people, to
which those of all the reft seem to have been in
a great measure similar, has been transmitted to
us by two authors, the most capable, perhaps,
that ever wrote, of observing them with pro-
found discernment, and of delcribing them with
propriety and force. The reader must per-

ceive

205

ceive that I have Caesar and Tacitus in my eye.
The former gives a short acount of the ancient
Germans in a few chapters of the sixth book of
his commentaries: The latter wrote a treatise
expressly on that subjec. These are the most
precious and inftruEtive monuments of antiquity
to the present inhabitants of Europe. From
them we learn,

I. THAT the ifate of Society among the

ancient Germans, was of the rudest and most
simple form. They subsisted entirely by hunt-
ing or by pasturage. Caef. lib. vi. c. 21. They
neglected agriculture, and lived chiefly on milk,
cheese, and flell. Ibid. c. 22. Tacitus agrees
with him in most of there points; de morib.
Germ. c. 14, 15, 23. The Goths were equally
negligent of agriculture. Prif Rhet. ap. Byz,
Script. v. i. p. 3 . B. Society was in the fame
ftace among the Huns, who disdained to cultih
vate the earth, or to touch a plough. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 475. The fame manners
took place among the Alans; ibid. p. 477.
While society remains in this simple state, men
by uniting together scarce relinquish any portion
of their natural independance. Accordingly we are
informed, 2. That the authority of civil govern-
ment was extremely limited among the Germans.
During times of peace they had no common or
fixed magifirate, but the chief meln of every
cliftrit di)penled justice, and accommodated dif-
ferences. CaC ibid. c. 23. Their Kings liad
not absolute or unbounded power; their autho-
rity confifed rather in the privilege of adviling,
than in the power of commanding. Matters of
finall conlequence were determined by the chief
men; affairs of importance by the whole con-
munity. Tacit. c. 7, ii. The Huns, in like
manner, deliberated in common concerning every
business of moment to the fbciety; and were not

fuibjedt
206

fitbjet to the rigour of regal authority. Amm.
Marcel. lib. xxxi. p. 474. 3. Every individual
among the ancient Germans was left at liberty to
chufe whether he would take part in any military
enterprize which was proposed; there seems to
have been no obligation to engage in it imposed
on him by publick authority. " When any of
the chief men proposes any expedition, such as
approve of the cause and of the leader rife up,
and declare their intention of following him; and
those who do not fulfil this engagement, are con-
fidered as deserters and traitors, and are looked
upon as infamous." Cae. ibid. c. 23. Tacitus
plainly points,at the fame custom, though in terms
more obscure. Tacit. c. i . 4. As every indivi-
dual was so independant, and master in so great a
degree of his own actions, it became, of confe-
quence, the great object of every person among
the Germans who aimed at being a leader, to
gain adherents, and attach them to his person
and interest. These adherents Cafar calls Am-
baiti and Clientes, i. e. retainers or clients; Taci-
tus, Comites, or companions. The chief diftinc-
tion and power of the leaders, confifled in being
attended by a numerous band of chosen youth.
This was their pride as well as ornament during
peace, and their defence in war. The favour
of these retainers the leaders gained or preserved
by presents of armour, and of horses; or by
the profuse, though inelegant hospitality, with
which they entertained them. Tacit. c. 14, 15.
5. Another consequence of the personal liberty
and independauce which the Germans retained,
even after they united in society, was their cir-
cumfcribing the criminaljurifdistion of the ma-
giftrate within very narrow limits, and their
not only claiming but exercising almost all the
rights of private resentment and revenge. Their
magistrates bad not the power either of imprison-
ing, or of inflicting any corporal punishment on a

free

207

free man. Tacit. c. 7. Every person was ob.
liged to avenge the wrongs which his parents or
friends had sustained. Their enmities were he.
reditary, but not irreconcileable. Even murder
was compensated by paying a certain number of
cattle. Tac c. z2. A part of the fine went to
the King, or state, a part to the person who
had been injured, or to his kindred. Ibid. c. 12.

THESE particulars concerning the institutions

and manners of the Germans, though well
known to every person conversant in ancient
literature, I have thought proper to arrange in
this order, and to lay before fuhliodf my readers
as may be less acquainted with there fads, both
because they confirm the account which I have
given of the state of the barbarous nations, and
tend to illustrate all the observations that I shall
have occasion to make concerning the various
changes in their government and customs. The
laws and customs introduced by the barbarous
nations into their new settlements, are the best
commentary on the writings of Caesar and Ta-
citus; and their observations are the best key
to a perfect knowledge of these laws and customs.

ONE circumstance with refpea to the teftimo-

nies of Caesar and Tacitus concerning the Ger-
nans, merits attention. Cafar wrote his brief
account of their manners more than an hundred
years before Tacitus composed his treatise de mo-
ribus Germanorum. An hundred years make a
considerable period in the progress of national
manners, especially if, during that time, those peo-
ple who are rude and unpolifhed-have had much
communication with more civilized flates. This
was the cafe with the Germans. Their intercourse
with the Romans began when Caesar crossed the
Rhiae, and increated prodigiously during the

interval

interval between that event and the time when
Tacitus flourished. Besides this, there was a
considerable difference between the fate of focie-
ty among the different tribes of Germans. The
Suiones were so much improved, that they began
to be corrupted. Tac. cap. 44. The Fenni were so
barbarous, that it is wonderful how they were
able to Cubfift. Ibid. cap. 46. Whoever under-
takes to describe the manners of the Germans,
or to found any political theory upon the Rate
of society among them, ought carefully to attend
to both these circumfiances.

BEFORE I quit this subjet, it may not be im-
proper to observe, that though fucceflive altera-
tions in their institutions, together with the gra-
dual progress of refinement, have made an entire
change in the manners of the various people, who
conquered the Roman Empire, there is till one
race of men nearly in the fame political situation
with that in which they were when they first
fettled in their new conquests: I mean the vari-
ous tribes and nations of Savages in North Ame-
rica. It cannot then be confidered either as a
digression, or as an improper indulgence of cu-
riofity to enquire, whether this similarity in their
political fate has occasioned any resemblance
between their character and manners. If the
likeness turns out to be itriking, it is a stronger
proof that a just account has been given of the
ancient inhabitants of Europe, than the tetimony
even of Caear or of Tacitus.

1. The Americans subsist chiefly by hunting

and fishing. Some tribes neglect agriculture en-
tirely. Among those who cultivate rome small
spot near their huts, that, together with all
works of labour, is performed by the women.
P. Charlevoix Journal Hiftorique d'un Voyage de
L'Amerique 4o. Par. 1744. p. 334. In such

VOL . I.P a state

2og

a slate of society, the common wants of men be.
ing few, and their mutual dependence upon each
other fnall, their union is extremely imperfet
and feeble, and they continue to enjoy their natu-
ral liberty almost unimpaired. It is the first idea
of an American, that every man is born free and
independent, and that no power on earth hath any
right to diminish or circumscribe his natural liber-
ty. There is scarce any appearance of fubordina.
tion either in civil or domestic government. Every
one does what he pleases. A father and mother
with their children, live like persons whom chance
has brought together, and whom no common bond
unites. Their manner of educating their children
is suitable to this principle. They never chatife
or punilh them, even during their infancy. As
they advance in years, they allow them to be en.
tirely maiters of their own actions, and responsible
to no body. Id. p. 272, 273.-2. The power
of their civil magistrates is extremely limited.
Among most of their tribes, the Sachem or chief
is elective. A council of old men is chosen to
assist him, without whose advice he determines
no affair of importance. The Sachems neither
pofTefs nor claim any great degree of authority.
They propose and intreat rather than command.
The obedience of their people is altogether vo-
luntary. Id. p. 266, 268.-3. They engage in
any military enterprize, not from conftrainr, but
choice. When war is resolved, a chief arises,
and offers himself to be the leader. They who
are willing (for they compel no person) stand up
one after another, and sing their war song. But if
after this, any of these ihould refuse to follow the
leader, to whom they have engaged, his life would
be in danger, and he would be confidered as the
most infamous of all men. Id. p. 2 17, 21 .--4.
Such as engage to follow any leader, expect to be
treated by him with great attention and refpe;
and he is obliged to make them presents of,confi-

derable

derable value. Id. p. 2t 8. - 5. Among the Ame-
ricans, the magistrate has scarce any criminaljurif-
dilion. Id. p. 272. Upon receiving any injury, the
person or family offended may inflic what pu-
nilhment they please on the perbon who was the
author of it. Id. p. 274. Their resentment and
desire of vengeance are exceflive and implacable.
Time can neither extinguish or abate it. It is the
chief inheritance parents leave to their children;
it is transmitted from generation to generation,
untilan occasion be found of satisfying it. Id. p.
309. Sometimes, however, the offended party is
appeared. A compensation is paid for a murder
that has been committed. The relations of the
deceased receive it; and it consists most common-
ly of a captive taken in war, who being fubftitut-
ed in place of the person who was murdered, as-
fumes his name, and is adopted into his family.
Id. p. 274. The resemblance holds in many other
particulars. It is sufficient for my purpose to have
pointed out the firilarity of those great features
which distinguish and characterize both people.
Bochart, and other philologists of the last century,
who, with more erudition than science, endea-
voured to trace the migrations of various nations,
and who were apt, upon the flightef appearance
of resemblance, to find an affinity between na-
tions far Icinoved from each other, and to con-
clude that they were descended from the fame
ancestors, would hardly have failed, on viewing
such an amazing similarity, to pronounce with
confidence, " That the Germans and Americans
mutt be the fame people " But a philofbpher will
satisfy himself with observing, " That the cha-
racters of nations depends on the state of society
in which they live, and on the political inRtitutions
efablilhed among them; and that the human
mind, whenever it is placed in the fame fiuation,
will, in ages the most distant, and in countries the

P 2. moit

211

most remote, aflume the fame form, and be di.
ftinguifhed by the fame manners.

I HAVE pushed the comparison between the

Germans and Americans no farther than was ne-
ceffary for the illustration of my subjet. I do
not pretend that the state of society in the two
countries was perfe&ly similar. Many of theGer.
man tribes were more civilized than the Ameri.
cans. Some of them were not unacquainted with
agriculture; almost all of them had flocks of tame
cattle, and depended for the chief part of their
subsistence upon these. Most of the American
tribes subsist by hunting, and are in a ruder and
more simple state than the ancient Germans.
The resemblance, however, between their con-
dition is greater perhaps than any that we know
between two races of men, and this has produced
a furprizing similarity of manners.

NOTE VII. SECT. I. p. 13. [G].

THE booty gained by an army belonged to an

army. The King himself had no part of it but
what he acquired by lot. A remarkable instance
of this occurs in the history of the Franks The
army of Clovis, the founder of the French mo-
narchy, having plundered a church, carried off,
among other sacred utensils, a vase of extraordina-
ry size and beauty. The bishop sent deputies to
Clovis, beseeching him to restore the vase, that it
might be again employed in the sacred services
to which it had been consecrated. Clovis desired
the deputies to follow him to Soissons, as their
booty was to be divided in that place, and promif-
ed that if the lot should give him the disposal of
the vase, he would grant what the bishop desired.
When he came to Soissons, and all the booty was
placed in one great heap in the middle of the
army, Clovis intreated, that before making the
division, they would give him that vase over and

above
212Z

above his (hare. All appeared willing to gratify
the King, and to comply with his request when
a fierce and haughty soldier lifted up his battle-
axe, and striking the vase with the utmost vio-
lence, cried out with a loud voice, " You ihall
receive nothing here but that to which the lot
gives you a right." Gregor. Turon. Hiftor.
Francorum. lib. ii. c. 27. p. 70. Par. i61o.

NOTE VIII. SEC T. . p. 15. [H].
THE history of the establishment and progress
of the feudal fyfiem, is an interesting object to all
the nations of Europe. In some countries, their
jurisprudence and laws are fRill in a great mea-
sure feudal. In others, many forms and practi-
ces eftablilhed by custom, or founded on statutes,
took their rife from the feudal law, and cannot
be understood without attending to the ideas pe-
culiar to it. Several authors of the highest re-
putation for genius and erudition, have endea-
voured to illustrate this fubjeat, but they have
left many parts of it obscure. I shall endeavour
to trace, with precision, the progress and variation
of ideas concerning property in land among the
barbarous nations; and (hall attempt to point
out the causes which introduced there changes,
as well as the effects which followed upon them.
Property in land seems to have gone through four
successive changes among the people who fettled
in the various provinces of the Roman Empire.

I. WHI LE the barbarous nations remained in

their original countries, they had no fixed pro-
perty in land, and no certain limits to their pof-
lesions. After feeding their flocks in one distriCt,
they removed with them, their wives and families,
to another; and abandoned that likewise in a short
time. They were not, in consequence of this im-
perfect species of property, brought under any
positive or formal obligation to lerve the com-

P 3 munity;

munity; all their services were purely voluntary,
Every individual was at liberty to chufe how far
he would contribute towards carrying on any mi.
litary enterprize. If he followed a leader in any
expedition, it was from attachment, not from a
sense of obligation. The clearef proof of this
has been produced in note VI. While property
continued in this state, we can discover nothing
that bears any resemblance to a feudal tenure, or
to the subordination and military service which
the feudal system introduced.

II. UPON fettling in the countries which they

subdued, the victorious army divided the con-
quered lands. That portion Which fell to every
soldier, he seized as a recompence due to hisva-
lour, as a settlement acquired by his own sword.
He took possession of it as a freeman in full
property. He enjoyed it during his own life,
and could dispose of it at pleasure, or transmit it
as an inheritance to his children. Thus property
in land became fixed. It was at the fame time
allodial, i. e. the pofieflor had'the entire right of
property and dominion; he held of no sovereign
or superior lord, to whom he was bound to do
homage, and perform service. But as there new
proprietors were in Come danger (as has been ob-
served in the text) of being disturbed by the re-
niainder of the ancient inhabitants, and in fill
greater danger of being attacked by barbarianl
as fierce and rapacious as themselves, they saw
the necessity of coming under obligations to de
fend the community, more explicit than those tc
which they had been subjet in their origina
habitations. On this account, immediately up'
on their fixing in their new settlements, ever;
freeman became bound to take arms in de
fence of the community, and if he refuse'
or neglected so to do, was liable to a con

fiderabl,

riderable penalty. I do not mean that any con-
trac of this kind was formally concluded, or
mutually ratified by any legal solemnity. It
was, like the other compacts which hold society
together, established by tacit consent; and their
mutual security and preservation made it the in-
terest of all to recognize its authority, and to en-
force the observation of it. We can trace back
this new obligation on the proprietors of lar,d to
a very early period in the history of the Franks.
Chilperic, who began his reign A. D. 56z, ex-
aded a fine, bannosjuffit exigi, from certain per-
sons who had refused to accompany him in an
expedition. Gregor. Turon. lib. v. c. 26. p.
211. Childibert, who began his reign A. D.
576, proceeded in the fame manner against others
who had been guilty of a like crime. Id. lib.
vii. c. 42. p. 342. Charlemagne ordained, that
every freeman who possessed five manfi, i. e. fix-
ty acres of land, in property, should march in per-
son against the enemy. Capitul. A. D. 807.
Louis le Debonnaire, A. D. 815, granted lands
to certain Spaniards who fled from the Saracens,
and allowed them to fettle in his territories, on
condition that they should serve in the army like
other free men. Capitul. vol. i. p. 500. By land
possessed in property, which is mentioned in the
law of Charlemagne, we are to understand, ac-
cording to the stile of that age, allodial land;
allodes and prpprietas, alodum and proprium being
words perfectly fynonimous. Du Cange voce
Alodis. The clearest proof of the distinCtion
between allodial and beneficiary poffeflion, is
contained in two charters published by Muratori,
by which it appears that a person might poflffs
one part of his estate as allodial which he could
dispose of at pleasure, the other as a bcne-
ficium, of which he had only the usufruct,
the property returning to the superior Lord
on his demise. Antiq. Ital. medii aevi, vol. i p.

P 4 559,

15S

559, 565. The fame diftintion is pointed out
in a Capitulare of Charlemagne, A. D. 8 i z. edit.
Baluz vol. i. p. 49I. In the curious testament
of count Everard, who married a daughter of
Louis le Debonnaire, by which he disposes of
his vast estate among his children, he diftin-
guilhes between what he possessed proprietate, and
what he held beneficio, and it appears that the
greater part was allodial. A. D. 837. Aub.
Miraei Opera Diplomatica Lovan. 1723. Vol.
p. 19.

IN the fame manner Liber homo is commonly

opposed to Vafus or Vaffallus; the former de-
notes an allodial proprietor, the latter one who
held of a superior. Thee free men were under
an obligation to serve the state; and this duty
was confidered as so sacred, that free men were
prohibited from entering into holy orders unless
they had obtained the content of the sovereign,
The reason given for this in the statute is remar-
kable, " For we are informed that Come do so,
not Co much out of devotion, as in order to avoid
that military service which they are bound to
perform. Capitul. lib. i. §. 14. If upon be-
ing lummoned into the field, any free man re-
fused to obey, a full Herebannum, i. e. a fine of
sixty crowns, was to be exaCted from him ac.
cording to the law of the Franks." Capil.
Car. magn. ap. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 14. §.
13. P. 539. This expression, according to the
law of the Franks, seems to imply that both
the obligation to serve, and the penalty on those
who disregarded it, were coeval with the laws
made by the Franks at their first settlement
in Gaul. This fine was levied with fiuch ri-
gour, " That if any person was insolvent, he
was reduced to servitude, and continued in that

state

Rate until such time as his labour (hould amount
to the value of the herebannum." Ibid. The
Emperor Lotharius rendered the penalty sHill
more revere; and if any person possessing such
an extent of property as inade it incumbent on
him to take the field in person refused to obey
the summons, all his goods were declared to be
forfeited, and he himself might be punished with
banishment. Murat. Script. Ital. vol. i. pars
ii.p. 53.

III. PROPERTY in land having thus become

fixed and subjet to military service, another
change was introduced, though slowly, and ftep
by siep. We learn from Tacitus that the chief
men among the Germans endeavoured to attach
to their persons and interests certain adherents,
whom he calls Comites. These fought under
their standard, and followed them in all their en-
terprizes. The fame custom continued among
them in their new settlements; and those attached
or devoted followers were called fideles, antrufti-
ones, homines in trufte Dominica & leudes. Ta-
citus informs us, that the rank of a Comes was
deemed honourable; De morib. Germ. c. 13.
The composition, which is the standard by which
we must judge of the rank and condition of
persons in the middle ages, paid for the murder
of one in trufle Dominica, was triple to that paid
for the murder of a freeman. Leg. Salicor.
Tit. 44-. §. i. & z. While the Germans re-
mained in their own country they courted the
favour of these Comites by presents of arms and
horses, and by hospitality. See note VI. While
they had no fixed property in land, these were
the only gifts that they could bestow, and the
only reward which their followers desired. But
upon their fettling in the countries which they
conquered, and when the value of property
came to be understood among them, instead

of

217

of these flight presents, the Kings and chieftains
bellowed a more substantial recompence in land
on their adherents. These grants were called
beneficia, because they were gratuitous donations;
and honores, because they were regarded as marks
of diftination. What were the services origi.
nally exacted in return for there beneficia cannot
be determined with absolute precision; becamfe
there are no records so ancient. When allodial
pofieffions were first rendered feudal, they were
not, at once, fubjeted to the feudal services.
The transition here, as in all other changes of
importance, was gradual. As the great objet
of a feudal vafial was to obtain protection, when
allodial proprietors first consented to become
vaflals of any powerful leader, they continued to
retain as much of their ancient independance as
was consistent with that new relation. The ho-
mage which they did to the superior of whom
they chore to hold, was called homagium planum,
and bound them to nothing more than fidelity,
but without any obligation either of military ser-
vice, or attendance in the courts of their superior.
Of this homagium planum some traces, though
obscure, may still be discovered. Bruffel, tom.
i. p. 97. Among the ancient writs publilhed by
D. D. De Vic & Vaifette hilt. de Langued.
are a great many which they call homagia.
They seem to be an intermediate ftep between the
homagium planum mentioned by Bruffel, and
the engagement to perform compleat feudal ser-
vice. The one party promises protection, and
grants certain castles or lands, the other engages
to defend the person of the granter, and to
assist him likewise in defending his property as
often as he mhall be summoned to do so. But
there engagements are accompanied with none
of the feudal formalities, and no mention is made
of any of the feudal services. They appear

rather

rather to be a mutual contra& between equals,
than the engagement of a vafial to perform ser-
vices to a superior Lord. Preuves de i' his. de
Lang. tom. ii. 173. & passim. As Coon as men
were accustomed to there, the other feudal ser-
vices were gradually introduced. M. de Mon-
tefquieu confiders there beneficia as fiefs, which
originally fubje&ed those who held them to
military service. L'efpr. des Loix. i. xxx. c. 3. &
16. M. L'abbe de Mably contends that such as
held there were at first fubjeaed to no other ser-
vice than what was incumbent on every free man.
Observations fur l'hiftoire de France I. 356.
But upon comparing their proofs and reasonings
and conjetures, it seems to be evident, that as
every free man, in consequence of his allodial
property, was bound to serve the community
under a revere penalty, no good reason can be
assigned for conferring these beneficia, if they
did not subje6t such as received them, to Come
new obligation. Why should a King have Itrip-
ped himself of his domain, if he had not expect-
ed, that, by parcelling it out, he might acquire
a right to services to which he had formerly no
title? We may then warrantably conclude,
" That as allodial property fubjeted those who
poffefied it to serve the community, so beneficia
fubjeeed such as held them, to personal service
and fidelity to him from whom they received
there lands. These beneficia were granted ori-
ginally only during pleaflure. No circumstance
relating to the customs of the middle ages is
better ascertained than this; and innumerable
proofs of it might be added to there produced
in L'efprit des Loix, i. xxx. c. 16. and by Du
Cange voc. beneficitun &feudum.

IV. BUT

219

IV. BUT the poffeflion of benefices did not

continue long in this slate. A precarious tenure
during pleasure was not sufficient to satisfy and
attach those who held it to their superior Lord,
they Coon obtained the confirmation of their bene.
sices during life. Feudor. lib. tit. i. Du Cange
produces several quotations from ancient char.
ters and chronicles in proof of this; Gloss. voc.
Beneficium. After this it was easy to obtain or
extort charters rendering beneficia hereditary,
first in the diredt line, then in the collateral,
and at last in the female line. Leg. Longob. lib.
iii. tit. 8. Du Cange, voc. Beneficium.

IT is no easy matter to fix the precise time

when each of there changes took place. M.
l'Ab. Mably conjectures with some probability,
that Charles Martel firit introduced the prac.
tice of granting beneficia for life: Obfervat.
tom. i. p. 103, I6o; and that Louis le Debon-
naire was among the first who rendered them
hereditary, is evident from the authorities to
which he refers; Id. 429. Mabillon however
has published a placitum of Louis le Debon-
naire, A. D. 860. by which it appears that
he still continued to grant some beneficia only
during life. De re Diplomatica, lib. vi. p. 353.
In the year 889, Odo King of France granted
lands to Ricabodo fideli suo jure beneficiario &
fruduario during his own life; and if he should
die, and a son were born to him, that right
was to continue during the life of his son.
Mabillon ut supra, p. 556. This was an in-
termediate ftep between fiefs merely during
life, and fiefs hereditary to perpetuity. While
beneficia continued under their first form,
and were held only during pleasure, he who

granted
220

granted them not only exercised the Domi.
nium or prerogative of superior Lord; but he re-
tained the property, giving his vassal only the
jfiifrunt. But under the latter form, when they
became hereditary, although feudal lawyers con-
tinued to define a beneficium agreeably to its
original nature, the property was in effec taken
out of the hands of the superior Lord, and lodg-
ed in those of the vassal. As loon as the reci-
procal advantages of the feudal mode of tenure
came to be understood by superiors as well as
vaflals, that species of holding became so agree-
able to both, that not only lands, but casual rents,
such as the profits of a toll, the fare paid at ser-
ries, &c. the salaries or perquisites of offices, and
even pensions themselves, were granted and held
as fiefs; and military service was promised and
exated on account of there. Morice Mem. pour
fervir de preuves a 1'hist. de Bretagne. tom. ii.
p. 78, 690. Bruffel, tom. i. p. 41. How absurd
soever it may seem to grant or to hold such pre-
carious and casual property as a fief; there arc,
inflances of feudal tenures still more singular.
The profits arising from the mafles said at an al-
tar were properly an ecclesiastical revenue, belong-
ing to the clergy of the church or monaftry
which performed that duty, but there were
sometimes seized by the powerful barons. In
order to ascertain their right to them, they held
them as fiefs of the church, and parcelled them
out in the fame manner as other property to
their fub-vaflals. Bouquet. recueil des hist. vol.
x. p. 238, 480. The fame spirit of encroach-
ment which rendered fiefs hereditary, led the
nobles to extort from their sovereigns heredi-
tary grants of offices. Many of the great offices
of the crown became hereditary in most of the
kingdoms in Europe, and so conscious were

monarchs

221

monarchs of this spirit of usurpation among the
nobility, and To foliicitous to guard against it, that,
on rome oceafions, they obliged the persons whom
they promoted to any office of dignity, to grant
an obligation that neither they, nor their heirs,
Thould claim it as belonging to them by heredi.
tary right. A remarkable inRtance of this is
produced, Mem. de l'Acad. des Inliript. tom.
xxx. p. 595. Another occurs in the Thefaur.
annecdot. published by Martene & Durand. vol. i.
p. 873.-This revolution in property occasion.
ed a change corresponding to it in political go.
vernment; the great vassals of the crown, as they
acquired such extensive poffeflions, usurped a
proportional degree of power, depressed the ju.
rifdiaion of the crown, and trampled on the pri-
vileges of the people. It is on account of this
connection, that the tracing the progress of feu-
dal property becomes an objec of attention in
history; for upon discovering in what state pro.
perty was at any particular period, we may de-
termine with precision what was the degree of
power possessed by the King or by the nobility
at that juncture.

ONE circumstance more, with respeCt to the

changes which property underwent, deserves at-
tention. I have Ihewn that when the various
tribes of barbarians divided their conquests in the
fifth and sixth centuries, the property which they
acquired was allodial; but in several parts of Eu-
rope property had become almost entirely feudal
by the beginning of the tenth century. The
former species of property seems to be To much
better and more desirable than the latter, that
such a change appears surprising, especially
when we are informed that allodial property
was frequently converted into feudal, by a vo-

luntary

luntary deeed of the poffefolr. The motives
which determined them to a choice so repugnant
to the ideas of modern times concerning pro-
perty, have been invefRigated and explained by
M. de Montesquieu with his usual discernment
and accuracy, lib. xxxi. c. 8. The most con-
fiderable is that of which we have an hint in
Lambertus Ardenfis, an ancient writer quoted
by Du Cange, voce Alodis. In those times of
anarchy and disorder which became general
in Europe after the death of Charlemagne;
when there was scarce any union among the
different members of the community; and
individuals were exposed, single and undefend-
ed by government, to rapine and oppreflion,
it became necessary for every man to have a
powerful protector, under whose banner he
might range himself, and obtain security against
enemies, whom he could not singly oppose.
For this reason he relinquished his allodial in-
dependance, and fubjeaed himself to the feudal
services, that he might find safety under the
patronage of some refpedtable superior. In
some parts of Europe, this change from allodial
to feudal property became so general, that he
who possessed land had no longer any liberty of
choice left. He was obliged to recognize some
liege Lord, and to hold of him. Thus Beau-
manoir informs us, that in the counties of Cler-
mont and Beauvois, if the Lord or Count dif-
covered any lands within his jurisdiction, for
which no service was performed, and which
paid to him no tax or custom, he might instant-
ly seize it as his own; for, fays he, according
to our custom no man can hold allodial proper-
ty. Couft. ch. 24. p. 123.. Upon the fame
principle is founded a maxim, which has at
length become general in the law of France,
Ntulle erre fans Seigneur. In other provinces of
France allodial property seems to have remained

longer
^;:

213

longer unalienated, and to have been more
highly valued. A vast number of charters con.
taining grants, or sales, or exchanges of allodial
lands in the province of Languedoc are pub.
lifhed Hilt. gener. de Langued. par D. D. De
Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. . During the ninth,
tenth, and greater part of the eleventh century,
the property in that province teems to have
been entirely allodial; and scarce any mention
of feudal tenures occurs in the deeds of that
country. The state of property, during these
centuries, seems to have been perfectly similar
in Catalonia, and the country of Roussillon, as
appears from the original charters publilhed in
the appendix to Petr. de la Marca's treatise de
Marca five limite Hifpanico. Allodial property
seems to have continued in the Low-Countries,
to a period still later. During the eleventh,
twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, this species
appears to have been of considerable extent.
Miraei opera Diplom. vol. i. p. 34, 74, 75, 83,
817, 296, 842, 847, 578. Some vestiges of al-
lodial property appear there as late as the four.
teenth century. Ibid. 218. The notions of men
with refpet to property, vary according to the
diversity of their understandings, and the ca.
price of their paflions. At the fame time thai
some persons were fond of relinquishing allodia
property, in order to hold it by feudal tenure
others seem to have been follicitous to convert
their fiefs into allodial property. An inftanci
of this occurs in a charter of Louis le Debon
naire, published by Eckhard, commentarii di
rebus Francia: Orientalis, vol. ii. p. 885. Ano
ther occurs in the year 1299. Reliquia MSS
omnis evi, by Ludwig, vol. i. p. 209. and eve'
one as late as the year 1337. ibid. vol. vii. p. 4C
The fame thing took place in the Low-Countries
Mera:i oper. I. 52.
224

IN tracing there various revolutions of pro-
perty, I have hitherto chiefly confined myself to
what happened in France, because the ancient
monuments of that nation have either been more
carefully preserved, or have been more clearly
iliufirated than those of any people in Europe.

IN Italy, the fame revolutions happened in
property, and succeeded each other in the fame
order. There is some ground, however, for
conjecturing that allodial property continued
longer in estimation among the Italians, than
among the French. It appears that many of
the charters granted by the Emperors in the
ninth century conveyed an allodial right to land.
Murat. antiq. med. aevi. v. i. p. 575, &c. But
in the eleventh century, we find some examples
of persons who resigned their allodial property,
and received it back as a feudal tenure. Ib.
p. 6io, &c. Muratori observes, that the word
feudurm, which came to be fubltituted in place
of beneficiuw, does not occur in any authentic
charter previous to the eleventh century. Id.
594. A charter of King Robert of France,
A. D. oo8, is the earliest deed in which I have
met with the word feudum. Bouquet recueil des
hiftoriens de Gaule & de la France, tom. x. p.
593. b. This word occurs indeed in an edi&t,
A. D. 790, published by Bruflel, vol. i. p. 77.
But the authenticity of that deed has been called
in question, and perhaps the frequent use of the
wordfeudut in it, is an additional reason for doing
so. The account which I have given of the na-
ture both of allodial and feudal poffeflions receives
some confirmation from the etymology of the
words themselves. Alode or allodium is com-
pounded of the German particle an and lot,

VOL. 1. i. e

225

i. e. land obtained by lot. Wachteri Gloffar.
Germanicum, voc. Allodium. p. 35. It appears
from the authorities produced by him and by
Du Cange, voc. fors, that the northern nations
divided the lands which they had conquered in
this manner. Feodum is compounded of od po.
feflion or estate, and feo wages, pay; intimating
that it was stipendiary and granted as a recom.
pence for service. Wachterus ibid. voc. ftodtlm,
p. 441.

THE progress of the feudal s)ysem among the

Germans was perfectly similar to that which we
have traced in France. But as the Emperors
of Germany, especially after the Imperial crown
passed from the descendants of Charlemagne
to the house of Saxony, were far superior to the
contemporary Monarchs of France, in abilities,
the Imperial vassals did not aspire so early to in-
dependance, nor did they so boon obtain the
privilege of possessing their benefices by heredi-
tary right. Conrad II. on the Salic, was the firt
Emperor, according to the compilers of the
Libri Feudorum, who rendered fiefs hereditary.
Lib. i. tit. i. Conrad began his reign A. D.
1024. Ludovicus Pius, under whose reign,
grants of hereditary fiefs were frequent in France,
succeeded his father, A. D. 814. Not only
was this innovation so much later in being in-
troduced among the vaflals of the German Em-
perors, but even after Conrad had eflablifhed it,
the law continued favourable to the ancient prac-
tice, and unless the charter of the vassal bore ex-
prefly that the fief descended to his heirs, it
was presumed to be granted only during life.
Lib. feud. ibid. Even after the alteration made
by Conrad, it was not uncommon in Grrmally
to grant fiefs only for life; a charter of this

kind

kind occurs as late as the year 1376. Charta
ap. Boehmer. Princip. Jur. feud. p. 36i. The
tranrniflion of fiefs to collateral and female heirs,
took place very slowly among the Germans.
There is extant a charter, A. D. 1201. convey-
ing the right of fucceflion to females, but it is
granted as an extraordinary mark of favour,
and in reward of uncommon services. Boehmer.
ibid. p. 365. In Germany, as well as in France
and Italy, a considerable part of the lands con-
tinued to be allodial long after the feudal mode
of tenure was introduced. It appears from the
Codex Diplomaticus Monafferii Buch, that a
great part of the lands in the marquisate of
Mifnia was still allodial as late as the thirteenth
century. NO 31, 36, 37, 46, &c. ap. Scrip-
tores hlft. German. cura Schoetgenii & Krey-
figii. Altenb. 1755. vol. ii. 183, &c. Allodial
property seems to have been common in another
diftrit of the fame province during the fame
period. Reliquiae Diplomaticae Sandtimonial.
Beutiz. No 17, 36, 58. ibid. 374, &c.

NOTE IX. SECT. I. P. I6.

As I shall, in another note, have occasion to

represent the condition of that part of the people
who dwelt in cities, I will confine myself in this
to confider the slate of the inhabitants of the
country. The persons employed in cultivating
the ground during the ages under review may
be divided into three classes: I. Serwi or slaves.
This seems to have been the most numerous
class, and confifed either of captives taken in
war, or of persons the property in whom was
acquired in tome one of the various methods
enumerated by Du Cange, voc. fervus. v. 6.
P. 447. The wretched condition of this nume-

Q_2 rous

227

Tous race of men will appear from several cir.
cumftances. i. Their malters had absolute do.
minion over their persons. They had the power
of punishing their slaves capitally, withoutthe
intervention of any judge. This dangerous right
they possessed not only in the more early periods,
when their manners were fierce, but it conti.
nued as late as the twelfth century. Joach. Pot.
giefferus de ftatu fervorum. Lemgov. 1736. 4to0
lib ii. cap. i. §. 4, o1, 13, 24. Even after this
jurifdiation of matters came to be restrained, the
life of a slave was deemed to be of so tittle value,
that a very flight compensation attoned for tak-
ing it away. Idem, lib. iii. c. 6. If masters had
power over the lives of their slaves, it is evi.
dent that almost no bounds would be set to the
rigour of the punishments which they might
inflict upon them. The Codes of ancient laws
prescribed punifliments for the crimes of slaves
different from those which were inflicted on free
men. The latter paid only a fine or compen-
fation, the former were subjeCted to corporal
punishments. The cruelty of there was in
many instances exceflive. Slaves, on very flight
occasions, might be put to the rack on question.
The laws with relpedt to these points are to
be found in Potgiefferus, lib. iii. cap. 7. 2 If
the dominion of maRers over the lives and per-
sons of their slaves was thus extensive, it was
no less so over their actions and property. They
were not originally permitted to marry. Male
and female slaves were allowed and even encou-
raged to cohabit together. But this union was
not confidered as a marriage, it was called con-
tubernium, not nuptiee or matrimnomum. Potgieff
lib. ii. c. 2. §. i. This notion was so much
established, that during several centuries after the
barbarous nations embraced the Christian reli-
gion, slaves who lived as husband and wife, were

not
228

not joined together by any religious ceremony,
and did not receive the nuptial benediction from
aprieft. Ibid. §. lo, II. When this conjunc-
tion between slaves came to be confidered as
a lawful marriage, they were not permitted to
marry without the content of their mafler, and
such as ventured to do so without obtaining that,
were punished with great fcveritv, and rome-
times were put to death. Potgieff ibid. §. I2,
&c. Gregor. Turon. hiftor. lib. v. c 3. When
the manners of the European nations became
more gentle, and their ideas more liberal, slaves
who married without their master's consent,
were fubjeted only to a fine. PotgieffI ibid. §. 20.
Du Cange Gloss voc. For)inmaritagium. 3. All
the children of slaves, were in the lame condi-
tion with their parents, and became the pro-
perty of the master. Du Cange Glof voc.fervus,
vol. 6. p. 450. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol. i. p. 766.
4. Slaves were so entirely the property of their
mailers, that they could fell them at pleasure.
While domeftick slavery continued, the property
in a slave was fold in the lame manner with
that which a person had in any other moveable.
Afterwards slaves became adflrjipii glcba, and
were conveyed by sale together with the farm
oreftate to which they belonged. Potgiefferus
has collected the laws and charters which illut-
trate this well known circumstance in the con,
dition of slaves. Lib. ii. c. 4. 5. Slaves had a
title to nothing but fubfiffance and cloaths from
their master; all the profits of their labour ac-
crued to him. If a master, from indulgence,
gave his slaves any pecutlnu or fixed allowance
for their fubfiftance, they had no right of pro-
perty in what they saved out of that. All that
they accumulated belonged to their master.
Potgieff. lib. ii. c. lo. Murat. antiq. Ital. vol.
768. Du Cange, voc. /firvJs, vol. vi. p. 45r,

Q3 Conformably

229

Conformably to the fame principle, all the effels
of slaves belonged to their master at their death,
and they could not dispose of them by tefia.
ment. Potgiefi: lib. ii. c. i i. 6. Slaves were
distinguished fiom free men by a peculiar dress.
Among all the barbarous nations, long hair
was a mark of dignity and of freedom, slaves
were for that reason obliged to shave their
heads; and by this diftintion, how indifferent
soever it may be in its own nature, they were
reminded every moment of the inferiority of
their :ondition. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 4. For the
fame reason it was enacted in the laws of almost
all'the nations of Europe, that no slave thould
be admitted to give evidence against a free man
in a court of justice. Du Cange, voc.fervus,
vol. vi. p. 451. Potgieff. lib. iii. c. 3.

2. Jillani. They were likewise adfcriptiglebe

or villa, from which they derived their name,
end were transferable along with it. Du Cange,
voc. villanus. But in this they differed from
slaves, that they paid a fixed rent to their ma-
sier for the land which they cultivated, and after
paying that, all the fruits of their labour and
indufiry belonged to themselves in property.
This diftilntion is marked by Piere de Fontaine's
Confeil. Vie de St. Louis par Joinville, p. ir.
edit. de Du Cange. Several cales decided agree-
ably to this principle are mentioned by Murar.
Ibid. p. 773.

3. THr last class of persons employed itl

agriculture were free men. These are diftin-
guifhed by various names among the writers
of the middle ages, Arimanni, condilionakis, o i.
ginarii, tributales, &c These teem to have
been persons who poefltfld tome small allc
dial property of their own, and betides that

cullivates

cultivated some farm belonging to their more
wealthy neighbours, for which they paid a fixed
rent; and bound themlelves likewise to perforn
several frall services in prato vel in mejje, in ,,. a-
,ira vel in vinea, such as ploughirg a certain
quantity of their landlord's ground, aflifting him
in harvest and vintage work, &c. The clearest
proof of this may be found in Muratori, v. i. p.
712. and in Du Cange under the respective words
abovementioned. I have not been able to discover
whether there arimanni, &c. were removable at
pleasure, or held their farms by lease for a certain
number of years. The former, if we may judge
from the genius and maxims of the age, seems to
be most probable. These persons, however, were
confidered as free men in the most honourable
sense of the word; they enjoyed all the privileges
of that condition, and were even called to serve in
war; an honour to which no slave was admitted.
Murat. Anfiq. vol. i. p. 743. vol. ii. p. 446. This
account of the condition of these three different
classes of persons, will enable the reader to appre-
hend the full force of an argument which I shall
produce in confirmation of what I have said in the
text concerning the wretched state of the people.
Notwithitanding the immenfc difference between
the first of these clafles and the third, such was the
spirit of tyranny which prevailed among the great
proprietors of land, and so various their opportu-
nities of opprefling thofl who were fettled on their
eflates, and of rendering their condition intoler-
able, that many freemen, in dclipair, renounced
their liberty, and voluntarily lurrendered them-
selves as fiaves to their powerful maiters. This
they did, in order that their rnaflers might be-
come more immediately interested to afford them
protection, together with the means of f'ublifling
thenmelves and their families. The forms of such
a liurrender, or obnoxiatio, as it was then called,
are preserved by Marculfus, lib. ii. c. 28; and

Q4 by

231

by the anonymous collector of formule published
by Bignon, c. 16. together with Marculfus. In
both, the reason for the obnoxiatio, is the wretch.
ed and indigent condition of the person who gives
up his liberty. It was still more common for
freemen to surrender their liberty to bifhopsor
abbots, that they might partake of the security
which the vassals and slaves of churches and mo.
nafteries enjoyed, in consequence of the fuperfti.
tious veneration paid to the faint under whose
immediate protecion they were supposed to be
taken. Du Cange, voc. oblatus, vol. iv. p. I286,
That condition must have been miserable indeed,
which could induce a freeman voluntarily to re-
nounce his liberty, and to give up himself as a
slave to the disposal of another. The number of
slaves in all the nations of Europe was prodigious.
The greater part of the inferior class of people
in France were reduced to this fiate, at the com-
mencement of the third race of Kings. L'efpr.
des Loix, liv. xxx. c. 1 i. The fame was the cafe
in England. Brady Pref. to Gen. Hist. Many cu.
rious fats with refped to the ancient state of vil
lains or slaves in England, are published in obfer-
vations on the flatutes, chiefly the more ancient
zd edit. p. 244.

NOTE X. SECT. I. p. 19.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be pro.

duced. Many charters granted by persons of
the highest rank are preserved, from which it
appears that they could not subscribe their
name. It was usual for persons who could not
write, to make the sign of the cross in confir.
mation of a charter. Several of there remain,
where Kings and persons of great eminence
affix ignrum crucis manu propria pro ignorloralt
literarun. Du Cange, voc, Crux, vol. iii. p. i Ig9.
From this is derived the phrase of signing instead
es subscribing a paper, In the ninth century,

Herbaud
232

Herbaud Comes Palatii, though fupremejudge of
the Empire by virtue of his office, could not sub-
scribe his name. Nouveau Trait6 de Diploma-
tique par deux Beneditins, 4to. tom. ii. p. 422.
So late as the fourteenth century, Du Guefclin,
constable of France, the greatest man in the state,
and one of the greatest men of his age, could
neither read nor write. St. Palaye Memoires fur
l'ancienne Chevalerie, t. ii. p. 82. Nor was this
ignorance confined to laymen; the greater part
of the clergy was not many degrees superior to
them in science. Many dignified ecclefiafticks
could not subscribe the canons of those councils,
in which they fat as members. Nouv. Traitd
dediplom. tom. ii. p 424. One of the quefti-
ons appointed by the canons to be put to persons
who were candidates for orders was this, " Whe-
ther they could read the gospels and epistles, and
explain the sense of them, at least literally ?"
Regino Prumienfis ap. Bruck. Hist. Philof v. iii.
p. 631. Alfred the Great complained, that from
the Humber to the Thames there was not a priest
who understood the liturgy in his mother tongue,
or who could translate the easiest piece of Latin;
and that from the Thames to the Tea, the eccle-
fiafticks were still more ignorant. Afterus de
rebus geftis Alfredi, ap. Camdeni. Anglica, &c.
p. 25. The ignorance of the clergy is quaintly
described by an author of the dark ages. " Po-
tius dediti gula quam Glossa:; potius colligunt
libras quam legunt libros; libentius intuentur
Martham quam Marcum; malunt legere in Sal-
mone quam in Solomone. Alanus de art. Pre-
dicat. ap. Lebeuf. Dissert. tom. ii. p. 21. To the
obvious causes of such universal ignorance arising
from the slate of government and manners, from
the seventh to the eleventh century, we may add
the scarcity of books, and the difficulty of ren-
dering them more common during that period.
The Romans wrote their books either on parch-

ment

ment or on paper made of the Egyptian papyrus.
The latter being the cheapest, was of course the
most commonly used. But after the Saracens
conquered Egypt in the seventh century, the corn-
munication between that country and the people
fettled in Italy or in other partsof Europe, wasal-
most entirely broke off, and the papyrus was nu
longer in use among them. They were obliged,
on that account, to write all their books upon
parchment, and as the price of that was high,
books became extremely rare and of great value.
We may judge of the scarcity of the materials
for writing them from one circumstance. There
still remain several manuscripts of the eighth,
ninth, and following centuries, wrote on parch-
ment, from which some former writing had been
erased, in order to substitute a new composition in
its place. In this manner, it is probable, that fe-
veral works of the ancients perished. A book of
Livy or of Tacitus might be eraled, to make
room for the legendary tale of a faint, or thefu-
perftirious prayers of a missal. Murat. Anti. Ital.
v. iii. p. 833. P. de Montfaucon affirms, that
the greater part of the manuscripts on parchment
which he has seen, those of an ancient date except-
ed, are written on parchment from which itom
former treatise had been erased. Mem. de
L'Acad. des inrcript. tom. ix. p. 325. As the
want of materials for writing, is one realbn why To
many of the works of the ancients have perihfed,
it accounts likewise for the small number of ma-
nufcripts of any kind, previous to the eleventh
century, when they began to multiply from a cause
which shall be mentioned. Hit. Liter. de France,
tom. vi. p. 6. Many circurnflances prove the
scarcity of books during these ages. Private per.
sons feldomr pofflfifed any books whatever. Even
monasteries of considerable Rotc had only one mif-
fal. Murat. Artiq v. ix. p. 789. Lupus, abbot of
Ferrieres, in a letter to the Pope, A. D. 855, be-

t echbec

feeches him to lend him a copy of Cicero de Oratore
and Qjintilian's Institutions, " for," lays he, " al-
though we have parts of those books, there is no
compleat copy of them in all France. Murat.
Ant. v. iii. p. 835. The price of books became
so high, that perions of a moderate fortune could
not afford to purchase them. The countess of An-
jou paid for a copy of the Homilies of Haimon,
bishop of Halberftadt, two hundred sheep, five
quarters of wheat, and the fame quantity of rye
and millet. Hiftoire Literairede France par desRe-
ligieux BenediCtins, tom. vii. p. 3. Even so late as
the year 147 , when Louis XI. borrowed the
works of Rafis, the Arabian physician, from the
faculty of medicine in Paris, he not only deposited
as a pledge a considerable quantity of plate, but
was obliged to procure a nobleman to join with
him as surety in a deed, binding himself under a
great forfeiture to restore it. Gabr. Naude Addit. a
l'hiftoire de Louys XI. par Comines. edit. de Fref-
noy, torn. iv. p. 28 . Many curious circumstances
with refpet to the extravagant price of books in
the middle ages, are collected by that industrious
compiler, to whom I refer such of my readers as
deem this small branch of literary history an objeEt
of curiosity. When any person made a present of
a book to a church or a monastery, in which were
the only libraries during these ages, it was deemed
a donative of such value, that he offered it on the
altar pro remedio animes /Je, in order to obtain the
forgiveness of his fins. Murat. vol. iii. p. 836.
Hist. Liter. de France, t. vi. p. 6. Nouv. Trait.
du Diplomat. par deux Benedidtins, 4to. tor. i. p.
481. In the eleventh century, the art of making
paper in the manner now become universal, was
invented; by means of that not only the number
of manuscripts increased, but the study of the
sciences was wonderfully facilitated. Murat. ib.
p. 871. The invention of the art of making pa-
per, and the invention of the art of printing, are

two

two considerable events in literary history. It is re.
markable that the former preceded the first dawn.
ing of letters and improvement in knowledge to.
wards the close of the eleventh century; the latter
ushered in the light which spread over Europe
at the aera of the Reformation.

NOTE XI. SECT. I. p. 19.

ALL the religious maxims and practices of the

dark ages are a proof of this. I shall produce one
remarkable teflimony in confirmation of it, from
an author canonized by the church of Rome, St.
Eloy or Egidius, bishop of Noyon, in the seventh
century. " He is a good Christian who comes
frequently to church; who presents the oblation
which is offered to God upon the altar; who doth
not taste of the fruits of his own industry until
he has consecrated a part of them to God; who,
when the holy festivals shall approach, lives
chafftely even with his own wife during several
days, that with a safe conscience he may draw
near to the altar of God; and who, in the last
place, can repeat the Creed and the Lord's Prayer.
Redeem then your fouls from deftrution while
you have the means in your power; offer pre-
sents and tythes to churchmen; come more fre-
quently to church; humbly implore the patronage
of the faints; for if you observe these things, you
may come with security in the day to the tribu-
nal of the eternal Judge, and fay, " Give to us,
O Lord, for we have given unto thee." Da-
cherii Specilegium Veter. Script. v. ii. p. 94.
The learned and judicious translator of Dr.
Mofheim's Ecclesiastical History, from one of
whose additional notes I have borrowed this pas-
sage, subjoins a very propeireflection; " We fee
here a large and ample description of a good
Christian, in which there is not the leafI mention

of
»36

of the love of God, resignation to his will, obe-
dience to his laws, or of juRice, benevolence,
and charity towards men." Mofh. Eccles. Hist.
v. i. p. 324.

NOTE XII. SECT. I. p. 20.

IT is no inconsiderable misfortune to the

church of Rome, whose doctrine of infallibility
renders all such institutions and ceremonies as
have been once universally received, immutable
and everlasting, that (he muff continue to ob-
serve in enlightened times, those rites which were
introduced during the ages of darkness and
credulity. What delighted and edified the latter,
must disgust and shock the former. Many of
these rites appear manifestly to have been intro-
duced by a superstition of the lower and molt
illiberal species. Many of them were borrowed,
with little variation, from the religious ceremonies
eflablifhed among the ancient Heathens. Some
were so ridiculous, that if every age did not fur-
ni(h instances of the fascinating influence of super-
flition, as well as of the whinfical forms which
it aflumes, it must appear incredible that they
should ever be received or tolerated. In several
churches of France, they celebrated a festival in
commemoration of the Virgin Mary's flight into
Egypt. It was called the feast of the Ass. A
young girl richly dressed, with a child in her
arms, was set upon an ass superbly caparisoned.
The ass was led to the altar in solemn proceflion.
High Mars was said with great pomp. The ass
was taught to kneel at proper places; a hymn
no less childish than impious was sung in his
praise: And when the ceremony was ended,
the priest, instead of the usual words with which
he dismissed the people, brayed three times
like an ass; and the people, instead of their

usual

237

usual response, We bless the Lord, brayed three
times in the fame manner. Du Cange, voc,
Feftum. v. iii. p. 424. This ridiculous ceremo.
ny was not, like the festival of fools, and tome
other pageants of those ages, a mere farcical
entertainment exhibited in a church, and min-
gled, as was then the custom, with an imitation
of some religious rites; it was an ad of devoti-
on, performed by the ministers of religion,
and by the authority of the church. However,
as this practice did not prevail universally in
the Catholick church, its absurdity contributed
it last to abolish it.

NOTE XIII. SECT. I. P25.

As there is no event in the history of man-

kind more singular than that of the Crusades,
every circumstance that tends to explain or to
give any rational account of this extraordinary
frenzy of the human mind is interesting. 1
have asserted in the text, that the minds of men
were prepared gradually for the amazing effort
which they made in consequence of the exhor-
tations of Peter the hermit, by several occur-
rences previous to his time. A more particu-
lar detail of this curious and obscure part of
history, may perhaps appear to some of my
readers to be of importance. That the end of
the world was expected about the close of the
tenth and beginning of the eleventh century; and
that this occasioned a general alarm, is evident
from the authors to whom I refer in the text.
This belief was so universal and so strong, that it
mingled itself with their civil tranfaftions. Many
charters in the latter part of the tenth century
begin in this manner: " Apropinquante mundi
termino," &c. As the end of the world is now at
hand, and by various calamities and judgments
the signs of its approach are now manifest. Hit

d(
a23

de Langued. par. D. D. de Vic Vaifette, tom.
ii. Preuves, p. 86, 89, go, 17, 158, &c.
One effect of this was, that a great number of
pilgrims retorted to Jerusalem, with a resolution
to die there, or to wait the coming of the Lord;
Kings, Earls, Marquiffes, Biflops, and even a
great number of women, besides persons ot infe-
rior rank flocked to the Holy Land. Glaber. Ro-
dulph. Hist. chez Bouquet Recueil, tom. x. p.
5o, 52. Another historian mentions a vast ca-
valcade of pilgrims who accompanied the count
of Angouleme to Jerusalem in the year 1o26.
Chronic. Ademari, ibid. p. i62. These pilgrims
filled Europe with lamentable accounts of the
ltate of Christians in the Holy Land. Willerm.
Tyr. Hist. ap. Gest. Dei per Flanc. vol. ii. p.
636. Guibert. Abbat. Hist. ibid. vol. i. p. 476.
Besides this, it was usual for many of the Chris-
tian inhabitants of Jerusalem, as well as of other
cities in the East, to travel as medicants through
Europe; and by describing the wretched condi-
tion of the professors of the Chriflian faith under
the dominion of Infidels, to extort charity, and
to excite zealous persons to make some attempt
in order to deliver them from oppreflion. Bal-
drici. Archiepifcopi Hiftor. ap. Gefta Dei, &c.
vol. i. p. 86. In the year 986, Gerbet, archbi-
shop of Ravenna, afterwards Pope Silvefter II.
addressed a letter to all Christians in the name
of the church of Jerusalem. It is eloquent and
pathetic, and contains a formal exhortation to
take arms againfi the Pagan oppressors, in order
to rescue the holy city from their yoke. Ger-
berti Epiftola: ap. Bouquet, Recueil, tom. x. p.
426. In consequence of this spirited call, forne
fiibjeas of the republick of Pisa equipped a fleet,
and invaded the territories of the Mahometans
in Syria. Murat. Script. Rer. Italic. vol. iii. p.
40o. The alarm was taken in the East, and
an opinion prevailed, A. D. iolo, that all the

forces

forces of Christendom were to unite, in order to
drive the Mahometans out of Palestine. Chron.
Ademari ap. Bouquet, torn. x. p. 152. It is evi.
dent from all these particulars, that the ideas
which led the Crusaders to undertake their wild
enterprize were gradually formed; so that the uni.
versal concourse to the standard of the cross when
ereAed by Urban II. will appear less surprising.

It the various circumstances which 1 have

enumerated in this note, as well as in the hifto.
ry, are sufficient to account for the ardour with
which such vast numbers engaged in such a dan.
gerous undertaking, the exteifive privileges and
immunities granted to those who aflumed the
cross, serve to account for the long continuance
of this spirit in Europe. i. They were exempt-
ed from prosecutions on account of debt during
the time of their being engaged in this holy
service, Du Cange, voc. Crucis privilegium, v.
ii. p. I 194.-- 2. They were exempted from
paying interest for the money which they had
borrowed. Ibid.- 3. They were exempted
either entirely, or at least during a certain time,
from the payment of taxes. Ibid. Ordonances
des Rois de France, tom. i. p. 33.-- 4. They
might alienate their lands without the contentof
the superior lord of whom they held. Ib. 5.
Their persons and effects wero taken under the
protection of St. Peter, and the anathemas of the
church were denounced against all who (hould
molest them, or carry on any quarrel or hofti-
lity against them, during their absence, on ac-
count of the holy war. Du Cange, Ib. Guibertus
Abbas ap. Bongarf. i. p. 480, 482.-6. They
enjoyed all the privileges of Ecclefiaficks, and
were not bound to plead in any civil court, but
were declared subjea to the spiritual jurisdiction
alone. Du Cange, lb. Ordon. des Rois, torn. i

P. 341

p. 34, 74.-7. They obtained a plenary remif-
sion of all their fins, and the gates of heaven
were set open to them, without requiring any
proof of their penitence, but their engaging in
this expedition, and thus gratifying their favou-
ritepaflion, the love of war. Guibert. Abbas, p.
480. When we behold the civil and ecclesiastical
powers vying with each other, and straining their
invention in order to devise expedients for en-
couraging and adding strength to the spirit of
superstition, can we be furprized that it should
become so general as to render it infamous, and
a mark of cowardice to decline engaging in the
holy war? Willierm Tyrienfis ap. Bongarf.
vol. ii. p. 641. The histories of the Crusades
written by modern authors, who are apt to sub-
ftitute the ideas and maxims of their own age
in the place of those which influenced the per-
sons whose aftions they attempt to relate, con-
vey a very imperfect notion of the spirit at that
time predominant in Europe. The original his-
torians, who were animated themselves with the
fame paflions which possessed their contempora-
ries, exhibit to us a more striking picture of the
times and manners which they describe. The
enthusiastic rapture with which they account for
the effects of the Pope's discourse in the council
of Clermont; the exultation with which they
mention the numbers who devoted themselves
to this holy warfare; the confidence with which
they rely on the divine protection; the extafy of
joy with which they describe their taking posses-
sion of the holy city, will enable us to conceive
in some degree the extravagance of that zeal
which agitated the minds of men with such vio-
lence, and will suggest as many singular reflec-
tions to a philosopher, as any occurrence in the
history of mankind.-- It is unnecessary to fe-
leat the particular paflages in the several hifto-
rians which confirm this observation, But left

VOL. 1. R these

24t

there authors may be suspected of adorning their
narrative with any exaggerated defcription,l
shall appeal to one of the leaders who conduc.
ed the enterprize. There is extant a letter
from Stephen, the earl of Chartres and Blois,
to Adela his wife, in which he gives her an ac.
count of the progress of the Crusaders, He
describes the Crusaders as the chosen army of
Christ, as the servants and soldiers of God, as
men who marched under the immediate protec.
tion of the Almighty, being conducted by his
hand to vitory and conquest. He fpeaksof
the Turks as accursed, sacrilegious, and de.
voted by heaven to deftrudtion ; and when he
mentions the soldiers in the Chriltian army who
had died, or were killed, he is confident that
their fouls Were admitted direcly into thejoys
of Paradise. Dacherii Specilegium, vol. iv.
p. 257.

THE expence of conduting numerous bodies

of men from Europe to Asia, muff have been
exceflive, and the difficulty of raising the necef.
fary fums muff have been proportionally great,
during ages when the publick revenues in eve.
ry nation of Europe were extremely (mall.
Some account is preserved of the expedients em
ployed by Humbert II. Dauphin of Vienne, in
order to levy the money requisite towards equip,
ping him for the Crusade, A. D. 1346. Theft
I ihall mention, as they tend to shew the confi.
derable influence which the Crusades had, both
on the state of property and of civil govern
ment. i. He exposed to sale part of his do
mains; and as the price was destined for fuich
sacred service, he obtained the consent of thi
French King, of whom there lands were held
ratifying the alienation. Hist. de Dauphine tom
i. p. 332. 335.-2. He issued a proclamation
in which he promised to grant new privileges tc

thl

he nobles, as well as new immunities to the
;ities and towns, in his territories, in confidera-
ion of certain fums which they were instantly
to pay on that account. Ibid. tom. ii. p. 512.
Many of the charters of community, which I
shall mention in another note, were obtained in
this manner.- 3. He exa&ed a contribution
towards defraying the charges of the expedition
from all his subjects, whether ecclefiafticks or
laymen, who did not accompany him in person
to the East. Ibid. tom. i. p. 335.-4. He ap-
propriated a considerable part of his usual reve-
nues for the support of the troops to be employ-
ed in this service; ibid. tom. ii. p. 5i8.-5.
He exa6ted considerable fums not only of the
Jews fettled in his dominions, but also of the
Lombards and other bankers who had fixed
their residence there. Ibid. tom. i. p. 338. tom.
ii. 528. Notwithstanding the variety of these
resources, the Dauphin was involved in such ex-
pence by this expedition, that on his return he
was obliged to make new demands on his sub-
jeds, and to pillage the Jews by fresh exactions.
Ibid. tom. i. p. 344, 347. When the count de
Foix engaged in the firit Crusade, he raised the
money necessary for defraying the expences of
that expedition, by alienating part of his terri-
tories. Hist. de Langued. par D. D. de Vic &
Vtifette, tom. ii. p. 287. In like manner Bald-
win, count of Hainaut, mortgaged or fold part
of his dominions to the bishop of Liege. A. D.
1096. Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, torn. i.
P. 59. At a later period, Baldwin Count of
Namur fold part of his estate to a monastery,
when he intended to assume the cross. A. D.
1239. Miraei oper. i. 313.

NOTE XIV. SE cT. I. p. 29.

THI usual method of forming an opinion con-
cerning the comparative state of manners in

R ?. two

S43

two different nations, is by attending to the
fads which historians relate concerning each of
them. Various passages might be felecled from
the Byzantin historians, describing the splendor
and magnificence of the Greek Empire. P. de
Montfaucon has produced fiom the writings of
St. Chrysostom a very full account of the ele.
gance and luxury of the Greeks in his age.
That father in his sermons enters into such de-
tails concerning the manners and customs of his
contemporaries, as appear strange in discourses
from tile pulpit. P. de Montfaucon has collect
ed these descriptions, and ranged them under
different heads. The court of the more early
Greek Emperors seems to have resembled thole
of Eastern monarchs, both in magnificence and
in corruption of manners. The Emperors in
the eleventh century, though inferior in power,
did not yield to them in oltentation and fplen.
dor. Memoires de l'Acad. des Infcript. tom,
xx. p. I97.-But we may decide concerning the
comparative state of manners in the Eastern
iEmpire, and among the nations in the weft of
Europe by another method, which, if not more
certain, is at least more striking. As ConRan-
tinople was the place of rendezvous for all the
armies of the crusaders, this brought together
the people, of the east and weft as to one great
interview. Tlere are extant several contempo
rary authors, botl aipong the Greeks and Latins,
who wxere witneffesyof this singular congrels 0o
people formerly ftrangcrs, in a great mcafire,
to each other. They describe with fimplicit)
and candour, the impreflion which that neet
ipebelacle made upon their own minds. Tli!
nmy be confidered as the mroft lively and jufl
picture of the real charad:er and manners of eacl
people. When tie Greeks speak of the Franks
they deferibe them as barbarians, fierce, illi
lerate, impetuous and tivage. They. afnilim
a tone ofl- fupcriority, as a more polifnled peo

plc

pie, acquainted with the arts both of govern-
ment and of elegance, of which the others were
ignorant. It is thus Anna Comnena delCribis
the manners of the Latins, Alexias, p. 224. 23 .
237. ap. Byz. Script. vol. xi. ' She always treats
them with contempt as a rude people, the very
mention of whose names was sufficient to conta-
minate the beauty and elegance of hifitry, p.
229. Nicetas Choniatas inveighs agaiinf them
K\ith flill more violence, and gives an account
of their ferocity and dcvaftations, in terms not
unlike those which preceding historians had cm-
ployed in describing the incursions of the Goths
and Vandals. Nicer. Chon ap. Byz. Script. ocl.
iii.p. 302, &c. But, on the other hai.d, the
Latin historians were firuck with astonishment
at the magnificence, wealth, and elegance which
they discovered in the Eastern empire. " O
what a vait city is Conflantinople (exclaims
Fulcherius Carnotenfis, when he first beheld it)
and how beautiful ! How many monasteries are
there in it, and how many palaces built with
wonderful art! How many manufactures are
there in the city amazing to behold ! It would
be astonishing to relate how it abounds with all
good things, with gold, silver, and fluffs of va-
rious kinds; for every hour ships arrive in its
port laden with all things necessary for the use
of man. Fulcher. ap. Eongars, vol. i. p. 586.
Willermus Archbishop of Tyre, the most intel-
ligent hifftorian of the crusades, takes frequent
occasion to describe the elegance and fplcndoilr
of the curt of Constantinople, and adds, that
what they obrerved there exceeded any idea
which they could have formed of it, noftrarulim
enim rerum modum &'dignitatem excedunt,
Willerm. Tyr. ap. Bong. vol. ii. p. 657. 664.
Guntherus, a French monk who wrote a hiflo-
ry of the conquefl of Conflantinople by the cru-
faders in the thirtcenth century, fpe.iks of the

R 3 magnilicence

2.5

magnificence of that city in the fame tone of
admiration, " Struauram autem )Edificiorum
in corpore civitatis, in eccleflis videlicit, & tur.
ribus, & in domibus magnatorum, vix ullus vel
defcribere poteft, vel credere defcribenti, nifi
qui ea oculata fide cognoverit." Hit. Conlan.
tinop. ap. Canifi Letiones Antiquas. fol. Antw,
1725. vol. iv. p. 14. Geoffrey deVillehardouin,
a nobleman of high rank, and accustomed to
all the magnificence then known in the weft,
describes, in similar terms, the astonishment and
admiration of such of his fellow soldiers who be-
held Constantinople for the firit time: " They
could not have believed, fays he, that there was
a city so beautiful and rich in the whole world,
When they viewed its high walls, its lofty
towers, its rich palaces, its superb churches, all
appeared so great that they could have formed
no conception of this sovereign city, unless they
had seen it with their own eyes." Hiftoire de la
Conquete de Conitant. p. 49. From thefeun.
disguised representations of their own feelings, it
is evident, that to the Greeks, the Latinsap-
peared to be a race of rude, unpolifhed barba-
rians; whereas the latter, how much soever they
might contemn the unwarlike charater of the
former, could not help regarding them as far fu-
perior to themselves in elegance and arts-That
the ilate of government and manners was much
more improved in Italy than in the other coun-
tries of Europe is evident not only from the sadis
recorded in history, but it appears that the more
intelligent leaders of the crusaders were struck
with the difference. Jacobus de Vitriaco, a French
historian of the holy war, makes an elaborate
panegyrick on the characer and manners of the
Italians. He views them as a more polished peo-
ple, and particularly celebrates them for their
lo; e of liberty and civil wisdom; in confiliis cir.

curmfeai,

cumfpeCti, in re fua publica procuranda diligen.
tes & fludiofi; fibi in pofterum providentes;
aliis fubjici renuentes; ante omnia libertatem
fibi defendentes; sub uno quem eligunt capita-
neo, communitate fusejura & inftituta distantes,
& fimiliter observantes. Hitor. Hierofol. ap.
Gefta Dei per Francos, vol. ii. p. 1085.

NOTE XV. SECT. I.p. 33.

THE different steps taken by the cities of Ita-
ly in order to extend their power and dominion
are remarkable. As soon as their liberties were
eftabliihed, and they began to feel their own
importance, they endeavoured to render them-
selves masters of the territory round their walls.
Under the Romans, when cities enjoyed muni-
cipal privileges and jurifdiaion, the circum-
jacent lands belonged to each town, and were
the property of the community. But as it was
not the genius of the feudal policy to encourage
cities, or to shew any regard for their poffeflions
and immunities, there lands had been seized,
and (hared among the conquerors. The barons
to whom they were granted, erected their castles
almost at the gates of the city, and exercised
theirjurifdition there. Under pretence of re-
covering their ancient property, many of the
cities in Italy attacked there troublesome neigh-
bours, and difpoffefling them, annexed their ter-
ritories to the communities, and made thereby a
considerable addition to their power. Several
inRfances of this occur in the eleventh, and be-
ginning of the twelfth centuries. Murat. antiq.
Ital. vol. iv. p. i , &c. Their ambition in-
creasing together witii their power, they after-
wards attacked several barons situated at a great-
eS dlifance from them, and obliged these to en-
gage that they should become members of their

R 4 community;

community; that they should take the oath of
fidelity to their magifirates; that they should
subje6t their lands to all burdens and taxes im.
posed by common consent; that they (hould de-
fend the community against all its enemies; and
that they should reside within the city duringa
certain specified time in each year. Murat. ibid.
163. This fubjetion of the nobility to the
municipal government established in cities, be.
came almost universal, and was often extremely
grievous toperfons accustomed to confider them.
selves as independant. Otto Frifingenfis thus de.
scribes the state of Italy under Frederick I. " The
cities To much asset liberty, and are so follicitous
to avoid the insolence of power, that almost all
of them have thrown off every other authority,
and are governed by their own magistrates. In-
fomuch that all that country is now filled with
free cities, each of which have compelled their
bishops to reside within their walls, and there is
scarce any nobleman, how great soever his power
may be, who is not subjet to the laws and go-
vernment of some city. De Geftis Frider. I. Imp.
lib. ii. c. 13. p. 453. In another place he.ob-
serves of the Marquis of Montserrat that he was
almost the only Italian baron, who had preserved
his independance, and had not become fibje& to
the laws of any city. See alto Muratori Antichi-
ta Eftenfi, vol. i. p. 411, 412. That state into
which some of the nobles were compelled to en-
ter, others embraced from choice. Theyobfer-
ved that high degree of security as well as of
credit and estimation which the growing wealth
and dominion of the great communities procured
to all the members of them. They were desirous
to partake of these, and to put themselves under
such powerful prote&i 6n. With this view they
voluntarily became citizens of the towns in which
their lands were most contiguous, and abandoning

their

their ancient caflles, took up their residence in the
cities at least during part of the year. Several
deeds are still extant, by which Come of the most
illustrious families in Italy are associated as citi-
zens of different cities. Murat. ib. p. 165, &Sc.
A charter by which Atto de Macerata is admit-
ted as a citizen of Ofimo, A. D. 1198. in the
Marcha di Ancona is fiill extant. In this he Ri-
pulates, that he will acknowledge himself to be
aburgefs of that community; that he will to
the utmot of his power, promote its honour and
welfare; that he will obey its magif-rates; that
he will enter into no league with its enemies;
that he will reside in the town during two months
in every year, or for a longer time if req'lired
by the magistrates. The community, on the
other hard, take him, his family, and friends,
under their protection, and engage to defernd
him against every enemy. Fr. Ant. Zacharias
Anecdota medii levi. Aug. Taurm. 1755. fol.
p. 66. This privilege was deemed so itrpor-
tant, that not only laymen, but ecclefiaftlcks of
the highest rank, condescended to be adopted
as members of the great communities, in hopes
of enjoying the safety and dignity which that
conferred. Murat. ib. 179. Before the infli-
tution of communities, persons of noble birth
had no other residence but their castles. They
kept their petty courts there; and the cilies
were deserted, having hardly any inhabitants,
but slaves or persons of low condition. But in
consequence of the practice which I have men-
tioned, cities not only became mr re pcpulous,
but were filled with inhabitants of better rank ;
and a cultom, which still fubl)'is in Italy, was
then introduced, that all families of diftirntion
reiide more constantly in the great towns, than
is usual in other parts of Europe. As cities
acquired new consideration and dignity by
the acceflion of such citizens, they became

mor'e

249

more oflicitous to preserve their liberty and
independance. The Emperors, as sovereigns,
had anciently a palace in almost every great ci-
ty of Italy ; when they visited that country they
were accustomed to reside in there, and the
troops which accompanied them were quartered
in the houses of the citizens. This the citi.
zens confidered both as ignominious and dange-
rous. They could not help confidering it as re-
ceiving a master and an enemy within their
walls. They laboured therefore to get free of
this fubjedion. Some cities prevailed on the Em-
perors to engage that they should never enter
their gates, but take up their residence without
the galls: Chart. Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 24.
Others obtained the imperial licence to pull
down the palace situated within their liberties,
on condition that they built another in the sub.
urbs for the reception of the Emperor. Chart.
Hen. IV. Murat. ib. p. 25. Thefevariousen-
croachments of the Italian cities alarmed the Em-
perors, and put them on schemes for re-eftab-
lifhing the Imperial jurifdidion over them on its
ancient footing. Frederick Barbarossa engaged in
this enterprize with great ardour. The free ci-
ties of Italy joined together in a general league,
and flood on their defence; and after a long
contest, carried on with alternate success, a so-
lemn treaty of peace was concluded at Constance,
A. D. 1 83. by which all the privileges and im-
munities granted by former Emperors to the
principal cities in Italy were confirmed and rati-
sied. Murat. dissert. XLVII[. -This treaty of
Constance was confidered as such an important
article in thejurifprudence of the middle ages,
that it is usually publilhed together with the Li-
bri Feudorum at the end of the Corpus Juris
Civilis. The treaty secured privileges of great
importance to the confederate cities, and though
it r-eserved a corfiderable degree of authority and

jurifdition

jurifdiAion to the Empire, yet the cities perfever-
ed with such vigour in their efforts in order to
extend their immunities, and the conjunctures in
which they made them were so favourable, that,
before the conclusion of the thirteenth century,
most of the great cities in Italy had shaken off
all marks of fubjedion to the Empire, and were
become independant Covereign republics. It is
not requisite that I should trace the various steps
by which they advanced to this high degree of
power so fatal to the Empire, and so beneficial
to the cause of liberty in Italy. Muratori with
his usual industry has colleCted many original
papers which illustrate this curious and little
known part of history. Murat. Antiq. Ital. DiC-
fert. L. See also Jo. Bapt. Villanovae hist Laudis
Pompeii five Lodi in Graev. Thef. Antiquit, Ital.
vol. iii. p. 888.

NOTE XVI. SECT. I. 34.

Lo N G before the institution of communities
in France, charters of immunity or Franchise
were granted to Come towns and villages by the
lords on whom they depended. But these are
very different from such as became common in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. They did
not eret there towns into corporations; they
did not eltablifh a municipal government; they
did not grant them the privilege of bearing arms.
They contained nothing more than a manumif-
sion of the inhabitants fiom the yoke of fervi-
tude; an exemption from certain services which
wereopprellive and ignominious; and the eflab-
lifhment of a fixed tax or rent which they were
to pay to their Lord in place of impositions which
he could formerly lay upon them at pleasure.
Two charters of this kind to two villagts in the
county of Roufillan, one A. D. 97. the other

A. D.

A. D. o125, are fill extant. Petr. de Marca Mar.
ca, five limes Hilpanicus. app. p. 909. 1038,
Such conceflions, it is probable, were not un-
known in other parts of Europe, and maybe
confidered as a flep towards the more extensive
privileges conferred by Louis the Gross on the
towns within his domains. The communities in
France never aspired to the fame independance
with those in Italy. They acquired new privi-
leges, and immunities, but the right of fove-
reignty remain entire to the King or baron with-
in whose territories the refpeative cities were f-l
tuated, and from whom they received the char-
ter of their freedom. A great number of there
charters granted both by the Kings of France,
and by their great vassals are published by M.
D'Achery in his Specilegium, and many are
found in the colletion of the Ordonances des
Rois de France. These convey a very ltriking
representation of the wretched condition of ci.
ties previous to the institution of communities,
when they were subject to the judges appointed
by the superior lords of whom they held, and had
scarce any other law but their will. Each con-
cession in there charters must be confidered as a
grant of fbme new privilege which the peoplcdid
not formerly enjoy, and each regulation as a me-
thod of redrefling some grievance under which
they formerly laboured. The charters of com-
munities contain likewise the firIt expedients
employed for the introdudion of'equal laws, and
regular government. On both these accounts
they merit particular attention, and therefore
in lead of referring my readers to tie many bulky
voluaies in which they are scattered, I fliall give
tlhen a view of fime of the moo: important ar-
ticles in there chart-i s ranged under two general
heads. I. Such as rcfpet personal safety. II.
Sucli as rcfptrt the fccirily of property.

I. DuRING

I. DURING that itate of turbulence and dif-
order which the corruption of the feudal govern-
mentintroduced into Europe, personal safety was
the chief object of every individual; and as the
great military barons alone were able to give sus-
ficient protection to their vassals, this was one
great source of their power and authority. But,
by the institution of communities, effectual pro-
vision was made for the safety of individuals in-
dependant of the nobles. For, i. the fundamen-
tal article in every charter was, that all the mem-
bersof it bound themselves by oath to affift,defend,
and stand by each other against all aggressors,
and that they should not susser any person to in-
jure, distress, or molest, any of their fellow ci-
tizens. D'Acher. Spicel. x. 642. xi. 341,&c.-
2. Whoever resided in any town which was made
free, was obliged under a revere penalty to ac-
cede to the community, and to take part in the
mutual defence of its members. D'Acher. Spic.
xi. 344.-3: The communities had the privilege
of carrying arms; of making war on their pri-
vate enemies; and of executing by military force
any sentence which their magistrates pronoun-
ced. D'Ach. Spicel. x. 643, 644. xi. 343 .-
4. The practice of making fatisfadion by a pecu-
niary compensation for murder, assault, or other
ats of violence, most inconsistent with the or-
der of society, and the safety of individuals, was
abolished, and such as committed these crimes
were punished capitally, or with rigour adequate
to their guilt. D'Ach. xi. 362. Miraei opera Dip-
lomatica, i. 292.-5. No member of a commu-
nity was bound ,tojuftify or defend himltlf by
battle, or combat, but if he was charged with
any crime, he could be convicted only by the
evidtnce of witneflss, and the regular course of
legal proceedings. Miraeus, ibid. D'Ach. xi.
375, 349. Ordon. tom. iii. 2,65.-6. If any

mall

man fufpeted himself to be in danger from the
malice or enmity of another, upon his making
oath to that effect before a magistrate, the per-
son fufpeted was bound under a revere penalty
to give security for his peaceable behaviour.
D'Ach. xi. 346. This is the fame species of fe.
curity which is frill known in Scotland underthe
name of Lawburrows. In France it was firit in-
troduced among the inhabitants of communities,
and having been found to contribute confidera.
bly towards personal safety, it was extended to
all the other members of the society. Eftablif.
semens de St. Louis, liv. i. cap. 28. ap. Du
Ca.ge vie de St. Louis, p. 5.

II. THE provisions in the charters of commu.

nities concerning the security of property are
not less considerable than those refpeaing perfo-
nal safety. By the ancient law of France no per-
son could be arrelted or confined in prison on
account of any private debt. Ordon. des Rois
de France, tom. i. p. 72, 80. If.any person was
arrested upon any pretext, but his having been
guilty of a capital crime, it was lawful to rescue
him out of the hands of the officers who had
seized him. Ordon. iii. p. 17. Freedom from ar-
reft on account of debt seems likewise to have
been enjoyed in other countries. Gudenus Syl-
logeDiplom. 473. In society, while it remained
in its .rudest and moftfimple form, debt seems to
have been confidered as an obligation merely
personal. Men had made rome progress towards
refinement before creditors acquired a right of
seizing the property of their debtors in order to
recover payment. The expedients for this
purpose were all introduced originally in
communities, and we can trace the gra-
dual progress of them. i. The fxnpleft and
most obvious species of security was, that

thr

the person who fold any commodity Ihould re-
ceive a pledge from him who bought it, which
he restored upon receiving payment. Of this
custom there are vestiges in several charters of
community. D'Ach. ix. 185. xi. 377.-2.
When no pledge was given, and the debtor be-
came refractory or insolvent, the creditor was
allowed to seize his effects with a firong hand,
and by his private authority; the citizens of
Paris are warranted by the royal mandate, " ut
ubicumque, et quocumque modo poterunt, tan-
tur capiant, unde pecuniam fibi debitam inte-
gre &:plenarie habeant, & inde fibi invicem ad-
jutores exiftant." Ordon. &c. tom. i. p. 6.
This rude practice, suitable only to the violence
ofa state of nature, was tolerated longer than
one can conceive to be possible in any society,
where laws and order were at all known. The
ordonance authorizing it was issued, A. D. I 34.
and that which corrects the law, and prohibits
creditors from seizing the effects of their debtors,
unless by a warrant from a magiftrare, and un-
der his infpecion, was not published until the
year 1351. Ordon. tom. ii. 438. It is probable,
however, that men were taught, by observing
the disorders which the former mode of pro-
ceeding occasioned, to correct it in practice long
before a remedy was provided by a law to that
effect. Every discerning reader will apply this
observation to many other customs and practices
which I have mentioned. New customs are not
always to be ascribed to the laws which autho-
rize them. These statutes only give a legal
fancion to such things, as the experience of
mankind has previously found to be proper and
beneficial.-3. As soon as the interpolition of the
magistrate became requisite, regular provision
was made for attaching or distraining the move-
able effects of a debtor; and if his moveables
were not sufficient to discharge the debt, his

im-

immoveable property, or estate in land, was li-
able to the fame distress, and was fold for the
benefit of his creditor. D'Ach. ix, p. 184, 185.
xi. p. 348. 380. As this regulation afforded the
most compleat security to the creditor, it was
confidered as so revere, that humanity pointed
out several limitations in the execution of it.
Creditors were prohibited from seizing the wear-
ing apparel of their debtors, their beds, the
door of their house, their instruments of hus-
bandry, &c. D'Ach. ix. 184. xi. 377. Upon
the fame principles, when the power of distrain.
ing effects became more general, the horse and
arms of a gentleman could not be seized. D'Ach,
ix. 185. As hunting was the favourite amuse-
ment of martial nobles, the Emperor Lodovicus
Pius prohibited the seizing of a hawk, on ac-
count of any composition or debt. Capitul.
lib. iv. § 21. But if the debtor had no other
moveables, even these privileged articles might
be seized -4. In order to render the fecurityof
property compleat within a community, every
person who was admitted a member of it, was
obliged to buy or build a house, or to purchase
lands, within its precincs, or at least to bring
into the town a considerable portion of his move-
ables per qua juflitiari posit, si quid forte iii eln
querele evenerit. D'Ach. xi. 326. Ordon. i. 367.
Libertates S. Georgii de Elperanchia. Hilt. de
Dauphine, tom. i. p. 26.-5. That security
might be as perfect as poflible; in some towns,
the members of the community seem to have
been bound for each other. D'Ach. x. 644-
6. All questions with refp:ct to property, were
tried within the community by magistrates and
judges, which the citizens ele&ted or appointed.
Their decisions were more equal and fixed, than
the fentencts which depended on the capricious
and arbitrary will of a baron, who thought hini;

skit
256

elf superior to all laws. D'Ach. x. 644, 646.
xi. 344. & passim. Ordon. iii. 204.-7. No
member of a community could be burdened by
any arbitrary tax; for the superior lord who
granted the charter of community, accepted of
afixed census or duty in lieu of all demands.
Ordon. t. iii. 204. Libertates de Calma. Hist.
deDauphine, tom. i. p. 19. Libert. St. Georgii
de Efperanchia, ibid. p. 26. Nor could the
members of a community be distressed by arn
unequal imposition of the fum to be levied on
the community. Regulations are inserted in
the charters of some communities concerning
the method of determining the quota of any tax
to be levied on each inhabitant. D'Ach. xi.
350, 365. St. Louis published an ordonance
concerning this matter, which extended to all'
the communities. Ordon. t. i. i86. These re-
gulations are extremely favourable to liberty, as
they vest the power of proportioning the taxes
in a certain number of citizens chosen out of
each parish, who were bound by solemn oath to
decide according tojuftice.-That the more per-
sect fecarity of property was one great object of
those who instituted communities, we learn, not
only from the nature of the thing, but from the
express words of several charters, of which I
shall only mention that granted by Alienor,
Queen of England and Dutchess of Guienne, to
the community of Poitiers, ' ut fua propria me-
lius defendre pollint, & magis integre cufto-
dire." Du Cange voc Communia, v. ii. p. 863.
-Such are some of the capital regulations efta-
blilhed in communities during the twelfth and
thirteenth centuries. These may be confidered
asthe first rudiments of law and order, and
contributed greatly to introduce regular gov ern-
ment among all the members of society. As
soon as communities were inflituted, high fen-
timents of liberty began to appear. When
VOL. 1. S Hum-

Humbert, lord of Beaujeu, upon granting
charter of community to the town of Belleville
exacted of the inhabitants an oath of fidelity t(
himself and fucceflbrs, they stipulated, on theii
part, that he should swear to maintain their fran.
chifes and liberties; and for their greater fecu.
rity, they obliged him to bring twenty gentle-
men to take the fame oath, and to be bound to.
gether with him. D'Ach. ix. 183. In the fame
manner, the lord of Moirens in Dauphine pro-
duced a certain number of persons as his sureties
for the observation of the articles, contained in
the charter of community to that town. These
were bound to surrender themselves prisoners to
the inhabitants of Moirens, if their liege lord
should violate any of their franchie.s, and they
promised to remain in custody until he should
grant them redress. Hist. de Dauphine, tom. i.
p. 17. If the mayor or chief magistrate of a
town did any injury to a citizen, he was obliged
to give security for his appearance in judgment,
in the fame manner as a private person ; and if
cast, was liable to the fame penalty. D'Ach.
ix. 183. These are ideas of equality uncommon
in the feudal times. Communities were so fa-
vourable to freedom, that they were difingui0i-
ed by the name of Libertates, Du Cange, v. ii.
p. 863. They were at first extremely odious to
the nobles, who foresaw what a check they mull
prove to their power and domination. Guibert
Abbot of Nogent calls them execrable inven-
tinns, by which, contrary to law and julfice,
slaves withdrew themselves from that obedience
which they owed to their mailers. Di Cange,.
ib. 862. The zeal with which fbmeof the nobl.s
and powerful ecclefiafticks opposed the efta-
blifhment of communities, and endeavoured to
circumscribe their privileges, was extraordinary.
A striking instance of this occurs in the contcfi
between the archbishop of Reims, and the inla-

bitants

bitants of that community. It was the chief
business of every archbishop, during a confider-
able time, to abridge the rights and jurifdi&ion
of the community; and the great object of the
citizens, especially when the fee was vacant, to
maintain, to recover, and to extend theirjurif-
diction. Hiftoire civile & politique de la ville
deReims par M. Anquetil, torn. i. p. 287, &c.

THE observations which I have made concern-
ing the slate of cities, and the condition of their
inhabitants, are confirmed by innumerable pas-
fages in the historians and laws of the middle
ages. It is not improbable, however, that some
cities of the first order were in a better state;
and enjoyed a superior degree of liberty. Un-
der the Rorrmn government, the municipal go-
vernment established in cities was extremely fa-
vourable to liberty. The jurisdiction of the
senate in each corporation, and the privileges of
the citizens, were both extensive. There is
reason to believe, that some of the greater cities
which escaped the deftrutive rage of the bar-
barous nations, still retained their ancient form
of government, at least in a great measure.
They were governed by a council of citizens,
and by magistrates whom they themselves elected.
Very strong prefhmptions in favour of this opi-
nion, are produced by M. I'Abbe De Bos. Hist;
Crit. de la Mon. Franc. tom. i. p. i 8, &c. tom.
ii. p. 524. edit. I742. It appears from some of
the charters of communities to cities, granted in
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, that they
only confirm the privileges poffefled by the in-
habitants, previous to the ettlablifment of the
community D'Acher. Specileg. vol. xi p. 345.
Other cities claimed their privileges as haing
possessed them without interruption from the
times of the Romans. H-ist. Crit. de la. Mon.
Franc. tom. ii. . 333. But the number of
cities which enjoyed such immunities was so

S 2 frall,

small, as in no degree to diminish the force c
my conclusions in the text.

NOTE XVII. SEC T. . p. 34.

HAVING given a full account of the eftablii

ment, as well as effects of communities in Itali
and France, it will be necessary to enquire with
fbme attention, into the progress of cities andof
municipal government in Germany. The an.
cient Germans had no cities. Even in their ham.
lets or villages, they did not build their houses
contiguous to each other. Tac. de Mor. Germ.
cap. 6. They confidered it as a badge of ser-
vitude, to be obliged to dwell in a city surround-
ed with walls. When one of their tribes had
shaken off the Roman yoke, their countrymen
required of them, as an evidence of their having
recovered liberty, to demolish the walls of a
town which the Romans had built in their coun-
try. Even the fiercest animals, said they, lore
their spirit and courage when they are confined.
Tac. Hiflor. lib. iv. c. 64. The Romans built
several cities of note on the banks of the Rhine.
But in all the vast countries from that river to
the coasts of the Baltick, there was hardly one
city previous to the ninth century of the Chris-
tian era. Conringius Exercitatio de Urbibus
Germania Oper. vol i. § 25, 27, 31, &C. He-
ineccius differs from Conringius with refpeEt to
this. ' But even after allowing to his arguments
and authorities their utmost force, they prove
only, that there were a few places in thole ex-
tenfi.e regions, on which fImne historians lh;v
beflowed the name of towns. Elem.Jui. Gerrnin.
lib. i. § o2 Under Charlemagne, and the E1m-
perors of his aim'ly, as the political slate of Ger-
many began to improve, several cities were sonld-

ed,
?6o

ed, and men became accustomed to associate and
tolive together in one place. Charlemagne found-
edtwo archbifhopricks and nine bifhopricks in
the mos considerable towns of Germany. Aub.
Miiei Opera Diplomatica, vol. i. p. i6. His
successors increased the number of these; and
as the bishops fixed their residence in these cities
and performed religious functions there, that in.
duced many people to fettle in them. Conring.
ibid. § 48. But Henry, firnamed the Fowler,
who began his reign A. D. 9go, must be con-
fidered as the great founder of the cities in Gtr-
many. The Empire was at that time infested
by the incursions of the Hungarians and other
barbarous people. In order to oppose them,
Henry encouraged his subjects to fettle in cities
which he surrounded with walls and towers. He
enjoined or persuaded a certain proportion of the
nobility to fix their residence in the towns, and
thus rendered the condition of citizens more ho.-
nourable than it had been formerly. Wittikin-
dus Annal. lib. i. ap. Conring. §. 82. From this
period the number of cities continued to en-
crease, and they became more populous and
more wealthy. But cities were frill destitute of
municipal liberty or jurifdition. Such of them
as were situated in the Imperial demesnes, were
uibjedt to the Emperors, and their Comites, Miffi,
2nd other judges persisted in them, and difpen-
fedjuftice. Towns situated on the estate of a
baron, were part of his fief, and he or his offi-
cers exercised a similar jurisdiction in them.
Conring. ibid. 5 73, 74. Heinec. Elem. Jur.
Germ. ib. i. § 104. I'he Germans borrowed
the institution of communities from the Italians.
Knipfchildius Tradatus Politico. Hist. Jurid.
de Civitatum Imperialum Juribus, vol. i. lib. i.
cap. 5 N. 23. Frederick Barbarofla was the
firt Emperor who, from the fame political con-
deration that influenced Lewis the Gross, mul-

S 3 tiplied

tiplied communities in order to abridge the pow.
er of the nobles. Pfeffel Abrege de 1' Hiftoire
& du Droit Publique d'Allemagne, 4to. p. 297.
From the reign of Henry the Fowler, tothe
time when the German cities acquired full pof.
session of their immunities, various circumftan.
ces contributed to their increase. The eftab.
lifhment of bifhopricks (already mentioned) and
the building of cathedrals, naturally induced
many people to fettle there. It became the cuf.
tom to hold councils and courts of judicature of
every kind, ecclesiastical as well as civil, in cities
In the eleventh century, many slaves were en-
franchised, the greater part of which fettled in
cities. Several mines were discovered and
wrought in different provinces, which drew toge.
ther such a concourse of people, as gave rife to
feveralcities. Conring. § Io0. The cities began
in the thirteenth century to form leagues for
their mutual defence, and for repressing the difor.
ders occasioned by the private wars among the
barons, as well as by their exaStions. This
rendered the condition of the inhabitants of ci-
ties more secure than that of any order of men,
and allured many to become members of their
communities. Conring. § 94. There werein-
habitants of three different ranks in the towns
of Germany. The nobles, or familiae, the citi.
zens, or liberi, and the artizans who were slaves
or homines proprii. Knipfchild. lib. ii. cap. 29
No. I . Henry V. who began his reign A. D
i 106, infranchifed the saves who were artians
or inhabitants in several towns, and gave them
the rank of citizens, or liberi. Pfeffel, p. 251
Knipfch. lib. ii. c. 29. N,. 113, 19. Though
the cities in Germany did not acquire liberty f(
early as those in France, they extended their pri
vileges much farther. All the Imperial and fro
cities, the number of which is considerable, ac
quired the full right of being immediate; b'

whicl
z6z

which term in the German jurisprudence, we are
to underlland, that they are subjed to the Em-
pire alone, and possess within their own pre-
cints all the rights of compleat and indepen-
dant sovereignty. The various privileges of the
Imperial cities, the great guardians of the Ger-
manic liberties, are innumerated by Knipfchild,
lib. ii. The great articles are generally known,
and it would be improper to enter into any dif-
quifition concerning minute particulars.

NOTE XVIII. SECT. I. p. 34.

THE Spanish historians are almost entirely si-
lent concerning the origin and progress of com-
munities in that kingdom; so that I cannot fix
with any degree of certainty the time and man-
ner of their first introduction there. It appears,
however, from Mariana, vol. ii. p. 22i, fol.
Hlaga 1 73(, that in the year x 35o, eighteen ci-
ties had obtained a feat in the Cortes of Castile.
From the account which shall be given of their
conftirution and pretensions, SeEt. III. of this vo-
lume, it is evident that their privileges and form
of government were the fame with those of the
other feudal corporations; and this, as well as
rte perfect similarity of political institutions and
transactions in all the feudal kingdoms, may lead
us to conclude, that communities were intro
duced there in the fame manner, and proba-
bly about the fame time, as in the other nati-
ons of Europe. In Aragon, as I shall have oc-
cafion to observe in a subsequent note, cities
seem early to have acquired extenfivo immuni-
ties, together with a share in the legillature.
In the year 1l 8, the citizens of Saragoffl
had not only attained political liberty, but they
were declared to be of equal rank with the no-

S- 4 bles

263

bles of the second class; and many other im
munities, unknown to persons in their rani
of life in other parts of Europe, were confer
red upon them. Zurita Anales de Aragon
tom. i. p. 44. In England, the eftablifhmen
of communities or corporations was pofterio0
to the Conquest. The practice was borrowec
from France, and the privileges granted b)
the crown were perfectly similar to those which
I have enumerated. But as this part of hiftor
is well known to most of my readers, I shall,
without entering into any critical or minutedif
cuffion, refer them to authors who have fully
illustrated this interesting point in the Englift
history. Brady's Treatise of Boroughs. Madox
Firma Burgi, chap. i. fecL. ix Hume's History
of England, vol. i. append. i. and ii. It is not
improbable that some of the towns in England
were formed into corporations, under the Saxon
Kings, and that the charters granted by the
Kings of the Norman race were not charters of
enfranchisement from a ifate of slavery, but a
confirmation of privileges which they already
enjoyed. See Lord Lyttelton's History of Hen.
ry II. vol. ii. p. 317. The English cities,
however, were very inconsiderable in the
twelfth century. A clear proof of this occurs
in the hiftlry tn which I last referred. Fitzfte.
phen, a contemporary author, gives a defcrip-
sion of the city of London in the reign of Hen-
ry 1I. and the terms in which he speaks, o
its trade, its wealth, and the splendour of its
inhabitants, would suggest no inadequate idea
of its slate at present, when itis the greatest
and most opulent city of Europe. But all ideas
of grandeur and magnificence are merely com-
parative. It appears from a contemporary
author, Peter of Blois, archdeacon of London,
who had good opportunity of being well in.

formed

\ .
264

formed, that this city, of which Fitzftephen
gives such a pomii.;;s account, contained no
more than forty thuufand inhabitants. Ibid.
315, 316. The other cities were frall in pro-
portion, and in no condition to extort any ex-
tensive privileges. That the constitution of the
boroughs in Scotland, in many circumstances,
resembled that of the towns in France and Eng-
land, is manifest from the Leges Burgorum an-
nexed to the Regiam Majeftatem.

NOTE XIX. SECT. I. p. 39.

SOON after the introduction of the third estate
into the national council, the spirit of liberty
which that excited in France began to produce
conspicuous effects. In several provinces of
France, the nobility and communities formed
associations, whereby they bound themfclves to
defend their rights and privileges against the
formidable and arbitrary proceedings of the
King. The count de Boulainvilliers has pre-
served a copy of one of there associations, da-
ted in the year 1314, twelve years after the
admiflion of the deputies from towns into the
States General. Hiftoire de Pancien gou-
vernement de la France, tom. ii. p. 94. The
vigour with which the people asserted and pre-
pared to maintain their rights, obliged their
sovereigns to refpeC them. Six years after this
altociation, Philip the Long ilfued a writ of fum-
mons, to the Community of Narbonne, in the
following terms: " Philip, by the Grace, &c.
to our well-beloved, &c. As we desire with
all our heart, and above all other things, to
govern our kingdom and people in peace and
tranquillity, by the help of God: and to re-
form our said kingdom in so far as it stands
in need thereof, for the publick good, and

for

for the benefit of our fubjets, who in times palt
have been aggrieved and oppressed indiverfe
manners by the malice of sundry persons, as we
have learned by common report, as well as by
the information of good men worthy of credit
and we having determined in our council which
we have called to meet in our good city, &c.
to give redress to the utmost of our power, by
all ways and means poilible, according to rea.
son and justice, and willing that this should be
done with solemnity and deliberation by the ad-
vice of the prelates, barons, and good towns of
our realm, and particularly of you, and that it
should be transacted agreeably to the will of
God, and for the good of our people, therefore
we command," &c. Mably, obfervat. ii. App.
p. 3 6. I shall allow there to be only the formal
words of a public and legal stile, but the ideas
are ingular, and much more liberal and enlarged
than one could expe& in that age. A popular
monarch of Great Britain could hardly address
himself to parliament, in terms more favoura-
ble to publick liberty. There occurs in the Hil-
tory of France a striking instance of the progress
which the principles of liberty had made in that
kingdom, and of the influence which the depu-
ties of towns had acquired in the States General.
During the calamities in which the war with
England, and the captivity of King John, had
involved France, the States General made a bold
effrt to extend their own privileges and jurif-
clidion. The regulations eftablilhed by the
States held A D 1355, concerning the mode
of levying taxes, the administration of which
the'y vested not in the crown, but in com-
millioners appointed by the States; concern-
ing the coining of money ; concerning the re-
dress of the grievance of purveyance; con-
cerning the regular administration of justice;
are mnuch more suitable to the genius of a re-
publican government than that of a feudal

monarchy.

monarchy. This curious statute is published,
Ordon. t. iii. p. 19. Such as have an opportuni-
ty to consult that large collection will find an a-
bridgment of it, Hist. de France par Villaret,
tom ix. p. 130. or in Hifloire de Boulainv. tom.
ii. 213. The French hiftorians.reprefent the bi-
ihop of Laon, and Marcel Provost of the mer-
chants of Paris, who had the chief direction of
this assembly, as seditious tribunes, violent, in-
terested, ambitious, and aiming at innovations
subversive of the constitution and government of
their country. That may have been the cafe,
but these men possessed the confidence of the peo-
ple; and the measures which they proposed as
the most popular and acceptable, plainly prove
that the spirit of liberty had spread wonderfully,
and that the ideas which then prevailed in France
concerning government were extremely liberal.
The States general held at Paris A. D. 1355,
consisted of about eight hundred members, and
above one half of there were deputies from towns.
M. Secouffe Pref. a Ordon. tom. iii. p. 48. It
appears that in all the different assemblies of the
States, held during the reign of John, the re-
presentatives of towns had great influence, and
in every refpeA the third State was confidered
as co-ordinate and equal to either of the other
two. Ibid. paflim. These spirited efforts were
made in France long before the House of Com-
mons in England acquired any considerable in-
fluence in the legislature. As the feudal fyflem
was carried to its utmost height in France fboner
than in England, so it began to decline sooner
in the former than in the latter kingdom. In
England, almost all attempts to eltablifh or to
extend the liberty of the people have been fuc-
cefsful; in France they have proved unfortunate.
What were the accidental events, or political
causes which occasioned this difference, it is not
ny present business to enquire.

NOTE

NOTE XX. SECT. I. p.4r.

IN a former note, No. VIII. I have enquired

into the condition of that part of the people
which was employed in agriculture, and have re-
presented the various hardships and calamities
of their situation. When charters of liberty and
manumiiflon were granted to such persons, they
contained four conceflions corresponding to the
four capital grievances to which men in a slate
of servitude are fubjeft. i. The right of difpof-
ing of their persons by sale or grant was relin-
quifhed. 2. Power was given to them of con-
veying their property and effects by will or any
other legal deed. Or if they happened to die in-
testate, it was provided that their property
should go to their lawful heirs in the fame man-
ier as the property of other persons. 3. The
services and taxes which they owed to their fu-
perior or liege Lord, which were formerly arbi-
trary and imposed at pleasure, are precisely as-
certained. 4. They are allowed the privilege
of marrying whatever person they chose, as for-
merly they could contract no marriage without
their Lord's permiflon, and with no person but
one of his slaves. All there particulars are found
united in the charter granted Habitatoribus
Montis-Britonis, A. D. 1376. Hist. de Dau-
phin, tom. i. p. 81. Many circumstances con-
curred with those which 1 have mentioned in
the text in procuring them deliverance from that
wretched state. The g ntle spirit of the Chris-
tian religion, together with the doctrines which
it teaches, concerning the original equality of
mankind, as well as the impartial eye with
which the Almighty regards men of every con-
dition, and admits them to a participation of his
benefits, are inconsistent with servitude. But in
this, as in many other instances, considerations

of

ofintereft, and the maxims of false policy led
men to a conduat inconsistent with their princi-
ples. They were so sensible, however, of the
inconsistency, that to set their fellow Christians
at liberty from fcrvitude was deemed an aft of
piety highly meritorious and acceptable to hea-
ven. The humane spirit of the Christian religi-
on ltruggled with the maxims and manners of
the world, and contributed more than any other
circumstance to introduce the practice of manu-
mifllion. When Pope Gregory the Great, who
flourished toward the end of the sixth century,
granted liberty to some of his slaves, he gives
this reason for it, " Cum redemptor noiter,
totius conditor naturae, ad hoc propitiatus hu-
manam carnem voluerit affumere, ut divinitati;
fusegratia, dirempto (quo tenebamur captivi)
vinculo, pristin2e nos reltitueret libertati; falu-
briter agitur, si homines, quos ab initio liberos
natura protulit, & jus gentium jugo fubftituit
fervitutis, in ea, qua. nati fuerant, manumitten-
tis beneficio libertate reddantur. Gregor Magn.
ap. Potgiefs. lib. 4. c. i. § 3. Several laws or
charters founded on reasons similar to this,
are produced by the fame author. According-
ly a great part of the charters of manumiflion
previous to the reign of Louis X. are granted
pro amore dei, pro remedio animse, & pro mer-
cede animae. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol. i. p.
849, 850. Du Cange, voc. nmanumlifio. The
formality of manumiltion was executed in a
church, as a religious solemnity. I he perlbn
to be let free was led round the great altar \ ith
a torch in his hand, he took hold of the horns
of the altar, and there the solemn words confer-
ring liberty were pronounced. Dtl Cangc, lb.
vol. iv. p. 467. I shall tranlciibe a part of a char-
ter of manumillion granted A D. o056 ; both
as it contains a full account of the ceremonies
tiued in this form of manumillion, and a' a fpe-
cimen of the imperfect knowledge of lhe Latin

tongue

tongue in that barbarous age. It is granted
by Willa the widow of Hugo the Duke and
Marquis, in favour of Cleriza one of her slaves.
Et ideo nos Domine Wille indite cometiffe-li-
bera et abfolvo te Cleriza filia Uberto- pro ti-
iore omnipotentis dei, & remedio luminarieani.
me bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Domini
Ugo gloriofliflimo, ut quando ilium Dominus de
hac vita migrare, juiferit, pars iniqua non abeat
poteftatem ullam, fed anguelus Domini noftri
Jesu Chrifli colocare dignitur ilium inter fandos
diletos suos; & beatus Petrus princips apofto-
lorum, qui habed potefftatemn omnium animarum
ligandi et abFolvendi, ut ipfi abfolvat anima eCJli
de peccatis 'ui, et aperiad illum janua paradifi;
pro eadem vero rationi, in mano mite te Benzo
prefbiter, ut vadat tecum in ecclesia fanti Bar-
tholomaei apoftoli; traad te tribus vicibus circa
altare ipfius ecclesia cum caereo apprehenfum in
manibus tuis & manibus fuis; deinde exite am-
bulate in via quadrubio, ubi quatuor vie fe de-
viduntur. Statimq; pro remedio luminarie ani.
me bone memorie quondam supra fcripto Dom-
ni ugo, et ipfi prefbiter Benzo fecit omnia, &
dixit, Ecce quatuor vie, ire et ambulate in qua-
cunq; partem tibi placuerit, tam sic supra fcripta
Cleriza, qua nofque tui heredes, qui ab ac ho-
ra in antea nati, vel procreati fuerit utriufq;
fexus, &c." Murat. ib. p. 853. Many other
charters might have been feleded, which in
point of grammar or ityle, are in no wife fuperi-
or to this. Manumillion was frequently granted
on death-bed or by latter-will. As the minds of
men are at that time awakened to sentiments ot
humanity and piety, these deeds proceeded from
religious motives, and are granted pro redmnpti-
one animae, in order to obtain acceptance with
God. Du Cange ubi supra, p. 470. & voc.fervuS

1' V Lvol.

vol. vi. p. 451. Another method of obtaining
liberty was by entering into holy orders, or
taking the vow in a monastery. This was per-
mitted for some time; but so many slaves es-
caped, by this means out of the hands of their
mailers, that the practice was afterwards re-
strained, and at last prohibited by the laws of
almost all the nations of Europe. Murat. ib.
p. 842. Conformably to the fame principles,
Princes, on the birth of a son, or upon any
other agreeable event, appointed a certain num-
ber of slaves to be enfranchised, as a testimony
of their gratitude to God for that benefit. Mar-
culfi Form. lib. i. cap. 39. There are several
forms of manumission published by Marculfus,
and all of them are founded on religious confi-
derations, in order to procure the favour of God,
or to obtain the forgiveness of their fins. Lib.
ii. c. 23, 33, 34, edit. Baluz. The fame ob-
servation holds with refpeLt to the other collec-
tions of Formula annexed to Marculfus. As
sentiments of religion induced some to grant li-
berty to their fellow-Chriftians who groaned
under the yoke of servitude; so mistaken ideas
concerning devotion led others to relirquifh
their liberty. When a person conceived an ex-
traordinary refpet for the faint who was the pa-
tron of any church or monastery in which he
was accustomed- to attend religions worship, it
was not unusual among men ,offeffed &ith Aln
excess of fiuperititious reverence, to gi\e up
themselves and their pofteriry to be slaves of tie
laint. Mabillon. de re Pililomat. lib. vi. O32.
The oblatior voluntary slaves of churches or
monasteries were very numerous, and may be
divided into three different clafles. The first
were flih as put themselves and effe-s under
the protection of a particular church or monat-
tery, binding themselves to defend its privilkges
and property against every aggressor. These

were

were prompted to do so, not merely by devo.
tion, but in order to obtain that security which
arose from the protection of the church. They
were rather vassals than slaves, and fometirnes
persons of noble birth found it prudent to secure
the protection of the church in this manner.
Persons of' the second class bound themselves to
pay an annual tax or quit-rent out of their estates
to a church or monafiery. Betides this, they
fnmetimes engaged to perform certain services,
They were called cenfJaies. The last class con-
sifted of such as actually renounced their liberty,
and became slaves in the ftrid and proper sense
of the word. Theife were called minifieriales,
and enslaved their bodies, as some of the char-
ters bear, that they might procure the liberty
of their fouls. Potgiefferus de ftatu fervorum,
lib. i. cap. i. §. 6, 7. How zealous the clergy
were to encourage the opinions which led to this
practice will appear from a clause in a charter
by which one gives up himself as a slave to a
monastery, " Cum fit omni carnali ingenuitate
generofius extremum quodcumq; Dei fervitium,
icilicet quod terrena nobilitas multos plerumq;
vitiorum servos facit, fervitus vero Chrifli no-
biles virtutibus reddit, nemo autem fani capitis
virtutibus vitia comparaverit, claret pro certo
eum effe generofiorem, qui fe Dei fervitio prae-
buerit proniorem. Quod ego Ragnaldus intelli-
gens, &c." Another author fays, Eligens ma-
gis effe fervus Dei quam libertus faeculi, firmiter
credens & fciens, quod fervire Deo, regnare eft,
fummaque ingenuitas fit in qua fervitus corn-
parabatur Chrifti, &c. Du Cange, voc. oblatus,
vol. iv. p. 1286, 1287. It does not appear,
that the enfranchisement of slaves was a frequent
practice while the feudal system preserved its \ i-
gour. On the contrary, there were laws which
iet bounds to this practice as detrimental to
society. Potgieff. lib. iv. c. z. § 6. The infe-

rior
272

ior order of men owed the recovery of their
liberty to the decline of that ariftocratical po-
iicy, which lodged the moit extensive power in
the hahds of a few members of the society, and
depressed all the-reft: When Louis X. ifiued hid
ordonance, several naves had been To long ac-
cutorned to servitude, and their minds were so
much debated by that unhappy situation, that
they refuted to accept of the liberty which was
offered them. D'Ach. Spicel. v. xi. p. 387.
Long after the reign of Louis X. several of the
French nobility continued to assert their ancient
dominion over their slaves. It appears from an
ordonance of the famous Bertrand de Guefclin
Constable of France, that the custom of en-
franchising them was considered as a pernicious
innovation. Morice Mem. pour fervir des preuves
al'hift. de Bret. tom. ii. p. 0oo. In fobmeina
flances when the praedial slaves were declared
tobe freemen, they were fill bound to per-
form certain iRevices to their ancient matters,
and were kept in a state different from other
fubjeas, being reftrited either fr6om purchasing
land, or becoming members of a cormmunity
within the precints of the manor to which
they formerly belonged. Martene & Durand.
Thefaur. Anecdot. vol. i.p. 914. This, how-
ever, seems not to have been common.-There
is no general law for the manumiflion of slaves
in the Statute-book of England similar to that
which has been quoted from the ordonances of
the Kings of France. Though the genius of the
English constitution seems early to have favour-
ed personal liberty, personal fervittde, never-
thelels, continued long in England in rome par-
ticular places. In the year 15 14, we find a charter
of Henry VIII. enfranchi ing two laves belonging
to one of his manors. Rym. Feder, vol.xiii. p. 470.
Aslate as the year 1574, there is a commiflion

VoL. I. T from

from Q(een Elizabeth with refpet to the manu.
miflion of certain bondmen belonging to her.
Ryner. in Obfervat. on the statues, &c. . 25p.

NOTh XXI. SECT . .

p. 47.

THERE is no custom in the middle ages more

singular than that of private war. It is a right
of to great importance, and prevailed so univer.
sally, that the regulations concerning it make a
considerable figure in the system of laws during
the middle ages. M. de Mohtefquieu, who has
unravelled so many intricate points in feudalju.
rifprudence, and thrown light on so many cuf.
sons formerly obscure and unintelligible, was
'iot led by his tubjed to confider this. I shall
therefore give a more minute account of the
cUcftoms and regulations which directed a prac.
lice so contrary to the present ideas of civili.
zed nations concerning government and order,
i. Afhong the ancient Germans, as well as other
nations in a firslilar state of society, the right of
a:venging injuries Was a private and perlfnal
fight, eXetcifed by force of aims, withoutany
reference to an umpire, or any appeal t6 a ma-
giftrate for decision. The cleareR proofs of this
were produced Note VI. 2 This praftice sub.
'ifted among the barbarous nations after their
fettlemerit in the provinces of the Empire which
they conquered; and as the causes of dilenti.
on among them multiplied, their family feuds
and private wars became more frequent. Proofi
of this occur in their early historians. Greg
Turon. hist. lib. vii. c. 2. lib. viii. c. 18. lib.
c. 27. and likewise in the codes of their laws
It was not only allowable for the relations t(
avenge the injuries of their family, but it wO
incumbent on them. Thus by the laws of thi
Angli and Werini, ad qtremrunque heredita
terrae pervenerit, ad illulh veftis bellic.a id e

loric

lorica & ultio proximi, 8& folatio leuidis, debet
pertinere. tit. vi, 5. ap, Lindenbr. Leg. Salic.
tit. 63. Leg. Longdb. lib. ii. tit. 14:§ i> o.-
.3 None but 'gentlemen, or persons of noble
births had the right of private war. All dif-
putes among slaves, villani, the inhabitants of
townt, and freemen of inferior condition, were
decided in the courts of justice. All disputes
between gentlemen and persons of inferior rahk
were termirat;ed in the fame thbiner; The
right of private war fiippofed 'obility of birth,
and eqtialif:y of rahk in the e o'ending, par-
ties, Bleatmatrior Coffittmed de Beatv. eh,. Iix.
p. 3o0.. Ordon' deg Rois' de France,' tmn.
ii. 395. §' xvi.' 50'8 § *v, &c; The digii-
fled ecclefiaft-ihka likewise claimed aridieier-
cifed the right -ofprivate war; but as it .ias
tidt altogether ddednt for theM to Pfotfeeute
quarrels in prftn, a^oddvorti. r W &fdy es *re
chosen by thte several tnonafterieri:and bitfhp-
ricks, These were cdrmmlnly tmet of high
rank. aid teleptation, who becamde the pdio-
teators 'of the chir'chtes and eotivhrit& by wibrti
they were eleted , :e'fpiffedr thelr qtdirrels, and
fought their battles:; armnis omni'a qut erant ec-
clifi .viriliteif defendebant, et viigilahter prote-
gebant. Brufel IUfage det fiefs, tom. i. p. 144.
Du.'Cange vsa. adVdatus. On manty occa'fidos,
the martial ideas tor which ecclefiafticks of no-
ble birth were eacuftomed, tmade them iorget
the pacifick spirit of their profeflion, and led
thtem into the field in person at the head of their
vaiTals, , flammra, ferro, celde, possessiones ec-
clefiarum practati defendebant." Gtido Abbas
ap. Du Cange. lb; p. 17g.- - . It Was not
every injury ot trespass that gave a gentleman a
title to make war upon his adversary. Atrocious
afts ,of violence, insults and affronis publilCkly
cbrmitted, were legal and permitted motives
for taking arms againf the authors of them.
Such cri.me as are now puninhed capitally in ci-

T a viited

viilized nations,.a't that time justified privatehi
tilities. IBeaurt.an. ch. lix. Du Cange Differr
xxix. furJoinvill.e, p. 331, But though the aveng.
ing of injuries was. the only motive that coulc
legally authorize a private war, yet disputes con.
cerning civil property, often gave rife to hoRili.
ties, and were terminated by the sword. )u
Cange Dissert. p. 332. -- 5. All persons present
when any quarrel arose, or any ad of violence
was committed, were included in the war
;which, it occasioned, for:it was supposed to be
impoflible for any man in fitch a situation, to re.
main neutral% without taking fide with one or
other of t:he contending parties. Beauman. p.
.ptO --6: All the kindred of the two principals
-in .the : war. were included in it, and obliged tc
espouse thequarrel of the;cbieftain with whom
,:they,were cqyanedaed. Du Cangei ib. 332. This

was folMded on the maxim of: t:he ancient Ger-
,mans, '- fiufcipere. tam inimicitias feu.patris, feu
::propinqui- quam amicitias, neceffe eft " a
.-maxim natural to all rude and simple nations,
:arong'whi: h the form of society, and political
..union i.ffengthens such a sentiment. The me-

thid of afeertaining the degree of affinity which
,obliged a person to take part in the quarrel of
',a skin(man was curious. White the church pro-
:Jilbited the marriageof,perfons within.the seventh
..,degree .f affinity, the vengeance of private war

extended as far as this absurd prohibition,. .nd
: atlwho had such a remote connetion with ainy
of the principals were involved in the calami
tiesof war. Rut when the church relaxed some-
what.of its rigour, and did not extend its pro-
hlibition of .marrying beyond tile fourth degrce
of affinity, the fame reftrietion took place in ll t
,conduSt ol. private war, Beauman. 3o0. 'D1
Cange Piffirt. ,.33,3.. - 7 A private war could
not be carried ol between two fill brothers,
because both have lthe fame common lkindred,
aud consequently neither have any persons buoml

to

tp Itand by him against the other, in the con.
test; but two brothers of the half blood might
wage war, because each of them has a diftint
kindred. Beauman. p. z99.-8. The vassals of
each principal in any private war were involved
in the contest, because by the feudal maxima
they were bound to take arms in defence of tile
chieftain of whom they held, and to assist him
in every quarrel. As soon, therefore, as the feu-
dal tenures were introduced, and this artificial
connection was established between vassals and
the baron of whom they held, vassals came to
be confidered as in the fame state with relati-
ons. Beauman. 303.-9. Private wars were very
frequent for several centuries. Nothing contri-
buted more to increase those disorders in govern-
ment, and that ferofity of manners which reduc-
ed the nations of Europe to that wretched state
which distinguished the period of history which
I am reviewing. Nothing was such an obstacle
to the introducion of a regular administration
of justice. Nothing could more effectually dif-
courage industry, or retard the progress and cul-
tivation of the arts of peace. Private wars were
carried on with allthe defiruaive rage, which is to
be dreaded from violent resentment when arm-
ed with force, and authorised by law. It ap-
pears from the laws prohibiting or restraining the
exercise of private hostilities, that the invasion
of the most barbarour anamy could not be more
desolating to a country, or more fatal to its in-
habitants, than those intestine wars. Ordon. t.
i. p. 701. tom. ii. 395, 408, 507, &c. The con-
temporary historians describe the excesses com-
mitted in prosecution of there quarrels, in such
terms, as excite aftonihlment and horror. I lhall
mentin only one passage from the history of
the Holy war, by Guibert, Abbot of Nogent:
" Erat -o tempore maximis ad invicem hoftil;ta-
tibus, totius Francorum regni faia turbatto;
crebra ubiq; latrocinia, viarum obfenlio: auJie-
bantur paflim, immo fiebant incendia infinita;

T s nullis

niiiltis: pre'ter 'sola' & indomita ' cupiditate ' e
iin'eitibus caufils'extruebantur praelia; 8t ut bre:
vitb'tinum'ctaldamquidcquid obtutibub elipidorum
fuibjacebart hufquam attendendo cujus effet, pra.
dae patebat. Ge'fa Dei per Francos, vol. i. p. 482:

I HAiNG- thus collected the chief regulations

whichi custom had: established concerning the
right a d exercise of private war, I shall enume.
rate in chronological order the various expedi.
¢nts etmployed to abolish or reitraih this fatal
cuiftom. i. The first expedient employed by the
civil magistrate in order to set some bounds to
the violence ofprivate revenge, was the fixing by
law the fine or composition to be paid for each
different crime. The injured person was original.
ly the sole judge concerning the nature of the
wrong which he had fuffered,the degree of ven-
geance. which he should exaft, as well as the
species of attonement or reparation with which
he ihould reft satisfied. Resentment became of
course as implacable as it was fierce. It was often
a point of' honour not to forgive, nor to be re-
conciled.' This made it necessary to fix those
compositions which make so great a figure in
the laws of bararous nations. The nature of
crimes and offences was estimated by the magif-
trate, and the 'utim due to the person offended
was ascertained with a minute, and often a
whimsical accuracy. Rotharis, the legislator of
the Lombards, wSho reigu,.l abouL thc middle of
the seventh century; discovers his intention both
in ascertaining the composition to be paid by
the offender, and in 'increasing its' value; it is,
fays he, that the enmity may be extinguished,
the prosecution may cease, and peace may
be restored. Leg. Langbb. lib. i. tit. 7. § lo.
----2. About the beginning of the ninth
ceitury, Charlemagne tiruck at the root of
the evil, and enaFted, " That when any
person had been 'guilty of a crime, or had
committed an oidtrage, he should immediate-
ly ifiniti to' the peiaic'which the ctchurch imi

. -...' ?posed,

imposed, and offer to pay the composition which
the law prescribed and if the injured person or
his kindred should refute to accept of this, and
prefurme to avenge themselves by force of arms,
their lands and properties should be forfeited.
Capitul. A. D. 8oz. edit. Baluz. vol. i. 371.-
3 But in this, as well as in other regulations,
the genius of Charlemagne advanced before the
spirit of his age. The ideas of his contempo-
raries concerning regular government were too
imperfect, and the r manners too fierce to sub-
mit 'o this law. Private wars, with all the cala-
mities which they occasioned, became more fre-
qutet than ever after the death of that great
monarch. His successors were unable to restrain
them. The church found it necessary to inter-
pose. The most early of these interpositions
now extant, is towards the end of the tenth
century. In the year 9Go, several Bishops in
the south of France assembled, and publilhed
various regulations, in order to set bome bounds
to the violence and frequency of private wars
if any person within their dioceffes should ven-
ture to transgress, they ordained that he should
be excluded tzom all Christian privileges during
his life, and be denied Christian burial after his
death. Du Mont Corps Diplomatique, tom. i.
p. 41. These, however, were only partial re-
medies; and therefore a council was held at Li-
moges, A. D. 994. The bodies of the faints,
according to the;cuflom of those ages, were car-
ried thither; and by these sacred relicks men
were exhorted to lay down their arms, to extin-
guilh their animufities, and to swear that they
would not for the future violate the publick
peace by their private hostilities. Bouquet Re-
cueil des 'Hiftor. vol. x. p. 49, 147. Severil
other councils issued decrees to the fame.ef&.
Du Cange Dissert. 343.-4. But the authority of
councils, how venerable soever in those ages,
was not sufficient to abolish a ouftom which flat-

T 4 tered

tered the pride of the nobles, and gratified their
favourite pailions. The evil grew Co intolerable,
that it became necessary to employ supernatural
means for fupprefling it. A bishop of Aqui.
taine, A. D. 1032, pretended that an angel had
appeared to him, and brought him a writing
from heaven, enjoining men to cease from their
hostilities, and to be reconciled to each other.
It was during a season of public calamity that he
published this revelation. The minds of men
were disposed to receive such pious impressions;
and willing to perform any thing in order to
avert the wrath of heaven. A general peace
and cessation from hoftiiities took place, and
continued for seven years; and a resolution was
formed that no man should in times to come at-
tack or molest his advarfaries during the seasons
set apart for celebrating the great festivals of the
church, or from the evening of Thursday in
each week to the morning of Monday in the
week ensuing, the intervening days being con-
fidered as particularly holy, our Lord's Paflion
having happened on one of there days, and his
RefurreEtion on another. A change in the dif-
positions of men so sudden, and which produced
a resolution so unexpeted, was confidered as mi-
raculous; and the respite from hostilities which
followed upon it, was called The Truce of God.
Glaber. Rodulphus Hiitor. lib. v. ap. Bouquet.
vol. x. p. 59. This, from being a regulation
or concert in one kingdom, became a general
law in Christendom, and was confirmed by the
authority of the Pope, and the violaters were
subjected to the penalty of excommunication.
Corpus Jur. Canon Decretal. lib. i. tit. 34. c. i.
Du Cange Gloffar. voc. Treuga. An a& of the
council of 'oulujes in Roussillon, A. D. 041,
containing all the stipulations required by the
truce of God, is publilhed by Dom de Vic
Pom Vaiffette Hist. de Languedoc, tom. ii.
Preuves, p. 206. A ceflation from hotilities

during

during three compleat days in every week, al-
lowed such a considerable space for the paflions
of the antagonists to cool, and for the people to
enjoy a respite from the calamities of war, as well
as to take measures for their own security, that,
if this truce of God had been exaftly observed, it
must have gone far towards putting an end to
private wars. This, however, seems not to have
been the cafe; the nobles, disregarding the
truce, prosecuted their quarrels without inter-
ruption as formerly. Q.a nimirum tempeftate,
univerfae provinciae adeo devaftationis continuar
importunitate inquietantur, ut ne ipfa, proob-
fervatione divina pacis, profelfa facramenta cuf-
todiantur. Abbas Ufpergenfis apud Datt de
pace imperil publica, p. 3. No. 35. The vio-
lent spirit of the nobility could not be restrained
by any engagements. The complaints of this
were frequent; and bishops in order to compel
them to renew their vows and promires of ceasing
from their private wars, were obliged to enjoin
their clergy to suspend the performance of divine
service, and the exercifeof any religious funacion
within the parishes of such as were refractory
and obstinate. Hist. de Langued. par. D. D. de
Vic & Vaifette, tom. ii. Preuves, p. 18.-5.
The people, eager to obtain relief from their sus-
ferings, called in a second time a pretended re-
velation to their aid. Towards the end of the
twelfth century, a carpenter in Guienne gave
out that Jesus Chriit together with the blessed
Virgin had appeared to him, and having com-
manded him to exhort mankind to peace, had
given him, as a proof of his miflion, an image
of the Virgin holding her Ton in her arms, with
this inscription, Lamb of God, who takes away
be fins of the world, give us peace. This low
fanatick addrelfed himself to an ignorant age,
prone to credit what was marvellous. He was
received as an inspired messenger of God. Many
prelates and barons afmbled at Puy, and took

an

an oath, not only to make peace with all their
own enemies, but to attack such as refused to lay
down their arms, and to be reconciled to their
enemies. They formed an aflociation for this
purpose, and assumed the honourable name of
the Brotherbood of God. Robertus de Monte
Michaele ap. M. de Lauriere Pref. torn. i. Ordon.
p. 29. Bat the influence of this fuperfiitious
terror or devotion was not of long continuance.
-6. The civil magistrate was obliged to exert
his authority in order to check a custom which
threatened the dissolution of government. Phi-
lip Augustus, as some imagine, or St. Louis, as
is more probable, published an ordonance, A. D.
1245, prohibiting any person to commence hof-
tilities against the friends and vassals of his ad-
verfary, until forty days after the commiflion of
the crime or offence which gave rife to the quar-
rel; declaring, that if any man presumed to
tranigrefs this statute, he (hould be confidered
as guilty of a breach of publick peace, and be
tried and punished by the judge ordinary as a
traitor. Ordon. tom. i. p. 56. This was called
the Royal Truce, and afforded time for the vio-
lence of resentment to subside, as well as leisure
for the good offices of such as were willing to
compose the difference. The happy effects of
this regulation seem to have been considerable,
if we mayjudge from the Solicitude of succeed-
ing monarchs to enforce it.-7. In order to re-
strain the exercise of private war still farther,
Philip the Fair, towards the close of the fame
century, A. D. 1296, published an ordonance
commanding all private hofilities to cease, while
he was engaged in war against the enemies of
the fate. Ordon. tc.m. i.p. 328, 39o. This regula-
tion, which seems to be almost essential to theex-
iRence and preservation of society, was often re-
newed by his successors, and being enforced by the
regal authority, proved a considerable check to
the doftructive conitets of the nobles. Both thefc

regulations,

regulations, introduced first in France, were a-
dopted by the other nations in Europe.--8. The
evil, however, was so inveterate, that it did not
yield to all these remedies. No sooner was pub-
lick peace established in any kingdom, than the
barons renewed their private hostilities. They
not only struggled to maintain this pernicious
right, but to secure the exercifeof it without any
restraint. Upon the death of Philip the Fair,
the nobles of different provinces in France form-
ed associations, and presented remonstrances to
his successor, demanding the repeal of several
laws, by which he had abridged the privileges
of their order. Among there, the right of pri-
vate war is always mentioned as one of the most
valuable; and they claim, that the restraint im-
posed by the truce of God, the royal truce, as
well as that arising from the ordonance of the
year 1296, should be taken off. In some in-
fiances, the two sons of Philip who mounted the
throne successively eluded their demands; in o-
thers, they were obliged to make conceflions.
Ordon. tom. i. p. 551, 557, 561, 573. The or-
donances to which I here refer, are offuch length
that I cannot insert them, but they are extreme-
ly curious, and may be peculiarly inftruftive to
an English reader, as they throw considerable
light on that period of Englilh history in which
the attempts to circumscribe the regal preroga-
tive were carried on, not by the people struggling
for liberty, but by the nobles contending for
power. It is not necessary to produce any evi-
dence of the continuance and frequency of pri-
vate wars under the successors of Philip the Fair.
--9. A pracice somewhat similar to the roy-
al truce was introduced, in order to strengthen
and extend it. Bonds of assurance, or mutual
security, were demanded from the parties at va-
riance, by which they obliged themselves to ab-
Rfain from all hoftllties, either during a time
plenti;ied in the Bond, or for ever and became

subjet

fubjeat to heavy penalties, if they violated this
obligation. These bonds were Sometimes grant-
ed voluntarily, but more frequently exacted by
the authority of the civil magifirate. Upon a
petition from the party who felt himself weakest,
the magistrate summoned his adversary to ap-
pear in court, and obliged him to give a bond of
assurance. If, after that, he committed any far-
ther hostilities, he became subjet to all the pe-
nalties of treason. This restraint on private war
was known in the age of St. Louis. Eftablifle-
mens, liv. i. c. 28. It was frequent in Bretagne,
and what is very remarkable, such bonds of as-
furance were given mutually between vassals and'
the lord of whom they held. Oliver de Cliffon
grants one to the Duke of Bretagne, his sovereign.
Morice Mem. pour fervir de preuves a l'hift. de
Bret. tom. i.p. 46. i p. 371. Many examples
of bonds of aurance in other provinces of France
are collected by Bruffel. tom. ii. p. $56. The
nobles of Burgundy remonstrated against this
practice, and obtained exemption from it as an
encroachment on the privileges of their order.
Ordon. ton. i. p. 558. This mode of security
was first introduced in cities, and thegood effects
of it having been felt there, was extended to the
nobles. See Note XVI. to The calamities oc-
cafioned by private wars, became at some times
so intolerable, that the nobles entered into vo.
luntary aflociations, binding themselves to refer
all matters in dispute, whether concerning civil
property, or points of honour, to the determi-
nation of the majority of the afociates. Morice
Mem. pour fervir de preuves A I'hift. de Bret.
tom. ii. p. 728 - i . But all there expedients
proving ineffi tual, Charles VI. A. D. 1413, ii-
sued an .ordonance exprefly prohibiting private
wars on any pretext whatsoever, with power to
the judge ordinary to compel all persons to com-
ply with this injunction, and to punish such as
hould prove refradory or difbbedjent, by im-

prisoning

prifoningtheir persons, seizing their goods, and
appointing the officers of justice, Mangeurs &
Gafteurs, to live at. free quarters on their estate.
If those who were disobedient to this edict could
not be personally arrested, he appointed their
friends and vassals to be seized, and detained un-
til they gave suret.y for keeping the peace; and
he abolished all laws, cufloms, or privileges
which might be pleaded in opposition to this or-
donance. Ordon. tom. x. p. 138. How flow is
the progress of reason and of civil order ! Regu-
lations which to us appear ob equitable,.obvious,
and simple, required the efforts of.civil and ec-
clefiaftical authority, during several centuries,
to introduce and eftablii( them. Even posterior
to this .period, Louis XI. was obliged to abolish
private wars in Dauphin', by a particular edict,
A. D. 1451.. Du Cange.differt. p. 348.

THIS note would swell to a disproportional

bulk, if I should attempt to enquire with the
fame minute attention into the progress of this
pernicious custom -in the other countries of Eu-
rope... In England, the ideas of the Saxons, con-
cerning personal reverge, the right of private
wars,. and: the composition due to the party of-
fended, ;seem to have been much the fame with
those which prevailed on the continent. The
law of:lna de Findicagtibusi in the eighth centu-
ry, Lamb:..p. 3; those of Edmund in the'tenth
ce::ttry, de homicidio, Lamb. p. 72. & de iniin-
citiis, p. 76; and thbfe of Edward the Confeflbr,
in the eleventh century,;de temporibus £ & diebus
pacis, or Treuga Dei, Lamb. p. 126, ::are per-
tI:.tlv finilar to the. ordonances of ihe French
Kwilgs their contemporaries, The.laiws of Ed-
w;ard, dc pact regis, a.re- still more explicit: than
those of thee French Mbnarchs, and by several
l"ovilions in them, discover that a more perfect
l'ii<ce was established in England at that period.
riiimludi ; p. 28. fol. verf Even after the con-

* :: :)". ' : .

' . . :quet,
'.x, ;'.: ,...

quefl, private wars, and the regulations for pre
,eming .them, were not altogether unknown, ai
appears .from Madox Formulare Anglicanum
No. CXLV. and from the'extras s .from Domes
day Book, published .by Gale Scriptores hist. Bri
tan. .p 759, 777. The well known. clause ir
the form of an English inditm.ent, which, as ar
aggravation,of the crimi.na}I guiilt, mnehtionshiE
having affaitked a perfbn, who was in the peace
of God ahd of the King, seems to be borrowed
from the Treuga or Pax Dei and the Pax Regis
which I have explained. But after the conquest,
the mention of private wars armng, the ndbility,
occurs more, rarely in the Englitfh history, than
in that, of any otier European::nationr, and no
laws coacerning them .are to be found in the bo-
dy of their statutes. Such a change .in their own
manners,. and such a variatioa from .thife of
their neighbours is remarkable. Is it to be a-
fcribed to5 the extra6rdinary power. which Wil-
liam the Norman acquired by tight: of conquest,
and tranfritted to bi.fucceffors, which .render.
ed 'the. execution of. juRice more vigorosniand
deceitive, and. the juri.diiiion of the Kidg's. court
more extensive than under the monarchs on the
continent ?, Or, was it owing to the' settlement
of the Normans in England, who hating never
adopted the prafice of private war in their own
country, aboliffied it.in the kingdom whith they
conquered? It is afferediinan Ordonariceof John
King of France, that ia all times paftc persons of
every rank in Normandy have. been-prohibited
to wage war, and the pracice has beeh deemed
unlawful. Ordon. tom. ii.. p. 407. If thisafad were
certainn, it would go far towards; explaining
the peculiarity which .I have mentioned. But
as there are some English .Ads of Parliament,
which, according to the remark of the learned
author of the Observations on the Sfattrus, chief.
ly the more ancient, which recite falfhoods, it
may be added, that this is not peculiar to
the laws of that country. Notwithstanding the

pofitivc

positive assertion contained in this publick law
of France, there is good reason for confidering
itasa fRatute which recites a fatfhood. This,
however, is not the place for discussing that point.
It is an inquiry not unworthy the curiosity of
an Englilh antiquarian.

IN Castile, the pernicious practice of private

war prevailed, and was authorised by the cuf-
toms and law of the kingdom. Leges Tauri.
tit. 76. cum commentario Anton. Gomezii, p.
51i. As the Castilian nobles were no less tur-
bulent than powerful, their quarrels and' hofti-
lities involved their' country in many calamities.
Innumerable proofs of this occur in Mariana.
In Aragon, the right of private revenge was like-
wife authorised by law; exercised in its full
extent, and accompanied with the fame unhap-
py consequences.. Hieron. Blanca Comment. de
rebus Arag. ap. Schotti. Hifpan. illuftrat. vol.
iii. p. 73'3. Lex Jacobi I. A D. 1247. Fueros
& Obfervancias del Reyno de Aragon, lib. ix.
p. 8 z. Several confederacies between the Kings
of Aragon and their nobles, for the restoring of
peace, founded on the truce of God, are fill
extant. Petr. de Marca. Marca fivi Limes His-
panic. App. 1303, 1388, 1428. As early as the
year 1165, we find a combination of the King
and court of Aragon,; in order to abolish the
rightof private war, and to punilh those who
presumed to claim that priilege. Anales de
Aragon por Zurita, vol. i. p. 73. But the evil
was so inveterate, that Charles V. A. D. 1519,
was obliged to pablifh a law, enforcing all for-
mer regulations tending to suppress this pra'tice.
Fueros &s Obfervanc. lib. ix. 183. b.

THE Lom bards, and, other northern. nations

who fettled in Italy, introduced the:.ame maxims
concerning the right of revenge in that country,
and these were followdd by the fGame effeits. As
the progreft of the evil was perfe&ly finmilar to
what happened in France, the expedients em-

ployed

ployed to check its career, or to extirpate it
finally, resembled those which I have enumer.
ated. Murat. Ant. Ital. vol. ii. p. 306.

IN Germany, the disorders and eaiamitiesoc.

cafioned by the right of private war, were greater
and more intolerable than in any other country
of Europe. The Imperial authority was lo
much shaken and enfeebled by the violence of
the civil wars, excited by the contests between
the Popes and the Emperors of the Franconian
and Suabian lines, that not only the nobility but
the cities acquired almost independant power,
and scorned all subordination and obedience td
the laws. The frequency of thefefaide or pri-
vate wars, are often mentioned in the German
annals, and the fatal effetts of therf are most
pathetically described, Datt. de pace Imper. pub.
lib i. cap. v. n0. 30. & paflim. The Germans
early adopted the Treuga Dei, which was first
efablifhed in France. This, however, proved
but a temporary and ineffetual remedy. The
disorders multiplied so fast, and grew foenor;
mous, that they threatened the difolution ds
society, and compelled the Germans to have re-
course to the only remedy of the evil,, viz. an
absolute prohibition of private wats. The Em-
peror William published his edi& to'this pur,
pose, A. D. 1255, an hundred and sixty years
previous to the ordonance of Charles VI. in
France. Datt lib. i. cap. 4. n°. 20. But neither
he nor his successors had authority to secure the
observance of it. This gave rife to a practice
in Germany, which conveys to us a striking idea
both of the intolerable calamities occasioned by
private wars, and of the feebleness of govern-
ment during the twelfth and thirteenth centu-
ries. The cities and nobles entered into alli-
ances and aflciationa, by which they bound
themselves to maintain the publick peace, and
to make war on such as should violate it. This

was

was the origin of the league of the Rhine, of
Suabia, and of many smaller confederacies dif-
tinguifhed by various names. The rife and be-
neficial effects of there associations are traced by
Datt with great accuracy. Whatever degree of
publick peace or of regular administration, was
preserved in the Empire from the beginning of
the twelfth century to the close of the fifteenth,
Germany owes to these leagues. During that
period, political order, refpe'd for the laws, to-
gether with. the equal administration of justice,
made considerable progress in Germany. But
the final and perpetual abolition of the right of
private war was not accomplished until A. D.
1495. The Imperial authority was by that time
more firmly established, the ideas of men with
refpe&t to government and subordination were
become more just. That barbarous and per-
nicious privilege which the nobles had so long
possessed, was declared to be incompatible with
the happiness and exifLence of fbciety. In order
to terminate any differences which might arise
among the various numbers of the Germanick
body, the Imperial chamber was instituted with
supreme jurifdition, to judge without appeal
in every question brought before it. That court
has subsisted since that period, forming a very
respectable tribunal, of effcntial importance in
the German constit.ution. Datt, lib. iii. iv. v.
Pfeffel abreg6 de l'Hifoire du Droit, &c. p. 556.

NOTE XXII. SECT. I. p.56. [Y]

IT would be tedious and of little use to enu-
merate the various modes of appealing to the
justice of God, which superstition introduced
during the ages of ignorance. I shall mention
only one, because we hive an account of it in a
placiruin or trial in the pretence of Charle-
!"ar:lie, from which we may learn the imperfet
V:LI. U man-

290o .ROOFS AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

manner in which justice was administered even
during his reign. In the year 775, a contefi
arose between the bifop of Paris and the abboi
of St. Denys, concerning the property of a small
abbey. Each of them exhibited deeds andre.
cords, in order to prove the right to be in them,
Instead of trying the authenticity, or confidering
the, import of there, the point.was referred to
the jtdicium c¢rucis. Each produced a person,
who, during the celebration of mars, stood be,
fore the cross with his arms expanded; and he
whose reprefeitative first became weary, and
altered his posture, loft the caute. The perfo
employed by the bishop on this occsfion, had
itrength or less spirit than his adversary, and the
question was decided in favour of the abbot,
Mabillon de re Diplomat. lib., vi. p 498. If
Prince so enlightened 'as Chtarit'eni a ounte.
nanced ucli an absurd mode .ofdeciF'bn, tis i
wonder that other monarc.hs fiould. tolerate it si
long. M..de Montefquiieu has treated of the
trial by judicial combat at considerable length
The two talents which diftinguil' i jiMb.tri
ous author, iiduftry in'. tracing als ttie citc
fiances of ancient and obrfire institutions, ani
sagacity in penetrating into the causes and pain
ciples which cuntributed to eftablih 'i hem, ar<
equally conspicuous in his obiervations on thi
subje&t: To there I refer the reader, as the,
contain most of the principles by which I hav
endeavoured to explain this practice. De l'Es
prit des Loix, lib. xxviii. It seems to be pro
bable from the remarks of M. de Montefqtietu
as well as from the fats produced by Muratori
tom. iii. Digfert. xxxviii. that the appeals to th
justice of God by the experiments with fire ail
water, &c. were practised by the people wht
fettled in the different provinces of the Romal
Empire, before they had recourse to thejudicia
combat. The judicial combat, however, wa
the most ancient mode of terminating any con

troverf)

troverfy among the barbarous nations in their
original Settlemenrs. This is evident from Vel-
leius Paterculus, lib. ii. c. 118. who informs us,
that all questions which were decided among
the Romans by legal trial, were terminated a-
mong the Germans by arms. The fame thing
appears in the ancient laws and customs of the
Swedes, quoted by Jo, 0. Stiernhook de Jure
Sueonum & Gothorum vetufto. 4to. Holmiae,
1682. lib. i: c. 7. .It is probable, that when the
various tribes which .invaded the Empire were
converted to Christianity, the repugnance of the
custom of allowing judicial combats to the pre-
cepts of religion, was so glaring, thatr for.fome
time, it was abolished, and by degrees, several
circumstances which I have mentioned, led
them to resume it.

IT seems likewise ti'4ie: probable rotn a law

quoted by Stiernbh6k inithie.treatie which I hav.e
mentioned, that the judicial!combat was :origi-
nally permitted, in- order .io: determine, points
.tefpeding the personal eharacter or.reputation
;of.iidividuals, and was afterwards extehded not
only to eriminal cafes, but to questions concern-
ing property: The words of the law are, " if
any man [hall fay to another there reproachful
words, *' you are not a man equal to other
men," or, " you have not the heart of a man,"
and the other shall reply, " I am a man as good
as you." Let them meet on the highway. If
he who first gave offence appear, and the person
offended absent himself, let the latter be deem-
ed worse than he was called; let him not be ad-
mitted to give evidence in judgment, either for
man or woman, and let him not have the privi-
lege of making a testament. If the person of-
fended appear, and he who gave offence be ab-
sent, let him call upon the other thrice with a
loud voice, and make a mark upon the earth, apd
lthen let him who absented himself, be deemed

U a in-

infamous, because he uttered words which he
durst not support. If both shall appear proper.
ly armed, and the person offended shall fall in
the combat, let a half compensation be paid for
his death. But if the person who gave the of.
fence lhall fall, let it be imputed to his own ralh-
ness. The petulance of his tongue hath been
fatal to him. Let him lie in the field without
any compensation being demanded for his death."
Lex Uplandica ap. Stiern. p. 76. Martial peo.
pie were extremely delicate with refped to every
thing that affeced their reputation as soldiers,
By the laws of the Salians, if any man called
another a hare, or accused him of having left
his shield in the field of battle, he was ordained
to pay a large fine. Leg. Sal. tit. xxxii. § 4 6.
By the law of the Lombards, if any one called
another arga, i. e. a good for nothing fellow,
he might immediately challenge him to combat.
Leg. Longob. lib, i. tit. v. § i. By the law of
the Salians, if one called another cenitus, a term
of reproach equivalent to arga, the fine which
he was bound to pay was very high. Tit.
xxxii. § i. Paulus Diaconus relates the violent
impreflion which this reproachful expreflion
made upon one of his countrymen, and the fatal
effets with which it was attended. De Geflis
Longobard. lib. vi. c. 24. Thus the ideas con-
cerning the point of honour, which we are apt
to confider as a modern refinement, as well as
the pratice of duelling, to which it gave rife,
are derived from the notions of our ancestors,
while in a Crate of society very little improved.

As M. de Montesquieu's view of this subjea

di:3 not lead him to confider every circumstance
relative to judicial combats, I lhall mention
lbme particular fads necessary for the illuftra-
tion of what I have said with refped to them.
A remarkable instance occurs of the decision f

an
29z

an abftraA point of law by combat. A quef-
tion arose in the tenth century concerning the
right of representation, which was not then fix-
ed, though now universally eflablifhed in every
part of Europe. "' It was a matter of doubt
and dispute (faith the hifiorian) whether the sons
of a son ought to be reckoned among the chil-
dren of the family, and succeed equally with
their uncles, if their father happened to die
while their grandfather was alive. An assembly
was called to deliberate on this point, and it
was the general opinion, that it ought to be re-
mitted to the examination and decision of judges.
But the Emperor following a better course, and
desirous of dealing honourably with his people
and nobles, appointed the matter to be decided
by battle between two champions. He who ap-
peared in behalf of the right of children to re-
present their deceased father, was victorious;
and it was established by a perpetual decree,
that they should hereafter share in the inheri-
tance together with their uncles. Wittickindus
Corbeins, lib. Annal. ap. M. de Lauriere Pref.
Ordon. vol i. p. xxxiii. If we can suppose the
caprice of folly to lead men to any ation more
extravagant than this, of fettling a point in law
by combat, it must be that of referring the truth
or falsehood of a religious opinion, to be decid-
ed in the fame manner. To the disgrace of
human reason, it has been capable even of this
extravagance. A question was agitated in Spain
in the eleventh century, whether the Mularabic
Liturgy and ritual which had been used in the
churches of Spain, or that approved of by the
See of Rome, which differed in,many particu-
lars from the other, contained the form of wor-
lhip molf acceptable to the Deity. The Spani-
ards contended zealously for the ritual of their
eaceflors. The Ropes urged them to receive that
t 'whichl they had given their infallible faniion.

U 3 A vi-

A violent contef 'arose. The-nobies proposed to
decide the controversy by the sword, The king,
approved of this methiod of decision., Two
knights in corpleat armour 'entered the lifts,
John Ruys de Matanca, the charmpio of tho
Mularabic Liturgy, was vitorioub. But the
Queen and Archblfhop of Toledo, whofairour.,
ed the other form, insisted on having the matter
submitted to another trial? and' hiWiritereft
enough to prevail in a request, inconfiftelnt;with'
the laws' of combat, which being: confidered ii
an appeal to God, the-decifion ought' to have
been acquiesced in as final. A great fire wai
kindled. A copy'of each Liturgy was cast into
the flames. It was agreed that the book which
flood thi:s prof,; and'reraincd untouche ouched, ld
be'receivedi i)all; tbhehache.s:of Spain. The
.alufrara:. Li'ti'ry' 'tiiilhdj 'iikewife in this

trial·n, d': Mv...' ay BUieve -R'. rigo deTole.
do,'; re/.intaViii n fiurt r

ieb ,hen these, when ther

was-rcdieedd, to'afhles.- · The Queen' and Arch.
bifliop hib d vowycr or'air (fufficieht to elude this
decifin also, and tuf of

the 'iMuifarabic form

bpf devotion was permitted 'ordly iri certain
chui'ches.; A deiterrniiatfion no less extraordi
nary thanfi', iwholetrahnfaaion. Rodr: de To;
ledo; q'udted. by': P :Orleans, 'Hit. 'de Revol
d'Efpagne, tom. i. .p."'ai7.,' Mariana, lib. i. c,
18. vol. i. p. .78..--A remarl'abli'pr'oof of the
general use of trial by combat'.iand"bf the.pra
diletai,,n for that mode of decifio'noccursi'in the
laws ot the Lombards. It was a cufobmr ii the
middle ages, that any perfoi might chuf thi
law to which he would be fubjeeted ; andby th,
prescriptions of that law he was obliged to regu
late his rrgnfa6tions, withoutbeing bound to cor
ply with any pratice authorized by other code
oflaw. Persons who had fubjeled themrelvest
the oRl.p iWfi Iriad herd to the apcientjuril
. >, . . ... , * *rtsu

prudence, as far as any kno.Jige opf-it was re-
tained in those ages of ignorane: ;were exempt-
ed from:paying any regprd t(o te formta of pro-
ceedings eCfiablihed4.. by thelgW iDf0rhe.:.Brgun.
dians, Lombards, and other barbarous people,
But the Emperor Otho,-'in. -dir .co.ntradijion
to this receiveed maxim, qrdiitld. ?' -'gt all per,
son4s, nder; wbatevere Jw W :thlieiy;L d. een al-
tzhoqgih. WMihe-lW omganlaw, ulJbe bound
tocq-njppWi. de

redii.st, soi~r.i.g ;h trilal by

i)pS.i^'? ,:gL,~ongob, .

lib..ii. ti. t 5 J 38.

.Whti thejiciail. combat f· bfifted, proof by
tharters, .ontrats, or other deeds, became inef-
feiual; antiTeven this, species of evidence, cal
cuklateto ,rnder the proceedings of courts cer-
tainnd decisive, was Blued.4. ;When a charter
or other inltruest ws produced. by one of the
parties, hisopponent gnight. cillenge it, affirm
iat ; was false rand forged, nd, offer to prove
this by combat. Leg. ]ongob. ib. § 34. It is
irue, that among the reasons enumerated by
Beaumanoir, on account of which judges might
refie to permit a trial by combat, one is, " If
the point in contef can be clearly proved or ass
certained by other evidence." Coqft. de Beauv.
ch. 63. p. 3a3. But tht'regulation removed the
evil only a single ftep. For the party who. fufr
peeed that a witness was about to depose in a
manner unfavourable to his cause, might accuse
him of being suborned, give him the lie, and
challange him to combat, if the witness was vang
quilhed in battle, no other evidence was admit-
ted, and the party by whom he was iumnoned
to appear loft his cause. Leg. Baivar. tit. 16. §, 2.
Leg. Burgund. tit. 45. Beauman. ch. 61. p. 315.
The reason given for obliging a witnefe to accept
efa defiance, and to 4efend himself by combar,
is remarkable, and contains the fame idea which
is fillthe foundation of what is called the point
Ps honour; "for it isjuft, that if any one as-

U . firms

295

firms that he perfeatly knows the truth of any
thing, and offers to give oath upon it, that he
should not hesitate to maintain the veracity of
his affirmation in combat." Leg. Burgund. tit. 45,

THAT the trial by judicial combat was efta.

bliihed in every country of Europe, is a fat well
known, and requires no proof. That this mode
of decision was frequent, appears not only from
the codes of ancient laws which established it,
but from the earliest writers concerning the
practice of law in the different nations of Eu.
rope. They treat of this cuffom at great length;
they enumerate the regulations concerning it with
minute accuracy; and explain them with much
solicitude. It made a capital and extensive ar.
ticle in jurisprudence. There is not any one
fubjedt in their fyffem of law which Beaumanoir,
Defontaines, or the compilers of the Aflifes de
Jerusalem 'eem to have confidered as of greater
importance; and none on which they have be-
'sowed so much attention. The fame obferVati-
on will hold with refped to the early authdrs of
other nations. It appears from Madox, that trials
of this kind were so frequent in England, that
fines, paid on these occasions, made no inconfi-
derable branch of the King's revenue. Hist. of
the Excheq. vol. i. p. 349. A very curious ac-
count of a judicial combat between Mefire Ro
bert de Beaumanoir, and Mefire Pierre Tourne-
mine, in presence oftheduke ofBretagne, A.D.
1385, is published by Maurice Mern. pour ser-
vir de preuves A I'hift. de Bretagne, tom. ii. P.
498. All the formalities observed in such extra-
ordinary proceedings are there described more
minutely, than in any ancient monument which
I have had an opportunity of confidering. Tour-
nemine was acciifcd by Beaumanoir of having
murdered his brother. The forrter was van.

qu ifhed,

quilhed, but was saved from being hanged upon
the spot, by the generous interceflion of his an-
tagonift. A good account of the origin of the
laws concerning judicial combat, is publilhed in
the history of Pavia, by Bernardo Sacci, lib. ik.
c. 8. in Graev. Thef. Antiquit. Ital. vol. iii. 743.

THIS mode oftrial was so acceptable, that ec-

clefiafticks, notwithstanding the prohibitions of
the church, were confirained not only to con-
niveat the pr'atice, but to authorize it. A re-
markable instance of this is produced by Pafquier
Recherches, lib. iv. ch. i. p. 350. The abbot
Wittikindus, whose words I have produced in
this note, confidered the determination of a
point in law by combat, as the best and most ho-
nourable mode ofdecifion. In the year 978, a
judicial combat was fought in the presence of
the Emperor Henry. The archbishop Alde-
bert advised him to terminate a contest which
had arisen between two noblemen of his court,
by this mode ofdecifion. The vanquished com-
batant, though a person of high rank, was be-
headed on the spot. Chronic. Ditmari Epif'c.
Merfb. chez Bouquet Recueil des -lift. tom. x.
p. i i . Q!eftions concerning the property of
churches and monasteries, were decided by com-
bat. in the year 961, a controverly conlcern-
ing the church of0 St. Medard, whether it belong-
ed to the abbey of 'Beaulieu, was terminated by
judicial combat. Bouquet Recueil des [Hist. tom,
ix. p. 7:9. Ibid. p. 612, &c. The Emperor
Henry I. decl;res, tha his law authorifi:,g the
pradiceof jidicial cornmats, was enaeled with
conflint ad atip alaue ns many faithflul billops.
Ibid. p. 231. So rcniiarkibly did the tnartial
ideas ot lfiloic ages picv. !l over the genius and
maxims cf the canon l\iw', which in.other intla: -
ces had luchl crc'lit naril allthoritiy with eclt-fi;lt-
ticks. A judicial. comllbit was appointed in 'Spailn,
by Charleb V. 3, . 1. 52z. The co:nbatarens

foug-ht

i97

fought in the Emperor's pretence, and the bat,
tie was conducted with all the rites pretcribed
by the ancient laws of chivalry. The whole
tranfagion is described at great length by Pon.
tus Heuterus Rer. Auftriac. lib. viii. c. 17. p. 205.

THE last inflance which occurs in the history

of France, of ajudicial combat authorised by
the mragiftrate, was the famous one between M.
Jarnac and M. de la Chaiftaignerie, A. D. 547.
Atrial by combat was appointed in England,
A. D. 1571. under the inspection of thejudges
in the court of common pleas; and though it
was not carried to the fame extremity with the
former, Queen Elizabeth having interposed her
authority, and enjoined the parties to compound
the matter, yet in order to preserve their ho.
nour, the lifts were marked out, and all the
forms previous to the combat were observed
with much ceremony. Spelm, Gloss. voc
Campus, p. 103. In the year 163I. a judicial
combat was appointed between Donald Lord
Rea, and David Ramsay, Efq; by the authority
of the Lord high Conflable, and Earl Marflal
of England ; but that quarrel likewise terminat-
ed without bloodshed, being accommodated by
Charles I. Another infiance occurs seven years
later. Rufhworth in Observation's on the Sta-
tutes, &c .

p. 266.
NOTE XXIII, S crT. I,. p. 6 [Z]

THE text contains the great outlines which

mark the course of private and publicjurifdiCion
in the several nations of Europe. 1 shall here
follow more minutely the various feps of this
progress as the matter is cu ious and important
enough to merit this attention. The payment
of a fine by way of fatisfation to the per-
son or family injured, was the first device of
* rude people, in order to check. the ca,
rter of private resentment, and to extinguilh
(hose facids..or deadly teuds which were pro.

.feauted

scuted among them with the utmost violence.
This custom may be traced back to the ancient
Germans. Tacit. de Morib. Ger. c. 2 . and pre-
vailed among other uncivilized nations. Many
examples of this are colleted by the ingenious
and learned author of Historical Law-TraCts,
ol. i. p. 41. These fines were ascertained and
levied in three different manners. At first they
were fettled by voluntary agreement between
the parties at variance. When their rage began
to subside, and they felt the bad effects of their
continuing in enmity, they came to terms of con-
cord, and the fitisfaction made was called a com-
pjiw', implying that it was fixed by mutual

6inB.ti. De lEfprit des L6ix, lib. xxx. c. 19.
It"is; apparent from some of the more ancient
codes of law.s, that when these were compiled
matters still tremained in that simple slate. In
certain cfes thle person who had committed an
offence was left exposed to the resentment of
those whom he had injured, until he should re-
cover their favour, quoquo modo potuerit. Lex
Frifion. tit. I I. S i. The next mode of levying
there fines was by the sentence of arbiters. An
arbiter is called in the Regiam majeftatem ami-
cabijis compositor. lib. 11. c. 4. § oI. He could
eftima'te.the degree of offence with more impar-
tiality than'the parties interested, and determine-
with greate ecquity what fatisfaftion ought to
be denmand'ed; It is difficult to bring an authen.
tic proof of a custom previous to the records
preserved .in any nation of Europe, But one
of the: Formule Andegavenfes compiled in the
sixth century, seems to allude to a tranfacti-
on carried on not by the authority of a judge,
but by the mediation of arbiters. Bouquet Re.
cueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. 566. But as an ar.
biter wanted authority to enforce his decisions,
judges were appointed with compulsive power
tp oblige both parties to acquiesce in their decifi-
-in. ircvigus to this las ftep, the expedient of
~":i~,:',?'. ,,,~U .} paying

paying compofctions was an imperfect remedy a-
gainft the pernicious effects of private resentment.
As soon as'this important change was introduc-
ed, the magistrate, putting himself in place of
the person injured, ascertained the composition
with which 'he ought to reft satisfied. Every
poflible injiry that could occur in the couffe of
human society, was conlidered and estimated,
and the compositions due to the person aggrieved
were fixed with such minute attention as disco-
vers, in most cafes, amazing discernment and
delicacy, in some instances, unaccountable ca-
price. Besides the composition payable to the
private party, a certain furn, called afredum,
was paid to the King or state, as Tacitus ex-
presses it, tor to the fifcus, in the'language of the
barbarous laws. Some authors, blending the
refined ideas of modern policy with their reason-
ings concerning ancient tranfaCions, have ima-
gi lied that the fredum was a compensation due to
the community, on account of the violation of the
publick peace. But it is manifestly the price
paid to the magistrate for the protection which
he affltded agairift the violence of resentment,
The enacting of this was a considerable flep to-
,wards improvement in criminal jurisprudence.
In some of the more ancient codes of laws, the
freda are altogether omitted, or so seldom men-
tioned, that it is evident they were but little
'known. In the latter codes the fredurn is as pre-
cifely specified as the composition. In common
cafes it was equal to the third part of the com-
'position. Capitul. vol. i. p. 52. In some extra-
ordinary cafes, where it was more difficultlto'pro-
tect ithe perft)n who had committed violence,
the fredum was auginented. Capitul. vol. i. p.
515. These fieda made a confiderdble branch
in the rev enlles of the ,barons ;and wherever ter-
iritori'al jt'riliid'ioi n wasgtanted, the royaljudges
were: prv(libited' from levying!lany freda. In ex-
:plaiinig thle nature of the;fridum,. I have follow-
'Ed, iil a great measure, the opinion of M. de Mon-

tefquieu,

tefquieu, though I know that several learned an-
tiquarians have taken the word in a different
sense. De 1'Esprit des Loix, lib. xxx. c. 20,
&c. The great objeat of judges was to compel
the one party to give, and the other to accept
the satisfaCtion prescribed. They multiplied re-
gulations to this purpose, and enforced them by
grievous penalties. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9.
§34. lb. tit. 37. § i, 2. Capitul. vol. i. p. 371.
§ 22. The person who received a composition
was obliged to cease from all farther hostility,
and to confirm his reconciliation with the adverse
party by an oath. Leg. Longob. lib. i. tit. 9.
§ 8. As an additional and more permanent
evidence of reconciliation, he was required to
grant a bond of security to the person from
whom he received a composition, absolving him
from all farther prosecution. Marculfus and
the other collectors of ancient writs have pre-
served several different forms of such bonds.
Marc. lib. II. § 18. append. § 23. Form. Sir-
mondics, § 39. The Letters of Slanes, known
in the law of Scotland, are perfectly similar to
there bonds of security. By the letters of Slanes,
the heirs and relations of a person. who had been
murdered, bound themselves, in consideration
of an Affyhmnent or composition paid to them,
to forgive, pass over, and forever forget, and
in oblivion inter all rancour, malice, revenge,
prejudice, grudge and resentment, that they
have or may conceive against the aggressor or his
posterity, for the crime which he had commit-
ted, and discharge him of all action, civil or
criminal, against him or h:s estate, for nowand
ever. System of Stiles by Dallas of St. Martin's,
p. 862. In the ancient form of letters of Slanes,
the pr vate p:irry not only forgives and forgets,
but pardlris nrid grants remiflion of the crime.
This r ,t ll(e, Dallas, realoning according to
the pr; .i, I,::; of his own age, confiders as an
enci, :- , i,, on the rights of fovereigoty, as
n'l., i .', hlie could pardon a criminal but the

king.

king. Ibid. But in early and rude times, thy
punishment, and the parden of criminals, were
all deeds of the private pefibh who was injured.
Madox has publihed two wfits, one inEi,
reign of Edward I 'the other in the reig
of Edward In. by which private p'irfo
grant a relearf or pardon of all ttefpafles, felo.
nies, robberies, and murders commiitted; For-
mul. Anglican. No. o02, 7o5. In the last of
there instruments, some regard seems to be paid
to the rights of the sovereign, for the pardon is
granted en quant qu en nous eft. Even after the
authority of the magistrate is interposed in pun.
ifhing criminals, the punishment of criminals is
long confidered chiefly as a gratification to the
resentment of the persons who have been in,
jured. In Persia a murderer is still delivered to
the relations of the person whom he has slain,
who put him to death with their own hands. If
they refuse to accept of a furn of money as a
compensation, the sovereign, absolute as he is,
cannot pardon the murderer, Tavernier's
Voyages, book v, c. 5 and to. By a law in the
kingdom of Aragon as late as the year 1564,
the punishment of one condemned to death can;
not be mitigated but by content of the parties
who have been injured. Fueros & Obfervancias
del Reyno de Aragon, p. 204. 6.

IP, after all the engagements to cease from

enmity, which I have mentioned, any person
renewed hoRilities, and was guilty of any vio-
lence, either towards the person from whom he
had received a composition, ot towards his relai
tions and heirs, this was deemed a most heinous
crime, and punished with extraordinary rigour,
It was an at of direc rebellion against the au-
thority of the magistrate, and was repressed by
the interposition of all his power. Leg. Longob
lib. i titr 9. § 8s 34. Capit. vol,. i. P. ^1§ 2
Thus the avenging of injuries was taken out of
private hands, a legal composition was establish
ed, and peace and amity were reitored undei

tlie

the infpetlion, and by the authority of a judge.
it is evident, that at the time when the barba-
rians fettled in the provinces of the Roman
Empire, they had fixed judges established among
them with, compulsive authority. Perfors veift-
ed with this character are mentioned by the
earliest historians. Du Cange, voc. 7udices. The
right of territorialjurifdistion was not altogether
an usurpation of the feudal barons. There is
good reason to believe that the powerful' leaders
who .,eized different' diftriats of the countries
which'they 'onquered, 'and kept possession of
them as'allodial proe'rty,' assumed at the fame
time the right of jurifdic'ion, and exertifed it
within their, owsn territories. This jurifdidtion
was fupte'mn snari e:t/le'die'dto ati causes.': .The
clearedt .pro's of' this ae produced .byt. o'Bou-
quet. Le 'Droit pubtique. de France'-i aici,
&c. tom. i. p. 2b6,'8ci. The priyilegeftbf.dg-
ing his own valals,; 'appeas' to have b.eii orig-
nally a right' inretiev baron who'eld a
fief. As far tack as the archives of nations can
condu& us with any certainty, we find thejurif-
dicion and fief united. One of the earliest
charters to a layman which I have met with, is
that ofLiLdovicusPius, A. D. 8 4 And itcon-
tains the right of territo:ial jurisdiction, in the
mos express and extensive terms. Capitul. vol.
ii. p. 405. There are many charters to churches
and 'monasteries of more early date, containing
grants' of similar jurifdiftion, and prohibiting
any royal judge to enter the territories of those
churches or monasteries, or top rf,)rm any a&
ofjudicial authority there B, uq et. Recuei.L
des Hist, torn. iv. p. 628, 631, 633. tom. . .p.
703, 710, 752, 762 Muratoil has published
many very ancient charters containing the fame
immunities. Antiq. Ital. Difert lxx. In most
of there deeds, the exacting of Freda is particu-
larly prohibited, which shews that they confli-
tuted a valuable part of the publick revenue at
that junture. The cxpcnce of obtainiing fen-

tence

teace in a court of justice during the middle
ages was so considerable, that this circumstance
alone was sufficient to render men unwilling to
decide any contest in judicial form. It appears
from a charter in the thirteenth century, that
the baron who had the right ofjuRtice, received
the fifth part of the value of every fubjedt, the
property of which was tried and determined in
is court. If, after the commencement of a law
suit, the parties terminated the contest in an ami-
cable manner, or by arbitration, they were ne-
verthelefs bound to pay the fifth part of the sub.
jet contested to the court before which the suit
had been brought. Hist. de Dauphine. Geneve,

.722, tom. i. p. 22. Similar to this is a regula.

tion in the charter of liberty granted to the town
of Friburg, A. D. 11 20. If two of the citizens
shall quarrel, and if one of them shall complain
to the superior Lord or to his judge, and after
commencing the suit Ihall be privately reconciled
to his adversary; the judge, if he does not ap-
prove of this reconciliation, may compel him to
nfift in his law-suit; and all who were present
at the reconciliation shall forfeit the favour of the
superior Lord Hiftoria Zaringo Badenfis. Auc-
tor. Jo. Dan. Schoepflinus. Carolfr. 1765. 4Ato
vol. v. p. 55.

WHAT was the extent of that jurifdikion

which those who held fiefs possessed originally,
we cannot now determine with certainty. It is
evident that, during the disorders which prevail-
ed'in every kingdom of Europe, the great vas-
fals took advantage of the feebleness of their
Monarchs, and enlarged their jurisdictions to the
utmofl. As early as the tenth century, the more
powerful barons had usurped the right of deciding
all causes, wlhether civil or criminal.Theyhad ac-
I,.ired the Hlighjufiice as well as the Low. Eflabl.
deSt.Louis, lib. i. c. 24, 25. Their sentences were
fi.nal, and there Iny no appeal from them to any
superior court. Se\ eral flriking inltances of this

are

are colleded by Bruffel. ;Traite des Fiefs, liv.
iii. . 11, 12, ,13. Not satisfied .with ,,this,. the
more potent barons. got their terrjtories ereced
into Regauliies, ..with al.most every, rQyal preroga-
tive and jurifdidion. Irif:ances of thlfe ,we,-re
frequent in France. Bruff ib. In Scotland, where
the power of the feudal nobles became exor'i-
tant, they were very numerous. H:iftoricai LIaw
Trads, vol; i. trac. vi. Even in .Engand,.tthlough.
the authority of the Norman -Kings circumficFib-
ed the juriifdiion .of the .barns. more ithan , in
any feudal kingdom, several counties - pI!a.tne
were ereded, into which the king's judges ,cu!dd
not enter, ,and no writ could.come in the,King's
name, until it received tlhe: eal ,of tbe county
palatine. :Spel,man. GlofW. voc. Comites Palaitai;
Blackstone's Commentaries;on the Laws of ,Egg-
land, vol. iii. p, 78. These lolds ,of, regaJ.kties
had a right tQ claim or. rescue their xaffals frprm
the, King's judges,if they assumed any jurifditi -
on over them. Bruffel ubi su.pra. In the law of
Scotland this .privilege was termed the right, of
repledging; and the frequency of it not only in-
terrupted the course of justice, but,ga;e:, rife to
great disorders in the exercife.of .it., Hiss. Law
Traas, ib. ThejuridiCtion, of :the counties,pa-
latine was productive of like .inconveniencies in
England.

THE remedies provided by Princes agiinfl
the bad effets of there usurpations were vaiious,
and gradually applied. Under Charlemagne and
his immediate dc4eendanis, the regal preroga-
tive still retained great vigour,. and the Duces,
Comites, and Milfi Domninici, tlhe former.of whlm
were ordinary and fixed judges, the latter ex-
traordinary and itinerant judges, in the dilftrent
provinces of their extensive domrinions, exer ciled
a juril'didion co-ordinate with tie barons in
tome cafes, and fupcrior to t'lc in others. Du

Volr.. r. X Cange

Cange voc. Duk, Comites & Mifi. Murat. An.
tiq. Dissert. viii. & ix. But under the feeble race
of Monarchs who succeeded them, the authori-
ty of the royal judges declined, and the barons
usurped that unlimited jurifdiftion which has
been described. Louis VI. of France attempt-
ed to revive the function of the Mii Doinici
under the title of Juges des Exempts, but the
barons were become too powerful to bear such
an encroachment on their jurifdition, and he
was obliged to desist from employing them. He-
naut. Abreg6 Chron. tom. ii. p. 730. His luc-
ceffors (as has been observed) had recourse to
expedients less alarming. The appeal de defauted
Droit, or on account of the refuial of justice,
was the firit which was attended with any confi.
derable effect. *According- to the maxims of
feudal law, if a baron had not as many vassals
as enabled him to try by their peers, the parties
who offered to plead in his court, or if he delay.
ed or refused to proceed in the trial, the cause
might be carried, by appeal, to the court of the
superior lord of.whom the baron held, and tried
there. De l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxviii. c. 28
Du Cange voc. defeaus Juflitia. The number
of Peers or assessors in the courts of Barons was
frequently very considerable. It appears frorr
a criminal trial in the court of the viscount dó
Lautrec, A. D. 299, that upwards of two hun
dred persons were present, and afifted in thi
trial, and voted in paflingjudgment. Hill. (lI
Langued. par D. D. De Vic. & Vailette, torn. i
Preuves, p. 114. As the rightofjurifdiCtio
had been usurped by many inconsiderable ba
rons, they were often unable to hold court
This gave frequent occefions to iuch appta'
and rendered the prasice familiar. By degree'
such appeals began to be taken from the court
of the more powerful barons, and it is evident

fifl

irom a decision recorded by Brulel, that the
:oyaljudges were willing to give countenance t6
Any pretext for them. Trait6 des Fiefs, tom. i.
p. 235, 261. This species of appeal had left
fsed in abridging thejurifdidion of the nobles,
han the appeal on account of the injuflice of
the sentence. When the feudal monarchs were
powerful, and their judges possessed extensive
authority, such appeals seem to have been fre-
quent. Capitul. vol. i. p. 175, 18 ; and they
were made in a manner suitable to the rudeness
of a simple age. The persons aggrieved retorted
tothe palace of their sovereign, and with out-
cries and loud noise called to him for redress.
Capitul, lib. iii. c. 59. Chronic. Lawterber-
gienfe ap. Mencken. Script. German. vol. ii. p.
284. b. In the kingdom of Aragon, the appeals
tothe Jfiizd or supreme judge were taken in
such a form as supposed the appellant to be in
immediate danger of death, oi of tome violent
outrage; he rufied into the presence of the judge
crying with a loud voice, Avi, Avi, Fueirza, Fu-
erza, thus imploring (as it were) the instant in-
terpofition of that supreme judge in order to
save him. Hier. Blanca Comment. de rebus Ara-
gon. ap. Script. Hispanic. Piftorii, vol. iii p.
753. The abolition of the trial by combat fa-
cilitated the revival of appeals of this kind.
The effects of this subordination which appeals
established, in introducing attention, equity, and
confifency of decision into courts of judicature,
hVere soon cbnfpicuous ; and almost all causes of
importance were carried tO be finally determi-
ned in the King's courts. Bruffel, tom. i. 252.
Various eircumftances which contributed to-
Wards the introduction and frequency of such
appeals are enumerated De l'Efprit des Loix,
liv xxviii. c. 27. Nothing however, was of such
effec as the attention which monarchs gave to
the constitution and dignity of their courts of

X 2, justice.

justice. It w'as the ancienit-cuftom for the fe
'dal mon'irchs toprefide themselves in their court
and to admilbifter justice in person. Marcul
lib. i.§'25. Mtrat. Dissert. xxxi Charlemagn
whilst he was dressing, used to call parties i
his presence, and having heard andconfidere
tlie"lhbje t'of litigation, gavejudgment concern
iing it. Egintiartus vitaCaroli magni citedb
Madox Hillt.of Exchequer, vol. i. p. gr. Thi
cotild nit' fail of rendering their courts refpea
ble. St.'Louis, who incouraged to the utmo
the praCfice -of appeals, revived this ancient cu
tonm, and adrni'iftred justice in person with a
the ancient simplicity. " I have often feenth
fasint," faysJoinville, " fit under the fhadeofa
oak in'the wood of Vincennes, when all wh
ha'dariy complaint, freely approached him.
other times' he gave orders to spread a carpeti
a garden, arid featirig himself upon it, heardth
causes that Were brought before him." Hit. d
"St. Louis, p. 13. edit. 176r. Princes of infer
br' rank, who possessed 'the rightofjuftice,fom
ti'rnms dispensed it in person, and perfiftedi
'tlheir tribunals. Two instances of this occ
withi rerped to the Dauphines of Vienne. Hi
de'D.iuphite, tom. i. p. 18. tom. ii. p. 257. Bu
as Kiiigs and Princes could not decide eve
caufe'in person, nor bring them all to bedete
mined in tle fiime court; they appointed Bailit
with a right of jurifdidtion, in different diftlit
of their kingdom. Thcfe possessed powers sorn
vwhat similar to those of the ancient Comniies.
\/as towards the end of the twelfth centlir
aid legininiing of tle thirteenth, that this ofli
v.as silt ii Infittitc iln lrance. Bruffel, iv ii

. .\ l:c.n'thll Ki:;g had a court etlablifle!:

dli ri nier t(i nartcrs of lis dominions, this inv'itcdll
flnljt "'a to have rt cttilurfl to it. It was the pr1
v.iate ilit; :!'. o'f tite lBaiiis, as well as an olbjeiu

.ic't li' p .'li:,, l: ) ',:tc'.il their jtunrifid iion. 'I?

ook advantage of every defect in. the righ:ts.of
he barons,'and of every error in theirproceed-
ings, to remove causes out of their! courts, and
to bring them under their, own cognizance.
There was a diftintion in the! feudal law, and
an extremely ancient, one1 between the lhgh. jus-
,tice and the low. Capitul. 3. A. Di 81 2. § 4.
A.D, 81t5; 3. Eftabl. de St. Louis, liv. i. c.
40. Many barons possessed the. latter jurifdici-
on who had no title to the former. The former
includedi the r;ight of trying crimes of every
kind, evern the highest; the latter, was confined
to petty trespasses. This furnifhed.endlefs pre-
texts for obtructing, restraining and reviewing
the proceedings in the baron courts. Ordon. ii.
457. § 25. 458. §. 29.-- regulation of greater
importance succeeded the inititution of Baillis.
TheKing's supreme court or parliament was
.rendered fixed, as, to the pl'ace, and. constant as
to the time of its meetings. In:France, as well
as in the other feudal;kingdoms,.tlhe King'scourt
oFjuftice was originally ambulatory, followed
the person of the monarch, and. was held only
during some of. the great feflivaas, Philip A.u-
gultus, A. D. 1305. rendered it sedentary at
Paris, and contrinutd its terms during the greater
part of the year. Pafquier Recherches, liv. ii.
c. and 3, Sr. Ordon. torn. i. p. 366. § 62.
Heand his successors vested extenfi;'e powers in
that court ; they granted the members of it fe-
veral privileges and diftinftions which it would
be tedious to enumerate. Pafquier, ib. Velly
hilt. de France, tom. vii. p. 307. Persons emi-
nent for integrity and skill in law were appoint-
edjudged there, lb By degrees the final deci-
iion of all causes of importance was bro.ught in-
to the parliament of Paris, and the other par-
liaments which adminiflred julice in the King's
P4me, ip diserent provinces of the kingdom.

X 3 This
I I-r ·T z rTlr i mTT\n

Thisjurifdition, however, the parliament of Pa
ris acquired very slowly, and the great vassal
of the crown made violent efforts in order too
stru&t the attempts of 'this parliament to exten
its authority. Towards the close of the thi
teenth century, Philip the fair was obliged t
prohibit his parliament from taking cognifanc
of certain appeals brought into it from th
courts of the Count of Bretagne, and to reco'
nife his right of supreme and final jurifdifio
Memoirs pour fervir de Preuves a l'Hiftoired
Bretange par Morice, tom. i. p. 1037. 107
Charles VI.'at the end of 'the following centur
was obliged to confirm the rights of the Duk
of Bretagne in more ample form. Ibid. ton. ii
p. 580, 581. So violent was the oppbfitiono
the barons to this right of appeal which theyco
fidered as fatal to 'their privileges and power
that the authors of the Encyclopedie have menti
oned several instances in which baronsput t
death, or mutilated, or confiscated the good!
of such as ventured to appeal from the senten
ces pronounced in their courts, to the parlia
Mnent of Paris, tom. xii. Art. Parlemnnt, p. 25

THE progress of jurifdition in the other feu

dal kingdoms was in a great measure similar to
that which we have traced in France. In Eng
land, the territorial jurifdiftion of the baron
was both ancient and extensive. Leg. Edw
Cons. N° 5 and 9. After the Norman conquei
it became more ftricfly feudal; and it is eviden
from fads recorded in the English history, as we
as from the institution of counties Palatinl
which I have already mentioned, that the uful
pations of the nobles in England were not i
ferior to those of their contemporaries on th
continent. The fame expedients were emplo)
ed to circumscribe or abolilh those dangero,
jurifdiaions. William the Conquerer ela

blilhed a constant court in the hall of his palace;
from which the four courts now entrusted with
the administration of jullice in England took
their rife. Henry I1. divided his kingdom into
fix circuits, and sent itinerant judges to hold
their courts in them at stated fealons. Black-
flne's Commentaries on the Laws of England,
vol. iii. 57. Justices of peace were appointed in
every county by subsequent monarchs; to whose
jurifdiAion the people gradually had recourse in
many civil causes. The privileges of the Coun-
ties Palatine were gradually limited; with re-
sped to some points they were abolished; and
the administration of justice was brought into
the ling's courts, or before judges of his ap-
pointment. The several steps taken for this
purpose are enumerated in Dalrymp!e's History
of Feudal Property, chap. vii.

IN Scotland, the usurpations of the nobility
were more exorbitant than in any other feudal
kingdom The progress of their encroachments,
and the methods taken by the crown to limit or
abolish their territorial and independant jurif-
ditions, both which , had occasion to confider
and explain in a former work, differed very
little from those of which I have now given the
detail. History of Scotland, vol. i. p. 45.

I SHOULD perplex myself and my readers in
the labyrinth of German jurisprudence, were I
to attempt to delineate the progress of jurifdic-
tion in the Empire, with a minute accuracy. It
is sufficient to observe, that the authority which
the Aulick council and Imperial chamber now
possess, took its rife from the fame abuse of ter-
ritorial jurifdition, and was acquired in the
fame manner that' the royal courts attained in-'
fluence in other countries. All the important
falfs with respect to both there particulars, may

X 4 be

311

be' fottnd i'ihi Phil. Datt; de pace pubtica li-npetri,
li. riv. Thd'ecapitl articles are pointed out in
Pfeffel Abrege de l'Ei:floire &8 Droit'publiquc
d'Alfeiiiagne,' p. 556, 581; and in Trait6du
Dtoit publique- de l'Empire par M. le Coq. de
Vitlera-. Ioth'the two last treatises are of great
authority, having been conpodfed un'der the eye
of M1; Sh'oepffih of Strafburgh,.one of the ablest
ptrblick lawyert'in Germany,

N'O'T E XtIV: S E 'd T. T' p. 65. [AA]

It is not e'af' to fix with precision the period,

at which Ecclefiafticks' firlt began to claim-ex-
eihttidon from the Civil jurifdielion. It is cer-
taini, that during the early and purest ages of
the church, they tpetended to no such immu-
nity. The authority of the civil magiffrate ex-
tefide'd to:all peVibfis, and to all ca'ules. This
si: hlias iot onTly been clearly established by
P}rteftiant alithors, but is adnirtted by many
RorHrfin C;tlolitcks o'f eminence, aiid particular-
ly'Biythie #rit'er'ir i defence of the liberties of the
Gnifatlii clurcH. There are several original

tda'pers'5publifhied by Muratori, whlicl (hew that

int'th'eninith a hd tenth centuries, causes of the
greatest impdrta'rice Pelating tb ecclefiaflicks
v/ere still determined by civil judges. Antiq.
I5al. v6ol. v. -ISirt. Ixx. Ecclefiafticks did not
fllak off all-:at' oice trie'ir fubjecion to civil
cdCtiSu . TltiSi'p'rivilege, like their other ufurpa-
titons,- ws 0aiiled slowly, and' f'ep by ftep.
i' is 'erre'ptioi' feeiis at sirs t6 lihave been mere-
1I an ac of cbrin;pl'aifince, flowing from venera-
tibn for tlidir chara'ter. Tihts' from a charter
of Charlemrgie in 'favour of the church of
Manls; A. D. 796, to whiclh MIi 'Abbe deFoy
te'fe'rs ith his 'Notice de Diplom'es; torn. i. p 201,
tlidat mnatetli direce' his judges,s if ny diference

· '-' ' Ifhould

,tould arise between the administrators of the
revenues of that church and any person what-
ever, not to summon the administrators to ap-
pear in mallo publico; but first of all to meet
with them, and to endeavour to accommodate
the difference in an amicable manner. This in-
dulgence was in process of time improved into
a legal exemption; which was founded on the
the lame fiperftitious refpea of the laity for the
clerical character and function. A remarkable
instance of this occurs in a charter of Frederick
Barbarossa, A.D. 1172, to the monastery of
Altenburg. He grants them judicium non tan-
turn fanguinolentis plaga, fed vita: & mortis;
he prohibits any of the royal judges from dif-
turbing theirjurifdition; and the reason which
he gives for this ample conceflion is, nam quo-
rum, ex Dei gratia, ratione divini minifterii onus
leve eft, &jugum suave; nos penitus nolumus
illius oppreflionis cortumelia, vel manu Laica
fatigari. Mencken. Script. rer. Germ. vol. iii.
p. 1067.

IT is not neceflary for illustrating what is con-

tained in the text, that I' should de(cribe the
manner in which the code of the canon law was
compiled; and shew that the doctrines in it moit
favourable to the power of the clergy, are foun-
ded on ignorance, or supported by fraud and
forgery. The reader will find a full account of
there in Gerard. Van Maffricht, Hiftoria Juris
Ecclefiaftici, & in Science de Government par
M. Real, torm. vii. c. i. &8 3. § 2, 3, &c. The
hiflory of the progress and extent of ecclefiafti-
caljurifdi&ion, with an account of the arts which
the clergy employed, in order to draw causes of
every kind into the spiritual courts, is no less
curious, and would throw a great light upon
many of the cultoms and in'fitutions of the dark
ages but it is lkewife foreign from the present

fubjeat.

fubjeft. Du Cange in his Glossary, voc. Curia
Cbri/tianitati;, has colledted mofft of the causes
with respect to which the clergy arrogated an
exclusive jurifdidtion, and refers to the authors
or original papers, which confirm his obferva-
tions. Giannone in his Civil Hittory of Naples,
lib. xix. § 3. has ranged these under proper
heads, and scrutinizes the pretensions of the
church with his usual boldness and discernment.
M. Fleury observes, that the clergy multiplied
at luch a rate, the pretexts for extending the
authority of the spiritual courts, that it was in
their power to withdraw every perlin and every
cause from thejurifdidtion of the civil magifirate.
Hist. Eccltf. tom. xix. Disc. Prelim. 16. But
how ill founded soever the jurifdition of the
clergy may be, or whatever might be the abuses
to which their manner of exercising it gave rife,
the principles and forms of their jurisprudence
were far more perfedt, than that which was
known in the civil courts. It is probable, that
ecclefiafticks never submitted during any period
of the middle ages, to the laws contained in
the codes of the barbarous nations, but were
governed entirely by the Roman law. They
regulated all their tranfadions by such of its
maxims as were preserved by tradition, or were
contained in the Theodosian code, and other
books extant among them. This we learn from
a custom which prevailed universally in those
ages. Every person was permitted to chufe a-
mong the various codes of laws then in force,
that to which he was willing to conform. In
any tranfaaion of importance, it was usual for
the persons contracing to mention the law to
which they submitted, that it might be known
how any controversy that should arise between
them was to be decided. Innumerable proofs
of this occur in the charters of the middle ages.
But the clergy confidered it as such a valuable
privilege of their order to be governed by the

Roman

Roman law, that when any person entered into
holy orders, it was usual for him to renounce
.the laws to which he had been formerly subjet,
and to declare that he now submitted to the
Roman law. Confiat me Johannem clericum,
filium quondam Verandi, qui profeffus fum, ex
riatione mea, lege vivere Langobardorum, fed
tamen, pro honore ecclefiaftico, lege nunc vi-
deor vivere Romana. Charta A. D. 1072. Fa-
rulfus presbyter qui profeffus fum, more facer-
dotii mei, lege vivere Romana. Charta, A. D.
o175. Muratori Antichita Eftenfi. vol. i. p. 78.

THE code of the canon law began to be com-

piled early in the ninth century. Mem. de
l'Acad. des Infcript. tom. xviii. p. 346, &c. It
was above two centuries after that before any col-
lection was made of those customs, which were
the rule of judgment in the courts of the barons.
Spiritual judges decided, of course, according
to written and known laws; Lay judges, left
without any fixed guide, were directed by loose
traditionary customs. But betides this general
advantage of the canon law, its forms and princi-
ples were more consonant to reason, and more
favourable to the equitable decision of every
point in controversy, than those which prevailed
in lay courts. It appears from Notes XXI. and
XXII. concerning private wars, and the trial by
combat, that the whole spirit of ecclesiastical
jurisprudence was adverse to there fangu;nary
customs which were deftru:tive of justice; and
the whole force of ecclesiastical authority was
exerted to abolish them, and to substitute trials
by law and evidence in their room. Almost all
the forms in lay courts which contribute to efta-
blilh, and continue to preserve order in judicial
proceedings, are borrowed from the canon law.
Fleury Inftit. du droit canon. part iii. c. 6. p. 52.
St. Louis in his Eftabliffemens confirms many of

his

315

his new regulations concerning property, and
the adminiltration ofjuftice, by the authority of
the canon law, from which he borrowed them.
Thus, for instance, the first hint of attaching
moveables for the recovery of a debt, was taken
from the canon law. Eftabl. liv. ii. c. 2z and 40.
And likewise the ceflio bonorum, by a person
who was insolvent. Ibid. In the fame manner,
he eftablithed new regulations with refpef to
the effeEts of persons dying intestate, liv. i. c. 89.
Thlee and many other salutary regulations, the
Canonills borrowed from the Roman law. Ma-
ny other examples might be produced of more
perfedjurifprudence in the canon law than was
known in lay courts. For that reason it was
deemed an high privilege to be subjea to ecclefi-
aftical jurifdition. Among the many immunities,
by which men were alluded to engage in the
dangerous expeditions for the recovery of the
Holy Land,. one of the most considerable was
the declaring those who took the Cross to be Ihb-
jet only to the spiritual courts. See note XIII.
and Du Cange, voc. crucis prvilegia.

NOTE XXV. S E CT. I. p. 67. [BB]

THE rapidity with which the knowledge and

ltudy of the Roman law spread over Europe, is
amazing. The copy of the Panderts was found
at Amalphi, A. D. 1r37. Irnerius opened a
college of civil law at Bologne a few years after.
Giann. Hist. book xi. c. 2. It began to be taught
as a part of academical learning in different parts
of France before the middle of the century.
Vaccarius gave lectures on the civil law at Ox-
ford as early as the year 1147. A regular sys-
tem of feudal law, formed plainly in imitation of
the Roman code, was compored by two Milanese
lawyears about the year 1150. Gratian publish-

ed

ed the code of canon law, with large additions
and emendations, about the fame time. The
earliest collection of these customs, which served
as the rules ofdecifion in the courts ofjuftice, is
the AiJcfs de Jer1zfalem. They were compiled,
as the preamble informs us, in the year og99,
and are called Jus Confuetudinarium quo rege-
batur regnum orientale. Willerm. Tyr. lib.
xix. c. 2. But peculiar circumnfances were the
occasion of this early compilation. The vitori-
ous Crusaders fettled as a colony in a foreign
country, and adventurers from all the different
nations of Europe composed this new society. It
was necessary on that account to ascertain the
laws and customs which were to regulate
the tranfations of business, and the adminifira-
tion of justice among them. But there was at
that time no colledion of customs, and no at-
tempt to render law fixed in any country of Eu-
rope. The first undertaking of that kind was
by Glanville, Lord Chief Justice of England, in
his TraAatus de Legibus & Confuetudinibus
Angliae, composed about the year II81. The
Regiam Majeflatem in Scotland, ascribed to Da-
vid I. seems to be an imitation, and a servile one
of Glanviile.- Pierre de Fontaines, who tells us
that he was thefi fils who had attempted such a
work in France, composed his Confeil, which
contains an account of the cuf{L ms of the coun-
try of Vermandois, in the reign of St. Louis,
which began, A. D. 1226. Beaumanoir, the
author of the Colftiumes de Beauvoifis, lived about
the lame time. The Efablifl-mclls ofSt. Louis,
cont;ining a large collecion of the cufloms
which prevailed .ithin the royal domains, w.ere
p;blilhcd by the authlority of that monarch. As
loin as men became acquainted with the advain-
tages of having written cufbrnms and laws. to
which they could have recourfle on every occa-
liol, the methodl of colltcting them became

common.

common. Charles VII. of France, by an ordo.
nance, A. D. 1453. appointed the customary
laws in every province of France to be collected
and arranged. Velly and Villaret. Hiftoire,
tom. xvi. p. 113. His successor, Louis XI. re-
newed the injunction. But this salutary under-
taking hath never been fully executed, and the
French jurisprudence remains more obscure and
uncertain than if these prudent regulations of
their monarch had taken effect. A practice
was established in the middle ages, which affords
the clearest proof thatjudges while they had no
other rule to diret their decrees but unwritten
and traditionary customs, were often at a loss
how to find out the fats and principles, accord-
ing to which they were bound to decide. They
were obliged in dubious cafes to call a certain
number of old men, and to lay the cafe before
them, that they might inform them what was
the practice or custom with regard to the point.
This was called Enquejte par tourbe. Du Cange,
voc. Turba. The effects of the revival of the
Roman jurisprudence have been explained by
M.deMontefquieu,liv. xxviii. c. 42. and by Mr.
Hume, Hiift of England, vol. ii. p. 441. I have
adopted many of their ideas. Who can pretend
to review any subjed which such writers have
confidered, without receiving from them light
and information ? At the fame time I am con-
vinced that the knowledge of the Roman law
was not so entirely loft in Europe during the
middle ages, as is commonly believed. My sub-
jeC does not require me to examine this point.
Many striking facts with regard to it are collect-
ed by Donato Antonio D'Aiti Dall' Ufo e auto-
rita della ragione civile nelle provincic dell' Im-
perio Occidentale. Nap. 17e1. 2 vol. 8vo.

THAT the civil law is intimately connected

with the municipal jurisprudence in several coun-
tries of Europe, is a fact so well known, that

't

it needs no illustration. Even in England, where
the Common law is supposed to form a system
perfectly diftina from the Roman code, and al-
though those who apply in that country to the
study of the Common law boast, with affectation,
of this distinction, it is evident that many of the
ideas and maxims of the civil law are incorpo-
rated into the Englifhjurifprudence. This is well
illustrated by the ingenious and learned author
of Observations on the Statutes, chiefly the more
ancient. zd edit. p. 66.

NOTE XXVI. SECT. I. p. 69. [CC].

THE whole.hiftory of the middle ages makes

it evident that war was the sole profefiion of gen-
tlemen, and the only subjed attended to in their
education. Even after some change in manners
began to take place, and the civil arts of lift had
acquired some reputation, the ancient ideas with
respect to the accomplishments necessary for a
person of noble birth, continued long in force.
In the Memoires de Fleuranges, p. 9, &c. vwe
have an account of the youthful exercises and
occupations of Francis I. and they are altogether
martial and athletic. That father of letters owed
his relish for them, not to education, but to his
own good sense, and good taste. The manners of
the superior order of ecclesiastics during the mid -
die ages, furnish the flrongeft: proof that the diC-
tinetion of profeflions was scarce known in Eu-
rope. The functions and character of the clergy
are obviously very different from thore of lay-
men ; and among the inferior ordeis of chui:h-
mrin, this conltituted a dinin& character, F. a-
jate from that of their citizens. But thi dig.L-
sied ecclefitllics, who were frequently of ro';!
birth, were above such a diftindion; they re-
tained the idea of what belonged to them as:; -n
tlcmen, and in spite of the decrees of Popes, or
the canons of councils, they bore arms, led their

vaI'alhs

vaftals to the field, and fought at their head in
battle. Among them the priefthoodwas scarce
a separate profellion; the military accomplilh-
ments which they thought eflnntial to them as
gentlemen, were cultivated; the theological
icience, and pacific virtues iuitable to their fpi-
ritual function, were neglected and dcfpiled.

As soon as the science of law became a labo-

rious study, and the pracice of it a ieparate pro.
feflion, Inch as roTe to eminence in it obtained
honours formerly appropriated to soldiers.
Knighthood was the most illustrious mark of
diftineCion during several ages, and conferred
privileges to which rank or birth alone were not
entitled. To this high dignity persons eminent
for their knowledge of law were advanced, and
by that,.were placed on a level with those whom
their military talents had rendered conspicuous.
Miles Juflitie, Miles Literatus became common
titles. Matthew Paris mentions such knights as
early as A. D. 1251. If a judge attained a cer-
tain rank in the courts of justice, that alone
gave him a right to the honour of knighthood.
Pafquier Recherches, liv. i . c. 16. p. 130. Dif.
fertations hifloriques fur la Chevalerie par Hono
re de Sainte Marie, p. 164, &c. A profeflion
which led to offices that enobled such as held
them, grew into credit, and the people of Eu-
rope became accustomed to fee men rife to eml
nence by civil as well as military talents.

NOTE XXVII. SECT. I. p. 72, [DD.]

THE chief intention of these notes, was to

bring at once under the view of my readeis,
luch facts and circumstances as tend to illustrate
or confirm what is contained in tlhat part of thel
hiflory to which they refer. When these la)
scattered in many different authors, and wert
taken from books not generally known, or whicl

ii

it would be disagreeable to cpnftilt, I thought it
would be of advantage to colleet them together.
But when every thing neeeffary for the proof or
illustration of my narrative or reaforiipgs may
be found in any one book which is generally
known, or deserves to be so, I fhali satisfy my-
self with referring to it. This is the cafe with
refped to Chivalry. Almost every fadt which I
have mentioned in the text, together with many
other curious and inftruiive particulars,. con-
cerning this singular inftittiton, maybe found
in Memoires. fur 1'ancienne Chevalerie coqfider6e
comme un eftabliffement politique & mnilitaire,
par. M. de la Curne de St. Palaye.
NOTE XXVIII. SECT. 1I. . 76. [7EE].
THE.fubje.t of.my enquiries ,does got call,me

to write a history of the progrefa of science. The
fats and observations which I have produced
are sufficient to illustrate the effects of its pro-
grefs upon manners and the state of society.
While science was altogether extind in the wef-
tern parts of Europe, it was cultivated in Con-
ftantinople and other parts of the Grecian Em-.
pire. But the subtile genius of the Greeks
turned almost entirely to theological disputation,
The Latins borrowed that spirit from them, and
many of the controversies which still occupy,
and divide Theologians, took their rife among
the Greeks, from whom the other Europeans de-
rived a confiderable.part of their knowledge. See
the teltimony of IEneas Sylvius ap Coringiuri
de antiq. academicis, p. .

43 Hiftoire literaire

de France, tom. vii. p. 113, &c. tom. ix. p.
151, &c. Soon after the Empire of the Caliphs
was eftabliled in the East, some illustrious
princes arose among them, who encouraged
science. But when the Arabians turned their
attention to the literature cultivated by the an-
cient Greeks and Romans, the chaste and cor-
redt taste of their works of genius appeared fri-.
tid, and unanimated to a people of a more warm:

VOL, . imagi-

imagination. It was impoflible for them to ad-
mire the poets and hifiorians of Athens, or of
Rome. Bit they were sensible of the merit of
their phiifu6phers. The operations of the inteld
left are more fixed and uniform than thofeof
the fancy or taste. Truth makes an impreflion
nearly the fame in every place; the ieas of
what is betatiftld elegaiit, or fubline, vary in
different climates. The Arabians, though they
negle&ed Homer, translated the most eminent
of the Greek phitofophers into their own lan-
guage.; ands guided by their precepts and dif.
coveries,,applied themfedves with great ardrur to
the study of .geoinetry, alltonomy, rnedicine,
dialedics-and metaphyfies. In the three former
they made conffiderable and useful improvements,
which hsve -contributed not a littre to advance
those fcien-esrto that bigh dbgree of perftaion
wvhich t'hey have attained. hi the two :latter
they chose iiifrotit e-for 'their gtlide, atnd refining
on the futile-and diftinguilhing fipkit whith cha.
rdterites :his philosophy, t-hey tenderedit alto-
gether friolous or unintelligibte. The schools
eftablitfhed 'in the East ifr teaching and culti-
vating thtef sciences,- were it high reputation.
They cofrrrtinieated their love of fcience'to their
countrymen, who conquered Asia and Spain;
and th&fschools inflituted there were little infe-
rior in 'fame to those in the East. Many of tile
perfone 'who diftinguiied themsfelves by their
proficienrty 'i'fcience in the twelfih 'and thliteen th
eentifies, were educated among the Arabians.
Bruckerus colHeds many instances of this. Hilfor.
Philof v. iii. p. '681, &c. A'lmost all: the men
enminent for science dutrig 'several centui:.io's,
were irlftituted in the 'fciencee;by the ArBbians,
The :fitft khoowledge 'of the AtriRotelan philbfo-
ply 'in the m.iddle ages, was acquired by tran-
flations of his works out of the Ara:bicc. he
Arabirtn 'coinmentatbrs were deemed the rhof
Ikimful and aurhentic gtgies it.h he stud'y of his
fyftim. 'Crinng, .antiq. caed. D'IE. -iii. p.

95,

&, c. Supplemn. p. 241, &c. Murat; anti-

quit. Ital. Vol. iii. p. 932, &c. From theth the
Schoolmen derived the geniias and principles of
their philosophy, which contributed so muin to
retard the progress of true science.

TH eftablifiment of Colleges or universities
isa remarkable era in literary hiftbry. The fchob4s
in catehdrals and monasteries confined themfclve$
chiefly to the teaching of grammar. There were
only one or two masters employed in that office.
But in colleges; professors wee .appointed to
teach all the different parts of fience: The time
that ought to be allotted to the fludy of each was
ascertained. A regular form of trying the pro-
ficiency of itudents was prescribed; and acade-
inical titles and honours were conferred on such
as acquitted themselves with approbation. A
good account.6s the origin and hature of trhee it
given by Seb. Bacmeifterus Antiqiitates Roftor
chienfes 'five, HiftoriaUrbis'& Academiae Rof-
toch. ap. Monumenta inedita Rer. OGerm. per E.
J. de Weftphalen, vol. iii. p. .8t. Lips. 1743.
The first bbfcure mention of there academica
degrees in the Univetfity of Parisj (frort which
the other universities in Europe have borrowed
molf of their curtoms and inflitutions) occurs,
A. D. s 15. Crevier hifi. de 1' univ. de Paris,
tom. i. p. s6, &c. They w.ere comptletdly efta-
blifhed, A.D. .23 . Ilb. 248. It is unnecessary
so enumerate the several privileges to which
batchelors, masters, and doCtors were entitled.
One circumRtance is sufficient to demonstrate the
high degree of eftimalion in wlich they were
held. Doaors in the different faculties contend-
ed with knights for the precedence; and the dilf
pute was terminated in many instances by ad-
vancing the fortner to the dignity ds knighthood,
the high prerogatives of which I have mentioned,
It was even asserted, that a doctor had a right
to that title without creation. Bartolus taught
--doctorem adualiter regentem in jure civill

Y a per

per decennium effici militem ipso fa0do. Honore
de St. Marie Diflert. p. 165. This was called
Chevalerie de ledures, and the persons advanced
to that dignity, milites Clerici. These new efta.
blifhments for education, together with the ex.
traordinary honours conferred on learned men,
greatly encreafed the number of scholars. In
the year i z62, there were ten thousand students
in the university of Bologna; and it appears from
the history of that university, that law was the
only science taught in it at that time. In the
year 1340; there were thirty thousand in the
university of Oxford. Speed's Chron. ap. An.
derfon's Chronol. Dedution of Commerce, vol.
i. . 172. In the fame century, ten thousand
persons voted in a question agitated in the uni-
verfity of Paris; and as graduates alone were ad-
mitted to that privilege, the number of fludents
must have been vastly great. Velly Hift.de
France, tom. xi. p. 147. There were indeed few
universities in Europe at that time; but such a
number of fludents may nevertheless be produc-
ed as a proof of the extraordinary ardour with
which men turned to the study of science in
those ages; it shows likewise that they already
began to confider other profeflions than that of
a soldier as honourable and useful.
N O T E XXIX. SECT. II. p. 82. [FS].

THE great variety of fubjets which I have

endeavoured to illustrate, and the extent of this
upon which I now enter, will justify my adopt-
ing the words of M. de Montesquieu, when he
begins to treat of commerce. " The subjed
" which follows would require to be discussed
"more at large; but the nature of this work
" does not permit it. I with to glide on a tran-

quil stream; but I am hurried along by a
" torrent."

MANY proofs occur in hiflory of the little in.
tercourfe between nations during the middle ages.

Towards

Towards the close of the tenth century, Count
Bouchard intending to found a monastery at St.
Maur des Fosses, near Paris, applied to an ab-
bot of Clugny in Burgundy, famous for his fanc-
tity, intreating him.to conduEt the monks thither.
The language in which he addressed that holy
man is singular: He tells him, that he had un-
dertaken the labour of such a great journey; that
he was fatigued-with the length of it, therefore
hoped to obtain his request, and that hisjourney
into such a distant country should not be in vain.
The answer of the abbot is still more extraordi-
nary: He refused to comply with his desire, as
it would be extremely fatiguing to go along with
him into a strange and unknown region. Vita
Burchardi venerabiles Comitis ap. Bouquet Rec.
des Hiis. vol. x. p. 351. Even so late as the be-
ginning of the twelfth century, the monks of
Ferrieres in the diocese of Sens did not know that
there was such a city as Tournay in Slanders;
and the monks of St. Martin of Tournay were
equally unacquainted with the situation of Ser-
rieres. A tranfation in which they were both
concerned, made it necessary for them to have
fume intercourse. The mutual interest of bothi
monasteries prompted each to find out the situ-
ation of the other. After a long search, which
is particularly described, the discovery was made
by accident. Herimannus Abbas de Reftaura-
tione St. Martini Tornacenfis ap. Dacher. Spicel.
vol. xii. p. 400. The ignorance of the middle
ages with refped to the situation and geography
of remote countries was still more remarkable.
The most ancient geographical chart which now
remains as a monument of the slate of that fci-
ence in Europe during the middle ages, is
found in a manuscript of the Chronique de St.
Denys. There the three parts of the earth then
known are To represented, that Jerusalem is plac-
ed in the middle of the globe, and Alexandria
appears to be as near. to it as Nazareth. Mem.

Y 3 de

de l'Acad. des Belles Lettres, tori xvi. p. T8a.
There seem to have been no inns or houses of
entertain'ment sot the reception of travellers dur.
ing the middle ages. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol.
iii. p. 581, :c. This is a proof of the little in.
tercourfe which took place between different na.
tions. Among people whose manners are simple,
and wh are seldom visited by strangers, hofpi.
tality is a virtue of the first rank. This duty of
hospitality was so necessary in that state of loci.
ety which took place during the middle ages,
that it was not confidered as one of thpfe virtues
which men may prafife or not, according to
the temper of their minds, and the generosity
of their hearts. H4ospitality was enforced by fta.
tures, and those who negleted this duty were
liable to puni(hment. Quicumque hofpiti veni.
enti leutum, aut focum negaverit, trium felido.
rum inlatione multetur, Leg. Burgund. tit,
kxxviii. § i. Si quis homini aliquo pergentiin
itinere manfionern vetaverit fexagiuta folidos com
ponat in publico. Capitul. lib. vi. § 82. ThiE
intreafe of the penalty, at a period so long aftei
that in which the laws of the Burgundians were
publilhed, and when the fiate of society wai
tnuch improved, is very remarkable. Other law!
bs the fame purport are collected by Jo. Fred
Polac Syfema Jurifprud Germanicg, Lips. 733
p. 75. The laws of the Slavi were more rigoroul
than any that he mentions; they ordained, "thai
the moveables of an inhospitable person should bx
tonfifcated, and his house burnt. They were e.
ven so follicitous for the entertainment of itran
gers, that they permitted the landlord to steal foi
l'lie uapport of his guest." Quod no&u furatut
fueris, eras appone hofpitibus. Rerum Meclebur
·gicar. lib. viii. a Mat. Jo. Beehr. Lips. 171'. P
5t. In cdnfequence of these laws or of that flat
'of society which made it proper to enad them
iloTpitality abounded while the intercourse amon[
fIcn was incofiderable, and secured the ftrangec

kine

a kind receetion under every roof where e chose
to take ihelter. This too, proves learly, that
the intercourse among men was rare, for as soon
as this inereafed, what was a pleasure became
burden, and the entertaining of travellers was
converted into a branch of commerce.

But the laws of the middle ages afford a proof

still more convincing of the small intercourse be-
tween different nations. The genius of the
Feudal fyftenr, as well as the spirit of jealousy
which always accompanies ignorance, joined in
discouraging strangers from fettling in any coun-
try If a person removed from one province in
a kingdom to another, he was bound within..
year and a day, to acknowledge himself the vas-
fal of the baron in whose efate he fettled; if he
neglefted to do so, he became liable to a penalty;
and if at his death he negleted to leave a cer-
tain legacy to the baron within whbfe teritories
he resided, all his goods were confiscated. The
hardflips imposed on foreigners fettding iou a
strange country, were fill more intolerable. In
more early times, the superior lord of any ter-
ritory, in which'a foreigner fettled, might seize
his person, and reduce him to fervittde. Very
firiking instances of this occur in the history of
the middle ages. The cruel depredations of the
Normans in the ninth century, obliged many
inhabitants of the maritime provinces of France,
tofly into the interior parts of the kingdom.
But inltead of being received with that humanity
to which their wretched condition entitled them,
they were reduced to a state of servitude. Both
the civil and ecclesiastical powers found it
necelfary: to interpose, in order to put a stop to
this barbarous practice. Potgieffer. de Statu
Server. lib. i. c. i. J 16. In other countries, the
iaws permitted the inhabitants of the maritime
provinces, to reduce such as were shipwrecked
^ their;,oas, to servitude. Ibid. § 1i. Thia

Y 4 barbarow

3z7

*barbarous cuRtom prevailed in other countries of
.Europe. The pracice of seizing the goods of
persons who had been Ihipwrecked, and of con.
fifcating.as the property of the lord on whose
nanor they were thrown, seems to have been
universal, De 'Weftphalen Monum. inedita
Rer. Germ. vol. iv. p. 907, &c. et Du Cange,
oc Laganumn, Beehr. Rer. Mecleb. lib. p. 512.
Among the ancient Welsh, three forts of per.
sons, a madman, a itranger, and , leper, might
be killed with impunity. Leges Hoel Dda,
quoted in Obfervat. on the Statutes, chiefly the
more ancient, p. 22. M. de Lauriere produces
several ancient deeds which prove, that in diffe.
rent provinces of France, firangers became the
laves of the lord on whose lands they fettled,
GlofTaire du Droii Francois, Art. Aubaine, p. 92.
Btaumanoir fays, :" that there are several places
in France in Which, if a flranger fixes his refi
dence for a year and day, he becomes the slave
of the lord of the manor. Couft. de Beauv. ch,
45. p. 254' But as a praatice so contrary to hu.
manity could not fiubfif, the superior lords found
it necessary to reft satisfied with levying certain
annual taxes from aliens, by imposing upon them
some extraordinary dutiesor services. But when
any stranger died, he could not convey his effets
by a will; and all his real as well as personal
estate fell to the king, or to the lord of the ba
rony, to the exclusion of his natural heirs. 'this
is termed in France Droit d'Aubaine. Pref. de
-Laurier. O(rdo). tom. i. p. 15. Bruffel. tom. ii
p. 944. Du Cange, voc. Albani. Patquier Re
cherches, p. 367. This practice of confifcatinu
the effels of strangers upon their death, wasver)
ancient. It is mentioned, though very obscure
ly, in a law of Charlemagne, A. D. ~13. Capi
tul. Baluz. p. 507. § 5. Not only persons wli
were born in a foreign country were subjed to tht
proit d'Aubaine, but even such as removed fron
Otle diocese to another, or from the.lands of 01C

niaro;)

·baron to another. Bruffel. vol. ii. p. 947, 949.
It is scarce possible to conceive any law more
unfavourable to the intercourse between nations.
Something similar to it, however, may be found
in the ancient laws of every kingdom in Europe.
With refpef to Italy, fee Murat. Ant. vol. ii.
p. 14. It is no small disgrace to the French jurif-
prudence, that this barbarous, inhospitable cuf-
tom, should itill remain in a nation so highly
civilized.

THE confusion and outrage which abounded

under a feeble form of government, incapable
of framing or executing salutary laws, rendered
.the communication between the different pro-
vinces of the fame kingdom extremely dange-
rous. It appears from a letter of Lupus, abbot
of Ferrieres, in the ninth century, that the high-
ways were so much infested by banditti, that it
was necessary for travellers to form themselves
into companies or caravans, that they might be
safe from the assaults of robbers. Bouquet Re-
cueildes Hist. vol. vii. 515. The numerous re-
gulations published by Charles the Bald in the
fame century, discover the frequency of these
disorders; and such ats of violence were be-
come so common, that by many they were hardly
confidered as criminal ;, and for this reason, the
inferior judges called Centenarii, were required
to take an oath, that they would neither com-
mit any robbery themselves, nor protect such as
were guilty of that crime. Capitul. edit. Baluz.
vol. ii. p. 63, 68. The historians of the ninth
and tenth centuries give pathetic descriptions of
there disorders. Some remarkable passages to
this purpose are collected by Mat. Jo. Beehr Rer.
Mecleb. lib. viii. p. 603. They became so fre-
quent and audacious, that the authority of the
civil magistrate was unable to repress them. The
ecclesiastical jurifdition was called in to aid it.
Councils were held with great solemnity, the
bodies of the faints were brought thither, and in

pre-

Plteence of their sacred reliques, anathemas were
denounced against robbers, and other violators of
the publick peace. Bouquet Recucil des Hilt.
tom. x. p. 360, 431, 536. One of these forms
of excommunication issued A. D. 988, is tlill
preserved, and is so singular, and composed with
eloqUence of such a peculiar kind, that it will not
perhaps appear unworthy of a place here. After
the usual introduction, and mentioning the out.
rage which gave occasion to the anathema, it runs
thus, " Obtenebrefcant occuli veftri, qui eoncu-
piverunt; arefcant manus, quae rapuerunt; de-
bilitentur omnia membra, qua& adjuverunt. Sem-
per laboretis, nec requiem inveniatis, frutuque
veitri laboris privemini. Formidetis, & paveatis,
A facie perfequentis, & non perfequentis hoftis,
ut tabefcendo deficiatis. Sit portio veftra cum
Judatraditore Domini, in terra mortis et tene-
brarum; donec corda vefira ad fatisfa&tionem
plenam convertantur. -Ne ceffent a vobis ha
malididiones, fcelerum veitrorum perfecutrices,
quamdiu permanebitis in peccato pervafionis.
Amen. Fiat, Fiat." Bouquet. Ib. p. 517.

WITH refpecE to the progrefi of commerce

which I have described, p. 78, &c. it may beob-
served that the Italian ltates carried on rome com-
merce with the cities of the Greek empire, as
early as the age of Charlemagne, and imported
into their own country the rich commodities of
the east. Murat. Antiq. hal. vol. ii. p. 882. In
the tenth century, the Venetians had opened a
trade with Alexandria in Egypt. Ibid. The in-
habitants of Amalphi and PiTa had likewiseex-
tended their trade to the fame ports. Murat. lb.
p. 884, 885. The effecs of the Crusades in in-
creasing the wealth and commerce of the Italian
ltates, and particularly that which they carried
on with the East, I have explained page z2th
of this volume. They not only imported the
Indian commodities from the East, but eltablifh-
cd manufatures of curious fabric in their own

country,

pountry. Several of the'se are enumerated by
Muratori in his Dissertations concerning the arts
and the eaving of the middle ages. Antiq.
Ital. vol. ii. p. 349, 399 They made great pro.
grefs particularly in the manufature offilk, which
had long been peculiar to the eastern provinces
of Asia. Silk fluffs were of such high price in
ancient Rome, that only a few persons of the
first rank were able to purchase them. Under
Aurelian, A. D. 270, a pound of silk was equal
in value to a pound of gold. Abfit ut auro fila
penfentur. Libra enim auri tunc libra ferici suit.
Vopifcus in Aureliano. Justinian, in the sixth
century, introduced the art of rearing silk-worms
into Greece, which rendered the commodity
some what more plentiful, though still it was of
fich great value, as to remain an article of lux-
ury or magnificence, reserved only for persons of
the first order, or for publick folemnities. Ro-
ger I. King of Sicily, about the year 1 30, car-
ried offa number of artificers in the silk trade
from Athens, and fettlingthem in Palermo, in-
troduced the culture of silk into his kingdom,
from which it was communicated to other parts
of Italy. Gianon. Hist. of Naples, b. xi. c. 7.
This seems to have rendered silk so common,
that about the middle of the fourteenth century,
athoufand citizens of Genoa appeared in one
proceflion clad in silk robes. Sugar is likewise a
production of the East. Some plants of the fu-
gar cane were brought from Asia and the firt
attempt to cultivate them in Sicily was made
about the middle of the twelfth century. From
thence they were transplanted into the southern
provinces of Spain. From Spain they were car-
ried to the Canary and Madeira isles, and at
length into the new world. Ludovico Guicciar-
dini, in enumerating the goods imported into
Antwerp, about the year 1560, mentions the
sugar which they received from Spain and Portu-
al as a considerable article. He describes that as

the

the produt of the Madeira and Canary islands.
Defcritt. de Paefi Bafli, p. 180, 18 . The fu-
gar cane was either not introduced into the Weft.
rndies at that time, or the cultivation of it was
not so considerable as to furnish an article in com-
merce. In the middle ages, though sugar was
not raised in such quantities, or employed-for so
many purposes, as to become one of the com-
mon necessaries of life, it appears to have been a
considerable article in the commerce of the Ita-
lian flates.

THESE various commodities with which the

Italians furnished the other nations of Europe,
procured them a favourable reception in every
kingdom. They were established in France in
the thirteenth century with moss extensive im.
munities. They not only obtained every indul-
gence favourable to their commerce, but per-
fonal right and privileges were granted to them,
which the natives of the kingdom did not enjoy.
'Ordon. tom. iv. p. 668.' By a special proviso,
-they were exempted from the droit d'aubaine.
Ibid. p. 670. As the Lombards engrossed the
trade of every kingdom in which they fettled,
they became masters of its cash. Money ofcourfe
was in their hands not only a sign of the value of
their commodities, but became an object of
commerce itself. They dealt largely as bankers.
In an ordonance, A. D, 129., we find them fil-
ed mercatores and campfores. They carried on this
as well as other branches of their commerce with
somewhat of that rapacious spirit which is natu-
ral to monopolizers, who are not restrained by
the concurrence of rivals. An absurd opinion,
which prevailed in the middle ages, was, how-
ever, in rome measure, the cause of their exor-
bitant demands, and may be pleaded in apology
for them. Commerce cannot be carried on with
advantage unless the perlbns who lend a furn are
allowed a certain premium for the use of their
money, and as a compensation for the risk which

they

they run in. permitting another to traffick with
their stock, This premium is fixed by law in
all commercial countries, and is called the legal
interest of money. Butthe Fathersof the church.
preposterously applied the prohibitions of usury
in scripture to the payment of legal interest, and
condemned it as a fin. The fchoolmen, misled
by Aristotle, whose sentiments they followed im-
plicitly, and without examination, adopted the
fame error, and enforced it. Blackstone's Com-
mentaries on the laws of England, vol. ii. p. 455.
Thus the Lombards found themselves engaged
in a traffick which was deemed criminal and
odious. They were liable to punishment if de-
teted. They were not satisfied, therefore, with
that moderate premium, which they might have
claimed, if their trade had been open and autho-
riCed by law. They exaAed a fum proportional
to the danger and infamy of a discovery. Ac-
cordingly, we find that it was usual for them to
demand twenty per cent. for the use of money in
the thirteenth, century. Murat. Antiq. Ital. vol.
i. p. 893. About the beginning of that century,
the countess of Slanders was obliged to borrow
money in order to pay her husband's ransom.
She procured the fum requisite, either from Italian
merchants or from Jews. The lowest interest,
which (he paid to them, was above twenty per
cent. and some of them exacted near thirty.
Martene and Durand. Thefaur. Anecdotorum.
vol. i. p 886. In the fourteenth century, A. D..
131 , Philip IV. fixed the interest which might
be legally exaced in the fairs of Champagne at
twenty per cent. Ordonan. tom. i. p. 484. The
interest of money in Aragon was somewhat low-
er. James I. A. D. 1242. fixed it by law at
eighteen per cent. Petr. de Marca. Marca five
Limes Hifpan. app. 1433. As late as the year
1490, it appears that the interef' of rmoneyc in

Pla-

Placentia, was at the rate of forty per cent. This
is the more extraordinary, because at that time
the commerce of the Italian States was become
considerable. Memorie Storiche de Piaceniza
tom. viii. p. 104. Piac. 1760. It appears from
Lud. Guicciardini, that Charles V. had fixed the
rate of interefl in his dominions in the Low.
Countries at twelve per cent. and it the time
when he wrote about the year i 566, it was not
uncommon to exast more than that film. He
complains of this as exorbitant, and points out
its bad effe&s both on agriculture and commerce.
Defcritt. di Paefi Bafi, p: 172. This high in-
terest of money, is alone a proof that the profits
on commerce were exorbitant,-T-hIe Lombards
were likewise eftablifed in England, in thethir-
teenth century, and a confidetable ftteet in the
city of London still bears their name. They
enjoyed great privilegesi and carried on an ex-
tensive commerce, particularly as bankers; See
Anderfon'sChronol. Deduclioni vo1. i: p. 137,
I6o, 204; 231, where the statutes .or other au-
thorities, which confirm this, are quoted. But
the chief mart for Italian coinmodities was at
Bruges. Navigation was 'then so imperfet, that
a voyage between the Baltick and Mediterranean
could not be performed in one fummter. For
that reason, a magazine or storehouse half way
between the commertial cities in the north, and
thofein Italy became necessary. ]fruges wa pitch-
ed upon as the most convenient station. That
choice introduced vast wealth into the Low Coun-
tries. Bruges was at once the staple for Eliglifi
wool; for the woollen and linen manufadtures
of the Netherlands; for ihe naval stores, and
other bulky comrmoditiet of the north; and for
the Indian commodities, as well as dotnefticlc
produtions imported by the Italian States
The extent of its commerce in Indian gord3

dviru

W'ith Venice alone appears from one fad. In the
year 1318, five Venetian gal:affes laden with
Indian commodities arrived at Bruges, in order
to dispose of their cargoes at the fair. L. Guic.
Defcritt, di Paefi Bafli, p. 174. Galeafies were
veflels of very considerable burthen. It was
the greatest emporium in all Europe. Many
proofs of this occur in the hifforians and records
of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. But
infteeadof multiplying quotatvions, I fhal refer
my readers to Anderson, vol.i. p. 12, 137, 213',
246, &c. The nature of this work prevents
me from entering into any long details, but there
are rome detached facts, which give an high
idea of the wealth both of the Flemish and Ita-
lian commercial ftltes. The Duke of Brabant
cointra.ced his daughter to the Black Prince, son
of Edward III. of England, A. D. 1339, and
gave her a portion which would amount to
three hua ndred thousand pounds of our present
money. 'Rymer's Ftdera, vol. v. p. I r3. John
Galee2zz Visconti Duke of Milan concluded a
treaty of mnarriage between his-daughter and
Lionel Duke of Clarence Edward's third son.
A. D. 1367. and granted her a portion equal to
two hundred thousand pounds of our present mon
ney. Rymer Faeder, vol. vi. p. 547. These ex
orbitant fums so far exceeding what was then
granted by the mos powerful monarchs, and.
which appear extraordinary even in the present
age, when the wealth of Europe is so much in-
creased. mist have arifden from the riches which
flowed into thefr countries from their e'tenfive;
and lucrative commerce. The fir.fr surce of
Wealth to the towns fituared oh the Baltick sea,
stems to have been the herihtighlet;ry rhe foaht
of hearing frequenting at'that time the toaf. of
Sweden and Denmrark. 'in th e fame manner ag
they now redbrt to the BfTiifh otfft. The es-

fHftB

feets of this fishery are thus described by an au.
thor of the thirteenth century. The Danes, fays
he, who were formerly clad in the poor garb ol
sailors, are now cloathed in scarlet, purple and
fine linen. For they abound with wealth flowing
from their annual fishery on the coast of Scho.
nen ; so that all nations retort to them, bringing
their gold, silver and precions commodities, that
they may purchase herrings, which the divine
bounty bestows upon them. Arnoldus Lube.
cenfis ap. Conring. de Urbib. German. § 87.

THE Hanfeatick league is the most powerful

commercial confederacy known in hjftory. Its
origin towards the close of the twelfth century,
and the objedts of its union, are described by
Knipfcildt Tradatus Hiftorico-Politico Juridicus
deJuribus Civitat. Imper. lib. i. cap. 4. Ander.
son has mentioned the chief fats with refpea-tq
their commercial progress, the extent of the pri.
vileges which they obtained in different countries,
their successful wars with several monarchs, as
well as the spirit and zeal with which they con.
tended for those liberties and rights without
which it is impossible to carry on commerqe to
advantage. The vigorous efforts of a society
attentive only to commercial objects, could not
fail of diffusing over Europe new and more libe
ral ideas concerningjuftice and order wherever
they fettled.

IN.England the progress of commerce war

extremely flow; and the causes of this are ob
vious. During the Saxon heptarchy, England
split into many petty kingdoms, which were
perpetually at variance with each other, exposet
to the fierce incursions of the Danes, and other
northern pirates, and funk in barbarity and ig
norance, was in ,no condition to cultivate corn
mcrce, or to pursue any system of useful and fa

luta.r

lutary policy. When a better profpet, began
to open by the union of the kingdom under or*
monarch, the Norran conquest took place. This
eccafioned such a violent (hock, and such a fuld-
den and total revolution of property, that the
nation did not recover from it during several
reigns. By the time that the constitution began
to acquire 'some stability, and the English had ft
incorporated with their conquerors as to heeom.
one people, the nation engaged with no lefsardour
than imprudence in support of their monarch's
pretensions to the crown of France, and long
wafted its vigour and genius in its wild efforts
to conquer that kingdom. When by ill fuccefCi
and repeated disappointments, a period was at
last put to this fatal frenzy, and the nation be-
ginning to enjoy rome repose, had leisure to
breathe and to gather new strength, the deftrueo
tive wars between the houses of York and Lan.
caster broke out, and involved the kingdom in
the worst of all calamities. Thus, besides tha
common obftrutions of commerce occasioned
by the nature of the feudal governmenti and thai
fate of manners during the middle ages, its
progress in England was retarded by peculiar
causes. Such a fucceflion of events adverse to
the commercial foirit was fuffieient to have
checked its growth, although every other cir-
cumftance had favoured it. The Englifll were
accordingly one of the lail nations in Europe
who availed themselves of their natural com-
mercial advantages. Before the reign of Edward
1I. all the wool of England, except a small
quantity wrought into coarse cloths for home
consumption, was fold to the Flemingsor Lom-
hards, and manufacured by them. Though
Edward, A. D. 132,6, began to allure some of
the Flemish weavers to fettle in England, it was
long before the English were cepable of fabricat-

VOL. I, ing

ing cloth for foreign markets, and the export of
.unwrought wool still continued to be the chief
article of their commerce. Anderson passim.-
All foreign commodities were brought into Eng.
land by the Lombard or Hanfeatick merchants.
The Englilh ports were frequented by (hips both
from the north and south of Europe, and they
tamely allowed foreigners to reap all the profits
arising from the supply of their wants. Thefirit
commercial treaty of England on record, isthat
with Haquin King of Norway, A. D. 1217.
Anders. vol. i. p. io8. But they did not venture
to trade in their own ships to the Baltick until
the beginning of the fourteenth century. Ib.
151. It was after the middle of the fifteenth
before they sent any Ihip into the mediterranean.
Ib. p. 1 77. Nor was it long before this period
that their veflels visited the ports of Spain or
Portugal. But though I have pointed out the
flow progress of the English commerce, as a
fat little attended to, and yet meriting confide-
ration; the concourse of foreigners to the ports
of England, together with the communication
among all the different countries in Europe,
which went on increasing from the beginning ol
the twelfth century, is sufficient to justify all
the observations and reasonings in the text con.
cerning the influence of commerce on the tfate
of manners, and of society.

NOTE XXX. SECT. III. p. 153.

I HAVE not been able to discover the precis

manner in which the Juftiza was appointed
Among the claims of the jnta or union forrmec
againtt James I. A. D. 1264, this was one; tha
the King Ihould not nominate any person to b

Juftiz

Jufliza without the content or approbation of the
ricos-hombres or nobles. Zurita Anales de Ara-
gon, vol. i. p. 1 80. But the King in his answer
to their remonstrance aferts, " that it was eftab-
lifhed by immemorial practice, and was con-
formable to the laws of the kingdom, that the
King, in virtue of his royal prerogative, named
the Jufliza. Zurita, Ibid. 18r. Blanca, 656.
From another passage in Zurita, it appears that
while the Aragonefe enjoyed the privilege of the
union, i. e. the power of confederating against
their sovereign as often as they conceived that he
had violated any of their rights and immunities,
the Juftiza was not only nominated by the King,
but held his office during his pleasure. Nor was
this practice attended with any bad effecs, as
the privilege of the union was a sufficient and es-
featual check to any abuse of the royal preroga-
tive. But when the privilege of the union was
abolished as dangerous to the order and peace
of fociery, it was agreed that the Juftiza
should continue in office during life. Several
Kings, however, attempted to remove the Jufti-
zas who were obnoxious to them, and they forme
times succeeded in the attempt. In order to
guard against this encroachment, which would
have destroyed the in tention of the institution,
and have rendered the Jufliza the depenld;nt
and tool of the crown, instead of theguardian
of the people, a law was ena6ted in the Cortes,
A. D. 1442, ordaining that the luftiza should
continue in office during life, and should not be
removed from it unless by the authority of the
Cortes. Fueros & Obfervancial del Reyno de
Arag. lib. i. p. 2z. By former laws the person
of the Juftiza had been declared sacred, and he
was refpolfible only to the Cortes. Ibid. p 5.
b. Zurita and Blanca, who both publilhed their
hiflories, while the Jufiza of' Aragon retained
the fullexercife of his privileges and juurifclilion,

Z z bave

have neglected to explain several circumstances
with regard to the office of that refpedable nma
giftrate, because they addressed their works to
their countrymen, who were well acquainted
with every particular concerning the functions
of a judge, to whom they looked up as to the
guardian of their liberties. It is in vain to con.
fult the later historians of Spain, about any
point, with refped to which the excellent hifto-
rians whom I have named are silent. The an-
cient constitution of their country was overturn.
ed, and despotism, eftablihed on the ruin of its
liberties, when the writers of this and the pre-
ceding century composed their histories, and on
that account they had little curiosity to know
the nature of those inflitutions to which their
ancestors owed the enjoyment of freedom, or
they were afraid to describe them with much ac.
curacy. The spirit with which Mariana, his con-
tinuator Miniana, and Ferreras, write their his-
tories, is very different from that of the two
historians of Aragon, from whom I have taken
my account of the constitution of that kingdom,

Two circumstances concerning the Juftiza,

betides those which I have mentioned in th(
text, are worthy of observation, r. None of the
ricos-hombres, or noblemen of the first order,
could be appointed Juftiza. He was taken oul
of the second class or cavalleros, who anfwel
nearly to gentlemen or commoners in Great.
Britain. Fueros & Obfervanc. del Reyno, &c
lib. r. p. 2 . b. The reason was. By the lawr
of Aragon, the ricos-hombres were not subjel
to capital punilhment; but as it was necel:
fury for the security of liberty, that the Juftiza
Ihould be accountable for the manner in which
he executed the high trust reposed in him, i'l
was a powerful restraint upon him to know thai

he

he was liable to be punished with the utmost ri-
gour. Blanca, p. 657, 756. Zurita, torn. ii.
229. Fueros & Oblervanc. lib. ix. p. 182. b.
183. It appears too from many paflages in Zu-
rita, that the Juftiza was appointed to check the
domineering and oppreflive spirit of the nobles,
as well as to set bounds to the power of the mo-
narch, and therefore he was chosen from an or-
der of citizens equally interested in opposing
both.

2. A MAGISTRATE possessed of such vast

powers as the Juftiza, might have exercised them
in a manner pernicious to the state, if he himself
had been fubjeat to no controul. A conflitu-
tional remedy, however, was provided against
this danger. Seventeen persons were chosen by
lot in each meeting of the Cortes. These form-
ed a tribunal called the court of inquisition into
the office of Juftiza. This court met at three
stated terms in each year. Every person had li-
berty of complaining to it of any inquiry or ne-
gleat of duty in the Juftiza, or in the inferior
judges, who acted in his name. The Juftiza
and his deputies were called to answer for their
condut. The members of the court passed
sentence by ballot. They might punish by de-
gradation, confiscation of goods, or even with
death. The law which ereced this court, and
regulated the forms of its procedure, was enact-
ed A. D. 1461; Zurita Anales, iv. 102. Blanca
Comment. Rer. Aragon. 770. Previous to this
period, inquiry was made into the conduA of
the Juftiza, though not with the fame formality.
He was from the first institution of the office
subjet to the review of the Cortes. The con-
ftant dread of such an impartial andt severe in-
quiry into his behaviour, was a powerful motive
to the vigilant and faithful discharge of his duty.

Z 3 A remark-

A remarkable instance of the authority of the
Juftiza when opposed to that of the King, occurs
in the year 1 386. By the constitution of Ara-
gon, the eldest son or heir apparent of the crown
possessed considerable power and jurifdicion in
the kingdom. Fueros & Obfervan. delReyno
de Arag. lib. I. p. 16. Peter IV. initigatedby
a second wife, attempted to deprive his son of
this, and enjoined his fubjets to yield him no
obedience 1 he Prince'immediately applied to
the Juftiza; " the safe-guard and defence, fays
Zurita, aginft all violence and oppreflion."
The Juftiza granted him the firmo de derecho,
the effect of which was, that upon his giving
surety to appear in judgmept, he could not be
deprived of any immunity or privilege, which
he pofleffed, but in consequence of a legal trial
before the Juftiza, and of a sentence pronounced
by him.' This was published throughout the
kingdom, and notwithstanding the proclamation
in contradiction to this which had been issued by
the King, the Prince continued in the exercise
of all'his rights, and his authority was univer-
sally recognized. Zurita Analcs de Aragon,
torn. ii. 385.

NOTE XXXI. SECT. III. p. 154.

I HAVE been induced, by the concurring tef-

timony of many respectable authors, to mention
this as the confiitutional form of the oath of al-
legiance, which the Aragonefe swore to their So-
vereigns. I must acknowledge, however, that
I have not found this singular oath in any Spa-
nifh author whom 1 have had an opportunity to
consult. It is mentioned neither by Zurita, nor
Blanca, nor Argenfola, nor Sayas, who were all
hiftoi iographers appointed by the Cortes of Ara-
,gon to record the transactions of the kingdoml.
ill these writers poflcfs a merit, which is very

rare

rare among historians. They are extremely ac-
curate in tracing the progress of the laws and
constitution of thtircountry. Their silence with
refped to this, creates some suspicion concerning
the genuineness of the oath. But as it is men-
tioned by so many authors, who produce the an-
cient Spanish words in which it is expressed, it
is probable that they have taken it from some
writer of credit, whose works have not fallen
into my hands. The spirit of the oath is per-
fedtly agreeable to the genius of the Aragonefe
conftltution.

TH E privilege of Union which I mentioned

in the preceding note, and alluded to in the next,
is indeed one of the most singular which could
take place in a regular government, and the
oath that I have mentioned expresses nothing
more than this constitutional privilege entitled
the Aragonefe to perform. If the King or his
ministers violated any of the laws or immunities
of the Aragonefe, and did not grant immediate
redress in consequence of their representations
and remonstrances, the nobles of the first rank,
or Ricos-bombres de natura, & de mefnada, the
equestrian order, or the nobility of the second
class, called Hidalgos & Infanciones, together
with the magistrates of cities, might either in
the cortes, or in a voluntary allembly, join in
union, and binding themselves by mutual oaths
and the exchange of hostages to be faithful to
each other, they might require the King, in the
name and by the authority of his body corporate,
to grant them redress. If the King refused to
comply with their request, or took arms in or-
der to oppose them, they might, in virtue of the
privilege of union, instantly withdraw their al-
legiance from the King, refuse to acknowledge
hlm as their Sovereign, and proceed to elect
another Monarch nor did they incur any guilt,

Z or

343

t' bhome! liable 'to any ptbfecution on that ic
tount. Blani tbore. Rer. Arag 66i, 669. Thi
thi'on did not resemble the

b eofederacies in bthe

feudal kingdids. oIl

was a cof3itftitonal aLs

eiatibn, which prete'ded to legal privileges
vhich 'issued its mnand'ates under a 'cohtlon feal
and ptbceeded in all its operations by regulai
alnd dicertained formts. Th:s dangerous righ'
Was not óonly claiimd, bult 'eereifed. in the yeal
1287, th'e Aragon'efe fotrred an union in oppo
fition to Alfonflo II. and obliged the King no
only to comply with their demandss btlt to ra
tify a privilege so fatal tq the power of the crown

,urita Anales, torh. i. p. '32. {n the yeai

.1344', ab uni'kd was formed against Peter IV,
witlh 'eiual feuccfs, anda netr ati'ficarion of the
'Bprivilege wasexltorted. Ztirta, tomt. ii, p. 202
Eut soon afrer! the 'King having defeated the
keaders of t'tle 'alnion in battle, the privilege 6o
union WAt finaity abrogated it the Cortes, and all
the laws or records which conhtait'ed 'any confir,
'nation of it, were cancelled or destroyed. The
King, in preftnce of the Cortes, called for the
ctt whereby 'he had ratified the union, and hav-
in'lg wounded lis hand with his poiniard, he held
i:t a'bove the record, "' That privilege, lays he,
" which has been ;t fatal to the kingdom, and
' 'o injurious to royalty, should be effaced

w' with the blood of aKing." 'Zirita, tom ii.

p. '2i~. The law abolishing the union is pub-
itehd. Fuer'os & Obfervanc. lib. ix. p. i78;
Frmn that period the J'uftiza became the conti-
,tutional giuaediin of publidk liberty, and his
power and jurisdiction occasioned none of those
'Vilentibcnvulfiohs 'which the tu'multuary privi-
Iege f 'the union was apt to produce. The con-
iitntitin of Aragon, however, flill remained ex-
rtieiielv free. One 'source 6f this liberty was
tomn th: early dtndmiflion of the representatives
reitites 'nt 'the Cortt. It 'feerts probable, from

Zurita,

Zurira, that burgesses were constituent members
of the Cortes from its first institution. He men-
tions a meeting of Cortes, A. D. 1 33, in which
the pr1-curadores de las ciudades y villas were pre-
sent. Tom. i. p. 51. This is the constitutional
language in which their prelence is declared in
the Corres, after the journals of that court were
regularly kept. It is probable, that an historian
so accurate as Zurita, would not have used theie
words, if he had not taken them from tome au-
thentick record. It was more than a century
after this period before the representatives of ci-
ties formed a constituent part in the supreme as-
femblies of the other European nations. The
free spirit of the Aragonefe government is con-
fpicuous in many particulars. The Cortes not
only opposed the attempts of their Kings to in-
crease their revenue, or toextend their preroga-
tive, but they claimed right and exercised powers
which will appear extraordinary even in a coun-
try accustomed to the enjoyment of liberty. In
the year 12'86, the Cortes claimed the privilege
of naming the members of the King's council
and the officers of his ihoufllold, and they seem
to have obtained it 'for some time. Zurita, tom.
i. p. 303, 307. It was the privilege of the
Cortes to name the officers who commanded the
troops Taifed by their authority. This seems to
be evident from a paflage in Zurita. When the
'Cortes, in the year 1503, raised a body of troops
to be employed in Italy, it pasTed an ad empow-
ering the King to name the officers who should
command them, Zurita, tom v. p. 2p74; which
plainly implies that without this warrant, it did
not belong 'to him in virtue of his prerogative.
In the Fueros '& Obfervancias del reyno de Ara-
gon, two general declarations of the rights and
privileges of the 'AragoneLe are publihed ; the
one in the reign of Pedro . A. D. z283, the

other

other in that of James II. A, D. I325. They
are of such length, that I cannot infcrt them,
but it is evident from there, that not only the
privileges of the nobility, but the rights of the
people, personal as well as political, were, at
that period, more extentive, and better under.
tsood than any kingdom in Europe. Lib. i. p.
7, 9. The oath by which the King bound him.
lelf to observe those rights and liberties of the
people, was very solemn. Ibid. p. 14. b. & p.
5. The Cortes of Aragon difcov ered not only
thejealoufy and vigilance, which are peculiar to
free states, in guarding the essential parts of the
constitution, but they were scrupulously atten-
tive to observe the most minute forms and cere-
monies to which they were accustomed. Accord-
ing to the eftablilhed laws and customs of Ara-
gon, no foreigner had liberty to enter the hall
in which the Cortes assembled. Ferdinand, in
the year 1481, appointed his Queen, Ilabella,
regent of the kingdom, while he was absent
during the course of the campaign. The law
required that a regent should take the oath of
fidelity in pretence of the Cortes; but as Ifa-
bella was a foreigner, before she could be ad-
mitted, the Cortes thought it necessary topafs
an at authorizing the ferjeant-porter to open
the door of the hall, and to allow her to enter;
· so attentive were they, faysZurita, to obfcrve
" their laws and forms, even such as may seem
" molt minute." Tom. iv. p. 313.

THFir Aragonefe were no leTs solicitous to fe-

cure the personal rights of individuals, than to
maintain tlie freedom of the constitution; and
the (pirt of their statutes with respect to bothi
was equally liberal. Two faats relative to this
matter merit observation. By an express flatute
in the year 1325, it was declared to be unlawful

to

to put any native Aragonefe to the torture. If
he could not be convicted by the teflimony of
witnesses, he was infiantly absolved. Zurita,
tom. ii. p. 66. Zurita records the regulation
with the fatisfadion natural to an historian, when
ie contemplates the humanity of his country-
men. He compares the laws of Aragon to those
of Rome, as both exempted citizens and free-
men from such ignominious and cruel treatment,
and had recourse to it only in the trial of slaves.
Zurita had reason to bellow such an encomium
on the laws of his country. Torture was at that
time permitted by the laws of every other nation
in Europe. Even in England, from which the
mild lpirit of legislation has long banished it,
torture was not, at that time, unknown. Ob-
servations on the Statutes, chiefly the more an-
tient, &-c. p. 66.

THE other sac shows, that the fame spirit

which influenced the legislature, prevailed among
the people. In the year i485, the religious zeal
of Ferdinand and Isabella, prompted them to in-
troduce the inquisition into Aragon. Though
the Aragonefe were no less superstitiously attach-
ed, than the other Spaniards, to the Roman Ca-
tholick faith, and no lelsdefirous to root out the
feeds of error and of heresy which the Jews and
Moors had scattered, yet they took arms against
the inquisitors, murdered the chief inquisitor,
and long opposed the establishment of that tri-
bunal. The reason which they gave for their
condu&t, was, that the mode of trial in the in-
qlifition, was inconfinlent with liberty. The
criminal was not confronted with the witnesses,
he was not acquainted with what they depolied
againfl him, he was futbjeded to torture, and
the goods of persons condemned were conficat-
ed. Zurita tnales, tom. iv. p. 341.

347

THE form of Government in the kingdom 61

Valencia, and principality of Catalonia, which
were annexed to the crown of Aragon, was like.
wife extremely favourable to liberty. The Va.
lencians enjoyed the privilege of union in the
fame manner with the Aragonefe. But they had
no magistrate resembling the Jufliza. The Ca-
talonians were no less jealous of their liberties
than the two other nations, and no less bold in
afterting them. But it is not necessary for illus-
trating the following history, to enter into any
farther detail concerning the peculiarities in the
constitution of these kingdoms.

NOTE XXXII. S .

S IE .

I . .155.

I HAVE searched in vain among the historians

of Castile, for such information as might enable
me to trace the progress of laws and government
in Castile, or to explain the nature of the con.
;fitution with the fame degree of accuracy,
wherewith I have described the political slate of
Aragon. It is manifest, not only from the hifto-
rians of Castile, but from its antient laws, par-
ticularly theiFuero Juzgo, that its monarchs were
originally eletive. Ley 2, 5, -. They were
chosen !by the bishops, the nobility, and the
people, ibid. It appears from the fame vene-
rable code of laws, that the prerogative of the
Caflilian monarchs was extremely limited. Vil-
laldiego in his commentary on these laws, pro-
duces many fads and authorities in confirma-
tion of both there particulars. Dr. Geddes, who
was well acquainted with Spanish literature,
complains that he could find no author who gave
a difind account of the Cortes, or supreme as-
:fembly of the nation, or who described the man-
ner in which it was held, or mentioned the pre-
cife number of members who had a right to fit
in it. He produces, however, from Gil Gon-

zaiss

sales d'Avila, who published a history of Henry
II. the writ of summons to the town of Abula,
requiring it to chute representatives to appear in
the Cortes which he called to meet A. D. 1390.
From this we learn, that Prelates, Dukes, Mar-
quiffes, the masters of the three military orders,
Conde's and Riccos-hombres were required to
attend. These composed the bodies of ecclefi-
afticks and nobles, whish formed two members
of the legislature. The cities which sent mem-
bers to that meeting of the Cortes, were forty-
eight. The number of representatives (for the
cities had right to chute more or fewer, accor-
ding to their refpetive dignity) amounted to an
hundred and twenty-five. Geddes Mifcellane-
ous Trats, vol.'i. 331. Zurita having occasion
to mention the Cortes which Ferdinand held at
Toro, A. D. I505, in order to secure to himself
the government of Castile after the death of Ifa-
bella, records with his usual accuracy, the names
of the members present, and of the cities which
they represented. From that lift it appears,
that only eighteen cities had deputies in this
assembly. Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 3.
What was the occasion of this great inequality,
in the number of cities represented in there two
meetings of the Cortes, 1 am unable to explain.

NOTE XXXIIT. SEC T. III. p. I57.

A CREAT part of the territory in Spain was

engrolled by the nobility. L. Marineus Sicu-
lus, who cornpofed his treatise de Rebus Hil-
pinia during the reign of Charles V. gives a
catalogue of the Spanifl nobility, together with
the yearly rent of their estates. According to
his account, which he affirms was as accurate as
the nature of the subje6t would admit, the fum

total

total of the annual revenue of their lands amoun't
ed to one million four hundred and eighty-two
thousand ducats. If we make allowance for the
vast difference in the value of money in the sis-
teenth century, from that which it now bears,
and confider that the catalogue of Marinaeus in-
cludes only the 'itulados, or nobility, whose
families were distinguished by some honorary
title, their wealth must appear very great. L;
Marinaus ap. Schotti Scriptores Hifpan. vol. i.
p. 323. The Commons of Castile, in their con-
tests with the crown, which I shall hereafter
relate, complain of the extensive property of the
nobility, as extremely pernicious to the king-
dom. In one of their manifesto's they alfert,
that from Valladolid to St. Jago in Galicia,
which was an hundred leagues, the crown did
not poflefs more than three villages. All the
reft belonged to the nobility, and could be sub-
jeteed to no publick burden. Sandov. Vidadel
Emperor. Carl. V. vol. i. p. 422. It appears
from the testimony of authors quoted by Bova-
dilla, that these vast poffeflions were bestowed
upon the Ricos-hombres, hidalgos, and cavalleros
by the Kings of Cafrile, in reward for the affif-
tance, which they had received from them in
expelling the Moors. They likewise obtained
by the fame means, a considerable influence in
the cities, many of which antiently depended
upon the nobility. Politica para Corregidores;
Amb. 1750. fol. vol. i. 440, 44z.

NOTE XXXIV. Ssc TII. II .

p. 160.

I H AvE been able to discover nothing certain,

as 1 observed Note XVIIl. with refpeA to (he
origin of communities or free cities in Spain.
It is probable, that as soon as these were recover-

ed

ed from the Moors, the inhabitants who fixed
their residence in them, being persons of dit-
tinction and credit, had all the privileges of
municipal government and jurifdition, confer-
red upon them. Many striking proofs occur of
the splendour, wealth, and power of the Spanilh
cities. Hieronymus Paulus wrote a delcription
of Barcelona in the year 1491, and compares the
dimensions of the town to that of Naples, and
the elegance of its buildings, the variety of its
manufactures, and the extent of its commerce
toFlorence. Hieron. Paulusap. Scottum. Script.
Hifp. ii. 844. Marineus describes Toledo as a
large and populous city. A great number of
its inhabitants were persons of quality, and of il-
luftrious rank. Its commerce was great. It
applied particularly to the manufactures of silk
and wool; and the number of inhabitants em-
ployed in these two branches of trade, amounted
nearly to ten thousand. Marin. ubi supr. p.
308. I know no city, fays he, that I would pre-
ser to Valladolid for elegance and splendour.
Ibid. p. 312. We may form foine eflimate of
its populousness from the following circumftan-
ces. The citizens took arms in the year 1516,
in order to oppose a meal'ure concerted by car-
dinal Ximenes, and they muttered in the city,
and in the territory which belonged to it, thirty
thousand fighting men. Sandov. Vida del Em-
per. Carl. V tom. i. p. 81. The manufactures
carried on in the towns of Spain, were not in-
tended merely for home consumption, they were
exported to foreign countries, and that com-
merce was a considerable source of wealth to the
inlabitants. The maritime laws of Barcelona,
are the foundation of mercantile juriitrudtnce
in modern times, as the Leges Rhoaiae were
among the antients. All the commercial flates
in Italy adopted these laws, and regulated thcir
trade according to them. Sandi Storia Civile

Ven,-

Veneziana, Vol. ii. 865. It appears from feve-
ral ordonances of the Kings of France, that the
merchants of Aragon and Caffile were received
on the fame footing, and admitted to the fame
privileges with those of Italy. Ordonances des
Roys, &c. tom. ii. p. 135. iii. i66, 504, 635.
Cities in such a flourishing Rfate became a re-
fpectable part of the society, and were entitled
to a considerable share in the legislature. The
magistrates of Barcelona aspired to the highest
honour a Spanish subjea can enjoy, that of be
ing covered in the pretence of their forereign,
and of being treated as grandees of the kingdom.
Origin de la dignidad de Grande de Castilla por
Don Alonfo Carillo. Madr. 1657. p. I8.

NOTE XXXV. SECT. III. p. 162.

THE military order of St. Jago, the molt ho-

nourable and opulent of the three Spanish orders,
was instituted about the year 11 70. The bull
of confirmation by Alexander III. is dated A.D.
1 176. At that time a considerable part of
Spain was subjet to the Moors, and the whole
country much exposed to the depredations, not
only of the enemy, but of banditti. It is no
wonder, then, that an institution, the object of
which was to oppose the enemies of the Chriltian
faith, and to restrain and punish those who dif
turbed the publick peace, should be extremely
popular, and meet with general encouragement.
The wealth and power of the order became so
great, that one historian fays, that the Grand
Master of St. Jago, was the perfbn in Spain of
greatest power and dignity next to the Kii g .,!.
Anton. Nebrifenfis, ap. Schott. SLcr,'. ilp.i1
812. Another oblerves, that the t)rdl'r Pof
feted every thing in Castile that a Kitg ,v.rl

1Us0

tnolf desire to obtain. Zurita Anales, v. 22.
The'kiights took the vows of 6bedience, of po-
verty, and of conjugal chaflity. By the former
they were bound implicitly to olcy the com-
mands of their grand master. The order could
briig into the field a thousand men at arms. JEI.
Ant. Nebref. p. 813. If these men at arms were
accompanied as was usual in thai age, this was
a formidable body of cavalry. There belonged
to this order eighty-four commanderies, and two
hundred priories and other benefices. .Diferta-
tions fur la Chevalerie par Hon. de St. Marie, p.
26z. It is easy to fee how formidable to his so-
vereign the command of there troops, the ad-
ministration of such revenues, and the disposal
of so many offices, muff have rendered a subject
The other two orders, though inferior to that
of St. Jago in power and wealth, were never-
thelefs very considerable. When the conquest
of Granada deprived the knights of St. Jago of
those enemies against whom their zeal was origi-
nally directed, superstition found out a new ob-
jet, in defence of which they engaged to em-
ploy their courage. To their usual oath, they
added the following clause: We swear to be-
lieve, to maintain, and to contend in publick
and in private, that the Virgin Mary, the mo-
rltr ofGod, our Lady, was conceived without
the stain of original fin." This singula!r additi-
on was made about the middle of the ieventeenth
century. Honorc de St. Marie Diflertations,
&c. p. 263.

NOTE XXXVI. SIc. JI. p. 164.

I HAVE frequently ib;d occasion to take notice
oFthe defects in police during the middle ages,
occasioned by the ieeblenefs cfgovernmcnt, and
ihe want of proper libordination anong the lif-
ferent ranks of men. 1 have oblfrvcd in a tbr-

Vo.,. I. A a mer

iner note, that this greatly interrupted thd
intercourse between nations, and even be-
tween diffei:ent places in the fame kingdom,
The description which the Spanifi historians
give of the frequency of rapine, murder, and
every aa of violence, in all the provinces of
Spain, are amazing, and present to us the idea
of society but little removed from the disorder
and turbulence of that which has been called a
state of nature. Zurita Anales de Arag. i. 175.
]El. Ant. Nebriffenfis rer. a Ferdin. geftar. Hist,
ap. Schottum II. 849. Though the excess of these
disorders rendered the inftitu tion of the Santa Her-
mandad necessary, great care was taken atfirt to
avoid giving any offence or alarm to the nobility.
Thejurifdidtion of the judges of the Hermandad
was expressly confined to crimes that violated
the publick peace. All other offences were left
to the cognizance of the ordinary judges. If a
person was guilty of the moft'notorious perjury,
in any trial before ajudge of the Hermandad, he
could not punish him, but was obliged to remit
the cafe to the ordinary judge of the place. Com.
mentaria in Regias Hifpan. Conftitut. per Alph.
de Azevedo, pars v. p. 22o, &c. son Duaci,
I612. Notwithstanding these restrictions, the
Barons were sensible how much the -lermandad
would encroach on theirjurifdiAion. In Caflile,
forie opposition was made to the institution; but
Ferdinand had the address to obtain the confeni
of the Constable to the introduction of the Her.
mandad into that part of the kingdom wherehii
estate lay; and by that means, as well as the
popularity of the institution, he surmounted eve
ry obstacle that Itood in its way. El. Ant. Ne
briffen. 851. In Aragon, the iNoblescombinec
against it with greater spirit; and IFrdinand
though he supported it with vigour, was obligec
to make tome conceflions in order to reconcile
them. Zurita Anales de Arag. iv. 356. Thi

poweC
354

iower and revenue of the Hermandad in Castile
eems to have been vety great. Ferdinand, when
preparing for the war against the Moors of Gra-
nada, required of the Hermandad to furnish him
sixteen thouifand beasts of burden, together with
eight thotfand men to condut them, and he ob-
tairied what he deinarided. .El. Ant. Nebriff.
88i. The Hermandad has been fotind tb be of
so much use in preserving peace, and restraining
or detecting crimes, that it is fill continued in
Spain, although it be no longer necessary either
for rrioderating the power of the nobility, or ex-
tending that of the crown.

NOTE XXXVII. SECT. III. p. 167.

NOTHING is rmore common amiong Antiquari-
ans, and there is not a more copious source of
error, than to decide concerning the institutions
and manners of past ages, by the forms and
ideas which prevail in their own times. The
French lawyers in the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries having found their sovereigns in poses-
sion of abfilute power, seem to think it a duty
incumbent on them, to maintain that such un-
bounded authority belonged to the crown in eve-
ry period of their monarchy. " The govern-
ment of France, fays M. de Real very gravely,
is purely monarchical at this day, as it was from
the beginning. Our Kings were ablolute origi-
nally as they are at present " Science du Go-
vernment, tom. ii. p. 3i. It is impoflible, how-
ever, to conceive two states of civil society more
unlike to each other, than that of the French
nation under Clovis, and that under Louis XV.
It is evident fromr the codes of laws of the vari-
ous tribes which fettled in Gaul and the countries
adjacent to it, as well as from the hiffory of
Gregory of Tours, and other early annalilts, that

A a 2 among

among all these people the form of governmen
was extremely rude and simple, and that the,
had scarce begun to acquire the first rudiment
of that order and police which are necessary it
extensive societies. The King or leader had th
command of soldiers or companions, who fol
lowed his standard from choice, not by con
itraint. I have produced the clearest evidenc
of this, Nbte VI. An event related by Gregor)
of Tours, lib iv. c. 14, affords the mot ftrik
ing proof of the dependance of the early Frenci
Kings on the sentiments and inclinations of their
people. Clotaire I. having marched at the head
of his army, in the year 553, against the Saxons,
that people, intimidated at his approach sued for
peace, and offered to pay a large fum to the of-
fended monarch. Clotaire was willing to close
with what they proposed. But his army insist-
ed to be led forth to battle. The King employ-
ed all his eloquence to persuade them to accept
of what the Saxons were ready to pay. The Sax-
ons, in order to tooth them, increased their ori-
ginal offer. The King renewed his follicitations:
But the army enraged, ruffed upon the King,
tore his tent in pieces, dragged him out of it,
and would have slain him on the fpor, if he had
not consented to lead them instantly against the
enemy.

IF the early monarchs of France pofleffed such

limited authority, even while at the head of their
army, their prerogative during peace will be
found to be fill more confined. They ascended
the throne not by any hereditary right, but in
confequ:nce of the election of their fubj:tls. In
order to avoid an unnecessary number ofquotati
onhi, I refer my readers to Hottomanni Franco-
gallia, cap. vi. p. 47. edit. 1573, where tlhy will

find
356-

find the ftlleft proof of this fiomn Gregory of
Tours, Amoinus, and the mos authentiick hil-
torians of the Merovingian Kings. The effet
of this eletion was not to invest them with
absolute power. Whatever related to the ge-
ncral welfare of the nation, was ffbmitted rd
publick deliberation, and determined by the
suffrage of the people, in the annual afferi-
blies called Les Champs des Mars, and Tcs
Champs de Mai. These aflmnblies were called
Champs, because, according to the euiftom of all
the barbarous nations, they were held in the
open air, in some plain capable of containing the
vast number of persons who had a right to be
present. Jo. Jac. Sorberus de Conitiis veteruni
Germanorum. vol. i. § 19, &c. They were de-
nominated Champs de Mars and de Mai, from
the Months in which they were held. Every
free man seems to have had a right to be present
in these assemblies. Sorberus, ibid. § 133, &c.
The ancient annals of the Franks dcfcribe the
persons who were pre:ent in tbhe assembly held
A. D. 788, in these words: In placito Ingelhei-
menli conveniunt pontifices, mnjores, minores,
ficerdotes, reguli, duces, comites, praefeA.i, cives,
oppidani, Apuid Sorber. § 304. There every
thing that concerned the happiness of their
country, fays an ancient historian, every thing
that could beof benefit to the Franks was con-
fidered, and enjoined. Fredegarius ap. Dt
Cange Gloffar. voc. Campus Martii. Chlothari-
us It. describes the bufinels, and acknowledges
t!e authority of these assemblies. They are cal-
led, fays he, that whatever relates to the com-
'non safety mnay be confidered and resolved by
commion deliberation; and whatever they de-
te'mine, to that I will conform. Am.inus de
Gest. Franc. lib. iv. c. i. ap. Bouquet Recueil. iii.
'16. The fiatutory claufcs, or words of legi-
lative authority in the decrees ified in these
flemblies, run not in the name of the King alone.

A a 3 " We

V' We have treated, fays Childebert, in a decree

A. D. 532, in the assembly of March, together
with our Nobles, concerning some affairs, and we
now publish the Fonclufion, that it may come
to the knowledge of all." Childeb. Decret. ap
Bouquet Recueil des Hiftor. tom. iv. p. .. We
have agreed together with (our vassals. Ibid. § 2
It is agreed in the assembly in which we were all
united. Ibid. § 4. The Salic laws, the mol
venerable monument of French jurifpruderce,
were enated in the fame manner. Diitaveruni
Saiicam legem pro:eres ipfius gentis, qui tune
temporis apud earn erant Retores. Sunt au-
ter eledi de pluribus viri quatuor-qui pei
tres Mallos convenientes, omnes caufarum ori.
gines follicit6 difcui rendo, tradantes de fingulis
judicium decreverurt hoc modo. Pr$f. Leg
Salic. ap. Bouquet, Ibid. p. i 22. Hoc decretum
eft apud regem & principes ejus, & apud
cundum populum chriftianum, qui infra regnun
Merwingorum confiftunt. Ibid. p. 124. Nay,
even in their charters, the Kings of the firt race
are careful to specify that they were granted witl
the consent of their vassals. Ego Childebertuw
Rex una cum confenfu & voluntate Francorum,
brc. A D. 558. Bbuquet, ibid. 6'2. Chlotha
rius III. una cum patribus noftris epifcnpis, opti
matibus, caeteri;que palatii noftri minitiris, A. D
664. Ibid. 648. De confenfu fidelium noftro-
rum. Mably Obferv. tom. i. p. 239. The hifto
rians likewise describe the fundtions of the Kint
in the national assembles in such terms, as implO
that his authority there was extremely friall
and that every thing depended on the court it
feilf Ipfe Rex (fays the authors of Annale
Francorum, fpeakil;gof the field of March) fede
bat in fella regia, ciicumfiante exercitu, pracC
piebatque is, die illo, quicquid a Francis decre
.tuum erat. Bouquet Recueil, tom. ii. p. 647

THAr

THAT the general assemblies exercised fu-

premejurifdiaion over all perfbns, and with reC-
peCt to all causes, is so evident as to stand in
need of no proof. The trial of Brunehaut. A. D.
613, how unjust soever the sentence against her
may be, as related by Fredegarius, Cjr.on. cap.
42. Bouquet. ibid. 430. is in itftlf sufficient
proof of this. The notorious violence and ini-
quity of the sentence serve to demonfirate the
extent of jurildiction which this assembly pof.
feled, as a Prince so sanguinary as Clothaire II.
thought the fandtion of its authority would be
sufficient to juftily his rigorous treatment of the
mother and grandmother of so many Kings.

WITH refpeC to conferring donatives on the, a
Prince, we may observe that among nations
whose manners and political institutions are fim-
ple, the publick, as well as individuals, having
few wants, they are unacquainted with taxes,
and free uncivilized tribes disdain to submit to
any stated imposition. This was remarkably the
cafe of the Germans, and of all the various peo-
pie that iffurd from that country. Tacitus pro-
nounces two tribes not to be of German origin,
because they submitted to pay taxes. De Mo-
rib. Germ. c. 43; and speaking of another tribe
according to the ideas prevalent in Germany, he
fays, " they were not degraded by the impofi-
tion of taxes." Ibid. c. 29. Upon their fettle-
ment in Gaul, we may conclude that while elat-
ed with the consciousness of viaory, they would
not renounce the high-fpirited ideas of their an-
ceftors, or voluntarily Ijlbmit to a burthen which
they regarded as a badge of servitude. The
evidence of the earliest records and historians
luftify this conclusion. M. de Montesquieu in
the twelfth and subsequent chapters of the thir-
teenth book of l'Efprit des Loix, and M. de

A a 4 Mably

Mably Obfervat. fur 1'Hifil. de France, tom. i.
p. 247. have investigated this fait with great at-
tention, and have proved clearly that the pro.
perty of no ftree-ir:a an ridg tthe Franks uwas
lubject to aty stated tax' That the state re-
quired nothing from persons ot this rank but
military service at their own expenee, and that
they flould entertain the King in their houses
when he was upon any ptdgrefs through his do-
minions, or his officers when sent on any public
employmenr, furnishing them with carriages and
horles. Monarchs lubfifted almost entirely up-
ion -the revenues of their own domains, and up-
on the perquilites arising from the adminifira-
tion of jufice, together with a few small fines
and forfeitures exadted from those who had been
guilty of certain trelpaffes. It is foreign from
my subjed to enumerate there. The reader
may find them in Obfervat. de M. de Mably,
vol. i. p. 267.

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by

free-men to their sovereign it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual assembly of March or May
it was the euftom to make the King a present of
money, of horses or arms, or of tome other
thing of value. This was an ancient cuflom,
and derived from their ancefors the Germans.
Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri
princi,ibusvel armentorum vel frugum, quod
pro honore acceptum, etiarn neceflitatibus tub-
.enit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 15. Thele
gifts, if we riay form a judgment concerning
them from the general terms in which they are
mentioned by the ancient hitorians, were con-
fiderable, and made no small part of the royal
revenue. Many passages to this purpcfe are pro-
duced by M. du Cange, DifTert. iv. fur Join-
ville, ;.l. Sometimes a conquered people Ipe.
cified the gift whicl they bound themfclves

tQ

to pay annually, and it was exa&ed as a debt if
they tailed. Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange,
ibid. p. 155. It is probable that the firift fep to-
wards taxation was to ascertain the value of
these gifts which were originally gratuitous, and
to compel the people to pay the fum at which
they were rated. Still, however, some memory
of their original was preserved, and the aids
granted to monarchs in all the kingdoms of Eu-
rope were termed benevolences or free gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were

raised to the throne by the election of the peo-
ple, Pepinus Rex pius, fays an author who
wrote a few years after the transaction which he
records, per authoritatemn Papa, & unEtionem
fandi chrifmatis, & eledionem omnium Fran-
corum in regni folio fublimatus eft. Claufula
de Pepirii confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des
Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the
chief men of the nation had transferred the crown
from one family to another, an oath was exat-
ed of them that they should maintain on the
throne the family which they had now pro-
moted; ut nunquam de alterius lumbis regem
in aevo prafumant eligere. Ibid. p. lo. This
oath the nation faithfully observed during a con-
fiderable space of time. The posterity of Pip-
pin kept poffeflion of the throne ; but with ref-
pet to the manner of dividing their dominions
among their children, Princes were obliged to
consult the general assembly of the nation. Thus
Pippin himself, A. D. 768, appointed his two
sons, Charles and Carlomannus, to reign asjoint
sovereigns; but he did this, una cum confenfu
Francorum & procerum fuorum feu & epifco-
porum, before whom he laid the matter in their
general assembly. Conventus apud fanhtum
Pionyfium. Capitular. vol. i, p. 187. This defti-

nation

Mably Obfervat. fur l'Hift. de France, torn i.
p. 247. have invefligated this fadt with great at-
tention, and have proved clearly that the pro-
perty of no free~-rhan amriong the Franks was
subject to any flated tax. That the state re-
quired nothing from persons of this rank but
military service at their own expence, and that
they floutdl entertain the King in their houses
when he was upon any prdgrefs through his do-
minions, or hisofficers when sent on any public
employment, furnishing them with carriages and
horses. Monarchs lubfifted almost entirely up-
on, the revenues of their own domains, and up-
on the perquisites arising from the adminiltra-
, tion of justice, together with a few small fines
and forfeitures exated from those who had been.
guilty of certain trelpaffes. It is foreign from
my subjed to enumerate there. The reader
may find them in Obfervat. de M. de Mably,
vol. i. p. 267.

WHEN any extraordinary aid was granted by

free-men to their sovereign it was purely volun-
tary. In the annual assembly of March or May
it was the custom to make the King a present of
money, of horses or arms, or of tome other
thing of value. This was an ancient custom,
and derived from their ancestors the Germans.
Mos eft civitatibus, ultro ac viritim conferri
princi ibusvel armentorum vel frugum, quod
pro honore acceptum, etiam neceflitatibus iub-
yenit. Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 15. There
gifts, if we may form a judgment concerning
them from the general terms in which they are
mentioned by the ancient hiforians, were con-
fiderable, and made no small part of the royal
revenue. Many passages to this purpose are pro-
duced by M. du Cange, Dissert. iv. fur Join.
ville, r.. Sometimes a conquered people (pe.
Fified the gift which they bound tlemnfclve'

tc

to pay annually, and it was exacted as a debt if
they failed. Annales Metenfes, ap. Du Cange,
ibid. p. 155. It is probable that the first itep to-
wards taxation was to ascertain the value of
these gifts which were originally gratuitous, and
to compel the people to pay the fum at which
they were rated. Still, however, obme memory
of their original was preserved, and the aids
granted to monarchs in all the kingdoms of Eu-
rope were termed benevolences or free gifts.

THE Kings of the second race in France were

raied to the throne by the election of the peo-
ple, Pepinus Rex pius, fays an author who
wrote a few years after the tranfa&ion which he
records, per authoritatem Papa, & unetionem
fan(ti chrifmatis, & eledionem omnium Fran-
corum in regni folio fublimatus eft. Claufula
de Pepini confecratione ap. Bouq. Recueil des
Hiftor. tom. v. p. 9. At the fame time, as the
chief men of the nation had transferred the crown
from one family to another, an oath was exact-
ed of them that they should maintain on the
throne the family which they had now pro-
moted; ut nunquam de alterius lumbis regem
in aevo prasfumant eligere. Ibid. p. Io. This
oath the nation faithfully observed during a con-
fiderable space of time. The pollerity of Pip-
pin kept poffeflion of the throne; but with ref-
pedt to the manner of dividing their dominions
among their children, Princes were obliged to
consult the general assembly of the nation. Thus
Pippin himself, A. D. 768, appointed his two
fTns, Charles and Carlomannus, to reign as joint
sovereigns; but he did this, una cum conifnfu
Francorum & procerum fuorum feu & epifco-
porum, before whom he laid the matter in their
general assembly. Conventus apud sanctum
Dionyfium. Capitular. vol. i, p. 187. This delti-

nation

nation the French confirmed in a subsequent asP
fembly, which was called upon the death of Pip-
pin , for, as Eginhart relates, they not only ap-
pointed them Kings, but by their authority they
regulated the limits of their refpedive territo-
ries, Vita Car. Magni ap. Bouquet Recueil, tom.
v. p. 90. In the fame manner, it was by the
authority of the supreme aliemblies that any dif-
pute which arose among the descendants of the
royal family was determined Charlemagne re-
cognizes this important part of their juriididtion,
and confirms it in his charter concerning the
partition of his dominions; for he appoints,
that, in cafe of any uncertainty with refpet to
the right of the several competitors, he whom
the people (hall chufe, shall succeed to the crown.
Capitular. vol. i. 442.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the assem-

bly of the nation, diflinguifhed by the name of
Conventus, Malli, Placita, were regularly al-
fembled once a year at least, and frequently
twice in the year. One of the most valuable
monuments of the hiflory of France is the trea-
tife of Hincmarus, archbifiop of Rheims, de
ordinePalatii. He died A.D. 882. only sixty-
eight years after Charlemagne, and he relates
in that short discourse the fads which were com-
municated to him by Adalhardus, a minister
and confident of Charlemngne. From him we
learn that this great monarch never failed to
hold the general assembly of his fubjeds every
year. In quo placito generalitas univerlbrum
majorum tam clericorum quam laicorum conve-
niebat. Hincm. oper. edit. Sirmondi, vol. ii.
c. 29. 211. In there assemblies, matters which
related to the general safety and state of the
kingdom were always discussed, before they en-
tered upon any private or less important bufi-
nef s. Ibid. c. 33. p. '13. His immediate fuc-

ceflors

geffors imitated his example, and tranfaated no
affair of importance without the advice of their
great council.

UNDER the second race of Kings, the genius of

the French government continued to be in a good
measure democratical. The nobles, the digni-
sied ecclesiastics, and the great officers of the
crown, were not the only members of the na-
tional council ; the people, or the whole body of
free men, either in person, or by their reprefen-
tatives, had a right to be present in it. Hinc-
marus, in describing the manner of holding the
general assemblies, fays, that if the weather was
favourable, they met in the open air, but, if
otherwise, they had different apartments allotted
to them, so that the dignified clergy were fepa-
rated from the laity, and the comites vel hujuf-
modi principes fibimet honorificabiliter a catera
multitudine fegregarentur. Ibid. p. c. 35. p.
1 4 Agobardus, archbishop of Lyons, thus
describes a national council in the year 833,
wherein he was present. Qui ubique conventus
extitit ex reverentiflimis epifcopis, & magnifi-
centillimis viris inluftribus, collegio quoque ab-
batum & comitum, promifcuaeque atatis &
dignitatis populo. lhe cetera multitudo of
Hincmarus is the fame with the populus of Ago-
bardus, and both describe the inferior order of
freemen, the fame who were afterwards known
in France by the name of the third efRate, and
in Elgland by the name of commons. The
people, as well as the members of higher digni-
ty, were admitted to a l(are of the legislative
power. Thus, by a law, A. D. 803. it is ordained,
' that the question shall be put to the people
with rcfpedt to every new law, and if they flall
agree to it, they (hall confirm it by their signature.
Capit. vol. i. 394 There are two capitularia
which convey to us a full idea of the part which
the people had in the administration of govern-

ment.

ment. When they felt the weight of any grie-
vance, they had a right to petition the so-
vereign for redress. One of these petitions, in
which they desire that ecclefiafticks might be
exempted from bearing arms, and from serving
in person against the enemy, is still extant. It
is addressed to Charlemagne, A. D. 803, and
expressed in such terms as could have been used
only by men conscious of liberty, and of the
extensive privileges which they possessed. They
conclude with requiring him to grant their de-
inand, if he wished that they fhouid any longer
continue faithful fubjets to him. That great
monarch, instead of being offended or furprized
at the boldness of their petition, received it in
a most gracious manner, and signified his wil-
lingnefs to comply with it. But sensible that he
himself did not possess legifiative authority, he
promires to lay the matter before the next gene-
ral assembly, that fuich things as were of com-
mon concern to all might be there confidered
and established by common content Capitul.
tom. i. p. 405-409 As the people by their
petitions brought matters to be proposed in the
general assembly, we learn from another capitu-
lare the form in which they were approved there,
and enacted as laws. The propositions were
read aloud, and then the people were required
to declare whether they assented to them or not.
They signified their assent by crying three times,
c' We are satisfied," and then the capitulare was
confirmed by the subscription of the monarch,
the clergy and the chief men of the laity.
Capitul. tom. i. p 627. A. ). 822 It seems
probable fiom a capitulare of Carolus Calvus,
A. D. 851, that the sovereign could not refute
his assent to what was proposed and establish-
ed by his fubjedts in the general assembly.
Tit. ix. § 6. Capitul. vol. ii. p. 47. It is un-
peceffary to multiply quotations concerning the

legislative

legislative power of the national assembly of
France under the second race, or concerning its
rights to determine with regard to peace and
war. The uniform flyle of the Capitularia is
an abundant confirmation of the former. The
reader who desires any farther information with
refpee to the latter, may consult Les Origines
ou 1'Ancien Gouvernement de ]a France, tom.
iii. p. 87. &c. What has been said with respect
to the admiflion of the people or their reprefen-
tatives in the supreme assembly merits attention
not only in tracing the progress of the French
government, but on account cf the light which
it throws upon a similar question agitated in
England, concerning the time when the com-
mons became part of the legislative body in that
kingdom.

N OTE XXXVIII. SE c T. II. p. 168.

THAT important change which the conflitu-

tion of France underwent, when thle gilative
power was transferred from the great council of
the nation to the King, has been explained by
the French antiquarians with lefscare, than they
befo\v in illustrating other events in their hiliio-
rv. For that realon I have en-,:eavoured with
the greater attention to trace the fleps which
led to this mmrnorable revolution. I shall here
add lome particulars which tend farther to illut:.
trate it. The Leges S.lic:, the Leges Burgiin-
dion um, and other c(odcs published by the feve..
ral tribes which fettled in Gaul, were general
laws extendi:g to every perlIon, to every pro-
vince and diltri('t where their authority was ac-
knowledged. But they si-em to hlave become
obsolete; and the reason of their fallling into dif-
ifc is very obvious. Almflt the whole proper-
ty of the nation was allodial when thele laws
wcre fiamned. Bat when the feudal infliturions

became

became general, and gave rife to an infinite va-
riety of questions peculiar to that species of te-
nure, the ancient codes were of no use in decid-
ing with regard to there, because they could not
contain regulations applicable to cafes which did
not exist at the time when they were compiled.
This considerable change in the nature of proper-
ty made it necessary to publish the new regulati-
ons contained in the Capitularia. Many of these
as is evident from the perufa! of them, were ge-
neral laws extending to the whole French nation,
in the general assembly in which they were en-
acted. The weakness of the greater part of the
monarchs of the second race, and the disorder
into which the nation was thrown by the depre.
dations of the Normans, encouraged the barons
to usurp an independent power formerly un-
known in France. The nature and extent of
thatjurifdidtion which they assumed, I have for-
merly confidered. The political union of the
kingdom was at an end, its ancient conftitutio!l
was difiblved, and only a feudal relation ftiblift-
ed between the King and his vassals. The regal
jurisdiction extended no further than the domains
of the crown. Under the lafl Kings of the fe-
cond race, these were reduced almost to nothing.
Under the first Kings of the third race, they
comprehended little more than the patrimontial
estate of Hugh Capet, which he annexed to the
crown. Even with this acccfiion, they conti-
nued to be very narrow. Velly. Hilt. de France,
tom. iii. p. 3z. Many of the most confiderab'c
provinces ot France did not at first acknowledge
Hugh Capet as a lawful Monarch. There are
ftillextant several charters, gra!rtce.. during the
first years of his reign, with this icnrarktabl:
clause in the form of dating the charter ; " Deo
" regnante, rege expeatante," regniante domit
no noftro Jesu Chrifto, Francis autem contro

i.'1

jus regnum ufurpante Ugone rege. Bouquet
Recueil. tom. x. p. 544. A Monarch whose
title was thus openly disputed, was not in a con-
dition to aflert the royal jurifdition, or to limit
that of the barons.

ALL these circumstances rendered it easy for

the barons to usurp the rights of royalty within
their own territories. The capitularia be-
came no less obfolcte than the ancient laws; local
customs were every where introduced, and be-
came the sole rule by which ill civil tranfadions
were conduted, and all causes were tried. The
wonderful ignorance, which became general in
France, during the ninth and tenth centuries,
contributed to the introduction of customary
law. Few persons, except ecclesiastics, could
read; and as it was not poflible for them to have
recourse to writen laws, either as their guide in
business, or their rule in adminiftringjuftice,
the customary law universally prevailed.

DURING this period, the general assembly of

the nation seems not to have been called, nor to
have once exerted its legislative authority. 1 o-
cal cuftorns regulated and decided every thing.
A firiking proof of this occurs in tracing the pro-
grefs of the French jurisprudence. The last of
the Capitularia collected by M. Baluze, was iffl-
ed in the year 921, by Ciharles the Simple. An
hundred and thirty years elapsed from that pe-
riod to the publication of the first orldonltnce of
the Kings of the third race, contained in the
great collection of M. L.ulriere, and the sirss or-
donance which appears eo be an act of legifl;tit;k
extending to the whole kingdom is that of Phili
Augustus, A. D. 1o. Od90 or. tomn. i. p. i,
18. During that long period of one hundred

and'

and sixty nine years, all tranfaftions were direst..
ed by local cuftors, and no addition was made
to the itatutory law of France. The ordonances,
previous to the reign of Philip Auguflus, con-
tain regulations, the authority of which did not
extend beyond the King's domains.

VARIOUS inflances occur of the caution with

which the King's of France ventured at firIt to
exercise legislative authority. M. l'Ab. de Ma-
bly produces an ordonance of Philip Auguflus,
A. D. 1 206, concerning the Jews, who, in that
age, were in some measure the property of the
lord in whose territories they resided. But it is
not so much an at of royal power,as a treaty of
the King with the countess of Champagne, and
the comte de Dampierre; and the regulations
in it seem to be established not by his authority,
but by their content. Obfervat. fur l'hift. de
France, ii. p. 355. In the fame manner an or-
donance of Louis VIII. concerning the Jews, A.
D. 223, is a contrac between the King and hil
nobles, with refped to their manner of treating
that unhappy race of men. Ordon. tom. i. p. 47,
The Eftabliflemens of St. Louis, though well
adapted to serve as general laws to the whole
kingdom, were not published as fuclh, but only
as a complete code of customary law, to be of
authority within the King's domains. The wi-
dom, the equity and tle order conspicuous in
that code of St. Louis, procured it a favourable
reception throughout the kit gdom. The vene
ration due to the virtues anl good intentions ol'
its autthor, contributed not a little to reconcile
the nation to that legillati e a!tl( ,;iv, which the
King began lo affumie. Soon, :i!'r irs rime, the
idea of the King's poffefling urr-nmc legillative
power became common. If, fiys '.aiiamanoir,
the King makes any cilablisimincnt ipccially for

hiti
368

his own domain, the barons may nevertheless
adhere to their ancient customs; but iftheefta-
blifhment be general, it shall be current through-
out the whole kingdom, and we ought to believe
that such establishments are made with mature
deliberation, and for the general guod. Cout de
Beauvoifis, c. 48. p. 265. Though the Kings
of the third race did not call the general aflem-
bly of the nation, during the long period from
Hugh Capet to Philip the Fair, yet they seem
to have consulted the biihops and barons who
happened to be pre'ent in their court, with rc-
pettt to any new law which they published. Ex-
amples of this occur Ordon. tom. i. p. 3 & 5
The practice seems to have continued as late as
the reign of St. Louis, when the legislative au-
thority of the crown was well established. Or-
don. tom. i. p. 58. A. D. 1 246. This attention
paid to the barons facilitated the King's acquir-
ing such full poffeflion of the legislative power,
as enabled them afterwards to exercise it with-
out observing that f,-rnia'ity.

THE assemblies, distinguished by the name of'
the States General, were first called, A. D. i302,
and were held occasionally fiom that period to the
3ear 1614, since lwhich time they have not been
'ilmmoned. These were \ ey differcnt from t .e
ancient afremblies or the 'French nation under
the Kings of the firfl and lfcoid race. I hecre
is no point with refpeCl to which the French an-
tiquarians are more generally agreed, than in
maintainin g that the States GeCneCl liad no fils-
iage in the paiii:ig of laws, and pcleflcd no
pr'op)-r juliliiiaion. T'l! whlil tenor of the
French hiliorly co)inrms tis ll pil ion!. The forin
rs proceeding iln tie States f(lner:il was ll:is,
Tlhe Kin, addrc i-d hinmfi: 11 to the whole body
::ifembled in one place, and laid before them the
laffirs on account of which he had iiimmoned
Vor,, i.
r b tlicm.

369

them. The deputies of each of the three orders,
of nobles, of clergy, and of the third estate, met
apart, and prepared their cahier or memorial,
containing their answer to the propositions which
had been made to them, together with the re.
presentations which they thought proper to lay
before the King. These answers and reprefen-
tations were confidered by the King in his coun-
cil, and generally gave rife to an ordonance.
These ordonances were not addressed to the three
estates in common. Sometimes the King addrefT-
ed an ordonance to each of the estates in parti-
cular. Sometimes he mentioned the assembly
of the three estates. Sometimes mention is made
only of the assembly of that estate to which the
ordonance is addressed. Sometimes no mention
at all is made of the assembly of estates, which
suggested the propriety of enacting the law. Pre-
face au tom. iii. des Ordon. p. xx. Thus the
States General had only the privilege of advising
and remonstrating ; the legislative authority re-
fided in the King alone.

NOTE XXXIX SECT. III . . 72

IF the parliament of Paris be confidered only

as the supreme court of justice, every thing re-
lative to its origin and jurifdiation is clear and
obvious. It is the ancient court of the King's
palace, new-modelled, rendered sedentary, and
invested with an extensive and ascertained jurif-
diAion. The power of this court, while em-
ployed in this part of its functions, is not the
objet of present consideration. The pretenfi-
ous of the parliament to contruul the exercise of
the legislative authority, and its claim of a right
to interpole with refped to publick aftfirs anni
the political administration of the kingdom,
lead to inquiries attended with greater diffi-
culty. As the officers and members of the

parliament

parliament of Paris were antiently nominat-
ed by the King, were paid by him, and on fe-
veral occasions 'were removed by him at
pleasure (Chroniq. Scandaleufe de Louis X[.
chez les Mem. de Comines, torn. ii. p. 51. Edit.
de M. Leng!et de Frefnoy), they cannot be con-
fidered as representatives of the people, nor
could they claim any share in the legislative
power as ating in their name. We mull fearcli
for some other fburce of this high privilege. She
parliament was originally compoted of the most
eminent persons in the kingdom. The peers of
France, ecclefiallicks of the highest order, and
noblemen of illustrious birth were members of
it, to whom were added some clerks and coun-
fellors learned in the laws. Paiquier Recher-
ches, p. 44, &c. Encyclopedie, tom. xii. Art.
Parlement, p. 3, 5. A court thus conflituted,
was properly'a committee of the States General
of the kingdom, and was compored of these
barons and fideles, whom the Kings of France
were accustomed to consult with regard to every
at ofjurifdicion or legislative authority. It was
natural, therefore, during the intervals between
the meetings of the States General, or dur;ng
those periods when that assembly was not call-
ed, to confilt the parliament, to lay matters of
publick concern before it, and to obtain its ap-
probation and concurrence, b-fore any ordo-
nance was publilhed, to which the people were
required to conform. 2. Under the second race
of Kings, every new law was reduced into pro-
per form by the Chancellor of the kingdom,
was propostd by him to the people, and when
enacted, was committed to him to be kept a-
mong the publick records, that lie might give
authentick copies of it to all who floilJd demand
them. Hincm. de ord. palat. c. 16. Capitul.
Car. Calv. tit. xiv. § i i. tit. xxxiii. The Chan-
cellor presided in the parliament of Paris at its

Bb z first

first infitution. Encyclopedie, tom. iii. art.
Cbancelie-, p. 88. It was therefore natural for
the King to continue to employ him in his an-
[ient functions of framing, taking into his culf
fody, and publishing the ordonances which were
issued. To an antient copy of the Capitularia
of Charlemagne, the following words are sub-
joined. Anno tertio Clementillfmi domini nollri
Caroli Augufli, sub ipso anno, hac faCta Capi-
tula funt, & confignata Stephano comiti, ut haec
manifefta faceret Pariflis mallo publico, & illa
legere faceret coram Scabineis, quod ita & fecit,
& omnes in uno confenferunt, quod ipfi volu-
ifient obfervare ufque in pofterum, etiam omnes
Scabinei, Epifcopi, Abbates, Comites, manu pro-
pria fubter fignaverunt. Bouquet iRecueil. tom.
v. p. 663. Mallus signifies not only the pub-
lick assembly of the nation, but the court of jus-
tice held by the comes, or mifflus dominicus.
Scabini were the judges, or the assessors of the
judges in that court. Here then seems to be a
very early instance, not only of laws being pub-
lifhed in a court of justice, but of their being
verified or confirmed by the subscription of the
judges. If this was the common pradtice, it na-
turally introduced the verifying of edicts in the
parliament of Paris. But this conjedture I pro-
pose with that diffidence, which 1 have felt in
all my rcaobnings concerning the laws and infli-
tu;ions of foreign nations. 3. This supreme
court of j.iflice in France was dignified with tlhe
appellation of parliament, the name by which
tihe gelneral aflchmbly of the nation was Lillili-

ngifhcel to.,arls tle close of the ficcond race of
Ki'ngs; and men, both in re;ifbnil, ;lan in 1con-
ilutt, iae wot.dclrClly i flue!,tced by llce filil;i-
Jiry of nanmes. The preflr ilng the anulitlEC
names of the magillrates, eclabl'ihcd wlile Ic-
publican g(vernmclt iibific.'nd in Rolme, enabli-l
Augtiuftu; ind Ilis fucccfloLrs to afliulne nIw powV-

erIS,

ers, with lets observation, and greater ease.
The bestowing the fame name in France upon
two courts, which were extremely different, con-
tributed not a little to confound their jurildidtion
and functions.

Ar.L these circumstances concurred in leadi!ng

the Kings of France to avail themselves of the
parliament of Paris, as the intirument of recon-
ciling the people to their exercise of legislative
authority. The French, accustomed to fee all
new laws examined and authorized before thiy
were published, did not sufficiently diRfinguifl
between the effect of performing this in the na-
tional assembly, or in a court appointed by the
King. But as that court was composed of re-
fpeitable members, and well flilled in the laws
of their country, when any new edi& rec-ived
its sanction, that was sufficient to dispose the
people to implici fibmiflion.

WHEN the praaice of verifying and )rgi/jr-:

ing the royal edicts in the parliament of Paris
became common, the parliament contended, that
this was necessary in order to give thitm lega
authority. It was ellablifhed as a fundamental
maxim in French jurisprudence, that no law
could be published in any other manner; that
without this formality, no edit or ordonance
could have any effect; that the people were not
bound to obey it, and ought not to confider it
as an edict or ordonance until it was verified in
the supreme court, afrer free deliberation. Roche-.
flax in des Parlemens de France, 4to. Gen. l 62 j.
i. 921i. The parliament, at different timer,
1aith with great fortitude and integrity, opposed
the will of their sovereigns, and notwithfland-
ilg their repeated and peremptory requisitions
and commandi hath refused to verify and pub-

B b 3 lifl

lins such edits, as it conceived to be oppressive
to the people, or subversive of the constitution
of the kingdom. Roche-flavin reckons that be-
tween the year 1562, and the year 1589, the
parliament refuted to verify more than a hun-
dred ediEts of the Kings. Ibid. 925. Many in-
flances of the spirit and constancy, with which
the parliaments of France opposed pernicious
laws, and asserted their own privileges, are enu-
merated by Limnaus Notitix Regni Francis,
lib. i. c. 9. p. 224.

BUT the power of the parliament to maintain

and defend this privilege, bore no proportion to
its importance, or to the courage with which
its members afterted it. When any monarch
was determined that an edit should be carried
into execution, and found the parliament in.
flexibly resolved not to verify or publifhl it, he
could easily supply this defect by the plenitude
of his regal power. He repaired to the parlia-
ment in person, he took possession of his feat of
justice, and commanded the ediEt to be read,
verified, registered, and publi(hed in his pre-
fence. Then, according to another maxim of
French law, the King himself being present,
neither the parliament, nor any magistrate what-
ever, can exercise any authority, or perform any
function. Adveniente Principe, ceffat magiftra-
tus. Roche-flavin. ibid. p. 928, 929. Ency-
clopedie, tom. ix. Art. Lit de .jiiice, p. 581.
Roche-flavin mentions several instances of Kings
who aaually exerted this prerogative, so fatal to
the residue of the rights ant liberties, tranf
mitted to the French by their ancestors. Pas
quier produces Iome inflances of the lame kind
Rech. p. 6r. Limnaus enumerates man)
others, which the length to which this note ha
swelled, prevents me frotn inserting at length

thougt

though they tend greatly to illustrate this im-
portant article in the French hiory, p. 245.
Thus by an exertion of prerogative, which,
though violent, seems to be constitutional, and
is justified by innumerable precedents, all the
efforts of the parliament to limit and controul
the King's legislative authority, are rendered in-
effectual.

I HAVE not attempted to explain the confti-

tution or jurifdic'ion of any parliament in France,
but that of Paris. All of them are formed upon
the model of that moit ancient and refpeaable
tribunal, and all my observations concerning i:
will apply with full force to them.

NOTE XL. SECT. III. p. 177.

THE humiliating poflure, in which a great

Emperor implored absolution, is an ev-ent so fin.
gular, that the words in which Gregory him-
self describes it, merit a place here, and convey
a friking picture of the arrogance of that Pon-
tiff. Per triduum, ante portam caftri, depofito
omni regio cultu, miferabiliter, utpote difcalcea-
tus, & laneis indutus, perfiftens, non prius cum
multo fietu apoftolicae miferationis auxilium, r&
consolationem implorari deftiti, quam mnnes
qui ibi aderant, 8F ad quos rumor ille pervenit,
ad tantam pietatem, & compaflionis mifericor-
diam movit, ut pro eo multis precibus & lacri-
mis intercedentes, omnes quidem infolitam
noflra mentis duritiem mirarentur; nonulli ve-
ro in nobis non apoftolica fedis gravitatem, fed
quasi tyranrica: fcritatis crudelitatem effe clama-
rent Epift. Gregor. ap. Memorie della Contefa

B b 4 Matilda

375

NMatilda da Fran. Mar. Fiorentini. Lucca. 1756,
vol. i. p. 174.

NOTE XLI. SECT. III. p. 186.

As I have endeavoured in the history to trace

the various steps in the progress of the conffitu-
tion of the Empire, and to explain the peculia-
rities in its policy \ery fully, it is not neceflary
to add much by way of illuftratioh. What ap-
pears to be of any importance I shall range un-
der diftin& heads.

I. WITH refpeA to the power, jurifdiaion

and revenue of the Emperors. A very jull idea
of these may be formed by attending tn the
view which 'ftffel gives of the rights of the
Emperors at two different periods. The first
at the close of the Saxon race, A. D. 1024.
These, according to his enumeration were the
right of conferring all the great ecclkfiaftical be-
nificesin Germany; of receiving the revenues
of them during a vacancy ; of Mort-main, or
of succeeding to the eiffTcs of ecclefiafticks who
di-d intestate. The right es confirming or of
anlnulling the elctions of the Popes. The right
of aGembling councils, and of appointing them
to d:cide co.cerlning the affairs of the church.
T'lii righr of conferring the title of King upon
tlh-ir 'vafils. The right of granting vacant fiefs.
'1l'l right of receiving the revenues of the Em-
pire, w)hether aiffing from the Imperial do-
Inains, from imports and tools, from gold or
iilter mines, film the taxes paid by the Jews,
fr fiorn f, rfeiiules. The right of governing
ihaly as irt proper sovereigns. The right ot
ercrtirng fice cities, and of cefablilhing fairs in
tlemn. The right of afficiblirg the diets ot

the

the Empire, and of fixing the time of their du-
ration. The right of coining money, and of con-
ferring that privilege on the states of the Em-
pire. The right of adminiftring both high and
lowjuftice within the territories of the different
states. Abreg6 p. 160. The other period is at
the extinction of the Emperors of the families
of Luxemburg, and Bavaria, A. D. 1437. Ac-
cording to the fame author the Imperial prer( ga-
ti' es at that time were the right of conferring
all dignities and titles, except the privilege of
being a state of the Empire. The right of Pre-
cesprimarile or of appointing once during their
reign a dignitary in each chapter or religious
house. The right of granting dispensations with
refped to the age of majority. The right of
erecting cities, and of conferring the privilege of
coining money. The right of calling the meet-
ings of the diet, and of presiding in them.
Abrege, &c. p. G57. It were easy to show that
M. Pfeffel is well founded in all there assertions,
and to confirm them by the testimony of the
inoft refpeetable authors. In the one period the
Emperors appear as m:ghty sovereigns with ex-
tensive prerogatives; in the other as the heads of
a confederacy with very limited powers.

THE revenues of the Emperors decreased still

more than their authority. The early Empe-
rors, and particularly those of the Saxon line,
betides their vast patrimonial or hereditary ter-
ritojies, possessed an extensive domain both in
Italy and Germany which belonged to them as
Emperors. Italy belonged to the Emperors as
their proper kingdom, and the revenues which
they drew from it were very considerable. The
first alienations of the Imperial revenue were
made in this country. The Italian cities having
acquired wealth, and aspiring at independance,

purchased

purchased their liberty from different Emperors,
as I have observed Note XV. The fums which
they paid, and the Emperors with whom they
concluded these bargains, are mentioned by
Cafp. Klockius de JErario Norimb. 1671. p. 85,
&c. Charles IV. and his son Wenceslaus diflipa-
ted all that remained of the Italian branch of
the domain. The German domain lay chiefly
upon the banks of the Rhine, and was under
the government of the Counts Palatine. It is
not easy to mark out the boundaries, or to efi-
rnate the value of this ancient domain, which
has been To long incorporated with the territories
of different Princes. Some hints with refpe&
to it may be found in the glossary of Speidelius
which he has intituled Speculum Juridico-Philo-
logico-politico-Hiftoricum Obfervationum, &c.
Norimb. 1673. vol. i. 679. 1045. a more full
account of it is given by Klockius de ]Erario, p.
84. Betides this, the Emperors poffelfed confi-
derable diftrits of land lying intermixed with
the estates of the Dukes and barons. They were
accustomed to visit these frequently, and drew
from them what was sufficient to fupportt their
court during the time of their residence. An-
nalifae, ap. Struv. tom. i. 6r r. A great part of
these were seized by the nobles during the long
interregnum, or during the wars occasioned by
the contests between the Emperors and the
court of Rome. At the fame time that such in-
croachments were made on the fixed or territo-
rial property of the Emperors, they were rob-
bed almost entirely of their casual revenues.
The Princes and barons appropriating to them-
selves taxes and duties of every kind, which had
usually been paid to them, Pfeffcl Abregc, p. 374.
The profuse and inconsiderate ambition of Char-
les IV. squandered whatever remained of the
Imperial revenues after so many defalcations.

He,

He, in the year 1376, in order to prevail with
the electors to chufe his son Wenceslaus King of
the Romans, promired each of them a hundred
thousand crowns. But being unable to pay so
largea fim, and eager to secure the election to
his son, he alienated to the three ecclesiastical
Electors, and to the Count Palatine, such coun-
triesas flill belonged to the Imperial domain on
the banks of the Rhine, and likewise made over
to them all the taxes and tolls then levied by the
Emperors in that diftriEt. Trithemius, and the
author of the Chronicle of Magdeburgh enume-
rate the territories and taxes which were thus
alienated, and represent this as the last and fatal
blow to the Imperial authority. Struv. Corp.
vol. i. p. 437. From that period, the shreds of
the ancient revenues possessed by the Emperors
have been so inconsiderable, that in the opinion
ofSpeidelius, all that they yield would be so
far from defraying the expence of supporting
their houfhold, that they would not pay the
charge of maintaining the posts established in the
Empire. Speidelii Speculum, &c. vol. i. p.
680. These funds, inconsiderable as they were,
continued to decrease. Granvelle, the minifler
of Charles V, asserted in the year 1546, in pre-
fence of several of the German Princes, that his
master drew no money at all from the Empire.
Sleid. Hiflory of the Reformation. Lond. 689.
p. 372. The fame is the cafe at present. Traitc
de droit Publique de 1'Empire par M. le Coq
de Villeray, p. 55. From the reign of Charles
IV, whom Maximilian called the pelt of the Em-
pire, the Emperors have depended entirely on
their hereditary dominions, as the only source
of their power and even of their subsistence.

2. THI ancient mode of electingthe Empe-
rors, and the various changes which it under-

went,

3379

went, require rome illustration. The Imperial
crown, as well as those of most monarchies in
Europe, were originally attained by eleCtion.
An opinion long prevailed among the antiquaries
and publick lawyers of Germany, that the right
of chufing the Emperors was velted in the arch-
bishops of Mentz, Cologne and Treves, the
King of Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the Mar-
quis of Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine
of the Rhine, by an edict of Otho III, confirm-
ed by Gregory V, about the year 996. But the
whole tenor of history contradicts this opinion.
It appears that from the earliest period in the
history of Germany, the person who was to
reign over all, was elected by the suffrage of all.
Thus Conrad I. was elected by all the people of
the Franks, fays some annalists; by all the prin-
ces and chief men, fay others; by all the nation,
fay others. See their words, Struv. Corp. 21 :
Conringius de German. Imper. Repub. Acroama-
ta Scx. Ebroduni 1654. p. 103. In the year
1024, posterior to the supposed regulations of
Otho Ill, Conrad II, was elected by all the chief
men, and his election was approved and con-
firmed by the people, Struv. Corp. 284. At
the election of l.otharius 11. A. D. 1125, sixty
thousand pc'io's of all ranks were present. He
was nanmed by the chief men, and their nomina-
tion was approved by the people. Struv. ibid.
p. 357 The first author who mentions the seven
.E.lcctols is sMartinus Polonus, who flourished in
the reign of Fredel ick II, whicll ended A. ). 1250.
We find that in all the ancient elections to which
1 have referred, the Princes of greatest power and
authority were allowed by their countrymen
to name the person whom they wished to
appoint Emperor, and the people approved
or dilapproved of their nomination. This

privilege

privilege of voting first is called by the Ger-
man lawyers the right of Pretaxation. Psef-
fel Abrege, p. 3 16. This was the first origin of
the exclusive right which the Eledors acquired.
The Eledors possessed the most extensive terri-
tories of any Princes in the Empire; all the
great offices of the state were in their hands by
hereditary right; as soon as they obtained or en-
grossed so much influence in the election, as to
be allowed the right of prataxation, it became
unnecessary for the inferior ecclefiafticks and ba-
rons to attend, when they had no other funcion
but that of confirming the deed of these more
powerful Princes, by their assent. During times
of turbulence, they could not resort to the place
of election, without a numerous retinueofarm-
ed vafTals, the expence of which they were ob-
liged to defray out of their own revenues. The
rights of the seven Electors were supported by
all the descendants and allies of their powerful
families, who shared in the splendor and influ-
ence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing
privilege. Pfeffel. Abrege, p. 376. The seven
Electors were confidered as the representatives
of all the orders, which compored the highefb
clats of German nobility. There were three
archbishops, chancellors of the three great di-
ftrics into which the Empire was anciently di-
vided ; one King; one Duke ; one Marquis;
and one Count. All these circumflances contri-
buted to render the introducti)n of this confi-
deralle innovation into the constitution of the
(;crmanick body, extremely easy. Every thing
of importance, relating to this branch A't the
political slate of the Empire, is well illuflraredl
by Onuthrius Panvinius an Aupiflinian Monk
olf Vcro;n;, who lived in the reign of Charles V.
His treatiJe, if we make some allowance for that

partiality

went, require some illultration. The Imperial
crown, as well as those of most monarchies in
Europe, were originally attained by election.
An opinion long prevailed among the antiquaries
and publick lawyers of Germany, that the right
of chufing the Emperors was velted in the arch-
bishops of Mentz, Cologne and Treves, the
King of Bohemia, the Duke of Saxony, the Mar-
quis of Brandenburgh, and the Count Palatine
of the Rhine, by an edict of Otho III, confirm-
ed by Gregory V, about the year 996. But the
whole tenor of history contradicts this opinion.
It appears that from the earliest period in the
history of Germany, the person who was to
reign over all, was elected by the suffrage of all.
Thus Conrad I. was eleted by all the people of
the Franks, fays some annalists; by all the prin-
ces and chief men, fay others; by all the nation,
fay others. See their words, Struv. Corp. 2 r:
Conringius de German. Imper. Repub. Acroama-
ta Scx. Ebroduni 1654. p. 103. In the year
1024, posterior to the supposed regulations of
Otho III, Conrad II, was elected by all the chief
men, and his election was approved and con-
firmed by the people, Struv. Corp. 284. At
theelection of Lotharius II. A. D. 1 125, sixty
thousand persons of all ranks were present. He
was named by the chief men, and their nomina-
tion was approved by the people. Struv. ibid.
p. 357. The first author who mentions the seven
.Electors is Martinus' Polonus, who flourished in
the reign ofFrederick II, which ended A. D. 1 250.
We find that in all the anleient elections to which
I have referred, the Princes of greatest power and
authority were allowed by their countrymen
to name the person whom they wiffed to
appoint Emperor, and the people approved
or dilapproved of their nomination. This

privilege

privilege of voting first is called by the Ger-
man lawyers the right of Pretaxation. Psef-
fel Abrege, p. 3 16. This was the firt origin of
the exclusive right which the Eledors acquired.
The Eletors pofleffed the most extensive terri-
tories of any Princes in the Empire; all the
great offices of the state were in their hands by
hereditary right; as soon as they obtained or en-
grossed so much influence in the election, as to
be allowed the right of prataxation, it became
unnecessary for the inferior etclefiafticks and ba-
rons to attend, when they had no other function
but that of confirming the deed of there more
powerful Princes, by their assent. During times
of turbulence, they could not retort to the place
of election, without a numerous retinueof arm-
ed vassals, the expence of which they were ob-
liged to defray out of their own revenues. The
rights of the seven Eledors were supported by
all the descendants and allies of their powerful
families, who shared in the Splendor and influ-
ence, which they enjoyed by this distinguishing
privilege. Pfeffel. Abrege, p. 376. The seven
Electors were confidered as the representatives
of all the orders, which composed the highest
clals of German nobility. There were threc
archbishops, chancellors of the three great di-
stricts into which the Empire was anciently di-
vided ; one King; one Duke ; one Marquis;
and one Count. All these circumstances contri-
buted to render the introduction of this confi-
derable innovation into the constitution of the
(;ermanick body, extremely easy. Every thing
of importance, relating to this branch o'f the
political ifate of the Empire, is well illuflrated
by Onuphrius Panviniius an Auglirinian Monk
ofl Verona, who lived in the reign of Charles \r.
His treatile, if we make some allowance for that

partiality'

partiality which he exprefles in favour of tlhe
powers which the Popes claimed in the Empire;
has the merit of being one of the first works in
which a controverted point in history is examined
with critical precision, and with a proper atten-
tion to that evidence which is derived from re-
cords, or the testimony of contemporary hifto-
rians. It is inserted by Goldaftus in his Politica
Imperialia, p. 2.

As the Eletors have engrossed thie sole right

of chufing the Emperors, they have assumed
likewise that of deposing them. This high
power the Electors have not only presumed to
claim, but have ventured, in more thap one in-
fiance, to exercise. In the year i298, a part
of the Electors deposed Adolphus of Nassau and
substituted Albert of Austria in his place. The
reasons on which they found their sentence,
show that this deed flowed from factious, not
from publick-fpirited motives. Struv. Corp. vol.
i. 540. In the first year of the fifteenth century,
the Electors deposed Wenceslaus, and placed
the Imperial crown on the head of Rupert Flec-
tor Palatine. The act of deposition is still ex-
tant. Goldafti Conftit. vol. i. 379. It is pro-
nounced in the name and by the authority of
the Electors, and confirmed by several prelates'
and barons of the Empire, who were present.
There exertions of the electoral power demon-
Itrate that the Imperial authority was funk very
low.

THE other privileges of the electors, and the

rights of the electoral college are explained by
the writers on the publick law in Germany.

3. WITH refpet to the diets or general as-
femblies of the Empire, it would be necefflary,

if

if my object were to write a particular history
of Germany, to enter into a minute detail, con-
cerning the forms of assembling it, the persons
who have right to be present, their division into
several Colleges or Benches, the objects of their
deliberation, the mode in which they carry on
their debates or give their suffrages, and the
authority of their decrees or recesses. But in a
general history it is sufficient to observe, that,
originally, the diets of the Empire were per-
fettly the fame with the alTemblies of March
and of May, held by the Kings of France.
They met, at least, once a year. Every free-
man had a right to be present. They were
assemblies, in which a monarch deliberated
with his subjects, concerning their common in-
terest. Arumaus de comitiis Rom. German.
Imperil, 4to. Jena. I66o, cap. 7. No. 20,
&c. But when the Princes, dignified ecclesias-
tics, and barons, acquired territorial and inde-
pendantjurifdiction, the diet became an assem-
bly of the separate flates, which formed the con-
federacy of which the Emperor was head.
While the constitution of the Empire remained
in its primitive form, attendance on the diets
was a duty, like the other services due from
feudal fub;edts to their fox ereign, which the
members were bound to perform in person;
and if any member who had a right to be pre-
sent in the diet neglcCed to attend in person,
he not only loft his vote, but was liable to an
heavy penalty. Arumanus de Comit. c. 5. No.
40. Whereas, from the time that the members
of the diet became independant states, the right
of fiffirage was annexed to the territory or dig-
nity, not to the person. The members, if they
could not, or would not attend in person, might
fend their deputies, as Princes fend ambassadors,

and

and they were entitled to exercise all the rights
belonging to their constituents. ibid. No. 42,
46, 49. By degrees, and upon the fame prin-
ciple of confidering the diet as an assembly of
independant states, in which each confederate
had the right of suffrage, if any member pof-
sessed more than one of those states or charac-
ters which entitle to a feat in the diet, he was
allowed a proportional number of suffrages.
Pfeffel. Abrege 622. From the fame cause the
Imperial cities, as soon as they became free, and
acquired supreme and independant jurifdiicion
within their own territories, were received as
members of the diet. The powers of the diet
extend to every thing relative to the common
concern of the Germanick body, or that can in-
terest or affe& it as a confederacy. The diet
takes no cognizance of the interior admini-
ftration in the different States, unless that
happens to disturb or threaten the general
safety.

4. WITH refped to the Imperial chamber, the

jurifdiEtion of which has been the great source
of order and tranquillity in Germany, it is ne-
cefIary to observe, that this court was instituted
in order to put an end to the calamities occasion-
ed by private wars in Germany. I have al-
ready traced the rife and progrels of this prac-
tice, and pointed out its pernicious effects as
fully as their extensive influence during the
middle ages merited. In Germany, private
wars seem to have been more frequent and
produdcive of worse consequences than in lhe
other countries of Europe. There are ob-
,;,ucs reasons for this. The nobility of Ger-
nLany were extremely numerous, and the caufre

of

ds their dissention multiplied in proportion. Thd
territorial jurifdition which the German nobles
acquired, was more coripleat than that profelfed
by their order in other nations. They became,
in reality, independent powers, and they claim-
ed all the privileges of that charader. The long
interregnum accustomed them to an uncon-
troiied licence, and led them to forget that
subordination which is necessary in order to main-
tain publick tranquillity. At the time when the
other monarchs of Europe began to acquire
fich an increase of power and revenues, as ad-
ded new force to their government, the autho-
rityand revenues of the Emperors continued
gradually to decline. The diets of the Empire,
which alone had authority to judge between such
mighty barons, and power to enforce its decifi-
ons, met very seldom. Conring. Acroamata, p.
234. The diets when they did assemble were
often compored of several thousand members,
Chronic. Confant. ap. Struv. Corp. i. p. 546,
and were mere tumultuary assemblies, ill qualified
todecideconcerning any queltion of right. The
feflion of the diets continued only two or three
days; Pfeffel Abrege, p. 244, so that they had
no time to hear or discuss any caife that was in
the smallest degree intricate. Thus Germany
was left, in some measure, without any court of
judicature; capable of repressing the evils of pri-
vate war;

ALL the expedients which were employed in

other countries of Europe in order to restrain
this pracice, and which I have described Note
XXI. were tried in Germany with little effet.
The confederacies of the nobles and of the cities,
and the division of Germany into various circles,

C c which

which I mentioned in that Note, were found
likewise insufficient. As a last remedy, the Ger-
mans had recourse to arbiters whom they called
AuJfregse. The barons and states in different
parts of Germany joined in conventions, by
which they bound themselves to refer all contro-
verfies, that might arise between them, to the de-
termination of Au.fregee, and to submit to their
sentences as final. These arbiters are named
sometimes in the treaty of convention, an instance
of which occurs in Ludewig Reliquae Manufcr.
omnis evi, vol. 2. 212. sometimes they were
chosen by mutualconfent; sometimes they were
appointed by neutral persons; and Sometimes
the choice was left to be decided by lot. Datt.
de Pace publica Imperii, lib. i. cap. 27 No 60,
&c. Speidelius Speculum, &c. voc. AuJfrag. p.
95. Upon the introduction of this pracice, the
public tribunals of justice became, in a great
measure, useless, and were almost entirely de-
ferted.

IN order to re-establish the authority of go-

vernment, Maximilian instituted the Imperial
chamber, at the period which I have mentioned.
This tribunal consisted originally of a president,
who was always a nobleman of the first order,
and of sixteen judges. The president was ap-
pointed by the Emperor, and the judges, partly
by him, and partly by the States, according to
forms which it is unnecessary to describe. A fium
was imposed, with their own conlent, on the
States of the Empire, for paying the salaries of
the judges, and officers in this court. The Im.
perial chamber was established first at Francfort
on the Maine. During the reign of Charles V.
it was removed to Spires, and continued in that
city above a century and a half. It is nowfixed

at Wetzlar. This court takes cognizance ofall
questions concerning civil right between the
States of the Empire, and paifesjudgment in the
las retort, and without appeal. To it belongs;
likewise, the privilege of judging in criminal
causes, which may be conlidered as conne&ted
with the preservation of the publick peace. Psef-
fel Abrege, 560.

ALL causes relating to points of feudal right

orjurifdidion, together with such asrefpeet the
territories, Which hold of the Empire in Italy;
belong propelly to thejurifdiction of the Aulick
council. This tribunal was formed upon the
model of the ancient court of the palace inftitut-
ed by the Emperors of Germany. It depended
not upon the States of the Empirej but upon
the Emperor; he having the right of appoint-
ing at pleasure all thejudges of whom it is com-
posed. Maximilian, in order to procure rome
compensation for the dimuntion of his authority,
by the powers vested in the Imperial chamber;
prevailed on the diet A.D. 1512. to give its
consent to the efftablihmnent of theAulick coun-
cil. Since that time, it has been a great obje&
of policy in the court of Vienna to extend theju-
rifdiCtion, and ftipport the authority of the Au-
lick council, and to circumscribe and weaken
those of the Imperial chamber. The tedious
forms and dilatory proceedings of the Imperial
chamber have furnished the Emperors with pre-
texts for doing bo. Lites Spirae, according to
the witticifin of a German lawyer, spirant, fed
nunquam exfpirant. Such delays are unavoida-
ble in a court composed of members named by
States, jealous of each other. Whereas the
judges of the Aulick council, depending in one
mailer, and being responsible to him alone, are

C c z more

more vigorous and decisive. Puffendorf. de Sta-
tu Imper. German; cap. v. § 20. Pfeffel Abrege,
p. 581.

NOTE XLII. SECT. III. p. 189.

THE description which I have given of the

Turkish government is conformable to the ac-
counts of the most intelligent travellers who
have visited that Empire. The count de Mar-
figli, in his treatise concerning the military state
of the Turkish Empire, ch. vi. and the Author
of observations on the religion, laws, govern-
ment and manners of the Turks, published at
London 1768, vol. i. p. 8i. differ from other
writers who have described the political conftitu-
tion of that powerful monarchy. As they had
opportunity, during their long residence in Tur-
key, to observe the order and justice confpicu-
ous in several departments of adminifiration,
they seem unwilling to admit that it should be
denominated a despotism. But when the form of
government in any country is represented to be
defpotick, this does not suppose that the power
of the monarch is continually exerted in ats of
violence, injustice and cruelty. Under govern-
ment of every species, unless when tome fran-
tick tyrant happens to hold the scepter, the or-
dinary adminifiration must be conformable to
the principles of justice, andif not active in
promoting the weltare of the people, cannot cer-
tainly have their destruCtion for its objet. A
state, in which the sovereign poffefles the abfo-
lute command of a vast military force, together
with the disposal of an extensive revenue; in
which the people have no privileges, and no part
either immediate or remote in legislation; in
which there is no body of hereditary nobility,

jealous

jealous of their own rights and diftinations, to
stand as an intermediate order between the
Prince and the people, cannot be distinguished
by any name but that ofa despotism. The-re-
ftraints, however, which I have mentioned, arif-
ing from the Capiculy, and from religion, are
powerful. But they are not filch as change the
nature or denominati.n of the government.
When a defpotick Prince employs an armed
force to support his authority, he commits the
supreme power to their hands. The Prxetorian
bands in Rome, dethroned, murdered, and ex-
alted Princes, in the fame wanton manner with
the soldiery of the Porte at Constantinople. But
notwithstanding this, the Roman Emperors have
been confidered by all political writers as pofiefe
sing defpotick power.

NOTE XLIII: SEC T. III. p. g9o,

THE institution, the discipline, and privileges

of the Janizaries are described by all the authors
who give any account of the Turkish govern-
ment. The manner in which enthusiasm was
employed in order to inspire them with courage
is thus related by Prince Cantemir, " When
Amurath I. had formed them into a body, he
sent them to Haji Bektalh a Turkilh Sains, fa-
mous for his miracles and prophecies, desiring
him to give them a banner, to pray to God for
their fuccefe, and to give them a name. The
faint, when they appeared in his pretence, put
the sleeve of his gown upon one of their heads,
and fays, Let them be called rengicheri. Let
their countenance be ever bright, their hands
vióorious, their sword keen, let their spear al-

C c 3 ways

ways hang over the heads of their enemies, and
wherever they go, may they return with a shin-
ing face. History of the Ottoman Empire, p.
38. The number of Janizaries, at the first in-
ftitution of the body, was not considerable. Un-
der Solyman, in the year '151, they amounted
to twelve thousand. Since that time their num~
ber has greatly increased, Marfigli, Etat. &c.
ch. 6. p. 68. Though Solyman possessed such
abilitlis and authority as to restrain this formida-
ble body within the bounds of obedience, yet
its tendency to limit the power of the Sultans
was, even in that age, foreseen by sagacious ob-
servers. Nicolas Daulphinois, who accompa.
nied M. d'Aramon ambafador from Henry II.
of France to Solyman, publithed an account of
his travels, in which he describes and celebrates
the dilcipline of the Janizaries, but at the fame
time predicts that they would, one day, become
formidable to their masters, and aft the fame
part at Conflantinople, as the Praetorian bands
had done at Rome. ColleCtion of Voyages from
the Earl of Oxford's Library, vol. i. p. 599.

NOTE XLIV. SECT. iJ . P. I92.

SOLYMAN the Magnificent, to whom the

Turkish historians have given the firnameof
Canuni, or instituter of rules, first brought the
finance}, and military establishment of the Tur-
kish Empire into a regular form. He divided the
military force into the Capiculy or soldiery of the
Porte, which was properly the standing army,
and Serrataculy or soldiers appointed to guard the
frontiers. The chief strength of the latter con-
. iLted of those who held Tiniariots and Ziarns.

-?:?,:!! vi^',; !:? There
i:.

These were portions of land granted. to certain
persons for life, in much the fame manner as the
military fiefs among the nations of Europe, in
return for which military service was performed.
Solyman, in his Canun Name or book of regula-
tions, fixed with great accuracy the extent of
there lands in each province of his Empire, ap-
pointed the precise number of soldiers each per-
son who held a Timariot or aZiam should bring
into the field, and established the pay which they
should receive while engaged in service, Count
Marfigli and Sir Paul Rycaut have given extracts
from this book of regulations, and it appears
that the ordinary establishment of the Turkifi
army exceeded an hund.ed and fifty thousand
men. When there are added to the soldiery of
the Porte, they formed a military power which
vastly exceeded what any Christian State could
command. Marfigli Etat Militaire, &c. p. 136.
Rycaut's state of the Ottoman Empire, book iii.
ch. 2. As Solyman, during his active reign,
was engaged so constantly in war, that his troops
were always in the field, the S rrataculy became
almost equal to the Janizaries themselves in difci-
pline and valour.

IT is not furprizing, then, that the authors

of the sixteenth century flould represent tile
Turks as far superior to the Christians, both in
the knowledge and in the practice of the art of
war. Guicciardini informs us, that the Italians
learned the art of fortifying towns from the
Turks. Hiftor. lib. xv. p. 266. Bufbequius,
who was ambassador from Ferdinand to Soly-
man, and who had opportunity to observe the
fIate both of the Chriflian and Turkish armies,
published a discourse concerning the belt manner
of carrying on war against the Turks, in which

C c 4 he

29r

he points out at great length the immense ad-
vantages which the infidels poffleted with refpeE
to difeipline, and military improvements of eve.
ry kind. Bufbequii opera edit. Elzevir. p. 393,
&c. The Testimony of other authors might be
added,' if the matter were, in any degree,
doubtful.

BEFORE I conclude there Proofs and illuflrati-

ons, I ought to explain the reason of two omifliL
ons in them; one of which it is necessary to men-
tion on my own account, the other to obviate
an objection to this part of the work.

IN all my inquiries and disquisitions concern.

ing the progress of government, manners, lite-
rature and commerce during the middle ages, as
well as in my delineations of the political confti.
tution of the different States of Europe at the
opening of the sixteenth century, I have not once
mentioned M. de Voltaire, who, in his EgfayJi
l'h2ioire generale, has reviewed the fame period,
and has treated of all there fubjeets. This does
not proceed from inattention to the works of that
extraordinary man, whose genius, no less enter-
prizing than uniyerfal, has attempted almost eve-
ry different species of literary composition. In
many of these he excels. In all, if he had left
religion untouched, he is inftru6tive and agree-
able. But as he seldom imitates the example of
modern historians in citing the authors from
whom they derived their information, I could
not, with propriety, appeal to his authority in
confirmation of any doubtful or unknown salt.
I have often, however, followed him as my
guide in there researches; and he has not only

pointe4

pointed out the fats with refpet to which it
was of importance to inquire, but the conclufi-
ons which it was proper todraw from them. If
he had, at the fame time, mentioned the books
which relate there particulars, a great part of
my labour would have been unnecessary, and
many of his readers who now confider him only
as an entertaining and lively writer, would find
that he is a learned and well-informed historian.

As to the other omission; every intelligent

reader muff have observed, that I have not en-
tered, either in the historical part of this volume,
or in theProofs and Illustrations, into the fame
detail with respect to the ancient laws and cuf-
toms of the British kingdoms, as concerning those
of the other European nations. As the capital
facts with regard to the progress of government
and manners in their own country are known to
most of my readers, filch a detail appeared to
me to be less essential. Such fats and obferva-
tions, however, as were necessary towards com-
pleating my design in this part of the work, I
have mentioned under the different articles which
are the subje&s of my difquilitions. The state
of government, in all the nations of Europe,
having been nearly the fame during several ages,
nothing can tend more to illustrate the progress
of the English constitution, than a careful inqui-
ry into the laws and customs of the kingdoms
on the continent. This source of information
has been too much negleded by the English an-
tiquarians and lawyers. Filled with admiration
of that happy confiitution now eflablifhed in
Great Britain, they have been more attentive to
its forms and principles, than to the condition
fnd ideas of remote times, which, in almost every

particular,

particular, differ from the present. While en-
gaged in peruiing the laws, charters, and early
historians of the continental kingdoms, I have
often been led to think that an attempt to illus-
trate the progress of the English jurisprudence
and policy, by a comparison with those of other
kingdoms in a similar situation, would be of
great utility, and might throw much light on
rome points which are now obscure, and decide
others, which have been long controverted.

INDE X.

# INDEX TO THE FIRST VOLUME.

I

N D E

X

TO T H ,E

FIRST VOLUME,

AFRICA, the (hocking devaltations
- made there by the Vandals, 199
/lanus, his character of the clergy in
his timae, 233.
Idfrtd the Great, his complaint of the
ignorance of the clergy, 233.
4dlldial pofeflion of land, explained,

14. How such poffeflion became

subje6e to military farvice, ib. Dil-
tinguilhed from beneficiary tenures,
215. How converted into feudal te-
nures, z2z.

Allodium, the etymology of that word,

1Z5. Amnmianut, his charaaer of the Huns,
lol, 1o6.

Admrnrath, Sultan, the body of Janiza.

ries formed by him, 190.

Anathema, form of that denounced a-

gainft robbers during the middle ages,
330.

Arabia, the antient Greek philosophy

cultivated there, while loft in Europe,
311, Note xxviii. The progress of
philolophy from thence to Europe,
312.

dragon, rife of the kingdom of, 146.

Ita union with Castile, ib. The con-
ftitution and form of its government,
'Sgo The privileges ot its Cortes,
'51. Office and jurilditiion of the

Juffiza, 152. The regal power very
confined, 153. Form of the alle-
giance swore to the Kings of, ib. The
power of the nobility to controul the
regal power, 344. Their privilege of
union taken away by Peter IV. b.
The ellablifhment of the inquisition
opposed there, 347.

Armiie, Itanding, the rife of, traced, 9z.

By what means they became more
general in Europe, 1iz.

Armt, the profeflion of, the mot ho-

nourable, in uncivilized nations, 67.
iJ, an account of the antient Romifli
seas of, 237, Note xii.

.4fmblier, legislative, how formed, 36.
j4nmblies, general, of France, their
power under the filft race of Kings,
165. Under the second and third,
166. At what period they loft their
legislative authority, 167.

Attila, King of the Huns, account of

his reception of the Roman ambaffa-
dorp, 197, Note ili. Someaccountof
his conquerts, 2o».

Ail/a, an assembly of Canilian nobler

there, solemnly try and depose Henry
IV. their King, 149.

Aujlria, the houle of, by whom found-
cd, 177.

B

iaillis, in the old French law, their of-
fice explained, 308.

Balance of power, the first rife of, in

Europe, I I . The progress of, 112.

Baltir, the first source of 'wealth, to the

towns situated on that jea, 335.

Barcelrca, its trade, riches, and privile-

ges-at the close of the fifteenth centu-
'Y> 35'.

Barons, their independence, and mutual

hn(tilities, under the feudal system, 16.
Hovi asseted by the franchelement of
cities, 34. Acnuiire a particip:tion in
Jegifldtlne government, 36. Tlheir p;i-
vate war, for redrref of pejl'ona! inju-
ricr, 44. Methods employed to aho-
li(h thele contention', 46. Origin of
their supreme and independant julif-
dition, 57. The bad effeas resulting
from theit privilegrs, 58. The iteps
taken by Plinces to reduce their c,-ilrts.
60. How obliged to relinquifi their
judicial prerogatives, 68. Of Italy,
fubje&ed to municipallaws, '147, Note
xv. Their right of tenlitorial juriliic-
tion explaind, 303. Their em.lu-
menits from cauies decided in their
courts, 304.

Benafices, under the feudal rfyfem, a his-

tory of, 217. When they became he-
reditary, 220.

Baaks, an enquiry into the materials of

the antient ones, 233. The lois of
old manuscripts accounted for, 134.
The great prices they fold for in anti-
ent time,, 235.

Borughs, reprelentatives of, how intro-

duced into national councils, 37.

Britens antient, their difRrefs and dejec-

tion when deserted by the Romans, and
harraffed by the Pias and Caledonians,
Y95, Note i.

Brstherhoodef God, an account of that

association for extinguiliing private
war:, 282.

Bruger, how it became the chief mart

for Italian commoditie, during the mid-
dle ages, 334.

Bltrgandiy, M:,ly heircf,; of, the import-

ance with s;hich her choice in a bIlf-
bhndl w l.. conlfilered by all lurope,
1 4,. Tloe trc....ltro .,s vi,.: l

of l.cwis

XI. of FI:iincc toward lier, o10 1I,
married t, 1lh, Arciiluke Miaimillili,
Icv7. The influtinc of this mat.lil o
the ftatc of liuropi, it.

C

CLfiar, his account of the antient r(: -

imans, compnled with tiihL of 'I hCl'tu
216,

Cambray, treaty of, its ebje&e g 1t7

The confederacy dissolved, 119.

Canon Law, an inquiry into, 62. Pro-

grels of ecclesiastical usurpations, 63.
The maxims of, more equitable than
the civil courts of the middle ages, 64.

Caflile, ri.e of the kingdorr of, 146. Its

union with Aragon, ib. 'Its King Hen.
ry IV. iolemnly tried and deposed in n
alfembly of the nobles, 149. The
conflitution and government of that
kingdom, 154. A hifloryof the Cortes
of, and its priilege', ib. The king-
(,l.m originally eleCive, 348, Note
xxi il.

Catalonia, the spirited behaviour of the

people tliere in defence of their rightr,
againll their King John II. of Alagol
149.

Cenl/uales, a species of the Oblati, or vo-

luntary slaves, the obligations they en-
tered into dcfcribed, 272.

Centenarti, or inferior judges in the mid-

d:e ages, the extraordinary oatl requi-
red frtm them, 329.

Cl0,:s; s de Alars and de

Masa, account

of tholi afftmblies of the antient Gaul',

357. Ckarlemagne, his law to prevent private
wars for redress of perfinal injurie,
46, 278. State of Germany under hiis
delcendants, 173.

Charles IV. Emperor, diflipates the I.-

perial domains, 378.

Charles y. Emperor, an emulator of the

heroic condu&t of his rival, Francis I.
72. His future grandeur founded on
the marriage of the Archduke Maxi-
rilian with the heireis of Burgundy,
107.

Charleis VII. of France, the firfl who in-

troduced flanding armies in Europe,
93. His fuccelsful extension of the re-
gal prerogative, 96.
Charles VIII. of France, his charaCter,

o8. How induced to invade Italy, i'.
His refiarces and preparations for thi.
enlerlprize, lo9. His rapid Slccel;,
i lo. A combination of the Italian
flates formed against him, 1il. Is
forced to leturn back to France, ib.
The diflrefrcd lfate of his revenues by
th;i. typI iltion, 116.

Cl'ar/lJa., ihis account of the North A-

merican Indians, made Ille of in a coim-
.itrifin between them and the antic.ti
(iermans, 209.

Clarters, of immunity or fianchife, an

inquiry into the nature of thole grant-
e:d by the barons of France to the
towns uinder their jutrifiliionn, 251,
t;ulte avi. Or commrunities, ylrllart!

DIt

by the Kings of France, how they
tended to establish regular government,
33, '52.

Chivalry, the origin of, 69. Its benefi-

cial effeas on human manners, 70.
The enthusiasm of, distinguished fionn
its salutary consequences, 71.

Chrijfianity, corrupted when first brought

into Europe, 73. Its influence in tree-
ing mankind from the bondage of the
feudal policy, 268, Note xx.

Circles of Germany, the occasion of their

being formed, 179.

Cities, the antient Itate of, under the feu-

dal policy, 31. The freedom of,
wvhere irft eltablilhed, 32. Charters
of community, why granted in France
by Louis le Gross, 33. Obtain the like
all over Europe, 34. Acquire politi-
cal consideration, 36.

Clrgy, the progress of their usurpations,

63. Their plan of jurisprudence more
perfect than that of the civil courts in
the middle ages, 64. The great igno-
rance of, in the early feudal time of
Europe, 233.

Cleriza, slave to Willa, widow of Duke

Hugo, extra& from the charter of ma-
numiflion, granted to her, 270.

Clermont, council of, resolves oil the holy

war, 24. See Peter the hermit, and
Crusades.

Clotaire I. inflance of the small authority

he had over his army, 356.

Clothariur II. his account of the popular

assemblies among the antient Gauls,
357.

Clovil, the founder of the French monar-

chy, unable to retain a Iacred vale ta-
ken by his army, from being diltributed
by lot among the reft of the plunder,
12, Note vii.

Co/eges, the firit eRlablifliment of, il Eu-

rope, 323.

Combat, judicial, the prohibition of, an

improvement 11 the admililtiation ot
jufticc, 47. The foundation and uni-
verlality of this mode of trial, 52.
The peiniciouseftesis of, 54. Various
expedients for abolilling this pra&ice,
5. The antient Swedifi law of, lor
words ol reproach, 191. Politive eti-
dence, or points of proof, rendered in-
effeuual by it, 295. This mode of tri-
al autholized by the ecclefialtics, 197.
The lfit initances of, in the hilltlicsof
Fra:nce and Englaind, z98.
C'm,,eric, the spirit of crusading how far

avourable t., at that early ptriod, 29.
The lihit eftablillhment of tree corpor:a-
tions, 32. Charters of community why
granted by l.uuis le CGrol., 33. The

like pracice obtains all over Europe,
34. The salutary elfecs of thele in-
ltitutirns, ib. The low Itate of, du-
ring the middle ages, 77. Caules
contributing to its revival, ib. tro-
motedl by the Henleatic league, 79. Ia
cultivated in the Netherlanlds, So. Is
introlduced into England by Edward Ill.
81. The beneficial c(nl'e(uernceb re-
fulting Irom the revival of, Si. The
early cultivation of, in Italy, 33'.

Cismrn laws, the first compilation of,

made in kngland by Lord Chiet Jullice
Clanville, 317.
Communities; lee Charters, Cities, Com-

nmerce, and Corporations.

Comnena, Anne, her character of the

Crusaders, 245.

Compafi, maririer's, when invented, and

its influence on the extension of com-
merce, 78.

Comptoition for personal injuries, the mo-

tives for eftablilhing, 278. The cul-
tom of, deduced from the pracrice of
the antient Germans, 299.

C6mpurgators, introduced as evidence in

the jurisprudence of the midJle ages,
49. Cendottieri, in the Italian policy, what,

133.

Conrad, count of Franconia, how he ob-

tained election to the empire, 173.

Corradin, the .,as rightful heir to the

crown of Naples of the hou:e of Swa-
bia, his unhappy fate, 138.

Cenflance, treaty of, between the Em-

peror Frederic Barbarossa, and the free
cities ol Italy, 250.

Corjiantinople, .ts flourifling slate at the

time of the Crusades, s6. When sift
taken by the Turks, 187. The Cru-
fiadcrs ho lo.Cked uipmi there, 244.
The account given of this city by the
latin Writers, 245.

Ccsjiritionr, lpopular, how formcd, 3'.
Cr ,Jdvl,, Gonlflvo de, ficules the crov, n

of Napl:s to Ferdinand of Aragol,
140.

Corpot atisns, and bodies politic, the efla-

blillliients of, how far favouiable to
thi imlrin' o eir of malnirs, 30.
The piivilcges of, where titIt claimed,
3t. Cha.ters orl commnunity, why
granted by Louis le Groul in Franci,
313 Tle inlilltutin ofl, obtains all over
1'ui11ip, 34. Tlheir Tcletes, i'.

CCrleI of A\.l'agun, its conllitution aid

pli;Vilcgt, rIt, 345.

Co t rs oi Caltile, a ihiltory of, anrd an ac-

count ul' ith conllituition and privil c!:,
154. The vigilance with whlich it

gujrided

gdarded its privileges against the en-
croachments of the regal power, 155.

Crafades, the firt motives of undertaking,

as. The enthusiastic zeal with which
they were undertaken, 13. First pro-
moted by Peter the hermit, 14. The
fuccefsof them, 25. Theconfequen-
ces resulting from them, ib. Their es-
fecta on manners, 26. On property,
27. How advantageous to the enlarge-
ment of the regal power of the Europe-
an princes, 28. The commercial es-
sects of, 29, 71. Theuniverfal frenzy
for engaging in these expeditions ac-
countedfor, 238, Note xiii. The pri-
vileges granted to those who engaged
in them, z40. Stephen earl of Char-
tres and Bloiss his account of them,
242. The expences of condouing theni,
how raised, ib Charater given of the
Crusaders by the Greek writers, 144.

D
Debt, the first hint of attaching moveables*

for the recovery of, derived from the
canon law, 316.
Debtors, how confidercd in the rude and

simple fRate of society, 154.

Dietsof Germany, lome account of, 383.
Dosorrs, in the different faculties, dispute
precedence with knights, 323.

E'
Ecclefiafliraljuriprudence, more perse&

in its plan than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 64.

Erekfiaflics, when, and by what degrees

they claimed exemption from civil ju-
rifdiaion, 311. Military talents cul-
tivated and exercised by those of the
middle ages, 319.
Edward IlI. of England, his endeavours

to introduce commerce into his king-
dom, 81.

EleCors of Germany, the rife of their pri-

leges, 183.
Eloy, St. his definition er description of a

good chiillian, 236, Note xi.

Emperuts of Germany, an inquiry into

their power, jurifdition, and revenue,
376, Note xli. The antient mode of
eleting them, 380.
England, a summary view of the corllref

between, and France, 88. The conie:-
quences of its losing its continental pof-
fefilons, 91. The power of the crown
how extended, rot. See lenry VI .
Why so many marks of Saxon usages
and languages, in comparison with thole
of the Normans, to be found in, 197,
Note IV. When corporations began to
be eflabliffed in, 264. Inflances of the
long continuance of personal lervitude
there, 273. Inquiry into the Saxon

laws for putting an end to private wars;'
i85i The causes of the speedy decline
of privatewars there, proposed to the
researches of AntiqUarians, 286. The
last initances of judicial combat record-
ed in the history of, 298. The territo-
rial jurifdi&tion of the barons now abo-
lifled, 310. Caufeof the flow progreft
of commerce there, 336. The sirs
commercial treaty entered into by,

338. Evidence, the imperfet nature of that ad-
mitted in law proceedings during the
middle ages, 48. Rendered ineffectual
by the judicial combat, 295.

Europe, the alterations in, by the con-

quests of the Romans, 2. The im-
provements the nations of, received in
exchange for their liberties, ib. Its
disadvantages under this change of cir-
eumflances, ib. Inquiry into the sup-
posed populotifaefs of the antient north-
ernnations, 4. The ravage desolation
exercised by the Goths, Vandals, and
Huns, 9. The universal change occa-
sioned by their in uptions and conquests,

o. The first rudiments of the present
policy of, to be deduced from this pe-
riod, It. Origin of the feudal system,
13 See FeudalJyflem. The general
barb:rifm introduced with this policy,
18. At what time government and
manners began toimprove, z. The
caures and events which contributed to
this improvement, 22. See Crufaler,
Corpcrations, People. The miseries oc-
cafioned by private wars in, 45. Me-
thods taken to flppre'f them, 46. Ju-
dicial combats prohibited, 47. The de-
sets of judicial proceedings in the mid-
dle ages, 48. The inftienae of super-
flition in there proceedings, 5o. The
origin of the independent territorial ju7
rifiticions of the barons, 57. The bad
consequences of their judicial power,
58. The Iteps taken by princes to a-
bolifi their courts, 60. An inquiry in-
tothe canon law, 61. Revival of the
Roman law, 66. Effestf of the spirit
of chivalry, 69. How improved by the
progref; of Icience and cultivation of li-
terature, 72. Christianity corrupted
when firlt received in, 73. Scholafiir
theology the firfl object of leaining in,
74. Low stale of commerce in, during
the middle ages, 77. Commerce re-
vives in Italy, 78. Is promoted bythe
Hanseatic league, 79. Is cultivated in
the Netherlands, 80. The effects of
the progrefsof commerce, on the polinl-
ing of manners, 81. The cefecct of
the marriage of the heireft of Burgundy

with

with the archduke Maximilian, on the
state of, 107. By what means fland-
ing forces become general in, 112.
Consequences of the league of Cam-
bray to, 117. A view of the political
constitution of tbe several flates of, at
the commencement of the sixteenth
century, tz1. Italy, 124. The pa-
pacy, ib. Venice, 132. Florence, 135.
Naples, 136. Milan, 140. Spain, 144.
France, r65. Germany, 172. Turkey,
187. Inflances of the frall intercourse
among nations in the middle ages,
325.

F

Fiodam, the etymology of that word,

226.

Fiefi, under the feudal system, a hiltory

of, 217. When they became heredi-
tary, 200.

Ferdinand, King of Aragon, unites the

Spanish monarchy, by his marriage with
Ilabella of Caflile, 146. His schemes
to exalt the regal power, 160. Rc-
fumes former grants of land from his
barons, 161. Unites to the crown the
grand mafterlhips of the three military
orders, ib. Why he patronized the as-
fociation called the Hlly brthetrhlood,
against the barons, 164.
aeudal system, the origin of, deduced,

13. The primary obje&t of this policy,
14. Its deficiencies forinterior govern-
ment, 15. Tenures of land, how efia-
blifhed under, ib. The rile of intefline
discords among the barons under, 16.
The servile slate of the people, il.
The weak authority of the King, ib.
Its influence on the external operations
of war, 17. Tlh general extinqtion of
all arts and sciences eff'eced by, iS.
Its operation on religion, 19. Its in-
fluence on the characer of the human
mind, 2o. At what time government
and manners began to be improved, 21.
The causes and events which contribu-
ted to this improvement, 22. See Cru-
nJdes. The antient slate of cities un-
der, 31. The firame of national coun-
cils under this policy, 36. How altered
by the progress of civil liberty, 37. An
inquiry into the adminilfrntion of julice
under, 42. Private war, 43. Judicial
combat, 47. The independant juril- 1
dielions of the barons, 57. The dif-
tinction between free men and valnals
under, 216. How (frangers were con-
fidered and treated under, 317. 1
;uIPr.ieprcns, observations on hia account
of the fate of London, at the time of
Henry 11. 264.

O L U M E.
Slanders. See Netherlandr.
Florence, a view of the conflitution of,

at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 135. The influence acquired
by Cosmo di Medici, 136.

France, by what means the towns in,

firit obtained charters of community,
33, Ordinances of Louis X. and his
brother Philip in favour of civil liber-
ty, 40. Methods employed to suppress
private wars, 46. St. Louis attempts
to discountenance judicial combat, 55.
A view of the contells between, and
England, 88. The consequences of
its recovering its provinces from Eng-
land, 91. The monarchy of, how
flrengthened by this event, 92. The
rife of Randing forces in, 93. The re-
gal prerogative strengthened by this
mealure, 95. The extension of the
regal prerogative vigorously pursued by
Louis XI. 97. See Leuir XI. The
effects of the invasion of Italy by
Charles VIII. o8. See Charle VIII.
National infantry eftablifled in, Xi g
League of Cambray formed againfl the
Venetians, 118. Battle of Ghiarra-
dadda, ib. An inquiry into its antient
government and laws, 16g. The
power of the general assemblies under
the first race of Kings, ib. Under the
second and third, 166. The regal.
power confined to the King's own do-
mains, 167. When the general assem-
bly or flates general, loft their legifla-
tive authority, ib, When the Kings
began to assert their legislative power,
168. When the government of, be-
came purely monarchical, 169. The
regal power nevertheless retrained by
the privilegesof the nobility, 170. An
inquiry into the jurifdiaion of its par-
liaments, particularly that of Paris,
171. How the allodial property of
land there was altered nto feudal, 223.
The progrefsof liberty in that kingdom
traced, 265. Note xix. The at-
tempts to eflablifh liberty there unfuc-
cefsfid, 267. The last inflance of ju-
dicial combat recorded in the hiltory of
298. The present government of,
compared with that of antient Gaul,
355. Note xxxvii. The States-gene-
ral, when firIt assembled, 369.
Francis I. of France, his charaiter influ-

enced by the spirit of chivally, 71. Is
emulated by the Emperor Charles V.

72. 'rederick Barbarofa, Emperor, the free
cities of Italy. unite againfl him, 2go.
Treaty of Conflance with them, ib.

Was

Was the first who granted privileges to
the cities in Germany, 261.
Fredum, in the antient German usages

expiained, 300.

Freemen, how diffinguifhed from vassals,

under the feudal policy, 216, 230.
Why often induced to surrender their
freedom and become laves, 231.
Fuicherius Carnotenfis, his chara&er of

the city of Conflantinople, 245.

G

Gaul, how allodial property of land was

changed into feudal, there, 223. The
government of, compared with that of
modern France, 335. Note xxxvii.
The small authority the kings of, en-
joyed over their armies, illustrated in
an anecdote of Clotairel. 356. Ac-
count of the popular assemblies of,
357. The salic laws how enaced,
358. Were not subjea to taxation,
359. See France.

Geoffrey de Villehardouin, his account of

the magnificence of ConRfantinople, at
the time when taken by the Crusaders,
146.

Germant, antient, an account of their

usages and way of life, 206. Their
method of engaging in war, 207. A
comparison between them and the
North American Indians, 0e9. Why
they had no cities, 260. Note xvii.
The pratice of compounding for per-
fonal injuries by fines, deduced from
their usages, 299.

Germany, little interested in foreign con-

cerns at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, 89. National infantry efta-
blilhed in, 114 State of, under Char-
lemagne and his defeendants, 173.
Conrad, count of Franconia chosen
Fmperor, ib. His fuccetfors in the
Imperial dignity, ib. Hw the nobili-
ty of, acquired independant sovereign
authority, 174. The fatal effects of
aggrandizing the clergy in, 175. The
contests between the Emperor Henry
IV. and Pope Giegory VII. 176. Rife
of the factions of Guelfs and Ghilc-
lines, 177. Decline of the Imperial
authority, ib. The House of Austria,
by whom fouhdcd, ib. A total cliage
in the political conflitution of the Em-
pire, 178. The fRate of anarchy in
which it continued to the time of
Maximilian the immediate predecessor
of Charles V. 179. Divided into cir-
cles, ib. The Imperial chamber infli-
tuted, 180. The Aulic council re-
formed, lb. A view of its political
coaftitution at the commencement of

the ensuing hifory, i/. Its defeFi'
pointed out, 181. The Imperial dig-
nity and power compared, 182. Elec-
tion of the Emperors, 183. The re-
pugnant forms of civil policy in the fe-
veral Statesof, 184. Theoppofition
between the secular and ecclesiastical
members of, 185. Theunited body
hence incapable of afting with vigouri
186. When cities firlt began to be
built in, 26o. Note xvii. When the
cities of, firlt acquired municipal pri-
vileges, 261. The artizans of, when
infranchifed, z26. Immediate cities in
the German jurisprudence, what, 263.
The great calamities occasioned there
by pr vate wars, 288. Origin of the
league of the Rhine, ib. When pri-
vate wars were finally abolished there,
289. Inquiry into the power, juril-
didtion and revenue of its Emperors,
376. Note xli. The antient mode of
elecing the Emperors, 380. Account
of the diets, 383.

Ghibelines. See Guelfs.
Ghiarradadda, the battle of, fatal to the

Venetians, 118.

Glanville, Lord Chief Justice, the firlt

who compiled a body of common law,
in all Europe, 317.

Goths, Vandals, and Huns, over-run the

Roman empire, and precipitate its
downfal, 3. The state of the coun-
tries from whence they issued, 4. The
motives of their first excursions, 5.
How they came to fettle in the coun-
tries they conquered, 6. A compari-
son drawn between them and the Ro-
mane, at the period of their irruptions,
8. Compared with the native Ameri-
cans, 9. The desolations they occa-
sioned in Europe, rb. The univerlal
change made by them in the lflte of
IEuipe, to. The principles on which
they made their fcttlcments, ia. 0-
rigin of the feudal Iyftem, 13. See
Feudal Svylern. An inquiry into the
adminiiiration of juflice among, 42.
Their private wars, 43. Destroy the
monuments of the Roman arts, 71.
Their contempt of the Romans, and
hatred ot their arts, 196. Note ii.
Their aversion to literature, ib. No
authentic account of their origin, or
antient history exifling, tb.
Government, how limited by the feudal

policy, 16. The effictta of the Cru-
fades on, 28. How al:f'eed lby the in-
franchifement of cities, 35. Legifla-
tive assemblies how formed, 36. Pri.
vate wars dellruclive to the authority
of, 46. Methodlc employed to abolilli

this

this hostile mode of redressing injuries, Henry VII. of England, his situation at
ib. How asseted by the supreme in- his accefion to the crown, ot. Ena-
dependant jurifdi&cions of the barons, bles his barons to break their entails
58. The steps toward abolilhing them, and fell their estates, ib. Prohibits his
60.. The origin and growth of royal barons keeping retainers, ib. Encou-
courts of justice, ib. How influenced rages agriculture and commerce, ib.
by the revival of science and literature, Herebannum, the nature of this fine under
76. A view of, at the beginning of the feudal policy, explained, a 16.
the fifteenth century, 84. The pow- Hermandad, Santa, account of that infti-
er of Monarchs then very limited, 85. tution, 354.
Their revenues small, ib. Their ar- Hllory, the molR calamitous period of,
mies unfit for conquest, ib. The pointed out, so.
Princes hence incapable of extensive Holy Brotherhood, an association in Spain
plans of operation, 87. The kingdoms under that name, on what occafioa
very little conneAed with each other, formed, 163.
88. How the efforts of, from this pe- Holy Land, the original inducements of
riod became more powerful and exten- the ChriRians to rescue it from the
five, 90. The consequences of Eng- hands of the Infidels, za. See Crufadert
land losing its provinces in France, 91. and Peter the Hermit.
The schemes of Louis XI. of France Honour, points of, the antient Swedifl
to extend the regal power, 97. See law for determining, 291.
Louis XI. The power of the English Hospitality, enforced by statutes during
crown enlarged, 102. See Henry VII. the middle ages, 316.
As also that of Spain, 103. How the Huns, instance of their enthufaftic paflion
use of flanding armies became general, for war, 197. Note iii. Some account
i . A view of the political confti- of their policy and manners, ae2, 2o6.
tution of the several Itates of Europe, See Gothi.
at the commencement of the sixteenth I
century, 124. In what respeCts the 7anizaries, origin, and formidable nature
charters of communities granted by of those troops, 189.
the Kings of France, tended to intro- Imperial chamber of Germany, infti-
duce a regular form of, 253. tuted, 180. The occasion of its infti.

Greece, the breeding of silk worms, when tution, 384.

introduced there, 331. Indians, North American, a comparison

Greek Emperors, their magnificence at drawn between them and the antient

Constantinople, 244. Germans, o09.

Gregory of Tours, remarks on the late Induflry, the spirit of, how excited by

of Eurepe during the period of which the infranchifement of cities, 35.
he wrote the hiflory, a . Infantry, the advantages of, beyond ca-

Gregory the Great, Pope, his reason for valry, taught to the reft of Europe by

granting liberty to his saves, 269. the Swiss, 114. National bodies of,

Gregory VII. Pope, the foundation of eflablilhed in Germany, ib. In France

his contests with Henry IV. Emperor and Spain, 15.
of Germany, 176. The mean fubmif- Inheritance, and right of representation
sion he extorted from Henry, 177. between orphan grandsons and their
His own account of this affair, 375. uncles, how decided in the tenth cen-

Guelfi, and Ghibelines, rile of those tury, 193.

fations in Germany, 177. Interef of money, the rW.eity of ad-

Guscciardini, the hiltorian, inflance of mitting in a commelMqI t w331.

his fuperllitious reverence for Pope Prepofteroully condemned' b ; the
Clement VII. 131. Note. churchmen of the middle ages, 133.

Gunhoernr, a Monk, his charanter of The cause hence, of the exorbitant

ConRftntinople, at thetimelwhen taken exactions of the Lombard bankers, i».
by the Crusaders, 45. Italy, when the Cities of them began to

H form themlflves into bodies politic, 31.

Ilanfeatie league, when formed, and its Commerce firfi improved there, and

influence on the extension of cor- the reasons of it, 78. The revolutions
merce, 79. 336. In Europe occalioned by the invalion
lenry IV. of CaRfile solemnly tried and of, by Charles VllI. of Prance, 107.

deposed by an alfembly of Cafiliian The (late of, at the lime of this inva-
noblis, 149. ion, 109. The rapidfuccefs of Charles,

Ilenr IV. Emperor of Germany, the hu- ilo. A comb nation of the States

miliating Rate to which he was reduced of, drives Charles out of, and gives
by Pope Oregory VII, 176, 37. birth to the balance of power in
Note xl. D d Europe

-Europe, tl. The political fitua-
tion of, at the commencement of
the sixteenth century, 12z4 The
papacy, ib. Venice, 13. Florence,
- 135. Naples, 136. Milan, 140.

Evidences of the desolation made
there by the northern invaders of
the Roman Empire, 203. How the
cities of, obtained their municipal pri-
vileges, 147. Note Xv. State ol,
under Frederick I 248. Treaty of
Contlance between the free cities of,
and the Emperor Frederick Barbarolfa,
. 0o.
.Judgment of God, modes of acquittal

by, in the law proceedings during the
middle ages, 50. .89. Notexxii.

.udicium Crucrts, method of trial by, 29o.
Yulius II. 'ope, forms a confederacy,

.against the Venetians at Cambray,
,118. Seizes part of the Venetian ter-
ritories, ib. The confederacy dilfolved,
1 19. Turns his ichemes againlt France,
and England, ib.

7Urifprudeune, ecclesiastical, more perfect

in its plan, than the civil courts of the
middle ages, 46. See Lawa.

rufiice, an inquiry into the administration

of, under the feudal policy, 41 The
steps towards the improvement of, as
civil liberty advanced, 43. Redress
chiefly pursued by private wars, 44.
Methods taken to suppress private
wars, 46. Judicial combats prohibited,
47. The defe&s of judicial proceed-
ings in the middle ages, 48. Compur-
gators, the natu e of that kin of evi-
dence, 49. Meth ds of trial by ordeal,
or acqu ttal by Judgment of God, 50.
Origin of the supreme independant ju.
riditionns of the feudal barons, 57.
The extent and bad tfiac& of their
privilege, 58. The flteps taken by
monarchs to reduce the barons courts,
60. The growth of royal courts of
justice, 61. Inquiry into the canon
law, 62. How improved by the revi-
val of the Roman law, 66. When the
adrniniftration of, became a diflin&
-profeflion, 68.
rj7:7za, or lhpreme judge of Aragon,

his office and privileges, tS'5. An In-
quiry by whom this officer was eleaed,
339. Wh, was eligible to this oflice,
340. Nature of the trihimal appointed
to controul his adminiltratioll, 341
Inflance of his e:tenfive power, 342.

K

King, his power how circumscribed

by the barons, under the feudal
fyfltm, 16. By what means the Cru-

TO THE

fades tended to enlarge the regalau.
thority, 28.

Koran, its influence in checking the Sul-
tans of the Ottoman empire, 189.

L

Land, how held at the eflabliflhment of

the feudal system, 15. See Feudal
jyftem.

Land, the property of, how confidered by

the antient barbarous nations, 21,
Note viii. Allodial possession of, x-
plainel, 214. The proprietors how
Iubje&ed to military service, 2S.
Allodial and beneficiary poffeflion di-
flingilised, ib. Allodial property
why generally converted into feudal,
a11.

Law, when the fludy of it, became a

diftin& employment, 68:

Lawu, Canon, an inquiry into, 62. The

maxims of, more equitable than the
ci,,il courts of the middle agcs, 64.
When firit compiled, 315.

Law, Roman, how it funk into oblivion,

65. Circumflances which favoured
the revival of it, 66. Its effeats in im-
provirg the adminiftratian of justice,
ib. Its rapid spread over Europe, 316.
Note xxv.

Lawburro'ws, in the Scottish law, ex-

plained, 254.

Liberty, civil, the rife and progress of,

traced, 32. How favonred by the or-
dinances of Louis X. of France, and
his brother Philip, 40. The spirit of,
how excited in> France, a65. Note xix.
The particulars included in the char-
ters of, granted te husbandmen, a68.
Note xx. The influence of the Chris-
tian religinn in extending, ib. The
foveral opportunit'es of obtaining, 28c.

Limsges, council of, its endeavours to

extinguish private wars, 279.

Ltertiure, the cultivation of, greatl

instrumental in civilizing the nationsor
Europe, 72. Why the first efforts ol,
ill direated, 73 The good cfftes nt-
vcithelefs of the spirit of inquiry ex-
erted, 75, How checked in its pro-
grc's, ib. Its influence on mannel'
and gover .ment, 76,

Liturgy, the prclercnce between the

Mularabic, and Romilh, how nacte-
tained in Spain, 294.

Loslbards, the firit bankers in Europe.

332. The motive of their exaalilE
exorbitant interest, 313.

London, its flourilhing Itate at the tini

of Henry H1. a64.

Louis Ie Gross, of France, his inducet
ments to grant privileges to towns

withia

within his own dominions, 33. See
Charters.

Loit, St. the great attention he paid to

the administration of justice, in appeals
which came before him, 308.

Louis X. of France, his ordinances in fa-

vour civil liberty, 40.

LfoiJ Xl. of Fiance, his chara&er, 97.

His (chemes for deprefling the nobility,
ib. Sows divisions among them, 99.
Increases the RIanding forces, ib. En-
larges the revenues of the ciown, ib.
His address in overruling the assembly
of Rates, loo. Extends the bounds of
the French monarchy, lot. The
rativity of his external operations, i;.
His treacherous baseness t(.ward the
heiress of Burgundy, loS. The es-
seas of his conduct, 1,7.
Louis XII. his hefitaticn in carrying on

war against the Pope, 131. Note.
Afterts his right to the dutchy of Mi-
lan, and retains Ludovico Storza in
prison, 143.

M

Manfred, his ftrggles for the crown of

Naples, 138.
MA/antind, the most calamitous period in

the history of, pointed out, 1o.

Manners, the barbarity of, under the

feudal establishments, after the over-
throws of the Roman empire, 18.
When they began to improve, 21.
EffeEs of the Crusades on, 25. How
improved by the infranchifement of
cities, 36. How improved by the
erection of royal courts of juflice, in
opposition to the barons courts, 61.
EffeCts of the revival of the Roman
law on, 65. The beneficial tendency
of the spirit of chivalry on, 69. How
influenced by the progress of science,
72. 76. How polished by the revival
of commerce, 81.

Manumission, particulars included in the

charters of, granted to hufhandmen
or slaves, 268. Note xx. The form
of, 269.

Maximilian, archduke of Austria, mar-

ried to Mary heirefsof Burgundy, 107.
The influence of this match on the
fate of Europe, ib.

Maximilian, Emperor, inflitutes the Im-

perial chamber, 180. Reforms the
Aulic council, ib.

Medici, Colimo di, the firt of the name,

the influence he acquired in Florence,
136.

MdaoG, the tate of the dutchy of, at

the commencement of the fixtcentt
century, 140. Rife and progress ol
the disputes concerning the fucccfliot
to, 141.

OL U ME.
Mind, the human, a view of, under the

firfl eftablifiment of the feudal policy
in Europe, 20. The era of its ulti-
mate depreflion, and commencement.
of its improvement, 21. The progrels
of its operations, before the full exer-
tion of it, 73.

Minifjtriales, a class of the Oblati, or

voluntary slaves, the pious motives of
the obligations they entered into, I'l.
Moors, make a conquest of Spain, 144.

By what means weakened during their
establishment there, 145. Remarks on
their condu& in Spain, 147.

Municipal privileges, how obtained by

the cities of Italy, 147. Note xv. Se-
cured to them by the treaty of Con.
fance, 250. The favourite Rate of,
under the Roman government, 259.

N

hNaples, a view of the conflitution of

that kingdom, at the commencement
of the sixteenth century, 136. Ilhe
turbulent unsettled slate of that king,
dom, 137. State of the disputes con-
cerning the fucceflion to the crown of,
138. The pretensions of the French
and Spanifl monarchs to the crown of,
139.

Narbonne, community of, preamble to

the writ of summons of Philip the
Long, to, z65. Note xix.

Navigation, proof of the imperfect Rate

of, during the middle ages, 334.

Netherlands, a vigorous prosecution of

the manufactures of hemp and flax
there, on the revival of commerce in
Europe, 80.

Normans, why so few traces of their

usages and language, to be found in
England, in comparison with those of
theSaxons, 167. Note iv.

0

Ohlati, or voluntary saves, the clafle6 of,

specified, 271.

Ordeal, methods of trial by, during the

middle ages, 5o. The influence of
fuperltition in didtating thfermeans, 5i.

Otto Frifingenfis, his account of the late

of Italy under Frederic 1. 248.

Ottoman empire, the origin, and despotic

nature of, 187. Becomes formidable
to the Christian powers, 192.

P

Papacy. See Popedom.
Paper, when firl made of the present

materials, 23;.
f Paris, an inquiry into the pre-eminent

jurisdiction of its parliament over the

d a other

ether parliaments of France, 171.
Its origin traced, 370. Note xxxix.
The royal edits registered by, before
admitted to be laws, 373.

Parliaments, or legillative assemblies,

how formed under the feudal policy,
36. How altered by the progress of
civil liberty, 37.

Prople, their wretched servile fate under

the feudal system, 16. 39. Released
from their slavish state by the infran-
chifement of cities, 34. How they ob-
tained a representation in national
councils, 36. Those who lived in the
country and cultivated the ground, an
inquiry into their condition under the
feudal policy, z17. Note ix.

Per.ia, murder, how punished there, 302.
Pgter the Hermit, excites the European

Princes to undertake the Holy War,
24.

Peter IV. King of Aragon, defeats the

leaders of the Aragonefe union, and de-
freys the privilege of there aflociations,
344.

Philip the Long, preamble to his writ of

summons to the community of Nar-
bonne, 265. Note xix.

Philoeophy, cultivated by the Arabians,

when loll in Europe, 32l. Note xxviii.
Its progress from them into Europe,
311.

Pilgrimages to the Holy Land, when 6rRf

undertaken, iz. See Crusades, and
Peter the Hermit.

Placentia, council of, the Holy war re-

solved en ny, 24. See Peter the Her-
mit, and Crusader.

Punder, how divided among the antient

northern nations, 13. Illustrated in an
anecdote of Clovis, 2lt. Note vii.

Popedom, the highest dignity in Europe

at the commencement of the sixteenth
century, 124. Origin and progrelt of
the papal power, 125. The tenritories
of the Popes unequal to the support of
their spiritual jurifdlEtion, ib. Their
authority in their own territoies ex-
tremely limited, t16. The check they
received from the Roman baronr, ib.
Nicolas Rienzo attempts to efltbli(l a
democratical government in Rome, and
t destroy the papal jut;fliilion, Y1.8.
The papal auth.nlity c'nfiderably
ftrengtheredr by the Popes Alexander
VI. and Julius 1. 129. See sulius II.
The permanent nature of eclefianical
dominion, ib. The civil administration
o', not uniform or confilent, 130.
Rome the school of political intrigue
during the fi.teenth century, ib. The
advantages derived from the union of

TO THE

spiritual and temporal authority, 131.
A view of the contests between the
Popes and the Emperors of Germany,
176. Populoufnejs of the antient northern na.
tions, an inquiry into, 4.
Prifcus, extraa from his account of the

Roman embafry to Attilla King of the
Huns, 197. Note iii.

Procopius, his account of the cruel deva.

stations made by the irruption of the
northern nations, 198. Note v. toi,
20.o

Proterty, the poffeflion of, how secured

by the French charters of communities,

254. Proveditori, in the Venetian policy,
their office, 134.

R

Religion, how corrupted by the northern

nations established in Europe under the
feudal policy, 19. Its influence in
freeing mankind from the feudal fervi-
tude, 268.

Repledging, the right of, in the law ol

Scotland, explained, 305.

Reproach, words of, the antient Swedifl

law of fatisfasion for, 291.

Revenues, royal, very small under the

feudal policy, 85. By what means in-
creased, ii5.

Rhine, origin and intention of the league

of, 288.

Rienzo, Nicholas, endeavours to rescue

Rome from the papal authority, and
eltablilh a democratical form of govern-
ment there, la8.

Robbers, the anathema, pronounced

against them during the middle ages,
3z9·

Rodulpb of HapFburgh, how he attained

election to the Empire of Germany,
'77.

Romans, an inquiry into those advantages

which enabled them to conquer the refl
of Europe, 2. The improvements
they communicated in return for their
conquests, ib. The disadvantages the
provinces laboured under, from their
dom;nion, ib. Their Empire over-
turned by the irruption of the barbarous
nat on0, 3. The concurrent causes of
their rein, 6. A compariion drawn
l'etween them and the northern nationr,
8. All the civil arts eflabliflced by them
obliterated, 18. The monument of
thrir arts indu(lril,)fly dftlroyed by
their barbarous invaders, 71.

Rome, papal. See Popedom.
R!yal truce, an account of, 81 z.

S&lit

Salic laws, t. anner in which they

were enaced, 358.

Saxonr, why so many traces of their

laws, language and customs to be found
in England, 197. Note i. Inquiry into
their laws for putting an end to private
wars, z85.

Science, the revival and progress of, how

far instrumental in civilizing the nations
of Europe, 72. A summary view of
the revival and progress of, in Europe,
321 . Note xxviii.

Sforza, Francis, the foundation of his

pretensions, to the dutchy of Milan,
142. Is murdered by his uncle Ludo-
vico, ib.
...-----Ludovico, his private views in

engaging Charles VIII. of France to
invade Italy, 108. See Charles VIII.
Murders his nephew Francis, and seizes
Milan, 142. Is stripped of his domi-
nions by Louis XII. of France, and
dies in prison, 143.

Shipwrecks, the right, lords of manors

claim to, whence derived, 318.

Silk, the rarity of, and the high price it

bore in antient Rome, remarked, 331.
The breeding of silk worms, when in-
troduced into Greece, ib.

Slanes, letters of, in the law of Scotland,

what, 301.

Slaves under the feudal policy, their

wretched Rate, 22.6 Oblati, or vo-
luntary saves, the several classes of,
271.
ocitty, civil, the rude fRate of, under the
feudal establishments after the downfal
of the Roman Empire, 18. The in-
fluence of the Crusades on, 25. How
improved by the establishment of mu-
nicipal communities, 30. The effe&ts
the infranchifements of the people had
on, 41. Private wars how deftru6ive
to, 45. These intestine hoflilities,
how fiupeffed, 46. The admininlration
of justice improved by the prohibition
of judicial combats, 47. T'hegrowth
of royal courts of justice, in oppofitien
to the barons courts, 60. How ad-
vanced by the revival of the Roman
law, 65. The cffe&s of the spirit of
chivalry in improving, 69. The revival
of commerce and its influences, 78.

Shlyman, Sultan, his charater, 191.
Spain, a summary view of its lituation,

at the conr lcnccment of the filteenlh
century, 89. The power of the crown
of, how extended by Ferdinand, 103.
National infantry ellabliflied in, 115.
I; conqtcrtd by the Vandals, 144. and

O L UM E.
after by the Moors, ib. The empire
of the Moors in, how weakened, 145.
Rife of the kingdoms of Castile and
Aragon, 146. Their union into the
Spanish monarchy, ib. The antient
customs still retained amidst all its re-
volutions, ib. Peculiarities in its con-
flitution aud laws remarked, 148. See
Aragon and CafPile. Various causes
which contributed to limit the regal
powerin, 156. The cities of, how
they attained their consideration and
power, 157. The schemes of Ferdi-
nand and Isabella, to exalt the regal
power, 16o. The grand masterships,
of the three orders, annexed to the
crown, 16. The afrociation of the
Holy Brotherhood, on what occasion
formed, 163. The tendency of this
afrociation to abridge the territorial
jurifdi6tions of the barons, 164. The
cruel devastations made by the Vandals,
in the invasion of that province, 199.
When the cities of, acquired municipal
privileges, 163. Note xviii. The long
continuance of the practice of private
wars there, 287. The total annual
revenue of the nobility, in the time of
Charles V. 35o. An inquiry into the
origin and of communities or free ci-
tiesin, 351.

St. rago, the military order of, when and

on what occasion inflituted, 352. Note
xxxv.

Standing armies. See Armies.
States general of France, causes which

rendered their authority imperfect,
167. When they loft their legislative
authority, ib. When first aflembled,
369. The form of proceeding in them.
iA.

Stephen earl of Chartres and Blois, his

account of the progress of the Cra-
faders, 242.

Stiernhook, his account of the antient

Swedifli law of fatiLfacion for words
of reproach, 291.

Strangers, in what light confidered, and

how treated during the middle agec,
and under the feudal policy, 327.

Sugar canes, when firfi brougat fromr Asia

into Europe, and thence carried to
America, 331.
Sultans, Turkish, their despotic power,

188. How nevertheless limited, 189.

Sipetfilition, its influence in tle legal

proceedings duting the middle ages,
5'.

Swvi j, the superior discipline of their

troops, in the fifteenth century, 113.
Teach other natieon the advantages of
infantry over cavalry, 114

Tacitur

T

lacitus, his account of the antient Ger-

mans compared with that of Cefar,
106.
TeCures, feudal, the origin of, 15. See

Feudal Sjfem,t and Land.
Theology, icholaftic, the firt literary pur-

fults at 'the revival of learning in Eu-
rope, 74.

Truce of God, an account of, 280.

urkiey, origin of, its government, 187.
The despotic genius of this government,
ib. No hereditary nobility in, 188.
The authority of the Sultans, how
checked, J89. Origin of the Janiza-
ries, ib. Becomes formidable to the
Christian Princes, 192.

V

Pandals, their cruel devaltations in the

invasion o: Spain, 199. The havock
made by them in Africa, 200. See
Goths.

Iaoals under the feudal system, a view

of their flavilh condition, 16. 39.
How they obtained infranchifement,
40. How antiently distinguished from
freemen, 7.6. Their wretched slate
under their feudal masters, 226.
Note ix.

Venice, the long duration of its civil con-

ftitution, and its flourilhing slate at the
time of the league of Cambray, 117.
Its poffeflions dismembered by the con-
federates, i 18. Dissolves the confe-
deracy, I 9. Its rife and progress,
132. Defets in its conflitution, 133.
The excellency of its naval inflitutions,
134. Its extenfivc commerce, 135.
Vlfconti, rife of the family of, in Milan.

141.

Union of the Aragonefe nobles to con-

troul the undue exercise of regal pow-
er, explained, 343. This privilege
abrogated by Peter IV. 344.

Universities, the firRf ertabliflment of, in
Europe, 323.

W

War, a comparison between the manner

of carrying on, by barbarous and by
civilized nations, 9. How rendered
feeble in its operations by the fetdsl
policy, 17. The profeflfion of arms,
the molt honourable, in uncivilized g.a-
ions, 67. The rife of standing armies
traced, 92. By what means flanding
forces became general, I a. The fu-
periority of infantry in, how taught,

13.

Wars, private, for redrefling personal in-

juries, under the feudal policy, an in-
quiry into, 43. Methods taken to
abolish this hostile pratice, 46. Judicial
combat prohibited, 47. Inquiry into
the sources of these customs, 274.
Note xxi. Who intitled to the privi-
leges; of exercising, ib. On what occa-
sions undertaken, 175. Who included,
or bound to engage in these disputes,
276. Who excluded from undertaking,
ib. The cruel manner of prosecuting
them, 277. A chronological account
of the expedients made ule of, to sup-
press them, 278. Truce of God, an
account of, ib. Brotherhood of God,
an account of, a28. oyal truce, what,
ib. Saxon laws of England, for put-
ting an end to them, =85. The ob.
ftinate attachment of the Spaniards to
this praAice, 287. The calamities
occasioned in Germany by, 288.

W/cf, antient, Rrangels killed with im-

punity by them, 3z8.

Willa, widow of duke Hugo, extras

from her charter of manumifion,
granted to Cleriza, one of her flavem,

2 0.

Willermus, archbishop of Tyre, his ac-

count of Conlsantinople, 145.
END OF TH.E FIRST VOLUME.
