v: r- -

Q

THE /
HISTORY OF SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QuEEN MARY AND OF KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His Accession to the CROWN of ENGLAND.

\

WITH
A REVIEW of rhe SCOTTISH HISTORY

previous to that Periodi

And an AiPErNUIX containing ORIGINAL P.PEIa.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ED1NBURGH,

AND HISTORIOCRAPHFR TO HIS,MAJESTY

FOR SCOTLAND.
THE FIFTEENTH EDITIOy.

IN THREE VOLUMES,
With ti; A UTHOR'S last Encmndations and Additions.

VOL. I.

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR T. CADELL JUN. AND W. DAVIES,
(SlCCESSORS TO MR. CADELL IN THE STRAND.

1797. L..

# PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

PREFACE

TO THE

FIRST EDITIO N

DELIVER this book to the world with all the
diffidence and anxiety natural to an author'on

publihing his first performance. The time I
have employed, and the pains I have taken, in
order to render it worthy of the public approba.
tion, it is, perhaps, priudeiit to conceal, until it
be known whether that'approbation hall ever be
bestowed upon it. :

But as I have depiated,' tnI..any instances,

from former historians, as I have placed fats in
a different light, and'have 'draawn tchraEters wvith
new colours, I ought to account for this conduc
to my readers; and to produce the evidence, on
which, at the distance of two centuries, I presume
to contradic the testimony of less remote, or
even of contemporary historians.

The tranfailons in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated againit each
other with the fiercest political hatred, embittered
by religious zeal. Each of theli produced hifto-
rians of conliderable merit, who adopted all
their fentimenta, and defended all their aftions,
Truth was not the sole obje& of these authors.
Blinded by prejudices, and heated by the part
wvlich they thcmfelves had ated in the scene

4 2 they

they describe, they wrote an apology for a sac-
tion, rather than the history of their country.
Succeeding Historians have followed these guides
almost implicitly, and have repeated their errors
and misrepresentations. Bpt as the fame passions
which inflamed parties in that age have descended
to their poftcrity; as alinoft every event in
Mary's reign has become the objec of doubt or
of dispute; the eager spirit of controversy soon
discovered, that without some evidence more
authentic and more impartial than that of fich
Historians, none of the points in question could
be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been
produced, and public archives, as well as the re-
pofitorics of private men, have been ransacked
by the zeal and curiosity of writers of different
parties. The attention of Cecil to collet what-
ever related to that period, in which he a&ed so
conspicuous a part, hath provided such an im-
mense store of original papers for il.uftrating this
part of the Englih and Scottifl history, as are
almost fnfficient to satisfy the utmost avidity of
an Antiquary. Sir Robert Cotton (whose library
is now the property of the Public) made great
and valuable additions to Cecil's collection; and
from this magazine, Digges, the compilers of
the Cabbala, Anderson, Keith, Haynes, Sorbes,
have drawn inoif of the papers which they have
printed. No History of Scotland, that merits
any degree of attention, has appeared since these
collections were publilhed. By consulting them,
I have been enabled, in many instances, to cor-
rect the inaccuracies of former Historians, to
avoid their mistakes, and to dcte& their mifre-
prefcntations.

But

But many important papers have escaped the

lotice of those indullrious Colletors ; and, after
all the' have produced to light, much 'still re-
nlained in darkness, unobferx ed or unpublished.
It was my duty to search for these ; and 1 found
this unpleaiant tafl attended with coniiderable
utility.

The library of the Faculty of Adyocates at

Edinburgh, contains not olly a large collection
of original papers relating to the affairs of Scot-
land, but copies of others no lcfs curious, which
have been preserved by Sir Robert Cotton, or are
extant in the Public Offices in Englaud. Of all
tilefe the curators of that library were pleased
to allow me the perusal.

Though the Britifli Museum be not yet open

to the Public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging dif-
position is well known, procured me access to
that noble colletion, which. is worthy of the
magnificence of a great and polished nation.

That va{. and curious collection of papers

relating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was
made by Dr. Sorbes, and of which he publifled
only two volumes, having been purchased since
his death, by the Lord Viscount Royiton, his
Lordship was so good as to allow me the use of
fourteen volumes in quarto, containiing that part
of them which is connected with my subject.

Sir Alexander Dick communicated to me a

very valuable collection of original papers, in two
large volumes. They relate chiefly to the reign
of James. Many of them are marked with Arch,
bilhop Spotilwood's land ; anld it appears from
several passages i his IHiltoory, that he had perused
them withl great attention.

Mr.

Mr. Calderwood, an eminent Pre/yterian

Clergyman of the last century, compiled an His-
tory of Scotland from the beginning of the reign
of James V. to the death of James VI. in fix
large volumes: 'wherein he has inserted rmany
papers of conCequence, which are no where else
to be found. This History has not been pub.
lilhed, but a copy of it, which still remains in
rnanufcript, in the possession of the church of
Scotland, was put into my hands by my worthy
friend the Reverend Dr. George Wifhart, print
cipal Clerk of the Church.

Sir David Dalrymple not only communicated

to me the papers which he has colleced relating
to Gowrie's conspiracy; but, by explaining to
me his sentiments with regard to that proble-
matical passage in the Scottish history, has en,.
abled me to place that transaction in a light
which dispels much of the darkness and confufio
in which it has been hitherto involved.

Mr. Goodall, though he knew my senti'ments

with regard to the condu& and character ofQueen
Mary to be extremely different from his own,
communicated to me a volume of manuscripts in
his poffeflion, which contains a great number of
valuable papers copied from the originals in the
Cottonian Library and Paper Office, by the late
Reverend Mr.'Crawford, Regius Professor of
Church History in the Univerlity' of Edinburgh.
I likewise received from him the original Regilfer
of letters kept by the Regent Lennox during his
adminifIration.

I have consulted all these papers, as far as I

thought they could be of any uie towards illus-
tratiig that period of which I write the hitoiy.

With
*u .

With what success I have employed them to
confirm what was already known, to afeertain
what was dubious, or to determine what was
controverted, the Public must judge.

I might easily have drawn, from the different

repositories to which I had access, as many papers
as would have rendered my Appendix equal in
size to the most bulky collection of my prede-
ceffors. But I have satisfied myfelfwith pub.
lifhing a few of the most curious among them,
to which I found it neceffaryto appeal as vouchers
for my own veracity. None of there, as far as
I can recolle&, ever appeared in any former
colleftion.

I have added a Critical Diertation concerning

the murder of King Henty, and the genuinenef of the
Q)een's letters to Bothwell. The fats and obferv-
ations which relate to Mary's letters, I owe to
my friend Mr. John Davidson, one of the Clerks
to the Signet, who hath examined this point
with his usual acutcnefs and industry.

# PREFACE TO THE ELEVENTH EDITION.

P R E F A C E

TO THE

ELEVENTH EDITION.

iT is now twenty-eight years since I publithed

the History of Scotland. During that time

I have been favoured by my friends with several
remarks upon it; and various ftritures have been
made by persons, who entertained fentimcnts dif-
ferent from rhine, with refpeft to the tranfa&ions
in the reign of Queen Mary. From whatever
quarter information came, in whatever mode it
has been communicated, I have confidered it
calmly and with attention. Wherever I perceived
that I had erred, either in relating events, or in
delineating characters, I have, without hesitation,
correfted those errors. Wherever I am satisfied
that my original ideas wercjuft and well-founded,
I adhere to them; and refting upon their con-
formity to evidence already produced, I enter
into no discussion or controversy in order to sup-
port them. Wherever the opportunity of con-
fulting original papers either in print or in manu-
script, to which I had not formerly acccfs, has
cnalled me to throw new light upon any part of
the Hillory, I have made alterations and addi-
tions, which, I flatter myself, will be found to
be of some importance.

COLIC.GEr. Or EDINBVRGH,

March 5tlh 1737.

1THE

# BOOK I. Containing a Review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the Death of JAMES V.

THE
!'.S fORr OF S CO TLANID

BOOK 1.
Coniaiilg a Review of tkf SCOTTISH IHtorj

previous to tle Death of JANES V.

T L firfi ages of the Scottish history are dark

and fabulous. Nations, as well as men, ar-

rive at maturity by de-rees, and the events, which
happened during their infancy or early youths
cannot be i-ecolleeted, and deserve not to be re-
membered. The gross ;inorance which anciently
covered all the North of Europe, the continual
migr;ations of its inhabitants, and the frequent and
drilrt&iive revolutions which these occasioned,
eindler it impoifible to give any authentic account
of the origin of rht dificrent kingdoms nolw dlta
hlihecd there. IEvery thing beyond that fhortb
period to wlich well-attelled annal: reach, is ob-
feure; an imenil;fe space is left for invention to
occucpy; each nation., with a vanity inseparable
froin Inanmn naturt, haih filled that void with
rcve:ts calculated to diifplay its own antiquity and
hllHec. Hi!ory, wlMlil ought to record truth and
to Iealh wisdom, often lets out with retailing
lietions and ablurdities.

The Scots carry their pretcnlions to antiquity

as.highll as ay of tllcir neighbours. Relying upon
uicertain legends, and the traditions of their
bards, still more umllCCtain, they reckon up a

VO, . a ferids

fe-res of kings several ages before tile birth los
Chriflt; and give a particular detail of the oc-
cunrences which happened in their reigns. B1ti
wvith regard to the Scots, as well as the other
northern nations, we receive the earliel! ar.
counts on which we can depend, not fiom tlc;i
own, lbut fiom tile Roman authors. XVbhcn tlt:
Romans, under Agricola [A. D. 8 ], firlt car-
-ied their arms into tih northern, parts of BriL
fail, they found it. p(ictfied by the Caledonians,
a fierce and warlike people: and having repulfc(l
xathlir than conquered them, they crected ?
fi-ong vall between the firths of Forth ani
Clyde, and there fixed the boundarics of thcir
ncmpire. Adnr;n, on account of the difficulty of
defending finch a diitaint frontier, contracted th,
limits of the Romnan province in Britain [A. I).

2 1i, by building a second wall, which ran be.
tween Newcafile and Carlfine. The ambition of
succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover
vhlait Ad.rian lad abandoned; and the country
between the two walls was alternately under the
dominion of the Romans and that of the Cale.
donians. About the bleginnin. of the fifth cen-
tury, the inroads of the Goths and other Barba-
rians obliged. the Romans, in order to defend the
centre of their empire, to recall thlof legions
which guarded the fronitier provinces; and at
that time they (1qlittcd all their covnquefis ip
B ritain.

A. 1). 42 I.] ThcXir longs residence in the

ifl;i(d had poliihcd, in sone degree, the rude in-
hir'bitants, and the Britons were indebted to their
intcrcourfec with the Roinans, for the art of writ-
ing, ;and the utif of numbers, without wliicl it is

imnpollibl

simpoffible long to preserve the memory of pat.

North Britain was, by their retreat, left nder
North Britain was, by their retreat, left under

the dominion of the Scots and Pi&s. The
farmer, wlo are not mentioned by any Roman

iuthlor before the-end of the fourth centuly, were
probably a colony of the CeltT, or Gauls: their
affinity to whom appears from their language,
their manners, and religious rites; circumitances
mnore decisive with regard to the origin of na-
tions, than either fabulous -traditions, or the tales
of ill-informed and -credulous annalills. The
Scots, if we may believe the common accounts,
fettled at first in Ireland; and, extending them-
fclves by degrees, landed at last on the coast op-
pofite to that island, and fixed their Ihbitations
there. Fierce and bloody wars were, during
teveral ages, carried on between them and -the
Pidts. At length, Kenneth II. the fixty-nintk
king of the Scots {according to their own
fabulous authors) obtained a complete victory
over the Pids [A. D. 838], and united under
one monarchy, all the country, ,from the wall of
Adrian to the northern ocean. The kingdom
henceforward became known by its present name,
which it derived from a people vho at sirs fettled

ithere as strangers, and remained long obscure and
inconsiderable.

From this period the history of Scotland would

merit some attention, were it accompanied with
any certainty. But as ourremote antiquities are
involved in the fame darkief,3 wuitl those of other
nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has
slhrown almoll an equal oblcurity over our morc
recent traiifaótions. This was occasioned by the

B m inilicioua

npaliciouF policy of Edward I. of England. Tu,
nards the end of the thirteenth century, this
tnonarch called ini question the independendec o'
Scotland; pretending that the kingdom 'wa heil
as a fief of the crown of England, and fubjaeet
to all the conditions of a feudal tenurt. n porer
to establish his claim, he seized the public ar-
phives, he ranfacliked lurches and monafteijcs,
and gettiog poilcfleioi, by force or fratd, o'
xnany hiltorical nmonpifiits, which tended to
prove the antiquity or freedom of the kingdom,
he carried some of them into England, and coie ,
lnanded the reit to be burned'. An univerfsl
oblivion of pait tranfaótions inight have been tle
elFet of this fatal event, but some impe-fed;1
chronicles had escaped the rage of Edward;
foreign writers had recorded fonm impQrtant
faas relating to Scotland; and .the traditiona
goncerning recent occurrences were fresh and
worthy ofcredit. These brolen fragments John
-e Fordun, whl lived in the fourteenth century,

polleted with a pioits indultry, and from them
gleaned materials which he formed into a regular
.history, His work was received by his couitry-
inen with applause; and as no re;ourfe could be
had to morz ancient records, it supplied the
place of the authentic annaas of the ikingdomh
It was copied in nmany monafto'ies, (.nd the
thiead of the narrative was continued by dif..
seret monks through the fil)fequ(ent roioit , ] n
the bwegiwing of the fitcenth century, John
h;,jor and Hector 3oetlhiui publiflhd tliejr his-
.orle of Scotland, tile forncr ; ficcintt and dry
writer, theg latter a copious and florid oue, a}41

' llnas, lffay 5j';.

* t.)d)

both equally'credulous. Not many years after4
iBuchanan undertook the fame work; and if his
;accuracy and impartiality had been, in any de-
gree, equal to the elegance of his taste and to
the purity and vigour of his ityle, his history
might be placed on a level with the moit adlfiired
coinpoitions of the ancients. But, inflead of
rcje.ting the improbable tales of chronicle wri-
ters, he was at the utmost pains to adorn them;
and hath clothed, with all the beauties and graces
f,s fiaion, those legends, which formerly had
enly its wildness and extravagance.

The hillory of Scotland may properly he di-

vided into four periods. The lirit reaches firin
tile origin of the monarchy, to thie re'igi of
ienneth II. The second from Kenneth's con-
queit of the Pits, to the death of Alexander III.
The third extends to the death of James V.
The last, from thence to the accession of James
VI. to the crown of England.

The firit period is the reign of pure fable and

conjet&ure, and oughlt to be totally neglected, or
abandoned to the indultry and credulity of anti-
uaries. 'Truth begins to dawn in the Icconil
period, with a light, f;eble at firit, but gradually
increaling, and the events which then happened
may be Ilightly touched, but me:ril rto particular
or laborious inquiry. In the third pciod, the
hiltory of Scotland, chiefly by means of records
npeferved in England, becomes mnore ;uilthentic
not only arc event:; related, but their causes and.
effr.s exlitined ; the claralerls of the ators are
displaycd ; the manners of tile age deferibed ; the
revolutions in the conilitntion pointed out: and
Lere every Scotfilan should begei not1 to read

" 3 olly>

pnvl, but to fiudy the history of his country,
During the fourth period, the affiiirs of Scotland
were so mingled with those of other nations, its
situation in the political fiate of Europe was sI
important, its influence on the operations of thu
neighbouring kingdoms was so vilible, that it3
hillory becomes an objec of attention to so-
reigners; and without fcnme kamwledg? of the
Various and extraordinary revoluttins which hap-
pened there, they cannot form a juit noti!n with
rcfpect either to the moit illustrious events, or to
the charactrs of the most difinguifhcd person-
ages, in the sixteenth century.

The following hifiory is colfined to the lai of

thele periods: to give a view r;s tile political Ifate
of the kingdom during that which immediately
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary
Book. The imperfect knowledge which itrangers
hIve of the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudiccs
Sco-fmen themselves have imbibed with rtgard to
the various revolutions in the government of thtir
country, render such an introduAtilun equally ne-
ceffary to both.

The period from the death of Alexanndr III.

to the death of James V. contains upwards of
two centuries and a half, from the y.ar one tholu
sand two hundred and eighty-fix, to tlhe year one
thousand five hundred and forty-two.

It opens with the famous controversy concern-

ing the independence of Scotland. Before the
union of the two kingdoms, this was a queflion
of n'ich importance. If the one crown had been
confidered not as imperial and independent, but
as feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could
ppt ayve been PonclLdcd on equal terms, and

every

evely advantage which the dependent kingdom
procured, muli have been deemed the concetfior
of a fovercign to Ilis vaflal. Accordingly, about
the beginniing of the present century, and while

treaty of union between the two kingdoms waS
,egociatiig, this controversy was agitated with
all the heat which national animofities naturally
ilfpire. What was then the subjed of feriout
cotccrn, the union of the two kingdoms bad
rendered a matter of mere curiosity. But though
tile objects which at that time warmed and ia-
terested both nations exist no longer, a queitiorn
vwhich appt;aviedo nimomentousto our anceltors can,
ptot be. altogether iudifferent or uninitruftive to us,

Some of the northern counties of England

were early in the hands of the Scottish kings,
1ho> as far back as the feudal cultorns can be
traced, held tltefe poffefioos of the kings of
Enigland, and did ilomnage to them on that ac-
c1lunt. This homage, due only for the ter.
ritories which they held in England, was in
.l) wife derogatory from their royal dignity,
Nothiing is more suitable to feudal ideas, than
that the fame person should be both a lord
and a vassal, independent in one capacity, and
dependent in anotherb. The crown of Eng-

land

b A very singular proof of this occurs in the French

hi;lb ry. Arpin fold tlh vicomtin of the city. Bourges to
'hilip I. who did homagc to the colt of Sancerre for 4
part of there lands, which held of that nobleman A. R.
I oo. I believe that no example, of a king's dning homage
to one of his own fubjcls, is to be met with in the hifto;ies
cither of England or Scotland. Philip le Bel abolilhed this
pr!kcic: i: France A. D 1301. lenault Abreg Cbronol.
Soinoewhat similar to this, is a charter of the Abbot of
MclrQf , 4. D, J5355, oulitituting Jaines Y. thp bailiffo

(lpwtv4

land was, without dcubt, imperial and independl
;cnt, though the princes who wore it were, for
many ages, the vassals of the kings of France;
and, in consequence of their poffeflions in th.at
kingdom, bound to perform all the services which
a feudal fovercign has a title to exact.. The
fame was the condition of tie monarchs of Scot-
land,; free and independent as kings of their own
country, but, as possessing English territories,
vassals to the-king of England. The Englili
monarchs, satisfied with their-legal and uncon-
troverted rights, were, during a long period,
neither capable, nor lhad any thoughts of usurp-
ing more. England, when conquered by the
Saxons, being divided by them into many finall
kingdoms, w as in no condition to extend its
dominion over Scotland, united at that time
tnder one monarch. And though these petty
principalities were gradually formed into one
kingdom; the reigning princes, exposed to con-
tinual invalions of the Danes, and often fulbjeed
to the yoke of those formidable pirates, feldoln
turned their arms towards Scotlandi and were
little able to eftablifli new rights in that country.
The fillt kings of the Norman race, busied with
introducing their own laws and manners into the
kingdom which they had conquered, or with
maintaining themselves on the throne whlich some
of them pofieffed by a very dubious title, were as
little solicitous to acquire new autlority, or to
form new pretensions in Scotland. An unex-

eward of that abbey, vesting, in him all the powers which
pcrtained to that oflice, and requiring him to be answerable
to the abbot for his cxcrcife of the fame. ,drchiv-. ptul.
pTin.,

e&cd calamity that besel one of the Scottifl
Kings firit encouraged the Englilh to think of
ringing his kingdom under dependence. Wil
iam firnamed the Lion being taken prifoncr at

vlAiwick, Henry II. as the price of his liberty,

ot only extorted from him an exorbitant ran-

am, and a promise to surrender the places of

reateft strength in his dominions, but compelled
lin to do homage for his whole kingdom.
Richard I. a generous prince, solemnly re.
nomnced this claim of homage, and absolved
sWilliam from the hard conditions which Henry
Ilad imposed. Upon the death of Alexander III.
jlear a century after, Edward I. availing himself
los the situation of affairs in Scotland, acquired
inn influence in that kingdom which no English
!nonarch before him ever possessed, and, imi.
tating the interestcd policy of Henry, rather than
the nlagnanimity of Richard, revived the claim of
sovereignty to which the former had pretended.

Margaret of Norway, grandtdaughter of

Alexander, and heir to his crown, did not long
survive him. The right of succession belonged
to the descendants of David carl of IHuntingdon,
third son of king David I. Among these, Ro.
bert Bruce and Jonh: Baliol, two illuitrious corn
petitors for the crown, appeared. Brucc was the
son of Isabel, earl David's second daughter;
Baliol, the grandson of Margaret the cldeft
daughter. Accolding to the rules of succession
which are now cllabliflied, the right of Bliol
was prtferunl, ;and notwaititanding Bruce's plea
of being nearer in blood to earl David, Baliol'a
elanin, as the representative of lhis mother and
gnuYlllngthcr, w}ould be deemncd icoUntetible,

Blnt

But in that age the order of succession was no
ascertained with the fame precision. The qude
tion appeared to be no less intricate, than it wa
important. Though the prejudices of the peo
pie. and perhaps the laws of the kingdom, fa
voured Bruce, each of the rivals was fupporte(
by a powerful faction. Arms alone, it wva
feared, must terminate a dispute too weighty fro
the laws to decide. But, in order to avoid tht
*niferies of a civil war, Edward was chosen urn.
pire, and both parties agreed to acquiesce in hi!
decree. This had well nigh proved fatal to the
independence of Scotland; and the nation, by its
eagerness to guard againit a civil war, was not
only exposcd to that calamity, but almost sub.
je&ed to a foreign yoke. Edward was artful,
brave, enterprising, and commanded a powerful
and martial people, at peace with the whole
world. The anarchy which prevailed in Scot-
land, and the ambition of competitors ready to
sacrifice their country in order to obtain even a
dependent crown, invited him first to seize, and
then to fubjetl the kingdom. The authority of
an umpire, wihicll had been unwarily bestowed
*upon him, and fiom which tile Scots dreaded no
dangerous consequences, enabled him to execute
his schemes With the greater facility. Under
pretence of examining the quellion with the ut-
most solemnity, he flTnmmoned all the Scottish
barons to Norham, and having gained some and
intimidatcd others, he prevailed on all who were
.present, not excepting Bruce and Baliol, the
competitors, to acknowledge Scotland to be a fief
of the Englifll crown, and to swear fealty to him
as their fioereign or liege I/vr/. This itep led

to

o another still more important. As it was vain
o pronounce a sentence which he had not power
o execute, Edward demanded poffeflion of the
,ilitrdoni, that he might he able to deliver it to
!i nlholt right ihould be found preferable; and
lich was the pnllillaniinity of the nobles, and the
mipatilient ambition of the competitors, that both
lflttedl to this tlrange demand, and Gilbert de
IlTfiraviile, earl of Angus, was the- only man

li ho refiufed to surrender the cattles in his cultody
to tle enemy of his country. Edward finding
Ba!iol the most obfcquious and the least formid-
able of the two competitors, soon after gave
uiio(llcnnt in his favour. Baliol once more pro-
t'efitl himfelfthe vassal of IEngland, and submitted
to every-conditiorL which the sovereign whom he
had now acknowledged was pleased to prescribe.

Edward, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled
llhe nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and
independence of their country, had reason to con.
ldude that his dominion was now fuilly eflablifhed.
Blit he began too soon to allurne the master; his
mw V vatfals, lierce and independent,, bore with irn-
paticnce a yoke, to which they were not accuf.
toned. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the
pailfive spirit of B.liol began to mutiny.. But
Edward, who had no longer Life for such a
pageant king, forced him to resign the crown,
;ad openly attempted to seize it as fallen to him-
self by the rebellion of his vafTal. At that eit
tical period arose tir William Wallace,' a'heroi
to whom the fond admiration of his countrymen"
i;t'l. ascribed many fabulous afts of prbwefs,l
thouSgh his real valour, as well as integrity'and

x %wisdom,

wisdom, are filch as need not the heightenings of
fidion. He, alnoft lingle, ventured to take
arms in defence of the kingdom, and his boldness
rcviyed the spirit of his countrymen. At last,
Robert Bruce, the grandson of him who stood in
competition with Baliol, appeared to assert his
own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his
country. The nobles, afliamed of their former
baseness, and enraged at the many indignities
offered to the nation, crowded to his itandard.
In order to crush him at once, the Englilh
monarch entered Scotland at the head of a
mighty army. Many battles were fought, and
the Scots, though often vanquifllcd, were not
filbdued. The ardent zeal with which the nobles
contended for the independence of the kingdom,
the prudent valour of Bruce, and above all a na-
tional enthuliafm inspired by such a cause, baffled
the repeated efforts of Edward, and counter-
balanced all the advantages which he derived from
the number and wealth of his fillujeatq. Though
the war continued with little intermission up-
wards of seventy years, Bruce and his posterity
kept poffetfion of the throne of Scotlaind, and
reigned with an authority not inferior to that of
its former monarchs.

But while the sword, the ultimate jtudge of all

disputes bctween contending nations. was em-
ployed to terminatc this controvellry, neither
Edward nor the Scots feeined to diftluft the
justice of their cause; and both appealed to
Litury and records, and from thefc produced, in
their own favour, fich evidence as they pre-
tended to be unanswerable. The letters and
memorials addressed by each party to the Pope,

: ho1

who was then reverenced as the common father,
and often appealed to as the common judge of all
chirifian princes, are still extant. The fabulous
tales of the early British hitloiy; the partial
teflimony of ignorant chroinickrs; iuppoititiou.s
treaties and charters; are the proofs on which
Edward founded his title to the fovercigty of
Scotland; and the homage done by the Scotti!h
monarchs for their lands in England is prepoite.
roafly futppofed to imply the fubjct:ion of their
whole kingdom c. Ill-folnded, however, as thrir
right was, the Englili did not fail to revive it ini
all the subsequent quarrels between the tw:o
kingdoms; while the Scots disclaimed it with
the utmost indignation. To this.we mufr impute
the fierce and implacable hatred to each other,
which long inflamed both. Their national a)rti-
pathies were excited, not only by the tfual cir-
cumftances of frequent hofilities, and reciprocal
injuries; but the Engli{h confidered the Scots as
vafials who had prefur.ed to rebel, and the Scots,
in their turn, regarded the EngliSh as ufiupcrs
who aimed at enllaving their country.

1306.] At the time when Robert Brucc began

yis reign in Scotland, the fame form. of govern.
rnent was eflablilhed in all the kingdoms of
Europe. This surprising similarity in their con.
ffitution and laws demonaftates that til nation.
whlich overturned the Roman empire, and. ere&ced
tlefe kingdoms, tlhough divided into difterent
tribes, and diftingilbhed by different namegs
were either derived oliginally from the fame
source, or had been placed in funilar-fitua.

c Anderson' Historical Efliy concening r filhepcnd-
cncy, Ae.

vOL. I*. tiortS.

tions. When we take a view of the feudal fyifem
of laws and policy, that stupendous and fingulr
fabric erested by them, the tirft obje& that itlikc,
1s is the king. And when we are told that i,
is the sole proprietor of all the lands within 1Is
dominions, that all his fubjedts derive their pof.
feflions from him, and in return consecrate tllhi:
lives to his service; wilcn we hear that all marks
of difdindtion, and titles of dignity, flow from him
as the only fountai' of honour; when we behold
the most potent peers, on their bended knees,
and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his
feet, and acknowledging him to he theirfovereisn
and their legr lord; we are apt to pronounce
him a powerfil, nay an absolute monarch. N,;:
conlcluiion, however, would be more rafli, or
worse founded. The genius of the feudal govern-
ment was purely ariflocratical. With all the en-
iigns of royalty, and with many appearances t!
despotic power, a feudal king was the most li
mited of all princes.

Before tihy rallied out of their own habitations

to conquer the world, many of the northern na-
tions feermed not to have been subje6t to the go-
vernmcnt of kingsd; and even where monarchical
government was eftabliflled, the prince possessed
but little authority. A general rather, than a
king, his military command was extensive, his
civil jurifdidtion almoll nothing '. The army
which he led was not composed of soldiers, who
.,ould be compelled to serve, but of fuchl as
voluntarily followed his standards. These con,
quered niot. r their leader, but for thliemflves;
. , Ctf, lib.' i. . c Tacit, d Mor. Germ.
c, 7. 11. f Cef, lib, i. c,
c 3.

''*i .;:
' and

atli being free in their own country, renounced
not their liberty when they acquired new fettle-
nlents. They did not exterminate the ancient
inhabitants of the countries which they subdued,

!,t feizirig the greater part of their lands, they

took their persons under protetion. The dif-
iculty of maintaining a new conquefl, as well as
the danger of being attacked by new invaders,
rendering it necefary to be always in a posture
of defence, the form of government which they
dllalblfhd was altogether military, and nearly
rcfenmbled that to which they had been ac-
ctiftomed in their native country. Their general
ftili continuing to be the head of the colony,
i-at of the conquered lands were allotted to him;
tllh remailder, under the name of benijiza oricfs,
iwas' divided among his; principal oflicers. As the
cormmnl safety required that these officers fllould,
upon all occasions, be ready to appear in arns, for
the common defence, and ihould continue obedient
to their general, they hound theinfelvcs to take
the field, when called, and to serve him with a
nmmirchr of men in proportion to the'cxtent of
their territory. These great officers again part'
celled out their lands among their followers, and
annexed the fame condition to the grant. A
feudal: kingdom was properly the 'encampment
us a grreat army ; military ideas predomiiated,
military subordination was efl.ablihed, and the
9ofi'eflion of land was the pay whicl foldicrs rec
ocived for their pcrfonal fcrvice. In consequence
of these notions, the possession of land was granted
during pleasure only, and kings were eleaive.

.n other words, an oficer disagreeable to his
genenrl was deprived of lis pay, and the person

c 2 wh»

who was moit capable of conducing an army
was chosen to command it. Such were the ii:.it
rudiments, or infancy of feudal government.

But long before the bcginning of the four.

tcenth century, the feudal fyflem had undergone
many changes, of which the following were the
molt considerable. Kings, formerly elective, were
then hereditary; and fiefs, granted at first during
pleafurc, descended from father to son, and were
become perpetual. These changes, not less ad.
vantageous to the nobles than to the prince, made
no alteration in the ariftocratical spirit of the feu.
dal constitution. The king, who at a distance
seemed to be invefled with majesty and power, ap.
pears, on a nearer view, to possess almost none
of those advantages which beifow on monarchs
their grandeur and authority. His revenues were
scanty; he had not a fianding army; and thejuril.
di&ion he possessed was circumscribed within vezy
narrow limits.

At a time when pomp and splendor were little

known, even in the palaces of kings; when the
otficers of the crown received scarcely any salary
besides the fees and perquisites of their office;
when embafies to foreign courts were rare;
when armies were composed of soldiers who fcrved
without payl.it was not necefl'ary that a king
should poflrfs a great revenue; nor did the con.
dition of Furope,. in those ages, allow its princes
to be opulent. Commerce made little progress
in the kingdoms where the fi'udil government
twa ellablifhed, Inltitutions, which had no other
objetl but to inspire a martial spirit, to train
Gnen to be soldiers, and to nmake arms the only ho.
$Qou4rbl¢ profelionj naturally difioutragcd the

opmmcrr1

commercial arts. The revenues arising from the
taxes imposed on the different branches of com-
?l'rc-we, wcre by confcquence inconsiderable; and
thc prince's treasury received little supply from
la source, which, among a trading people, flows
.vith such abundance as is almost inexhauftilIe.
A fixed tax was not levied even on land; such a
;urthen would have appeared intolerable to men
Wvho received their estates as the reward of their
valour, and who confidered their service in the
field -,s a full retribution for what they possessed.
The kinrg's dermefrs, or the portion of land which
lie tili retained in his own hands unalienatcd,
furnilihed fubfiilence to his court, and defrayed
the ordinary expence of governmentg. The only
fated taxes which the feudal law obliged vas-
fals to pay to the king, or to those of whom
they held their lands, were three: one when his
eldeit forl was made a knight; another when his
cldelt daughter was married; and a third in or-
der to ransom him if he should happen to be
taken prisoner. Besides these, the king received
the feudal cafialties of the ward, marriage, &c.
of Ils own vassals. And, on some extraordinary
occasions, his fuibjc&ts granted him an aid, which
lley diltinguiflied by the name of a bIenevolence,
in order to declare that he received it not in
cofe(lquence of any ighlt, but as a gift flow-
ing from heilr good villl'. All there added
tilrecther, produced a revenue so feanty and pre-
c:iouls, as naturally incited a feudal monarch
to ;im at diminiffling the exorbitant power and
wc.alth of the nobility, but inflead of enablilng

A Craig. tie Feeud lib.i. Dicg. 14. Du Cange Glofl:
:oc, Dominicum. . 1it Cangc, voc, Auxil;uln.

c 3 hii

him to carry on his fclhemes with full effect,
kept him in continual indigence, anxiety, and tdc
pendence.

Nor could the king supply the defeEt of il;s

revenues by tle terror of his larms. Meren;irv
troops and Itanding armies were unknown as
long as the feudal government fubifted in vi.
gour. Europe was peopled with soldiers. The
vafflals of the king, and tile fub-vaffals of the ba.
pons, were all obliged to carry arms. While
the poverty of princes prevented them from for-
tifving their frontier tos ns, while a campaign
continued but a few weeks, and while a fierce and
impetuous courage wasi impatient to bring every
quarrel to the decijion of a battle, an army,
without pay, and with little difciplinc, was fufli.
cient for all the purposes both of the security and
of the glory of the nation. Such an army, how-
ever, far from being an engine at the king's difi
pofal, was often no less formidable to him, than
to his enemies. The more warlike any people
were, the more independent they became; and
the fame persons being both soldiers and fubjest,;,
civil privileges and immunities were the confe.
qucnce of tiheir viaories, and the reward of their
martial exploits. Conquerors, whom mercenary
armies, under our present forms of government,
often render the tyrants of their own people, ais
well as the scourges of mankind, were commonly,
under the feudal conlUitution, the most indulgent
ps all princes to their fuibjets, because they ltood
moit in need of their aflfifance. A prince, whom
even war and victories did not render the mailer
ps his own army, pofflieed hardly any fladow of
i4t7ry power during timeo of peace. His dif-

banded

)anded soldiers mingled with h}is other fubjedts;
lot a single man received pay from him; many
ges elapled even before a guard was appointed to
}efend his person; and destitute of that great in-
Irument of dominion, a itanding army, the autho-
rity of the king continued always feeble, and was
ften contemptible.
Nor were these the only circumftanccs which

Contributed towards dcpreffing the regal power.
1y the feudal fyltem, as has been already ob-
ecrved, the king'sjudicial authority was extremely
i'rclmfcribed.. At first, princes feein to have
'ben the fuprcmc judges of their people, and, in
peribn, heard and determined all controverlies
iamong them. The multiplicity of causes soon
mnade it necessary to appoint judges, who, il the
king's name, decided matters that belonged to
the royaljurifdiaion. But the Barbarians, who
'over-ran Europe, having destroycd most of the
great cities, and the countries which they seized
being cantoned out among powerful chiefs, who
were blindly followed by numerous dependaliit;,
whom, in return, they were bound to protect
fiom every injury; the adminiltration of justice
was greatly interrupted, and the execution of
any legal fentcnce became almnolt impra;ticable.
Theft, rapine, murder, and disorder of all kinds.
prevailed in every kingdom of Europe, to a de-
gree almost incredible, and fearcely compatible
with the fubfillence of civil society. Every of-
fender flleltered himself under tht protection of
some powerful chieftain, who screened hinm from
the pursuits of jultice. To apprehend, and to
puniih a criminal, often required the union and

eflort

effort of half a kingdomi. In order to remedy
these evils, many persons of dillintion were en-
trusted with the adminiltration of jultice withi:
their own territories. But what we may presume
was, at firIt, only a temporary grant, or-a personal
privilege, the incroaching spirit of the nobles gra-
dually converted into a right, and rendered here-
ditary. The lands of some were, in process of
time, erefted into baronies, those of others into
regalities. The jurifdiktion of the former was
extensive; that of the latter, as the name implies,
royal, and almost unbounded. All causes, whe-
ther civil or criminal, were tried by judges, whom

i A remarkable instance of this occurs in the following

hitlory, so late as the year one thousand five hundred and
fixty-one. Mary, having appointed a court ofjuftice to be
held on the borders, the inhabitants of no less than eleven
counties were summoned to guard the person who was-to a&t
as judge, and to enable him to enforce his decisions. The
words of a proclamation, which afford such a convincing proof
of the feehlenefs of the feudal government, deserve our no-
tice.-" And beca.fe it is necelliry for the execution of her
Highness' commandments and service, that her jutlice be
ncll accompanied, and her authority sufficiently fortified, by
the concurrence of a good power of her faithful fubjeis-
Therefote commands and charges all and sundry earls, lords,
barons, freeholders, landed.men, and other gentlemen,
dwelling within the laid counties, that they, and every one
of them, with their kin, fiiends, servants, and houflold-men,
well bolain in feir of war in the mo(t fubftantious manner,
[i. e. completely armed and provided,] and with twenty days
victuals to meet and to pass forward with him to the borough
of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the said space of
twenty days, and .to receive such dilettion and commands as
Thall be given by himto them in our Sovereign Lady's name,
for qiuietneli of the country; and to put the fame in execution
under the pain oflofiing their liter lands, and goods." Kcith's
Hlt. of Scotland, 98.

the

the lord of the regality appointed; and if the
king's courts called any person within his terri-
tory before them, the lord of regality might put
a stop to their proceedings, and by the privilege
of replcd.ng, remove the cause to his own court,
and even punish his vaflal, if he flubnitted to a
foreign jurifdiEtionk. Thus alnioft every quef.
tion in which any person who resided on the
lands of the nobles was interested, being deter-
mined by judges appointed by the nobles them.
if.:l's, their vassals were hardly sensible of being,
in any degree, fiubjet to the crown. A feudal
kingdom was split into many small principalities,
alinoft independent, and held together by a feeble
and commonly. an imperceptible bond of union,
The king was not only stripped of the authority
annexed to the person of a supreme judge, but;
his revenue suffered no small diminution, by the
loss of those pecuniary emoluments, which were,
in that age, due to the person who administered
jiftice.

In the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles. rose towards independence,
Not satisfied with having obtained a hereditary
right to their fiefs, which they formerly hell
during pleasure, their ambition aimed at some,
thing bolder, and by introducing entails, endea
voured, as far as human ingenuity and invention
can reach that end, to render their poffefiona
unalienable and everlasting. As they had full
power to add to the inheritance traniifmitted to
them from their ancestors, but none to tiininilih
it, time alone, by means of marriages, legaciest
snd other accidents, brought continual acicelions

9 Cs4»lg ,

i b. il.
i icg. 7.

of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like a
river, became considerable from the length of its
course, and as it rolled on, new honours and new
property flowed successively into it. Whatever
influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons likewise possessed in an ample
manner. These marks of diftincion are, in their
own nature, either official or personal, and being
annexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by
the admiration of mankind upon illu{lrious cha-
racters, ought to be appropriated to these. But
the son, however unworthy, could not bear to be
itripped of that appellation by which his fa-
ther had been diltinguified. His presumption
claimed what his virtue did not merit; titles of
honour became hereditary, and added new luflre
to nobles already in possession of too much power.
Something more audacious and more extravagant
fill remained. The ;apreme direEtion of all as-
fairs, both civil and military, being committed
to the great officers of the crown, the fame and
fifety of princes, as well 'as of their people; de-
pended upon the fidelity and abilities of these of-
ficers. But such was the prepoflerous ambition
of the 'nobles, and so successful even in their.
wildest attempts to aggrandize themselves, that in
all the kingdoms where the feudal institutions
prevailed, moit of the chief offices of itate wvere
annexed to great families, and held, like fiefs, by
hereditary right. A person whose undutiful be-
haviour rendered him odious to his prinde, or
whose incapacity exposed him to the contempt Of
the people, often held a place of power and trust
of the greatest importance to both. In Scotland
the offices of lord justice general,- great chain-

berlain,

berlain, high steward, high conflablc, earl
marflal, and high admiral, were all hereditary;
and in many counties, the office of fiheriff was
held in the fame manner.

Nobles, whose property was so extensive, and

whose power was so great, could not fail of being
turbulent and formidable. Nor did they want
instruments for executing their boldest designs.
That portion of their lands which they parcelled
oat among their followers, fnpplied them with a
numllrous band of faithful and deternined vas-
fals; while that which they retained in tleir
own hands, enabled them to live with a princely
splendor. The great hall of an ambitious baron
was often more crowded than the court of his
sovereign. The ilrong caltles in which they re-
fided afforded a secure retreat to the discontented
and seditious. A great part of their revenue was
Ipcnt upon multitudes of indigent but bold re-
tainers. And if at any time they left their re-
treat to appear in the court of their sovereign,
they were accompanied, even in times of peace,
willt a vafl train of armed followers. The ufutal
irtinue of William the sixth earl of Douglas
confiited of two thousand horse. Tlofe of the
other nobles were magniticent and formidable in
proportion. Implatient of subordination, and
forgetting their proper rank, such potent and
Ihulighty barons were the rivals, rather than the
fibjfts of their prince. 'They often despised his
orders, insulted his person, and wretied from him
his crown. The hiitory of Europe, during fe-
veral ages, containo little clfe but the accounts of
tihe wars and revolutiono occasioncd by their cxor-
bitant ambition.

But,

But, if the authority of the barons far exceedec

its proper bounds in the other nations of Europe,
we may affirm that the balance which ought tc
be preserved between a king and his nobles was
alnmot entirely lolt in Scotland. The Scottish
nobles enjoyed, in common with those of other
nations, all tile means for extending their authority
wihich arise from the ariltocratical genius of the
feudal government. Besides these, they possessed
advan!tages peculiar to themselves: the accidental
fourccs of their power were considerable; and
linigular circumlltances concurred with the spirit
of the conttitution to aggrandize them. To enu-
merate the inolt remarkable of these, will serve
both to explain the political ilate of the kingdom,
and to illultrate many important occurrences in
the period now under our review.

1. The nature of their country was one cause

of the power and independence of the Scottifl
nobiiiitv. Level and open countries are formed
fior elrvitudt. The authority of the supreme
magiitrate reaches with ease to the inoft distant
curners; anld when nature has ereted no barrier
and aflbrds no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious
arc loon detedetd and puiniihcd. Mountains, and
ferig, and rivcrs, set bounds to despotic power,
and amidlt these is the natur;l leat of fieei
dlom and ijldependence. In fucli phicee did the
Scottili nobles uftially fix thcir reiidonce. By
retirint, to his own caltle, a mutinous baron
couild defy the power of his iovcrcign, it being
alniolt imprafic;able to lead an arny, through
a ban'en country, to places of diificult accef
to a single man. The tlame causes which check-
ed the progrcls of the Romau arms, and ren-

dered

dered all the efforts of Ewhvard I. abortive, often
proteced the Scottish nobles from the ven.
geance of their prince; and they owed their
personal independence to those very mountains
and marlhes which saved their country from beinsg
conquered.

1I. 'The want of great cities in Scotland con-

tributed not a little to increase the power of
the nobility, and to weaken that of the prince,
Wherever numbers of men afimbIe together,
order must be etablifhedi and a regular form of
government ntllt he inffitutcd, the authority of
ithe magiftate mufl be recognliczd, and his dcci-
sions meet with prompt and full obeiience. Iaws
and fiubordination take rife in cities; and where
there are few cities as in Poland, or none as
mi 'lartary, therc are few or lo traces of a well-
arranged police. But ulnder the feudal govern-
ments, commerce, the chief nmeans of assembling
mankind, was negleeed; tlhe nobles, in ordlttr to
strengthen their influence over their vaflils, re-
fided iamong them, and seldom appeared at colult,
wlhere they fIlund a liperior, or dwelt in cities,
where thiey met with equals. In Scotland, the
erLtile counties in the foiu'h lying open to the
Englifli, no town lituated teree could rile to be
p'eat or popultus amh idt colltilntal inroads and
llarms- the residence of oui- ronanclhs was not
ixed to any particular place; many patls of the
:ountry were barren and unciltivattd; and in
:onfequence of tlhfe pecntiar circuimftances, add-
:d to the general causes flowing from the nia-
ure of the feudal inititutions, the towns in Scot-
;ind were few, nnd very inconfiderabk. Tihe
;afils of every. baron occupied a diltiat, pov!-
Y OLt J. V| tin1a

tion of the kingdom, and formed a separate am
almo{t independent focicty. Initead of giviln
aid towards reducing to obedience their fcditiou
chieftain,'or any whom lie took under his pro
tee.tion, they were all in arms for his defence
and obilrnteed the opcrations of jultice to tht
utinoft. The prince was obliged to connive at
criminals whom lie could not reach; the nobles,
confeious of this advantage, were not afraid to of-
fend; and the difficulty of punilhing almnoft assured
them of impunity.

111. The diviiion of the country into clans had

no small effect in rendering tie nobles confi-
derable. The nations which over-ran Europe
were originally divided into many finall tribes;
and when they came to parcel out the landls
which they had conquered, it was natural for
every chieftain to bestow a portion, in the firli
place, upon tlhofe of his own tribe or family.
Tliefe all held their lands of him; and as the
safety of each individual depended on the general
union, these fliall societies clung together, and
were diltinguillied by fomne common appellatioi,
either patronymical or local, long before the il-
troduftion of surnames, or etifiFns armorial. But
when tlefe became comlmon, . the descendants an(l
rclations of every chiicftain assumed the£ fame
namue and arms w'itl him; other vaflals were
proud to imitate their example, and by degrees
they were communicated to all those who held of
the fame fuiperior. Thus clannfiips were formed.;
and in a generation or two, that consanguinity,
which was, at firlt, in a great mcaflure, imiaginary,
was believed to be real. An artilicil union was
converted into a natural one; men willingly

followed

followed a leader, whom they regarded both as
the il)perior of their lands, and the chief of their
hlood, ald served him not only with the fidelity
cf vallals, but with the affection of fiiends. In
the other feudal kingdoms, we may observe such
Iunions as we have described imperfe&ly formed;
but in Scotland, whether they were the produdtion
of chance or the effe&t of policy, or irtroduced
by the Irish colony above mentioned, and strength-
ened by carefully preserving their genealogies
both genuine and fabulous, clanfhips vere uni-
vcrfal. Such a confederacy might be overcome,
it could not be broken; and no change of man-
rcr:s, or of government, has been able, in some
parts of the kingdom, to difTolve associations whicl
are founded upon prejudices so natural to t:he 1-t-
mail mind. How formidable were nobles at the
iead of followers, who, counting that carifijult
ind honourable which their chiefapproved, rflied
rit, the field at his command, ever ready t ;facri-
ice their lives in defence of his person or of his
inc; against fiuch men a king contended with
:reat disadvantage; and that cold service which
1oney purchases or authority extorts, was not an
qual match for their ardour aid zeal.

IV. The finallnefs of their number may be
ientioned among the causes of the grandeur of
i, Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not back
I tie firfI divilion of property in the kingdom;
it as tar as we can trace the matter, the origi-
1l poflefions of tlhe nobles seem to have been ex-
nlive. The ancient thanes were the equals and
e rivals of thcir prince. Many of the earls and
rons who filceceede them, were mattcrs of
rritoriict no IJ8 ample. France and England,

1 z countries

countries wide and fertile, afforded fettleilents tc
a numerous and powerful nobil;ty. Scotland, i
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could nol
contain many fudc overgrown proprietors. Bul
the power of an aristocracy always diminishes in
proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble
if divided among a multitude, inefiltiblk.if cen.
tered in a few. When nobles are numerous, their
operations nearly resemble those of the people;
they are routed only by what they feel, not by
what they apprehend; and submit to many arbi-
trary ian oppreflive ads, before they ;ake arms
againit their sovereign. A frnall body, on the
contrary, is more fentible, and more impatient;
auick in discerning, and prompt in repelling dan.
gir; all its motions are as sudden as those of the
oter ilre flow. Hence proceeded the extreme
jeaUl .y with which the Scottilh nobles obfenred
thei;i1 onarchs, and the fierceness with which they
ppopd 1 their incroachments. Even the vlrtue of
a prince did not render them less vigilant, or less
eager to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce,
notwithilanding the splendor of his viciories and
the glory of his name, was upon the point of ex.
periencing the vigour of their resistance, no less
than Iris unpopilardefcendant James III. Befidcs
this, the snear alliance of the great families by fre-
quent interinarriages, was the natural consequence
of their finall uhber; and as confanguinltywvas,
ii those ages, a powerful bond of union, all the
kindred of a nobleman interelted themfclves in
his quarrel, as a common cause; and every con-
telt the king had, though with a single baron,
soon drew upon 1hil the rmsn of a whole con.
*deracy,

V, Tbof,

V. Those natural connexions, both with their

equals and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles
strengthened by a device, which, if not peculiar
to theinfelves, was at least more frequent among
thenm, than in any other nation. Even in times
of profound peace, theyformed afrociations, which,
when made with their equals, were called leagues
of mzutual defence; and when with their inferiors,
hotnls of manrent. By the former, the contra&ting
parties bound themselves mutually to assist each
c.ther in all causes and againit all persons. By
the latter, protection was ltipulated on the one
hand, and fidelity and personal service pronifed
on the other'. Seli-lrefervation, it is probable,
forced men at firit into thcfe confederacies; and
while disorder and rapine were universal, while
government was unsettled, and the authority of
laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it neceffarv to unite in this manner for their
ficurity, and the weak were obliged to court the
patronage of the fitong. 13y degrees, these alo-
ci'aions became so many alliances offensive and
lhfcnfive againfit the throne; and as their obliga-
tion was held to be more sacred than auy tie what-
ever, they gave much umbrage to our kings, and
contributed not a little to the power and independ-
ience of the nobility. In the reign of James II.
William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Crawford,
l(oss, Mlrray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Bal-
vneuy, and other powerful barons; and so forntid-
able was this combination to the king, that he
had recourse to a measure no less violent than, un-
jull, in order to dissolve it.

I At 30, Parl, 424. Ad 43. Pairl. 155 .Th

,D 3 VI. The

countries wide and fertile, afforded fettlenlents to
a numerous and powerful nobility. Scotland, a
kingdom neither extensive nor rich, could not
contain many such overgrown proprietors. But
the power of an aristocracy always diminishes in
proportion to the increase of its numbers; feeble
if divided among a multitude, irrefiftiblkif cen-
tered in a few. When nobles are numerous, their
operations nearly resemble those of the people;
they are roused only by what they feel, not by
what they apprehend; and submit to many arbi.
trary ana oppressive ads, before they lake arms
againit their sovereign. A small body, on the
contrary, is more sensible, and more impatient;
juick in discerning, and prompt in repelling dan.
g,r; all its motions are as sudden as those of the
otffer iLre flow. Hence proceeded the extreme
jea.lUfy with which the Scottish nobles observed
thei rm onarchs, and the fierceness with which they
oppoc 1 their incroachments. Even the virtue of
a prince did not render them less vigilant, or lefi
eager to defend their rights; and Robert Bruce,
notwithitanding the splendor of his vicories and
the glory of hia name, was upon the point of ex.
periencing the vigour of their rciitance, no less
than his itmpopulardefcendant James III. Besides
this, the near alliance of the great families by fre.
quent intermarriages, was the natural consequence
of their finall number; and as consanguinity was,
in those ages, a powerful bond of uuion, all the
kindred of a noblemal interelled themfclves in
his quarrel, as a common caufc; and every con-
test the king had, though with a tingle baron,
soon drevw upon himn tile urma of a whole con.
ftderacy,

Vr q'hns

V. Those natural connexions, both with their

equals and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles
strengthened by a device, which, if not peculiar
to themselves, was at least more frequent among
themn than in any other nation. Even in times
of profound peace, theyformed associations, which,
when made with their equals, were called leagues
of mutual defence; and when with their inferiors,
bonds of manrent. By the former, the contra&ting
parties bound themfelveq mutually to assist each
other in all causes and against all persons. By
the latter, proteEtion was tlipulated on the one
hand, and fidelity and personal service proinifed
on the other'. Selfi-prefervation, it is probable,
forced men at firit into these confederacies; and
while disorder and rapine were universal, while
government was unsettled, and the authority of
laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it necessary to unite in this manner for their
security, and the weak were obliged to court the
patronage of the fthong. i3y degrees, these afTo-
ciations became so many alliances ostensive and
defensive against the throne; and as their obliga-
tion was held to be more sacred than any tie what-
ever, they gave much umbrage to our kings, and
contributed not a little to the power and independ-
ence of the nobility. In the reign of James II.
William the eighth earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the earls of Crawford,
Ross, Murray, Ormond, the lords Hamilton, Bal-
veny, and other powerful barons; and so formid-
able was this combination to the king, that he
had recourse to a neafure no less violent than un-
jult, in order to dissolve it.

Afl 3o Ir, 4Pal 24. Act 43. Parl, 155;.

s>3 VI. The

VI. The frequent wars between England and

Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the
power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar-
rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almnoil
every where fordable, divides them towards the
east: on the wetl they are separated by an inagi-
nary line. The slender revenues of our kings pre-
vented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons
in the towns on the frontier; nor would the jea-
lousy of their filbjets ha'e permitted filch a me-
thod of defence. The barons, whose estates lay
near the borders, confidered themselves as bound
both irh honour and in interelt to repel the enemy.
The wariletRlifips of the different malrches, offices of
great power and dignity, were generally bellowed
on them. This gained them the leading of the
warlike coulties i1l the south; and their vaflals,
living in a Jiate of perpetaal hoItility, or enjoying
at belt an insecure peace, became more inured to
war than even the relt of their countrymen, and
more willing to accouipany their chieftain in his
most hardy and dangeroas enterprises. It vwas the
valour, no less than the number of their followers,
that rendered the Douglases great. The nobles
in the northern lnd midland counties were often
dutiful and obfcquious to the crown, but our
monarchs always found it impracticable to fabdue
ther mutinous and ungovernable spirit of the bor-
derers. In all our domestic quarrels, those who
could draw to their fide the inhabitants of the
southern counties were almost furc of vicaory;
and, conscious of this advantage, the lords wlih
poflffecd authority there were apt to forget the
duty which they owed their fovcreign, and tO
aspire' beyond thv rank of fubjets.

VII. ThT

VII. The cllamities which besel our kings

contributed more than any other cause to diuninilh
the royal authority. Never was any race of mo-
narchs so unfortunate as the Scottifl. Of iix
ficceflive princes, fiom Robert III. to James VI.
not one died a natural death ; and the minorities,
during that time, were longer, and more fre-
quenlt, than ever happened in any other king-
omin. From Robert iBruce to James VI. we
reckIn ten princes; and fivcn of these were called
to the throne while they were minors, and alllolt
infants. Even the moik regular and best ella.
blilhed governments feel sensibly the pernicious
effcdts of a miiority, and either become languid
and inactive, or are throvwn into violent and unna-
tural convullions. But under the irnperfe& and
il-iadjulted fyilttm of governient in Scotland
t iile eficts were Blill more fatal; the fierce and
mutinous spirit of the nobles, uilreltrained by the
authority of a king, scorned all fubijeation to the
delegated juriil'dition of a rege'nt, or to the feeble
C ommlands of a minor. T1wt royal authority was
ercLmiifcribed within narrower limits than ever;
tht prerogatives of the crown, naturally incon-
llderable; were reduced almncl to notling; and
the arittocratical power gradually rose upon the
ruins of the monarchical. Le thte personal power
of a regent should enable him to adt with too
much vigour, the authority annexed to that office
was folnctimes rendered inconsiderable by .being
divided; or, if a Jingle regent was choien, the
ireater nobles, mnd the heads of the more illtf-
trious families, were feldomnraifed to that dignity.
It was often conferred upon Jnen who puoliellcd
littl. influellc, and uxcited no jcaloufy. They,

olifd'ioli

conscious of their own weakness, were obliged to
overlook some irregularities, and to permit others;
and in order to support their authority, which was
destitute of real strength, they endeavoured to
gain the molt powerful and ative barons, by
granting them poffeflions and immunities, which
raised them to fill greater power. When the
king himself came to assume the reins of govern-
ment, he found his revenue wafted or alienated,
the crown lands seized or given away, and the
-nobles so accustomed to independence, that, after
the firtggles of a whole reign, he was seldom able
to reduce them to the fame state in which they
had been at the beginning of his minority, or
to wrest from them what they had usurped during
that time. If we take a view of what happened
to each of our kings who was' o unfortunate
as to be placed in this situation, the truth and
importance of this observation will fully appear.

1329.] The minority of David II. the son of

Robcrt Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions
of Edward Baliol, who, relying on the aid of
England, and on the support of some difafletcd
barons among the Scots, invaded the kingdoms
The success which at firit attended his arms
obliged the young king to retire to France;
and Baliol took poffeflion of the throne. A
small bo'dy of the nobles, however, contilnuing
faithful to their exiled prince, drove BaJiol out
of Scotland; and after an ablence of nine years,
)David returned from FIrance, and took the govern-
mnet of the kingdom into his own hands. Bllt
zobles who were thus wafting their blood and
ireafire in defence of the crown, had a right to
the undilturbed poflEllion of their ancient privi-

leges ;

eges; and .even onmc title to airvogate new ones,
It feenms to have been a maxim in.thatage, that
every leader might .claim as his own, the irritoryx
which his sword bad won from the eneney;
Great acquifitiQols were gained by the nobility in
that uay: and to these the gmratitude and liberalitcy
Qs David added, by difLribu'tilg aqtng s'tm4h ai
adhered to him, tle va:lt poffefiious which f41l to
the crown by the f,

feiture of£iis ecemi s. - ,he:

family of Douglas, which began to rife aboven-
the other. nobles in the reign, f his father,
augmented both its ppwer aid it propety
during his minority.

1405.] James I. was seized by the gEi lih.

during the continuance of a lruce,.and U aIge-
aeroufly detained a prisoner alnpoft :.tiuteep' rearse
During that period the kiig4gdi.t was, govrned
firfl by his uncle Riobert ,duke f 'Albany, a4d
then by Mordo, the son of Robert. ,: oth 'tl"fe
noblemen aspired to tle crowtn;, aa4 tlheir unna-
tural ambition, if uC nay believe molt .of our
liftorians, not only cut lhghrt the days of priipc
David, the king's elder brother, but prolonge4
the captivity of Jamcs. They flattered tlies)
selves that they mig~4t ifep with .less oppofitior
into a tli'one, when allnoft vac:alt: and, dreadinug
the king's return as thl extincion of thci aiur
thority and the end 9f, their. hopes, thliy carripe
on the negociatiols for obtaining jis libierty
tvitlh extt.-ene rellniffn¢fs. At the fine tiimpe
they i)cgleted iotlling. tlat could ei:her fopth
,r bribe tlIe nobles to appronM of th}eir fihee.
They facjened the reins of governmnnt; tley
allowed the prerogative to he encroached upon;
thety iffcrtd tle nm(t i/rvgular ag» of powerq

and even wanton instances of oppression, to pass
ivith impunity;' they dealt out the patrimony of
she crown among those whose enmity they
dreaded or wvhofe'favour they had gained; and
reduced the royal authority to a state of im-
becility, from which succeeding monarchs la-
boured in vain to raise it.

1437.] During the minority of James II. the

administration of'affairs a's well as the custody of
the king's person were committed to fir Wil-
liam Crichton and fir Alexander LivingRfon.
Jealousy and discord were the effects of their
coniunt authority, and each of them, in order
to Itrengthen himself, bellowed new power and
privileges upon the great ienh whose aid he
courted. While the young earl of Douglas,
encouraged by their divisions, eredted a fort of
independent principality within the kingdom;
;nd 'forbidding his vassals to acknowledge any
authority but his own, he created knights,
Appointed a privy council, named officers civil
iind military, assumed every ensign of royalty
but the title of king, and appeared in public
with a magnificence more than royal.

'46o.] Eight pcrfons were chosen to govern

the: kingdom during the minority of James III.
.ord Boyd, however, by seizing the person of
the young king, and by the afeendant which he
acquired over him, foori cngrolled the whole
authority. 'He formed the ambitious projec of
raising his family to the fame pitch of power and
grandeur with those of the prime nobility; and
he effected it. While intent on this, he relaxed
the vigour of government, and the barons be-
came accustomed, once more, to anarchy and in-

dependence.

dependence. The power which Boyd had been
at so much pains to acquire, was of no long con-
tinuance, and the fall of his family, according to
the fate of favourites, was fildden and defiruc-
tive; but upon its ruins the family of Hamilton
rof, which soon attained the higheRt rank in the
kingdom.

As the minority of James V. was longer, it was

lilkesife more turbulent, than tlofe of tie pre-
ceding kings. And the contending nobles, en-
couraged or protected either by the king of
France or of England, formed thcmfclves into
more regular factions, and disregarded more
than ever the restraints of order and authority.
The French had the advantage of feeing one
devoted to their interest raised to be regent.
This was the duke of Albany, a native of
France, and a grandson of James II. But Alex-
ander lord Home, the molt eminent of all the
Scottish peers who survived the fatal battle of
Flowden, thwarted all his measures during the
lirit years of his adminilfration; and the intrigues
of the queen-dowager, fiiler of Henry VIII.
rendered the latter part of it no less feeble.
Though supported by French auxiliaries, the
nobles despised his authority, and regardlcef
either of his threats or his intreaties, peremp-
torily reftifed, two fevcral times, to enter Eng-
land, to the borders of which kingdom he had
led them. Provoked by these repeated inltance,
of contempt, the regent abandoned his troublc.-
some itation, and, retiring to France, preferred
the tranquillity of a private life, to an office
dcitittlte of real authority. Upon his retreat,
:Douglasu uarl of AIngus becamnv malter of the

k.ing's

kirags pLitmi, and governed the kinrgIdm ini his
sratie. Many efforts were made to depr've liurr
of ]li uafurp.c' authority. Bknt .lie numerous
vaflals and friends of his iamlity adthered to him,
beecaufe he divided with themt the power and
emoluments of his office; the people reverenced
and loved thle name of Douglas; he exercised,
without the title of regent, a ftller and more
tioabltlte atilthrtrity than' any who had enjoyed
that dignity; and the ancient, but dangerous,
pre-eminence of the )ouglafes feeined to be re-
flored.

To these, and to many other causes, omitted

or ulnobfervet hby us, did the Scottilh nobility
owe that exorbitallt aud uncommon power, o'
which Iitiilances; occur so frequently in our his-
tory.. Nothing however demoiiltratcs so fully the
extent of their power; as the length of its
dleration. MIany years after the declenlion of
the feudal fyfleni in the other kiigdonm of
Eilr'op, and when tlht arms or policy of princes
lintd, every wher-e, shaken, nr laid it in ruins,
tie foii;;lrticans of that ancient fabric rmnllilned,
in a grca, ineafore, firmi and untotuched in Scot-
land.

'he powers which the feudal inllititiotiS Yvetled

in the nohls, soon became intolerable to all tihe
princes of luIrope; who longedl to poflrlts lomne
thing more than a nomlinl alid precariousi autho-
rity. Their impatience to obtainl this,, precipi-
tated Henry Tl. of Eig lalnd,. Edward 11. ;adl
'some other weak pnIlces, into r;:lh andl preiratiure
attempts againit the privileges of the harons, in
whicli theyiwere dilapptointed or ;perfliled. Prince(,
of greater abilitic.i, were cor;nitit tu mitigate cvils

whk'lr

which they could no' cure; they fought occu-
pation for the turbulent iirit of their nobles
in firquent wars; and allowed their fiery cou-
r-age to evaporate in foreign expeditions, Swhich,
if they brought no other advantage, secured at
lic;!l domestic tranquillity. But time and acci-
dents ripened the feudal governments for de-
i'ru&tiou. Towards the end of the fifteenth
century, and beginning of the fixtccnth, all the
princes of Europe attacked, as if by concert,
ihe power of their nobles. Men of genius theen
niide-ltook with success, what their unlsfl;fiul pre-
dcccfibrs had attempted in vain. Lewis XI. of
France, the meft profound and the molt adven-
turlous genius of that age, began, and in a tingle
:-ign almolt completed the fecimne )f their de-
irutction. The sure but concealed policy of
Henry VII. of England produced the faine es-
fed. The means, indeed, employed by these
Imilonarchs were very different. The blow whliich
lewvis ltruck was sudden and fatal. The arti-
tiecs of lHenry refictbled those flo v poifois
which walte tlhe conlltiution, but become noiL
mort;l till foine diiaant period. N(:r cdd they
produce consequences lecf oppolite. I,cwis
boldly added to the crown whatever he wrlelte
from the nobles. Henry underminedl his barons,
by encouraging them. to fell their lands, which
c(liched tile commons, and gave them a weight
in the legillature unknown to their predece lbrs.
But while tliefe great revolutions \were carryilng
on in two kingdoms with which Scoml;lld waaxi
intimately conncited, little alteration happeneld
there; our kings could neither extend tlirli ownt
Irerogative, nor enable the commons to cncroacli

VoL. . .i upoII

upon the aritlocracy; thl nobles not only rt
tained moll of their ancient privilegcs and pol
efilions, but continued to make new acquifitiont

This was not owing to the inattention of ou

princes, or to thlir want of ambition. The-
were abundantly fenfilb. of the eyorbitanat powe
>,f the nobility, and extremely solicitous to hum
ble that order. They did not, however, pofl;tI
means filflicient for accomplilhing thiis end. Tli
resour-ces of our monarchs were few, and the
progress whicli they ma.te was of course inconfi-
derable. But as the number of their followers,
and the extent of their j'rifditioion, were the two
chlief circumlancc: which rendered the nobles
formlidable; in order to countcrbalane the one-
and to refirain the other, all otur kings lad. rc-
,-ourle to nearly the fame expedients.

I. Among nobles of a fierce courage, and of

inpolifhed manners, fiurroundcd with val'als bold
and licentious, whom they werc bound by in-
tereit and hollourl to protect. the causes of dif-
cord were many and unavoidalble. As the con-
telnding parties could fldom agree in acknow-
ledging tih authority of any common superior or
iludge, and their impatient spirit would feldoln
wait the flow decilions of jultice, their quarrcls
were ufirally terminated by the sword. The of-
finldcd baron a;femibled his vaflals, and waited
tIe lands, or shed the blood, of his enemy. To
tlrgive : an injnry was mean ; to firbear revenge,
i]ifaillortls or cowardly '. Hence quarrels were

tralf-

n 'The fpLiit of revenge was ercouiraged , not only by the

mn.ners, but, whl.t i..; nfTl rnlearkable, by the Ilws of rhole
.,cs. sl arny pellun Ilthi U,'ht thri prol'ci'clion of'ai injury of-

fIcrc

:aunfinitted from f;tllcl- to fuIn, and, under the
name of dead'j feudls, flubiiitd for niany genell t-
tions with unmitigated rancour. It wa, thle in-
tcrclf of the crown to foment rather than to ex-
tiuliniifh these quarrels; and by fcattcringr or
cherithing the feeds of discord among the nobles,
that tknion, which would have rendered thle
aristocracy invincible, and which must at once
have annihilated the prerogative, was efife&ually
prevented. To the fa:me cause, our kings were
ildebted for the fuccefa with which they forne-
timcs attacked the most powerful ehieftains
They employed private revenge to aid the im-
pri'ence of public laws, and arming against the
person who had incurred their displeasure, those
rival families which vrifhed his fall, they re-
warded their ervice by flaring among them the
spoils of the vanquilhed. But this expedient,
rltough it served to humble individuals, did not
weaken the body of the nobility. Those whup

sered to his family, too troublerome, or too dangerous, the
Salique laws permitted him publicly to defif from demand-
ing vengearce; but the fame laws, in order to punish his
cowardice, and want of affetion to his fmrily, deprived him
cf the right of fucceflion. Henault's Abregd Chronol. p. 8x.
Am'ong the Anglo-Saxons, we find a singular infiitution dif-
fingui(hed by the name of Jdalitium; a voluntary afrociation,
the object whereof was the personal fcurity of those who
joined in it, and which the feebleriefs of government at that
time rendered necellary. Among other regilations, which
.ae contained in one of these Rill extant, the following de-
fcrvea notice " If any associate llall either eat or drink
with a person who has killed any member of the fodalitiutn,
unless in the pretence of the Icing, the bif.op, or the count,
and unliefs he can prove that he did not know the person, let
him pay a great fine." Hicks Diflert. Epiftolar. apud
'lhelaur. Lin,. iSptcntr. vol. i. p. zt.

E . 'twere

wire now the inith'rnient: of their prince's
veil¢eance, became, iii a flort time, the obie&s
,Of hi. fear. Having acqctir'd power reid v.'calth
by lfe ,i,;;g the crown, they, in their turn, Cet up
for ;idept :idence: arid though there igiht be
a f(u'iuat;o.i of power and of property ; though
old s :ii e.

;ie ll, z.rd new ones rose upon their

ruini ; the rights cf the artillcra-y remained en-
tire, and ils v:g'oir unbroken.

]I. As the ad;nililration of jultice is one of

tlhe moflt powerful ties between a king and lia
fi.ubjeat. , all our monarchs were at the utmoift
pains to circumscribe the iurifdiction of the
farons, and to extend that of the cirown. The
external tsorms of fubordi;ntion, natural to the
feudal fyltem, favoured this attempt. An ap-
peal lay fiom the judges and courts of the
barons to tholf of the king. The right, how-
ever, of judging in the lirit instance belonged to
the nobles, and they easily found means to de-
feat the effedt of appeals, as well as of many
cther feudal regulations. The royaljurifsdi&ion
was alnolt confinted w\ithin the narrow limits of
tihe king's d(niitlies, beyond which his judges
claimed indeed much authority, but possessed
next to none. Our kingsc were fcnfihle of these
limitations, and hore themn with impatience.
.But it was iJmpoflible to overturn in a momentr
Vwhat vwa; so (deely ro(ted; or to firip the
nobles at once of privileges which they had held
so longl, and which wcrC wingight almoll into
the fiame o the feudal conilitttionl. To ac-
complill thlis, hlowver, was an ob)ject of uni.
form lind a;nxious attention to all our princes.
Jaunle I. led the wiay here, as well as in other

inflances,

inifances, towards a more regular and persetd
police. He made choice, among the etates of
parliament, of a certain number of persons, whom
hie d'itinguifhed by the name of Lords of Sef/ion,
and appointed them to hold courts for deter-

ini'lng civil causes three times in the year, and
forty (lays at a time, in whatever place he pleased
to name. Their jurisdiction extendecd to all
matters vwhich formerly came under the cogni-
zance of the king's council, and being a com-
mittee of parliament, tleir decisions were final.

lames II. obtained a law, annexing all regalities,
which should be forfeited, to the crown, and de-
claring the right ofjurifdi&ion to be unallcnable
for the future. James III. inlpofed severe pe-
nalties upon those judges appointed by the
barons, whose decisions should he found on a re-
vicw to be unjust; and, by many other regula-
tiuns, endeavoured to extend tle authority of his
\on court ". James IV. on pretence of remedy-
ing tlle inconveniences ariling fiom the lulort
ttcls of the court of Sellion, appointed other
illilges called Lords ojf D)aily .Crn'ril. The.
'i/o/i was an ambulatory court, and met feildom:
thel Daily Council was fixed, -nld ftit conilaitl\r aIt
E(diniburgh; ; and thliGgh ne,t composed of niern-
Icrs of 1)arliament, the famle powers which the
l.:ird:, of Session enjoyed were veilled in it. At
i't Jalles V. crecdtd a new colrt tihat liill flh-
.\ll:, and which lie lnamed the Coll/,',e o/ f vJ/lic,
ll, I(lrI; ol S'. /0'r. ol \'hiicih were calleld Iord.
i| (.''ii'ii/ dtn. ; S'//ion. Tilis courlt not only exer-
.itei llte i im i jriftl idi:iion ,'litic ioi:erly be-
'I inrcl to the Sefllio and l)aily Couecil, but

":Q G.l 2.6 1' d

. l

969 A
I'. 93. At y9 P. 14S7.

r 3 ncev

new rights were added. Privileges of great im-
portance were granted to its members, its forms
w-ere Iprfcribed, its, termns fixed, and regularit-,
power, an(d fpicndour conferred upon it ". The
persons conitituted judges in all these different
courts had, in many reipeds, the advantage of
tlhoie who prelided in the courts of the barons;
they were tnore eminent for their Ikill in law,
their rules of proceeding were more uniform, and
th!eir deciliona more confillent. Sich judicato-
rios became the oljctts of confidence, and of
venlration. Men willingly fibmi'ted their pro-
perty to their dc-terminrition, and their encroach-
ments on the juriclidiions of the nobles were
pop;ar', antd f or that ireaon liccefsful. By de.
vices of a jimilar nature, the jurifdition of the
nobles in crilninal caules was reltrained, and the
;iuthorit of the court of 'iiftciary extended.
The crown, in this particular, gaining insensibly
upon the nobles, recovered more ample atitho-
rity; and the king, whiofe jul-idiction once re-
ielnbled tlat of a baron rather than that of a
fotereiirl P, cae m ore and more to be confi-

dered

o Ketrit, App. 74, &e:.
p The inJli plrtfeCt idlu of the fudal i (enm of govern-

rent nway br ittaitned by attenJ!il t t thi (L.ite of Germ nv,
and t') the bioi:;y if Flir.;c. In rlh. formelt, the f'eudiil in-
ftl-'itiolls Iill sub!i,! , ilt greant vi goulr; and tlhllgh altoge-
thn: .aio: iihtcl in thin Iatrti, th.- public records have bccn so
carefully iprcl,: vrd, tllh tl:e French la .vers and antiquaries
l.Ije Ieen enb ed, d ith ni,)le crtalinty anr pirciflion thala
thule oil .in otl.er country in luroec, to tr.ace its rif., its
progiefs, .ind rrvnolions. In G(crnlmiy, cvry pilcipilily
'may be clSniidereld . a li(f, and all il'i great prince., as; v:i-
fals, holding of tlic einper r. 'I'l:ey pr (frl; il the tfudal pri-
Vileges i thc si ae p ctal iir
si ehr julildi6tions wili;n

tllhir

dcied as the head of the community, and the
frtprme diipenrfr of justice to luis pcopl). Thefi
acquifitio s of our kings, howcver, tlhoiugl com-
caratively pTeat, were in reality inconsiderable;
and. , notwithstanding all their efforts, many of
the fcparate jurifdiitions pofrcifld by the noblles
reinained in grcnt vigour, and their final aholi-
t;ii was rcfcrved to a diltant and mure happy
period.
th':r own erritor'es separate and extensive; and the great
office, of the empire are a I he:ediuaiy, nd annexed to parti-
ctltr famuiiies. .:t thi laje tmne the cerplr.,r rc'l;n] mmny
of tli: prerogatives of the feudal milrchs. Lice them, his
cl..im; *l;d retcnfions are innumerabile, anid lis p..cr small
hi iurifiictlon wivthnl hi; own denme:es nr h 'rcdiiay courn-
tiis i.; cimplete; beyond the bounds of t.,(i ii is alrnoft
nothing; and Io permanent awe rtudal pr nc'ples, that al-
t'c;llgh the feudal ivitem be overturned in ainmo.t every par-
ticulr alte in C rmiany, and although the greater ,aic t f its
p)inces have become absolute, the , riinlal leud l coinftitn-
tin of the empire fill icmain-, and ideas pci liar t ihhat
tarm of government dirret all its opeI ation, andi det, rmine
the lights of all its p'inces. Our obltI-'ratns, w hi regird
it, dlc limitted jurifdidin of ki;ns uidel the feudal dA ern-
im nts, are grcatly illuftated by xwh.t lihaDined in France.
'Ihe feblenels and dotage of the dcfcendlanrs of Charle-
ll.ignr encouraged the peers to ifuip al ilidependent jurif..
didtion. Nothing rnemained in the hands of the cr wn; all
ua, I'iz ed by them. Wihcn Hgiih t'aet afcendedli thle thrne,
A. I). '87, he Iept pofirelton of his priv.ite parrimrny the
C nte tt Paris; and al the jurifdlilon vl hich the ki,^ts h s
fit crll)rs ex,-rcileid for lome t :m., was within its 'erit ,recs.
'1 lit e w ce orlli t, ulr towtn in I rancee vii re lhe c, lld cla-
Ililh (; randi Bali'is, or rny.il judges ; all the ither lands,
townl, a.id bdiliaiges bilurg de to the noiilea. 'The methoda
to whi l tie l:lccli muh t mrchs had ri:courle frt exterinling
their ju iidiflion, vicre ixatly limilar to tilofe mlnllo)cd by
our princes. Ilenault's Abr,'g, I, 617, &c, Dc l'Efl it
ctic; l. ix, liv. 30. cl. zo, &;c.

But

But betidcs thcfe methods of defending their

prerogative and humbling the ariltocracy, wchich
may be confidered as common to all our princes:,
we shall find, by taking a review of their reigns,
that almolt every one of our kings, from Robert
Briuce to James V. had formed some particular
fivlem fordeprclTingthe authority of their nobles,

!which was the object both of their jeal(,ufy and
terror. This condut of our monarchs,. if we
-rft satisfied with the accounts of their hifltoians,
nmift be conlidercd as flowing entirely fiom their
resentment againit particular noblemen; and all
ltheir attempts to humble them mult be viewcd
as the sallies of private passion, not as the confe-
iiucnces of ani general plan of policy. But,
tlhotrli lone of tlieir adions may be imputed to
ihoif pailions, though the different genius of the
men, the temper of the times, and the Rtate of
tili nation, necealarily occalioned great variety in
thelir fchemcs; yet without being chargeable
Swith exceflive refinement, we may affirm, that
lheir end was uniftlmly the falme ; and that the
project of reducing the po\wer of tle arliftocracy,
lometimcs a;c\vld, and pursued wlith vigour;
i;)intiin'c:i c),ccailecd, or Iccmiinrly futif)cldld
weia neve\r ;altogetler tabain donl:d.

No prince was ever more indebted to hiil

nobles than Robert Bruct. lTheir valour con-
fquered the kingdom, and placed him on the

)lilronc. 1'Ii; r it ;l(lde andt gc ielroity bellowcd

on thl In cilr lands of tile valllui(ihed. Propcrty
*Ii;:.s i'ld!,n m!idergolie gI'eater or mn'ore udlci
!'Yl)'i)lii)o ', l]i;m Ilil:-l to Xl']lic it w\'is flS ie(L. at
ltlt tilme iat act,,tkd. £l A\i';lrd 1. halving fo:r

i'itcxl

7 ?~~~~d~~a".1A. 1srJM 14, 17 ad

feited.the eltates of mofl of the ancient Scottiflt
barons, granted .them to his Ernglifh, fubjeEts.
These were expelled by the Scpts, and their
lands seized by new nafters. Amidst such rapid
changes, confusion was unavoidable and many
posSessed their lands by titles extremely defec-
tive. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their beinig
weary of war than desirous of peace, Robert
formed a scheme for checking the growing
power and wealth of the nobles. He summoned
them to appear, and to niew by what rights they
held their lands. They assembled accordingly,
and the queition being put, they itarted up at
,nt'C, and drew their swords, " By theie, said
they, we acquired our lands, and wiih these
we will defend them.' The king, intimidated
by their bQldnefs, prudently dropped the projecct.
BPtt so deeply did they resent this attack upoi
their order, that, notwithstanding Robert's po-
pular and splendid virtues, it occalioned a dan,
gerous conspiracy against his life.

David his son, at first an exile in France, after-

wards a prisoner in England, and involved it
continual war with Edward III. had not leiiure
to attend to the internal police ,of his kingdom,
orto think of retrenching the privileges of the
nobility.

Our hiftorlans have been more careful Tn re.

late the military than the civil trlintsti(i's of
the reign of Robert II. Skirmiflhes alnd ilroada
of little confequcnce they defiribc mninutely;
but with regard to every thing that happened
during several years of tranquillity, they arc
altogether silent.

The

The feeble admninifration of Robert Il. muii

likewise be passed over slightly. A prince of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly conftitu-
tion, was not a fit person to enter the lilts with
aitive and martial barons, or to attempt wreiling
from them any of their rights.

The civil tranfaations in Scotland are better

known since the beginning of the reign of
James I. and a complete series of our laws sup-
plies the defects of our hiftorlans. The Engliili
made sone amends for their injustice in detaining
that prince a prisoner, by their generous care of
his education. During his long residence in
lEnland he had an opportunity of observing the
feudal fyflem in a more advanced state, and re-
fined from many of the imperfections which Itill
adhered to it in his own kingdom. Iie saw
there nobles great, but not independent; a king
powerful, though far from absolute: he saw a
regular administration of government; wife laws
enafted ; and a nation flourishing and happy,
because all ranks of men were accustomed to
obey them., Full of these ideas, he returned
into his native country, which presented to him
a very different fecile. The royal authority,
cuvcr great, was now contemptible, by having
been so long delegated to regents. The ancient
patrimony and revenues of the crown were almost
tottllly alienated. During his long absence the
name of king was little known, and less re-
garded. The licence of many years had ren-
dered tlle nobles independent. Universal anarchy
prevailed. The weak were exposed to the ra-
pine .andl oppreflion of the llrong. In every
.orl'ner tone barbarous chieftain ruled at plea-

sure,

furc, and neither feared the killi,, nor piticd the
people q.

James was too wife a prince to employ open

force to correct filch inveterate evils. Neither
th'c nT n nor the tliles would have borne it. lle
app '1. the gentler and lets ofiterlfve remedy of
laws and statutes. In a parliament held imnc-
di.ltely after his return, he gained the confidence
of his people by mrany wife laws, tending vilibly
to re-eltablifl1 order, tranquillity, and ulltice in
the kingdonm. But at the fame time that he
endeavolured to fecrure thelfe bleflings to his sub-
j i.ts, ie difeovered his intention to recover tli,fe
1'lo flions of which the crown had been unljutilly
l-realveld ; and for that purpole obtained an at,
iy which hi was iinpowered to summon ilclh as
had obtained crown lands during the three lall
reigns, to produce the rights by which they held
thmcln r. As this itatute threatened the property
ot the nobles, another which passed in a fubfc-
.lnent parliament aimed a dreadful blow at their
),owrc'. By it the leagiues and combinations
vi'iicel we have already deficribed, and which
:enluered the nobles so formidable to the crown,
were declared unlawful '. Encouraged by this
{uccels; in the beginning of his enteplrife, James's
:Icxt itep was Itill bolder and more dccilive.

'1 A cotempolary monkii writer defcrihcb these cal.mil..

t .i very feelingly in his rude Latin, In diebus illis, non
c..t lex ia Scotia, seI quilibet rpotcltioruin juniotrcn op-
pirlct ct totum regnum suit unun latrociniumn holloli

edld, dcpr;edationes. inccindi.i, cc catcra maleficia rem.in-

ICruiit iin)punita; it juflitia rclegait. extra terninos rcgni
Il.i.jvi. Cih.lrular. Morav. apud Inner Eliay, vol. i.
P. ;'-27

r Ait 9 1 1 424. * Aat 30 P. 1424.

DI)ri;ng

D)uring the fitting of parliament, he seized at
once his conuin Murdo duke of Albany, and his
ions ; the earls of Douglas, Lennox, Angus,
March, and above twenty other peers and barons
of prime rank. To all of them, however, he
was ilnnlediately reconciled, except to Albany
and his sons, and Lennox. These were tried
by their peers, and condemned; for what crime
is now unknown. Their execution itruck the
v.lhole order with terror, and their forfeiture
added conliderlble pofleffions to the crown. He
seized likewilfc the earldoms of Buchan and
Stratliern upon diflferent pretexts, and that of
M:Lr fell to hinm by i,,heritance. The patience
and inactivity of the nobles, while the king was
proceeding so rapidly towards aggrandizing the
crown, are amazing. The only obitruction he
met with was from a flight infurreaion headed
by the duke of Albany's youngest son, and that
was eaiily suppressed. The splendour and pre-
fence of a king, to which the great men had been
long unaccultiomed, inspired reverence: James
was a prince of great abilities, and conducted his
operations! with inucli prudence. He was in
fiiendfhip with England, and closely allied with
the French king: hr was adored by the people,
w1ho enjoyed unufuial security and happiness un-
der his adminiltration: and all his acquilitions,
however fatal to the body of the nolles, had
been gained by nttacks upon individuals; were
obtained by decisions of law; and being founded
on circunnltances peculiar to the perfoiis llho
fuifcre-d, might excite murmurs and apprelen-
sions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a
general rebellion. It was not lo with the next

att cllpt

attempt which the king made. Encouraged by
the facility with twhich he had hitllrto advanced,
he ventured upon a measure that irritated the
whole body of the nobility, and which the events
ih'w, either to have been entered into with too
much precipitancy, or to have been carried on
with too much violence. The father of George
l)unbar earl of March had taken arms agailnlt
Robert III. the king's father; but that crime
had been pardoned, and his lands reltored by Ro-
bert duke of Albany. James, on pretext that the
regent had e:ceeded his power, and that it was
the prerogative of the king alone to pardon trea-
son, or to alienate lands annexed to the crown,
obtained a sentence, declaring the pardon to be
void, ard depriving Dunbar of the earldom.
Many of the great men held lands by no other
right than what they derived from grants of the
two dukes of Albany. Such a decilion, though
tllcy had reason to expect it in confcquencc of
the lsatlte which the king had obtained, occa-
liou(le a general alarm. Though Dunhar was,
at iprcfnt, the only sufFerer, the precedent might
be extended, and their titles to pofleflions, which
they confidered as the rewards of their valour,
might be filbjeded to the review of courts of
law, whofc forms of proceeding, and jurifdic-
tion, were in a martial age little known, and ex-
tremely odious. Terror and dileontent fprcad
fait upon this discovery of tile king's intentions;
the commnon danger called on the xwhole order to
unite, and to make one bold Itand, before they
were ltripped fucceflively of their acquilitions,
and reduced to a Itate of poverty and inligni.
ficancc. The prevalence of tlerfc fentinell ts

VOL. 1. F almong

among the nobles encouraycd a few desperate
men, the fiiends or followers of those' who had
been the chief sufferers under the king's admi-
niftration, to form a conspiracy againit his life.
The firlt uncertain intelligence of this was
brought him while he lay in his camp beFore
Roxburgh caflle. He durfi not confide il
nobles to whom he had given so many carses of
difgnlit, but initantly difinifled them and theii
vaflls, and,

a retiring to a monallery near Perth,

was foun after murdered there in the moll cruel
manner. All our hlitorians menttion with alto-
niilhnbnt thlis circinldance of the king's dilband-
ii!g his arnm, at a time when it was so ncccflany
for his prefeirvation. A king, fay they, fur-
rolnded with his barons, is fccire fiom lecret
trealbn, and may defy open rebellion. But those
very barens were the persons whom lie chiefly
dreaded; and it is evident fiom this review of
his adiniil'rlation, that he had greater reason to
apprehend danger, thanl to expcd defence fiom
their hiands. It was the misfortune of James,
that his maxims and manners wcre too relined
for the age in which le lived. Happy had he
reigned in a kingdom mCe civilized! his love
of peace, of jullice, and of clegtance, would have
rendered his fchemecs ficcefsful; and inllead of
perifing because he h.id attempted too much, a
grateful people would have applauded alnd fe-
conded his efforts to reform and to imlrove
ther,..

Crichton, the nmol able man of those who had

the diretion of affairs during the minority of
James II. had been the miniller of James I. and
well acquainted with his relolution of humbling

the

thc! nohility. lie did not relinqif(h the design,
and he endeavoured to inspire his pupil with the
farne sentiments. But what James had attempted
1., eflete slowly, and by legal means, his son and
C -itch!on pInfuted wvith the impetuosity natural to
;iotrmlin, :and wvill the fierceness peculiar to that
a? . Vilhl;ia tlhe si:th earl of Douglas was the
mrt vi-iim to their barbarous policy. That
young! noblman, (as we have already observed,)
c intelnniig tlhe authority of an infant prii:Ce,
.;!:-,o!it o1 ciily re!loutiiced lis allegiance, ali
ac ;i".'d to iildependcilce. Crichton, too illi-
'i;,Ci il to )c;ar inch an infilt, hut too weak toi

':i}, or to lirinr to jullice so powerful an of-

ti',dJr1-, dccov't'd iaim by many piro)iles to an
iiiiC.'ic'\w In the ca.lltc of Ldinburgh, and, \ot-
w'i hl[tildi0lln tli eit', mli!ldcl: d both himi and his
irothie;-. Cric!ton, however, gained little by
tiiis aat of tre:.chcr-, wlich rendered him uni-
vr'eriily odious. W\i'lliam the eighth earl of
.D:Aurlas was no Icfs piowrful, and no lefis
fr: iidcatlc to the crown. By forming the
li.:.;l.i whiich \;e a;'irei(!y mtiitiolld with the cal
of C ra i'ord and other baro(ns, lIe had ii:iited
a iuai'li. his fovcrcign almolt one half of his king-
(ilnl. But his cereduiity led lhim into tlhe fame
iliar. tvlieil h ad been faitail to the former carl.

I lyin- onl tlle kiln 's pronliica, who liad nlow

;:ii.;iiicd to the vyc'a of manhood, and liaiiiL;
ri;ailed la Iafe-,c l

,llut tndrcl tile igcat feal, lie

ventureld to meet liimll ill Stirling cafe.l. J:all
uri-qd him to difolve' that dangerous calfedirZicr
i:1to which lIe liad enteredl: the earl obflliiatclly
reflle ed. "11 f you will not," said tlc elnraged
.oiunarcli, drawing his (daggr, " this fliml ;" aInd

.' 2 llabhed

stabbed him to the heart. An adtion so un-
worthy of a king filled the nation with aftonilh-
mcnt and with horror. The earl's vassals ran to
arms with the utinoft fury, and dragging the
fafe-condut, .which the king had granted and
violated, at a horie's tail, they marched towards
Stirling, burnt the town, and threatened to
bedieg the caltle. An accommodation, how-
ever, ensued; on what terms is not known. But
the king's jealousy, and the new earl's power
and refentilent, prevented it from being of long
continuance. Both took the field at the head of
their armies, and met near Abercorn. That of
the earl, compofedl chiefly of borderers, was far
superior to the king's, both in number and in
valour; and a single battle mist, in all proba-
bility, have decided whether the house of Stuart
or of Douglas was henceforth to possess the
throne of Scotland. But while his troops imn-
patiently expeced the signal to engage, the earl
ordered them to retire to their camp; and fir
;anmus Hamilton of Cadvow, the person in whom
c placed tlhe greatest confidence, convinced of
hit, want of genius to improve an opportunity, or
of his want of courare to seize a crown, deserted
hilm that very night. This example was followed
by many ; and the e;'l, despised or forsaken by
atll, rwas fooI driven out of lt:e kingdom, and
obliged to de:pend for his fulliltc;ice on the
fi-icidllip of thc king of England. The ruin of
this great family, which had so long rivalled and
overawcd the crown, and the terror with which
such an example of unsuccessful ambition filled
lle nobles, fIcured the king, for some time,
trii oppoiitioni; and the royal authority re-

maincd

; ,':.' .'! OlnContu-oie(r aild :limof(l afolntihc. .[tlll':'
Aid; 1 T'';. f.ft.;:- t:i;s finv'uable intclrval to pals nn-

hi;n,\'cdl; p:-oci the confcrnt of pa'lia-

-7.c;t ': i;:;' m-ire ad.alnt.lgeolus to the prerigr.-
t;,i, ;.nd eoire l bvlb.r:!\e of the privilci es of tli
a.ri)crin.I'. til i v.'crCe ever obtained by any
orn-L" cr: l 1hs s <!i nt mionarch of Scotland.

B) '.;-, ; of tilc, n.;t only all the vast posses-

f i/,, of tih cr-il of Douglas were annexed to the
c<-r!u', I;!1 all pri;,r and futire alienations of
r:,.-:i i:i)f; V:.'-. d'c!:'icd to he void, and the
.''i,';, '.:; tiinp.:rC'':i tf le ize them at pleafin'e,

'.P.til.,tt c ,'prccz£. (;r forom of law., and oblige

l! 4;. I tji'I 'r.i to

r -('.:ntld whatever tlhev had rc-

,*';.,1 . f;,in them'. :'t dr.adfil infiruimcnt of
t~.plr\; 1,1 in tl.e ] :
' ... 'f .?. p, ic¢ !

.' ,,,iir l:v'.' F r ,i'utid tihe wardenflip of tie

;;:-ch!ict; L( be grarlt'd hicrcdita;ily; rcltlained, in
..':..r.il i-n[t-c',: t'n ju-iisldiCion of that office;
i,::!; tt it'ndrld the autlioritv of ihe kig's courts u.

)- .' tlii.d:, it \was Ci c-;itdl, that no rrarr/lit',

'': c:'-iluiive rihi:t of i;dnliliiillr iir .ittice within

*1 1i:':i il lhl.nd,, inleild be ilranlitcd, ill time ta
n.' -. v, ithont the' coiflnt ofparliinlr.cct x; a Co!..
.Itil l .'ihic ini mpied alinofi al ('Xplrc)Is prolihi-

i:.;. 'Ii )li oi.i Vs wlo Ialrady pofsdildl tllhi

- pi.'t pi:vilcte, swould naturnllvy e felicitous to
:, c'vet ii froln bccoillng colunlonl, by beinp; bc-
:\ c;t'(l I many. Thole wlho had not tlhemi-
' .''. ; ii:;ti i, w ould enlm y ot'ers trli ' ac-

:it it of si; i,
so ilttcril'r diltitntion, :l Ibolt

' c'.' h. i (jctinl'; thle (!himi o n1i'v

't 1' I. ;. u ''.,i!. ¢t} 4'

" 3 I',s

By a fourth aet, all new grants of hereditary

offices were prohibited, and thole obtained since
the death of the last king were revoked Y.

Each of there itatutes undermined some of the

great pillars on which the power of the arilto-
cracy relied. I)uring the remainder of his reign,
this prince pursued tlie plan which lie had begun
with the utmoll vigour; and had not a sudden
death, occasioned by the splinter of a cannon
which burst near him at the liege of Roxburgh,
prevented his progress, he wanted neither genius
nor courage to perfect it; and Scotland might,
in all probability, have been the first kingdom in
Europe which would have seen the subversion of
the feudal system.

JIaiCes III. discovered no less eagerners than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility; but,
far inferior to either of them in abilities and ad-
dress, he adopted a plan extremely impolitic,
and his reign was disastrous, as well as his end
tlagical. Under the feudal governments, the
nobles were not only the king's ministers, and
poFelifed of all the g-reat offices of power or of
1 rul ; they were likewif his companions and
favourites, and hardly any but them approached
his person, or were intitled to his regard. But
James, who both feared and hated his nobles,
kept them at an untifi'al dillance, and beftltwed
every mark of confidence a;nd affestion upon a
few mean persons, of profellions so dishonourable
as ought to have rendered them unwo)rthy of his
prelenee. Shult up with these in his callle of
,Stirling, lhe seldom appeared in public, and
;rnluifd lliinfelf in architcA ure,, inufic, and other

Y Aa 44.

arts,

arts, which were then little cleered. The
ilob!cs bcheld tihel power and f'lvoir of tihec
minions wi'h indignation. IEven the sanguinary
mealures of his father provoked them less than
his ncglet. Individuals ialle sinTered by the
former; by the latter, every man thought him-
self injured, liecaufe all were contemned. Their
discontent was much heightened by the king's
recalling all ritrhts to crown lands, hereditary
offices, i-tgalities, and every other coiicefion
which was detrimental to his prerogative, and
which had been extorted during his minority.
Combinations among tliemfelves, secret intrigues
with England, anld all the usual preparatives for
cilil war, were the effec;. of itheir refentinent.
Alexander duke of Albany, and John earl of
M'lar, the kiln's brothers, two vouing men of
turbuilent and amblitious spirits, aid ineenfcd
;igainft James, who treated them with the fame
coldiuifrs as he did tlle other great menl, entered
deepCly into all their cabals. The king ldttecicd
'their deifi.ns before they were ripc for executiom,
and, seizins his two Irothers, commltced tile
d]uke of Alban, to Edinburgh catlle. The carl
of Mar, having remonl'ral cd with too mni: Ilold-
netl; aainiii the! king's c(ndu!t, nas murdered,
if we may bclie ,. onlo hi firianl ;, by his conmmianld.
Ailbhany, appiciehenfvle ofi tile lamn.' fate, made Ilis
Jfeapc out of tlie caltle, and fled iiito Fr'laie.
CoIncerti for ilth king's lhonour, (,ri d int,;ltiot n at
I\s meahires;, were perhaps the motives Xvlich
firil induced him to join the maleconteits. But
James's attachment to favourites renderi:r- hlim
every iday more odious to the nobles, the prolp ect
of the advant;ages whlich might lb derived fr,no

their

their general difaffeAion, added to the resent-
Trcnt which he felt onl account of his 'brother's
death, and his own injuries, soon in[pired A\l-
b:inv with more ambitious and criminal thoughts.
He concluded a treaty with il.dward IV. of Eng-
land, in which le aiuImed the name of Alexadc' -
king of Scots; and in rctui'n for the aflillance
which was promised lhim towards dethroning his
brother, he bound himself, as soon as lie was put
in poffefflon of the kingdom, to fxwear fealty and
do homage to tihe English monarch, to renounce
the ancient alliance with France, to contract a
new one with Enrl.lnd, and to surrender some of
the ftrongeit catllcs and molt valuable countics
in Scotland 2. That aid, which the duke. so
basely purchased at the price of his own lonour
and the indepcndence of his country, was punliu-
ally granted him, and the duke of Glouceikc-
with a powerful army conmdudd him towards
Scotland. The danger of a foreign invasion
obliged James to implore tlih afliftance of tllofc
nobles wrhom lie haid so lon? treated with coin
tempt. Some of thelm were in clofc confedelracy
with the duke of Albany, and approved of all
Ilis pretentions. Oth'ers were impatient for any
event h\\ ich would rellorel tllcir order to its an-
cient pre-cminence. Thlcy s:emecl, however, to
enter with zeal into thline mieaflrs 0,f tlheir fove-
reign ifr tlhe defence of 1lie kin!gdom aain llt it:;
invadersl', and took the lield at tl;e chead of a
powvrl"Il army of thlei followers, hut witli ;
fironger dilpoliltion to rcdllls their own -griev-
tances, tihaii to annny the eI e1yll; and ith ;i

2 Aberce. Mart. Atch. vl, ii p 43.
3 Black Adtt, ful. (i.

fix:at

fixed resolution of punishing those minions,
whose insolence they could no longer tolerate.
Ti7's resolution they executed in the camp near
Lanudr, withl a military dispatch and rigour.
Having prcviounuf concer.cd their plan, the earla
of' Aingus, -Iurnly, Icnnox, followed by almost
all the barons of chief note in the army, forcibly
en .'red the apartment of their sovereign,. sized
all h);; fa'ourites except one Ramiav, whom they
coild not tear f-om the king, il whose arms he
took f(hlter, and, without any form of trial,
ha.gcd t!lcm inliantly over a bridge. Among
the nll remarkable of those who had engrofled
the iing's affeciaon, were Cochran a mason,
Hommil a taylor, Leonard a finith, Rogers a
mufceian, and Torfifal a fencin-malter. So
despicable a retinue discovers the capriciousness
of James's charadter, and accounts for the indig-
nation of the nobles, when they beheld the favour
due to them, bellowed on such unworthy objects.

James had no reason to confide in an army so

little under his command, and, difmifling it, slut
himtfelf up in the cattle of Edinburgh. After
various intrigues, Albany's lands and hononrs
were at length rellored to him, and he seemed
even to have regained his brother's favour by
some important fcrvices. But their friendfllip
was not of long duration. James abandoned
limnfelf once Iiore to the guidance of favourites;
and the fate of those who had suffered a;t Lauder
did not deter others from courting that danger.
ons pre-eminence. Albany, on pretext that al
attempt had been made to take away his life by
poison, fled from court, and, retiring to his:atlUa
at D)unbar, drew thither a greater number of

barons

barons than attended on the king himself. At
the fame time he renewed his former confederac.-
with Edward; the earl of Angus openly ncgt:-
tiatcd that infamous treaty ; other barons were
ready to concur with it; and if the fuddcn
death of Edward had not prevented Alblan;v'
receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the rewa-r
of thi; unworthy coinbination with the enemies
of his country. Lut, inilead of any hopes o'
reigning in Scotland, lie found, upon the death
of Edward, that he could not recide there i
safety; and flying first to England, and then to
Irance, he seems fiomn that time to have taken
no part in the affairs of his native country.
Emboldened by his retreat, tle king and lis
ministers multiplied the insults lwhich they of-
sered to the nobility. A standing guard, a thing
unknown under the feudal governments, and in-
consistent witl the familiarity and confidence
with which monarchls then lived amirdft their
nobles, was raised for the king's defence, and
the command of it given to Ramlay, lately
created earl of Bothwell, the fame person who
had so narrowly elcaped when his companions
were put to death at Lauder. As if this pre-
caution had not been fiflicient, a proclamation
wva,.ifiled, forbidding any peroll lo appearl il
arms witlhill the precinlts of the court b; which,
at a time when no man of rank left his ow-n
Lhonlf wvithout a nlnllerous retinue of armed fol-
lowers, wais, ill cffedt, debarring the nohles from
all acccfs to the king. James, at the fame timne,
became fonder of retirement than ever, and,

b Ferrelius, 39S.

funk

funk in indolence or fliperftition, or attentive
(,ldy to amiufiments, dcvolved his whole autho-
rity upon his favourites. So many injuries pro-
vokcd the moit considerable nobles to take arms,
and having persuaded or obliged the duke of
lotllefay, the king's eldest son, a youth of
liftccn, to set himself at their head, they openly
declarcd their intention of depriving James of a
CIown of wldch he had discovered himself to be
so unworthy. Roused by this danger, the king
quiltcd his retirement, took the field, and en-
countered them near Bannockburn ; but the va-
;or of the borderers, of whom the army of the
in;:ucointenls was chiefly composed, soon put his
t -ops to flight, and he himnfelf was slain in the
l>ii'!-iii. Suipicioni, indolence, immoderate at-
lt:,i'nuclnt to favouritcs, and all the vices of a
fIcb-l). mind, are visible in his whole conduct;
bit tlh characaer of a cruel and unrelenting
tv-.il s:eens to ibe unjufly affixed to him by our
liftoi i'ns. I-is ni:ei'lct of the nobles irritated,
lut. did not wacken them ; and tleir discontent,
l! illnlmot erate ambition of his two brothers,
;:oil li.ir unnatuiral confederacies vith England,

'i.e fIlillicient to have dillurlhed a more vigorous

:ilruiuilftlation, and to have rendered a prince of

l!''c'3;i ltah nts unlihalpy.
't':i' i(i(';i it.",' v'llhic[l many perfois of ralnk.

c:.l :' l dinllnt: il: eoleldulit of the confpiriators,
tl, cIlucr! wil il l t error of the sentence of ex-
(c:".l:n .lelition whli:h tlie rope pronolinccd
;l. dit! t:;-n, (ollh'ed them io use tIliir viclory
v i slI ric:it mioderation, and tuiri;,nity. lrcin.t
co)il;ii),su how dctl'iable tIhe crime of iimbruiin
li:;r ihuadt; in the blood of tl:i tfov.reirig alp-

pi ;red,

peared, they cndeavoured to regain the good
opinion of their countrymen, and to atone for
the treatment of the father, hy their loyalty
and duty towards tle son. They placed him
inltantly on the throne, and the whole kingdom
soon united il acknowledging his authority.

James IV. was naturally generous and brave;

he felt, in an high degree, all the passions which
animate a young and noble mind. He loved
magnificence, he delighted in war, and was eager
to obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient
and hereditary cnmiiy between the king and
nobles ieelns alniolt entirely to have ceased. He
envied not their splendor, because it contributed
to the ornament of his co:lrt; nor did he dread
their power, which he con'idiervd as the security
of his kingdom, not as an o'bjct of terror to
himself. This confidence on his part met with
the proper return of duty ;and affection on theirs;
and in his war with England, he c;perienced
how much a king, belovcd bs his nobles, is able
to perform. Though ti;h ardour of his courag'e,
and the spirit of chivalry, rather than the pro-
spect of any national advan;ti;ge, induced him to
declare war against England, such was thle zeal
of his ful-,jjes for the king's glory, that he was
i.llolwed by as gallant an army as ever any of
IhiS aiilors lRhad led upon Englihi ground. But
tlough James ihnl'elf formed no fhieme danfger-
ous or dctrilnultal to tlhe arillociacy, his reign
was dliltignilhed byan event extremely fatal to
it ; and one accidental blow humbled it more
llhai all the prcmeditated attacks of preceding
kings. In the rahl and unfortunate battle of
Flowvden, a brave nobility chotf rather to die

than

;than to desert their sovereign. Twelve carl:.-
thirteen lords, live eldele sons of noblemen, and
an incredible number of barons, fell with the
king C Th'llc whole body of the nobles long and
fci;libly felt this difaier ; and if a prince of fult
age had then ascended the throne, their con-
ftcrnation and feebll'nefs would have afforded
him advanti.ges which no fornier monarch ever
pofTllld.

But }:;imes V. who fucceetded his father, uaal

an inf.iit of a yeall old; and thlomgh the office of
r renit was conferred upon hlis co)ulin the duke of
Alhany, a man of genius and entcr-prife, a native
sI' France, and acc.uiftorletd to a go'erumnent
v here the power of the king was alreadv great;
thloughl h made many bold atterpt. l to exte-nd
tlc :'oval authnoity; thouglh he put to ld-atit
1i.'d -(nie, a.nd baniii'cd. the ear! of Aungus,
tihe two noihlemen ofi greatert influence in the
Linirlodm, the ariitocracy lotl no ground under
ltis adiliuifniratioi. A fItranger to the manners,
thil law\s, and the language of the people whom
ti' was called to rule, he aded, on {bome occa-
ti)ns, ratlihr like a viceroy of the French king
than the goverCnor of Scotland ; but the nobles
afilicted their own privileges, and contcnded for
the interel. of their country, with a boldncfs
vltich covinced( hilm of their independence, and
of the impotcnce of his own authority. After
sirvrn;ll rnfuccefsful tutlggles, lie voluntarily rc-
tird to France ; and the king beiing tlien in Ihis
thilteentl year, thle nobles agreed thatt be fhoull
alill'ne the govern ment, and that eight persons
lthtuild be appointed to attend him by turns, and

c Abcr. ii. r4 .
VOL. 1. G t'

to advift and aflift him in the adminiflration of
public affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one
of that number, did not long remain satisfied
with such divided power. He gained some of
his colleagues, removed others, and intimidated
the relR. When the term of his attendance ex-
pired, he i1ill retained authority, to which all
were obliged to fibmit, because nole of them
was in a condition to dispute it. The affeftion
of the young king was the only thing wanting
to fix and perpetuate his power. But an adtie
and high-fpiritcd prince fiubmitted, with great
impatience, to the reifraint in which he was
kept. It ill suited his years or disposition to t,-
confined as a prifoncr within his own palace; to
be treated with no refpe&t, and to be deprived
of all power. He cotld not, on some occasions,
conceal his resentment and indignation. Angus
foresaw that he had much to dread fiom these;
and as he could not gain the king's heart, lh
resolved to make sure of his person. James was
continually surrounded by the earl's spies and
confidents; many eyes watched all his motions,
and observcd every Hlep he took. But the king's
cagernIefs to obtain liberty eluded all their vigi-
lance. He escaped from Falkland, and fled to
the castle of Stirling, the residence of the queen
his mother, and the only place of ftrcngth in the
kingdom which was not in the hand of the
l)ouglafis. The nobles, of whlom bme were
influenced by their hatred to Angus,'and others
by their rclieeEt for tle king, crowded to Stir-
ling, and his court was soon filled with persons
of tile greatest dilliinAion. The earl, though
aftn(ll!eLld at tlli unexpectcd revolution, rfoilved

at

at firtl to make one bold push for recovering his
autholity, by marching to Stirling at the head of
his. followers; bbut hle wanted either cour;age or
t+rength to execute this resolution. In a parlia-
ment held soon after, he and his adherents were
attainted, and after efeaping from many dangers,
and enduring much mitery, he was at length ob-
!i{gd to fly into England for refuge.

James had now not only the name, but,

th:ugh extremely young, the full authority of a
lk;i . l-e was inferior to no prince of that age
in gracefllnefs of person, or in vigour of mind.
1-is underllanding was good, and his heart
w.arm; the former capable of great improve-
n cnt, and the latter susceptible of the belt im-
preflions. But, according to the usual fate of
I-inces who are called to the throne in their in-
fancy, his education had been neglefted. His
private preceptors were more ready to flatter
than to inPtrutt him. It was the interelt of those
swho governed the kingdom to prevent him fiom
kIlnwing too much. The carl of Angus, in order
to (livert him from bufincfs, gave him an early
t:i!} for such pleasures as afterwards occupied
and clgroffed him more than became a king.
Aecordingly, we difeover in James all the sea-
1 n ,',; of a great but uncultivated spirit. On
tli ocne hand, violent paflions, imnplacable re-
I'cnllllet, l an immoderate detire of power, and
the: iutinot rage at difappoilntmcent. On the
t'llkrP, love to Ihis pedple, zeal for the puniflh-
liilt (o private opprlcflrs, confidence in his fia-

l,;ll'~ll,, and the moil: engaging openness and
;aill.,ility of l)chaviour.

c: WWhat

What he himnfelf had suffered from tile exorbi-

tant power ofthe nobles, led him early t, imitate
hi:, predeceflbors in tlieil attempts to humble them.
'The plall he formed fior .that purpose was Inol.
profound, more lyftcmatic, and pursued with
greater conitancy and iteadinefs, than that of
any of his ancellorb ; and the influence of the
events in his reign upon tliofe of the fnlfeiqueut
period render it necessary to explain his cuiidu&i
at greater length, and to enter into a more ni-
nute detail of' hii. acions. He had penetration
·enough to dilcovcr those defets in the schemes
=adopttd by form er kiings which occasioned their
miscarriage. Thle example of James I. had
Tanight himn, that wife laws operate ilowly on a

lude people, and that cie lierce firit of the
feudal nobles was not to be subdued by these
alone. The efects of the violent measures of
James II. convinced lim, that the oppression of
o ie great family is apt either to excite the i:fufi-
cion and resentment of the other nobles, or to
enrich with its spoils fonim new family, whicit
would soon adopt the fame fentimenirs, and be-
coinc equally formidable to the crown. Ht:
fa\;, Irom1 tlh ftatal end of janmes [11. that neg-
lccl was still more intolerable to tle nobles than
opprellion, and that thie minifiry of new men
aind favourites was both dlnhonou-al)le and ldn-

e'rous to a prince. At the famc t.iln'., lie fe'
that thle authority of the crown was nlt fifli-
ciclnt to coiintcrbatl;licc the power ol the ;:ailto-
raicvy, and that without fonmc new aiccelion o
{tcilngthl, he could expet no better flice:ls il
llc Il'ulr;!gle tiha.mn his ancilltorsi. 1n thi's cxtre-
mit)y lie applied hlinfelf to the clergy, hoping

t hat

thi.t they 5would loth relihl his plan, and concur,
nith all their infiuence, in enabling him to put
it il execution. Under tie feudal government
the chlorch, being reckoned a third cl tate, had
its repretentatives il p'rlianien' ; the nuimber of
tlefi; wvas considerable, and they poffcifed great
ilrcitcnce in that assembly. ''he fuperltition of
fin-ner kings, and the zeal of many ages of ig-
nill-nncce, had bestowed on ecclliailics a great
proportion of tile national wcaltl ; and the au-
thority \hich they acquired by the reverence of
rhe people, wa:i superior even to that which they
derived from their riches. This powerful body,
however, depended entirely on the crown. The
popes, notwithitanding their attention to extend
their usurpations, had neglefted Scotland as a
ditant and poor kingdom, and permitted its
kings to excrcife powers which they disputed
wvith more considerable princes. The Scottish
monarchs had the folc right of nomination to
v;cant l)iihoprics and abbeysd; and James na-
turlaliy concluded, that men who expected pre-
frminnt from his favoor, would be willing to
Ineit it hy promoting his deligns. Happily for
him, the nobles liad not yet recovered the blow
'.vhli h fell on their order at Flowden ; and if we
,nav judgce either from their condu&, or fromn
l he chliiictr given of them by tir Ralph Sadler,
lilt Engiii'll envoy ill Scotland, they were imen'
:,i litlit gelius, ,f n) cxperience in 1ulineft, and
:i.;ij ;ablc of ;nitinor tith'r with tiunaimity or with
vitoil'. Mayii of tih cllergy, oil the other hand,

.rt d tifliigii!ih.(l l)y their great abilities, and no
1'; hy thehir Iambition. Var'Viius califca of difgulli

I'i, PRi'. Scct. 1. 197, &c, Act 115 P. 1510.

G 3 fulbliltcd

J'hfllfted between thl:mn and the martial nobles,
whot were apt to views the pricilic character of
ecc!elialtics with fomc dcgret of contempt, and
who envied their power and cwallth. By acting
i; concert with the king, they not only would
gratify him, but av!c nr ti-heilv\es, aid hoped
to aggrandize their own order, )by depressing
thiofe w-lo were their sole rivals. .Secure of so
powerful a concurrence, James vcntured to pro-
ceed wit.l greater boldnels. In the firit heat of
It'retntment, 1'- laid. driven the ca:rl of Angus out

si the kilngdon ; and, fenlible that a perlon so
far liuprior to t!e otler nobles in abilities might
c(.eatc many obitacles which wtould retard or ren-
ler incffettual all. its i'lemces, he foleinnly swore,
tlhat he wo)uld never penlTit iiln to return into
krotl'.1nd; and, notwitlhitlading tll repeated soli-
citat:io!n of tle king of England, he adhered to
hii; v;-i- with uiurelenting obirinacy. I-Ie theln
procelided to repair tlhe fortilications of Edin-
burgh, Stirling, and other callles, and to fill his
ma]Tl;l'ai's witli arni anli ammunition. iHav\ing
lakenl these precautions by way of defence, lie
began to treat the inoil, iy wi;t the utitmotl cold-
Ilcl' and rei'n c. Illofe o{uices, which they
were apt fron lonmhg )ofiellion to conlider as ap-
yronpriat d to their ord :r, were now bellowed on
('eleliaflic=;, who alone p,,f'lled tihe king's ear,
and, tog.'iicr withl a few ;ienltlecmcnl of inferirc
railk, to swhom hlie had comilinicatled Ili'; felhenis,
were intrillted vVitli tlie nianagiemeint of all public
alsairs. Th'lerc inilltcr;i v.'er.c chofeni withl judg-
ient ; aind cardinal leatotu, who loon becaime
tlie Inoilt enilieiit aillong taiem, was a mian of
:fiperior ;geliub. 'JTlly lferved the king with

lidclity,

iidclity, they carried on his ncafures w';ih vigour,
,i{t:i ieptl'tationl, and wVithl f'lCeCfs. James no
lon. er concealed his di!fr-ui of the nobles, and
{'lificrec nro opportunity of mortifying them to
.ifc: p.-. Slighlt offnces were arggrra;attd i:ntl

ical rimTi, aind puniihed witih fcvelitv. Every
;ccia';tion agiainll persons of rank was heard with.
'l(-a!'.rc, ecvery appariiance of guilt was examined
v it ri-o!ri , and CCe- r trial proved fatal to those
',dl; w!I'tc accused: -the banilling HIepburn tarl
c, tlthlcll ivr realons extremely frix\)lous, be.
.niiliiog the clc!!l son of lord lorlres witilout
filiiea;it evidnlce of his guilt, and the con!denn-
5i]r lady G lamiis, a I;iHer of the eari of Ant'niu,
1i, ibe Iburnt ur the crime of \ itchcErast, of whiich
("'.ii tliat credulous age b.lieved her innocent,
a;,c monilumients botil of the king's hatred of the
n.bilhty, of the severity .of lis government, and
olf tie !ti eclhes he made towards absolute power.
I) th!-ft acts of authority, he tried the spirit of
t11 nobles, and how much they were willing to
i, .:-. 'I'liJr patience increaled his contempt for
l'11, ;t;ld added to the ardour and boldness
wvitil \liicll he pursued his 1l'an. Mealcnwhiile
tlhy olleved the thendency of his Ichemes with
c.'.'Cn, and wi' tli rleantimnt; hut the kil!hn's
'(atcity, thle .igilalii. of hii minillter, and the

o.illt . ;a proper leadier, Ilade it danigcron; to
I',!it it aniy r;eaflr'cs .for their defenice, ati d inl-

i,,il'tllc to aet with bectomilmr xigour. Jalnes and
lii; eonifcllors, by a ftalfe Itep which they took,
|irlclrted to thinle, at length, an advantage which
lil,' diod no ;il to ilnpilove.

i. Jo:ivcs, wl' il are wvell kiownl, lIad )1 on'1)tcd
llex-y V.ll. to dilcl;;ini thle popc's atitiollty

;ud

and to fcize the revcnues of the regular clerg-.
-Iis fvftem of reformation fatistied none of his
subjects. Some we!e enraged becauie he had
proceeded so far, others murmured bccaufe he
proceededt no farther. By his imperious temper,
and alternate -persecutions of the zealots for
popery, and the converts to the protefrant opi-
nions, he was equally formidable to both. Henry
v-as afraid that this general diffatisfacion of liih
people mirht encourage hi' enemies on the con-
tin-nt to inmvade his kingdom. He knew ti-at
b.til the 'pope and the emperor courted the
firiendihip of the king of Scots, and endeavouret
to cngage him in an alliance against England.
I-e resolved, therefore, to disappoint the effects
of their negociations, by entering into a closer
ulnion with his nephew. In order to accompliff
this, lie tranfinitted to James an elaborate me-
morial, presenting the numerous encroachments
of the fee of Rome upon the rights of fove-
rcigns ; and tlia' he might induce him more
ceirtainly to adopt the fame measures for abolifb-
ing papal usurpation, which had proved so efli-
vcacious in England, le lent ambassadors into
Scotlarid to propoft a personal interview with
him at York. It was plainly James's interest to
accept this invitation; the affillance of so power-
ful ;n ally, the high honours which were pro-
tnii'td himi, and the liberal filhfidies he might
lhave obtained, would have added no little dig-
nity to his donellic government, and must have
greatly facilitated the execution of his favourite
plan. On the other hand, a war with England,
which he had reason to ipprehllnd if he rejeded

c Stryl', EcclCf. Mem. 1, App. 135.

Henry's

-lcnrr's; offers of firiendi ip, was inconfiltcnl
w.'itih 11 his views. ''llis would brilng him to
.',.¢ind on his barons; a: army could not be
.r:til;'R witliout their ail('ta!ce: to call nobies in-
cci:,..d agaiiiit tieir pii:iec into the field, was to

ic his tienelies, to make them sensible of thliir
i..>'!I ti:'cgtth, and to afford tilcm an opportunity

of tvecilngig their wrongs. James, who was not
i;o' l:;int that all these coirfcqucnces might fol-
low a bri acil sith England, iilLened at firit to
-ic;uirys prvopoflal and confeuted to the interview\
:t York. But the clergy dreaded an union,
whib nilLmu. have been c tlabl'fhed on .the ruins of
th'e chu'rch. Henry had taken great pains to
i!si'li' into lis nephew his ouw flcntilentj coll-
_Clu.!1g religion, a-n lhad .frequently solicited
hi.ii, by aimbaifadors to renounce ilie u{flrped do-
nIi'i;.,l of the pope, whichl was no Ieti- dilhonour-
.}hil' to princes' t.ian grievous to thltir fbjert.
Tihe c'ierly liad hitlherto, with great addrels, di-
.xrt(ed the king from regrarding tlihe loil.c'ia-
tiOiiS;. [llt, ill an amiicable coloti:rence, I-Ienry
c.e<i)cti, alnd they feared, that Janus vwould
y!iild to his intreaties, or be convinced by lii;
..'2.mjllcilts. They knewx that the reveueis of the
chlmail: werea al allhtingi oliject to ;! prince wl.o

.l;l noct e id

wey, ad who ioved it ; that the p)ride

.,id iiinhf;i'jn of cci:ftialiiCS r;iifTd (lie indigna-
linl of the noble)(;; that tlheir illlccii(: lIci: gav
o(lii;ic to thic pepl; t llat the lprotcitilit opi-
lnio., \v'ere tine diiir fall tijrolghoiit the nation;
aitnd thlat an ulivert'al (let'ciiioll fionl the cllIL-
)lilled chliunc:l would i e thie COllic(lLqtCn of giv-

1 ! th1e flln;lllt degree of ien:cotlragelnenlt t to
Illet prilci)leic. Fior thece trc;rfons, they cTem-

'lo)yed

ployed all their credit with the king, and had
recoirfe to every artifice and infinuat'bn, in order
to divert him from a journey, which must have
b.cr so fatal to their interest. They endeavoured
to inspire him with fear, by magnifyiig the
danger to which he would expose his person, bl,
venturilng so far into England, without any fecu-
rity but the word of a prince, who, having vio-
lated every thing venerable and sacred in reli-
gion, was no longer to be trusted; and by wa;
of compensation tor the fums which he might
have received from Henry, they offered an an-
nual donative of fifty thonfand crowns; they
rromifed to contribute liberally towards carrying
on a war with England, and flattered him with
the profpefr of ilnnmenfe riches, arising from the
forfeiture of persons who were to be tried and
condemned as heretics. Influenced by these con-
fiderations, James broke his agreement with
Hen r, who, in expeciation of meeting him, had
al,-cd;l come to York; and that haughty and
inliptticlt monarch resented the affront, by de-
claarinrg war againit Scotland. His army was
soon ilady to invade the kingdom. James was
obliged to hax.e recourse to the nobles for the
(dcfcnicc of his dominions. At his command
they affembl'd their followers; but with the
falme difpufitions which had animated their an-
cc'lors in the reign of James I. 1. and with a full
rcfoliliion of imnitatilng their example, by punlifl-
ing 1hose t o whom they imputcd the tGrievances
of whilch they had rcalon to complain ; and if
the kiilL in Inilers hid rinot Ibeen men of abili-
ties superior to thole of James III. and of con-
fiderable interft even with their enemies, wIlo

could

could not agree among themselves what viclims
to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have been
as remarkable as that of Lauder, for the daring
encroachments of the nobility on the prerogative
of the prince. But though his miniaers were
avctd by this accident, the nobles had soon an-
othler opportunity of discovering to the king
* : fir dillatisfaCtion with his government, and
tl;cir contempt of his authority. Scarcity of
provisions, and the rigour of the season, having
obliged the Eiglifh army, which had invaded
Scotland, to retire, Jamnes imagined th.it he
could attack them with great adcvantage in their
retreat; but the principal barons, with an ob(i-
lacy and disdain which greatly aggravatcd their
disobedience, refused to advance a ftep beyond
the limits of their own country. Provoked by
this insult to himself, and suspicious of a new
conspiracy against his minillers, the king in-
ltantly disbanded an army which paid so little
regard to his orders, and returned abruptly into
the heart of-the kingdom.

An ambitious an hligh-fpirited prince could

not brook such a mortifying afli-ont. His hopes
of success had been rash, and his dcfpair upon ;a
difappointnent was excessive. He felt himself
engaged in an unnecessary war with England,
vwhicll, instead of yielding him the laurels and
triiimnplhs that he expered, had begun with fuclh
circumlilances as encouraged the insolence of his
lubjecis, and exposed him to the scorn of his
tenelicis. He saw how vain and inecfiltual all
his lroje'as to humble the nobles had been, and
tll;it, tlough in times of peace a prince may en.-
IavoiU' r to depress thlm, the)n will rife during

wvar

war to their former inlport;licc and dignlitv
lirnpatieniice, refentm:cnt, indigation, filled lhi.
h-oiim !)by turns. 'The vi.olncc of lhefe paflion.i
ali:ed liis temlper, and, perhaps, impaircd i;i
!'.:i' n . tI Hr bc:anle pcnflivt, iflllti, and irtilred .
1] [ freinmd throurgh the day to be i\x-;lloed ii.
in profound'm1( dil

r' ion, and thron'gh the ni';i !

n: was dplinrbed with those viiitn;iy i-rr;.,
\hlich m;;:le inlprcffion upon a wealk undel-ltad-
hi1, only, or a dfifollrercd fancy. In o(rder to,
rI vi\ the king's fpi-its, an inroad on the Awcettl:-
lwr-elcrs was concerted by Lis minillcs, who pr,'-
v,.iled uon llt barons in the nciighlhorini pro,-
Vc' CCS to ra{le as; many trooC. ;as \\Te til, o lht
n-cetlar' , :nid to crter the enemy's coll' v.
IBut nothiing could rem.ivc t'h king s aversion io
his nobilitv, or diminilh his jcalo1fy of theli
power. I-ie would not even intrust threm wit.
the commanid of the forces which the'I . had as-
feniled ; that was refer-ed for Oliver Sinclair
li'i, ; vourite, who no sooner appeared to tnak
pofIiTffion of the di;gnitv conferred upon him,
tlian rage and indignnation roccafionedl an uiiverfal
)irutinyi in the arny. Fi.v hundred Englifli
w;ho ;lappe)ned to he drawnl up ihn fight,. attacked
the Scots in i.his disorder. Latred to the kini,,
aird contClept of their general, produced an el-
sect to whilh there is no parallel in i'lliUry.
'Fth]C overciamel the fear of death, andl tlhe lovt
of liecrty ; and ten thoufald men fled, bcfore a;
numnbcr 1' tsar inferior, witholut liikilng a Ifigle
bltow. No man wa( delilolt o1t a vi tory, wslielh
would have been acceptablle to 1he king alnd to
lis favouritc; few cindeavoured to sIte thlenifelfvc
by flight ; the Englifl li;l the clioice of wsli.t

3 piiluiirr.

prisoners they pleased to take; and almost every
person of diitintion, who was engaged in the
expedition, remained in their hands . This afto-
nilhing event was a new proof to the king of the
g' neral difaffettion of the nobility, and a new
discovery of his own weakness and want of au-
thority. Incapable of bearing these repeated
insults, lhe found himself unable to revenge them.
'The deepelt melancholy and despair fulceeded to
hilc furious t.-anlports of rage,'which the firit ac-
colunt of the rout of his army occasioned. All
lile violent passions, which are the enemies of
life, preyed upon hlis'mind, and waited and con-
funmed a youthful and vigorous conitittition.
Souni autlhors of that age impute his untimely
di;thl to poison ; but tle diseases of the mind,
\, len they rife to an height, are often mortal;
:ad the known effects of disappointment, anger,

ltld refeltment, upon a sanguine and inlpetuous
teii)per, fifficiently account for his unhappy
tite. l" His death (fays Drummond) provetli
his miind to have been raised to an high flrain,
and above mediocrity; he could die, but could
not digelt a difatter." Had James survived this
inistortune, one of two things mull have hap-
p1ned : either the violence of his temper would
iave engaged him openly to attack the nobles,
who would have found in HIenry a willing and
poerfill proteEtor, and have derived tile fame
·llilliiace from him which the mnalecontents, int

f Accolring to an account of this event in the Hamilton

MSS. aboul thirty were killed, above a thousand were taken
prioners, and among them a hundrcd and sixty rcrfons of
cidition. Vol. ii. 2z86, The small number oft te Englifn
prcventel their Calkins rtol prifoncrs,

VOL. 1, 1 tlhe

tle succeeding reign, did from his daughter
Elizabeth; in that cafe, a dangerous civil war
must have been the certain consequence. Or,
perhaps, necefiity might have obliged him to
accept of Henry's offers, and be reconciled to
his nobility. In that event the church would
have fallen a sacrifice to their union ; a reforma-
tion, upon Henry's plan, would have been efta-
blifhed by law ; a great part of the temporalties
of the church would have been seized; and the
fi-iendflip of the king and barons would have
been cemented by dividing its spoils.

Such were the efforts of our kings towards

reducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If
they were not attended with fucccfs, we mull
not, for that reason, conclude that they were
not conducted with prudence. Every circum-
stance feenis to have combined againfi the crown.
Accidental events concurred with political causes
in rendering the bell-concerted ineafures ahor.
tive. ''lhe allalination of one king, the sudden
death of another, and the tiltal despair of a third,
contributed no lcfs than its own natural llicngthl
to preserve the arillocl.tcy from ruin.

Amidll these Itl-ggles, the influence lwhich

our kings pol'cflcd in their parliamencnts is a eil-
cirlnnia;n.c fieenmilgly inexplicable, and whicil
mnertl; I'arti:ul;ar artcnltion. As tlhefe affemlblics
were ccmplol((l clielly of the nobles, they, we
are apt to imagine, nllmul have dictated all their
decilionls; Iut, inttead of this, every king fouitl
tlhenl olf;ieqliious to his will, and obtained fich
laws as lie dcemed necefn:.ry for extending hiti
autbority. All things were conducted there with
sil'):ttch iand unaiiimity ; and, iln tolle of our

1,;11 ,..

historians, do we find an inflance of any oppoli-
tion formed againit the court in parliament, or
mention of any difficulty in carrying through the
nmeafures which were agreeable to the king. In
order to account for this singular fast, it is ne-
cefliry to inquire into the origin and contiitution
of parliament.

The genius of the feudal government, uniform

in all its operations, produced the fame effedts in
finall as in great societies; and the territory of a
baron was, in miniature, the model of a king-
dom. He poffelfed the right ofjurifdlicion, but
thofc who depended on him being siee men, and
not slaves, could be tried by their peers only;
and, therefore, his vassals were bound to attend
his courts, and to ailift both in paflsng and exe-
cuting his sentences. When assembled on these
occasions, they established, by mutual consent,
tuch regulations as tended to the welfare of their
finali society; and often granted, voluntarily,
fuici supplies to their Jiiperior, as his necessities
required. Change now a iingle name; in place
of baron, fubititute king, and we behold a par-
l;dinent in its first rudiments, and observe the
iivlI exertions of those powers, which its mem-
bers now poflefs as judges, as legillators, and as
difcnfcrs of tle public revenues. Suitable to
ti'is idea are the appellations of the King's Court g,
ndl of the Ci'ng's Great Council, by which par-
liainc:nts were anciently diflinguilhed; and luit-
;ibl to this, likewise, were the constituent mem-
bers of which it was composed. In all the feudal
kingdoms, fich as held of the king in chits were
Ituund, by the condition of their tenure, to at-

g Du Cany, vo:. Curil.

H 2 tendl

tend and to affill in his courts. Nor was this
eitenmed a privilege, but a service h It was
exacted likewise of bilhops, abbots, and the
greater ecclesiastics, who, lolding valt poflefions
of the crown, were deemed iubjec& to the fame
burden. Parliaments did not conti.;:e long in
this state. Cities gradually acquired wealth, a
considerable hlare of the public taxes were levied
on them, the inhabitants grew into estimation,
and, being enfianchifed by the sovereign, a place
in parliament was the confcquence of their li-
berty, and of their importance. But as it would
have been abfrud to confer such a privilege, or
to impose such a burden on a whole community,
every borough was permitted to chufe one or two
of its citizens to appear in the name of the cor-
p'oration; and the idea of reprefcntation was firll
introduced in this manner. An innovation, still
more important, naturally followed. The vassals
of the crown were originally few in number, and
extremely powerful ; but as it is inpoffible to
render property fixed and permanent, many of
their poffeflions came gradually, and by various
meioi(ds of alienation, to be split and parcelled
out into different hands. Hence arose the di.-
tinctioli between the Greater rand tle ]LerfrBarons.
'.uh former were those who retainecl their ori-
ginal liefs undivided, the latter were tlhe new and
lei'; potent vafi:ls of the crown. Both were
boulnd, however, to perform all feudal service;,
and of cofllcquelnc to give attendance in pallia-
ment. To the lcl'er baroni, wi'h formed no in-
conliderable body, this wais an intolerable grliev-

h Du C:afige, voc. Placituin, col. i9. Jl8gnaa C1a31ti,
art. j4. A.t. Jac. I. 1.1Z5. cap. 52.

an'ec.

ance. Barons sometimes denied their tenure,
boroughs renounced their right of electing, char-
tcrs were obtained containing an exemption from
attendance; and the anxiety with which our an-
celtors endeavoured to get siee from the obliga-
tion of litting in parliament, is surpassed by that
only with which their posterity solicit to be ad-
iinttcd there. In order to accommodate both
p:;rtics at once, to secure to the king a sufficient
numtilber of members in his great council, and to
Efi\vc his vatfals from an unneceflary burden, an
c.t!y expedient was found out. The obligation
to perfoinal attendance was continued upon the
greater barons, from which the lesser barons
scrCe exempted, on condition of their eleting ill
eachL county a certain number of reprejentati'es,
to appear in their name. Thus a parliament
iecanme complete in all its members, and was
cujmpofed of lords spiritual and temporal, ot
kniglhts of the shires, and of burgeflis. As
ni.li) cauiles contributed to bring government
t-r!ier to perfection in England than in Scotland;

i:; Itll rigour of the feudal institutions abated
soon r, and its defels were supplied with greater
facility in the one kingdom than in the other;
England led the way in all tllefe changes, and
blar.cfrfs and knights of the {hire appeared in the
parli aments of that nation, before they were
heard of in ours. Burgesses were firlt admitted
i;to the Scottil parliaments by Robert Bruce
! A. 1). 1326]; and in the preamble to the la'ws
,f Robert 111. they are ranked among the con-
.i lcnt nDlcmbers of that alrembly. 'rlle lefln

t Abercrornby, i 6j5,

'1 3 barons

barowlti were indebted to James I. for a ftatut,
exempting them from personal attendance, and
permitting them to eleA representatives [A. D,
14271: the exemption was eagerly laid hold on;
but the privilege was so little valued, that, ex.
cept in one or two inflances, it lay neglected dur.
ing one hundred and iixty years; and James VI.
firl[ obliged them to fend representatives regularly
to parli;ment k.

A Scottifn parliament, then, consisted anciently

of great barons, of ecclefiafics, and a few repre.
ientatives of boroughs. Nor were these divided,
as in, England, into two houses, but comnpofed
one alfembly, in which the lord chancellor pre-
fidedl. In rude ages, when the science of go.
vernment was extremely imperfet among a mar-
tial people, unacquainted witl the arts of peace,
itrangers to the talents which make a figure in
debate, and despising tlem, .parliaments were
not hldd in the fame eltimation as at present; nor

k Eflhys on Brit. Antiq. Efr. II. Dalr)n)mp. Hilt. of Feud.
I'rop ch. S.

In England, the peers aiid commons ferm early to 'hve

met in separate houses; and aini:' I. who was ftnd of imi-
tatiig thle 1.liglillh i .111 their cuflliis, halr probably an in-
tention of inlodiciug Iod 'unie llwcrablle ditlinltion betwrv.e
tli, !re.itl :ild lefelli bharon:; in Siitlndl ; at leafI lie dlcter-

ii:led ilhat luhtir conlultatioi,. Ihiulil nut bt t.arried onn under
tdl diihetion of the fl-tic pielidcnt; ti by his la.L\, A. I).

3S7. it is providedl, " that out (f l-the cmnrilrlioners of all
the Ihires Ih:all be choliin a wiie and expert man, r.alled the
coluimion speaker of the pallianrent, who lhall pIolpofe all anil
fundly needs and c.iuil'c pcrtairinng to the comrnnlns in tle
p'aliaiuicnt or general council." No such speaker, it woulil
li'em, was ever chofenll and by .a flilbfquent law the chanl.
.:t.llor was dleclard perl;.tual i)relidcat ol parliament.

did

did haughty barons love those courts in which
they appeared with such evident marks of in-
feriority. Parliaments were often hallilv as-
ferabled, and it was, prbhably, in the king's
power, by the manner in which he ifiued his writs
for that purpose, to exclude fucl as were averse
from his measures. At a time when deeds of
violence were common, and the rettraints of law
and decency were little regarded, no man could

cit Uirc i

wth safety to oppose the king in his own

court. The great barons, or lords of parlia-
imnct, .wace extremely few; even so late as the
b,:ginningl of the reign of James VI. '" they
;notount(d only to fifty-three. The ecclefiatics
q:ualled thm inn number, and being devoted im-
pli:itlv to the crown, for reasons wilich have
bciin already explained, rcndered all hopes of
vitory in any struggle dcfperate. Nor were the
nobles themselves so anxious as might be ima-
gined to prevent ats of parli;amlent flvourable to
the royal prerogative; conscious of their own
llrcngtll, and of the king's inability to carry thecr
;icts into execution without their concurrence,
tliy truletd that they might either elude or
'.intire to coiitemn them; and the slatute re-
ok ing the king's property, and annexing alien-
:edic jurisdictions to the crown, repeated in every
risi;n, and violated and dcfpifed as often, is a
illlling proof of the impotence of laws when
ol<'l(lpcd to power. So Imany concurring cal It-S
.!'t: fiullicient, perhllps, to account for the alfend-
n;it \vlichl our kings acquired in parliament. But,
'itlliout hlavingi reeor'lli to ally of these, a single

sm And. Coll. vol. i. ricf. ,o.

circnll.-

circumstance, peculiar to the constitution of the
S;cottish parliament, the mentioning 'of which we
have hitherto avoided, will abundantly explain
this fad, seemingly so repugnant to all our rea-
fonings concerning the weakness of the king,
and the power of the nobles.

As far back as our records enable us to trace

the constitution of our parliaments, we find a
committee diltinguifhed by the name of iords of
Articles. It was their business to prepare and to
digelf all matters which were to be laid before the
parliament. There was rarely any business intro-
duced into parliament, but what had pallcd
through the channel of this committee; every
motion for a new law was first made there, and
approved of, or rejected by the members of it;
what they approved was formed into a bill, and
presented to parliament; and it seems probable,
that what they rejtcted could not be introduced
into the honfe. This committee owed the extra.
ordinary powers veiled in it to the military genius
of tile ancient nobles; too impatient to fubmnit
to the drudgery of civil business, too impetuous
to observe the forms, or to enter into the details,
ueceltlry in condufEing it, they were glad to lay
that burlden upon a small number, while they
thenfelves had no other labour than iimply to
give, or to refuse, their aflent to the bills which
were presented to them. The lords of articles,
then, not only directed all the proceedings of
parliament, but )poflefld a negative before dt-
bate. That committee was chofcn and con li-
tited in such a manner, as put this valuable pri.
vilege entirely in the king's hands, It is ex.

tremt!v

trtmel- pSrobable, that our kings once had the
sole right of nominating the lords of articles n.
They came afterwards to be elected by the par-
liament, and consisted of an equal number out of
each :lfate, and molt commonly of eight temporal
and cight spiritual lords, of eight representatives
of boroughs, and of the eight great officers of
the crow>n. Of this body, the eight eccleliatics,.
rogether with the officers of the crown, were en-
tilrly at the king'sXdevotion, and it was scarcely
pofliblc that the choice could fall on fucl tem-
poral lords and burgeflis as would unite in oppo-
iition to his mcafuires. Capable either of in-
!lcnlcing their election, or of gaining them when

n It appears fiom authentic records, Lhat a parliament was

;ia;ointed to be held March 1z, 1566, and that the lords of
articles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days hefore the
allembling of parliament. If they could be regularly ele6Qed
to long hefore the meeting of pirliament, it is natural to con-
clitde, thatthe prince alone pofli ledthe right of electing them.
Tiere arc two dii}erent accounts of the manner of their elec.
tlun at that time, one by Mary herfeir, in a letter to the arch.
bi(hop of Glasgow: " We, accompanied with our nobility
" for the time, past to the Tulbooth of Edinburgh, for
"holding of our parliament on the 7th day of this inftiult,
" and elected the lords articulars." If we explain these
wvoris, according to the flrict grammar, we mull conclude
tl.t the qicen herclifelfeled lthem. It is, however, more
'lobible that Mary meant to fay, that the noblc. then pre-
ent wvitlh hir, viz. her ptivy counl'ellors, and otlhes, elutecd
thil lcnrti; (f articles. Keith's l-lil. of Scotland, p. 13r.
'The other account i. Lord Rjlthvcn's, who (xprefslv atlirtms
thl.t Ihe queen hlerlkelf eletedj thelm. Keith's Append. 126.
WV I.ihler we rtmrbrace the one or the other of these opinions
'. 'it no crl(equence. If the privy counfellsos and ntobls at-
t, idilng the court had a igh:t to rlec the loids of articles, it
'V.ls I'l ially ;tdvantageous for the crow), as if the prince had
hlll i,c loul nomnination u' thellm.

cle&cd,

ele&ted, the king commonly found the lords of
articles no less obsequious to his will than his
own privy council, and, by means of his autho-
rity with them, he could put a negative upon his
parliament before debate, as well as after it; and
what may seem altogether incredible, the molt li-
mited prince in Europe actually possessed, in one
instance, a prerogative which the most absolute
could never attain °.

To

o Having deduced the hiflory of the committee of lords of

articles as low as the subjec of this preliminary book re-
quired, it may be agreeable, perhaps, to some of my readers,
to know the subsequent variations in this singular inffitution,
and the political ule which our kings made of these. When
parliaments became more numerous, and more considerable
by the admiflion of the representatives of the lesser barons,
the preserving their influence over the lords of articles be-
came likewise an object of greater importance to our kings.
James VI. on pretence that the lords of articles could not
find leisure to confider the great multitude of affairs laid
before them, obtained an at, appointing four persons to
be named out of each flasec, who should meet twenty
days before the commencement of parliament [Aft zzz,
P. 1594], to receive all supplications, &c. and re.
jeting what they thought frivolous, should engross in
a book what they thought worthy the attention of the
lords of articles. No provision is made in the aR for the
choice of this felet body, and the king would of course
have claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I. was
beginning to introduce thole innovations which gave so
much offence to the nation, he dreaded the opp' fition of his
parliament, and in order to prevent that, an artifice was nmae
isfe of to secure the lords of articles for the crown. 'IThe
temporal peers were appointed to choose eight bilhops, and
the bilhops eight peers there sixteen met together, and eih:eed
eight knights of the Ihire, and eight burgcefes, and to thrle
the crown officers were added as usual. If we can only
fuppofci eight persons of fu numerous a body, as the peers of

Scotland

To this account of the internal constitution of

Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of
the political state of Europe at that period, where
the following history commences. A thorough
knowlcdge of that general fyltem, of which every
kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less re-
quilite towards underltanding the hiitory of a na-
tion, than an acquaintance with its peculiar go-
vcrnment and laws. The latter may enable us to
comprehend domelsic occurrecesc and revolu-
;.ions; but without the former, foreign tranfac-

Scotland were become by that time, attached to the court,
thrfe, it is obvious, would be the men whom the bishops
would choose, and of conseq:uence the whole lords-of alticles
wele the tools and creatures of the king. This practice, la
inconfittent with liberty, was abolilhed during the civil war;
and tile statute of James VI. was repealed. After the re-
aroration, parliaments became more servile than ever. What
was only a temporary device in the reign of Charles I. was
then converted into a (anding law. " For my part," fays
til Author from whom I have borrowed many of these par-
ticulars, " I should have thought it less criminal in our re-
"' lioration parliament to have openly beotuwed upon the
'" kilng a negative before debate, thin, in such an underhand
" ltilicial manner, to betray their conltituents and the na-

tion.' Efliys on Brit. Antiq. 55. It is probable, how-

cvel, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil, to Aug. 156o0
piinted in the Appendix, that this parliament had some a;p-
tcaance of ancient precedent to jufify their unworthy con.
duct. Various clueflioln concerning the constituent members
ol the Scottish parliament ; concerning the ;era at which the
rp'rclentatives of boroughs were introduced into that aflemin
bly ; and concerning the origin and power of the committee
of lords of articles, occur, and have been agitated with
great warmth. Since the firl: publication of this work, all
there disputed points have been confidered with calmnneli and
accuracy in Mr. Wight's Inquiry into the Rile and Progrelc
of Parliamlent, &c. 4to edit. p. 17, &c.

tioll

tions mull be altogether mysterious and unintel-
ligible. By attending to this, many dark pas..
figes in our history may be placed in a clear
light; and where the bulk of historians hilve
fecn only the effe&t, we may be able to difcov\
the cause.

The iubverfion of the feudal government ;:

France, and its declension in the neighbourtii
kingdoms, occalioned a remarkable alteration in
the political Itate of Europe. Kingdoms, which
were inconsiderable when broken, and parcelled
out among nobles, acquired firmniefs and ft.rengtli
by being united ifito a regular moniarchy. Kings
became conscious of their own power and import.
ance. They meditated fehemes of conquest, and
engaged in wars at a diltance. Numerous armlcs
were raised; and great taxes imposed for tlhi&
subsistence. Considerable bodies of infantry were
kept in constant pay; that service gre\v to hc
honourable ; and cavalry, in which the itrength of
European armies had hitherto confiltcd, thought
proper enough for the short and voluntary excur-
lions of barons who served at their own expencc,
were found to be unfit either for making or de-
fending any important conquest.

It was in Italy, that the powerful monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany ridt appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The divilion
of that country into many finall Itates, the luxuryi
of the people, and their effeminate aversion to
arms, invitel their more martial neighbours to an
easy prey. The Italians, whlo had been accuf-
tomed to mock battles only, and to decide thcir
interior quarrels by innocent and bloodless vic-
tories, were ailtolilllcd, 'hcll the FrenchC ilvaded

tlci;

their country, at the fight of real war; and ai
they could not relift the torrent, tlhe fifl'ercd it
to take its course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue
and policy supplied the want of Itrengili. Nt-
cecfity and felf-prefervation led that ;iingio,:I
people to the great secret of modern politics, by
eiacling them how to balance the power of one
prince, by throwing that of another into the opl
polite scale. By this happy device, the liberty
of Italy was long preserved. The scales were
poised by very fliilful hands ; the finallclt varia-
tions were attended to, and no prince was allowed
to retain any fuperiiority that could be dangerous.

A fyitem of condiud, pursued with so nuscl

i[ccefs in Italy, was not long confined to that
country of political refinement. The maxim of
preserving a balance of power is founded so much
upon obvious reasoning, ard the lituation of Eu-
rope rendered it so necessary, that it soon beuanne
a matter of chief attention to all 1 ife politicians.
;ivelr flep any prince took, was observed by all
hi neighbours. Amballadors, a kind of honour-
:bllc spics, authorised by the mutual jealt)ofy of
kigs, resided alnmolt conllantly at every dilferent
coiur, and hiad it in charge to watcl all its mo-
tions. D)angers were foreseen at a greater dif-
tance, and prevented with more ease. Confe-
dticries were formed to humble anly power which
,fc above its deprtioportion. Revenge or self-
dccenclle were no longer the only causes of ,hoili-
lity, it became common to take arms ouit of pn-
liy ; and war, both in its comnmencementi and:ii
its operations, was more an exercise of tlie judg-
mcnt, than of the passions of men. Alinoit
evcry var in Lurope became general, iuid the
VOL. 1. I molt

nmil inconsiderable states acquired importance,
because they could add weight to either scale.

Francis I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen,
and Charles V. who obtained the imterial crown
in the year one thousand five hundred and nine-
teep, divided between them the irength and as-
sections of all Europe. Their perpetual enmity
was not owing solely either to personal jealousy, or
to the caprice of private palTicn, but was founded
io much in nature and true policy, that it sub-
fitted between their potcerity for several ages.
Charles succeeded to all the dominions of the
houlfe of Austria. No family had ever gained so
much by wife and fortunate malriages. B1 ar-
quifitions of this kind the Ault'ian princes rofc,
in a ihort time, fromn obscure counts of Hap-f
bour-g to be archdulkes of Austria and kings of
Bohemia, and were in poffeflion of the imperial
dignity by a fort of hereditary right. Belides
there territories in Germany, Chinrles was heir
to the crown of Spain, and to all the dommnioins
which belonged to the houfc of Burgundy. Thl
Burgundian provinces cirgrofedl, at that time, the
riches and commerce of one half of Europe; and
lih drew from them, on many occalion%, those in:-
mense fiums, which no people without trade and
liberty are able to contribute. Spain furnilhed
hinm a gallant and hardy infantry, to whofi dil;i-
pline he was indebted for all his conquielt. At
the fame time, by the discovery of the new world,
a vein of wealth was opened to him, which all
the extravagance of ambition could not exhault.
These advantages rendered Charles the tirlt prinee
in Europe ; but lie wiihed to be more, and openly

3 alpired

aspired to uni-erfai monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed ; but it grew up, without observation, to
an unexpeSed height and vigour. He possessed,
,n an eminent degree, the characteristic virtues of
all the di;'erent races of princes to whom he was
allied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
tihe ubtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his
grandfather; he purfiud them with that obstinate
and inflexible perfevtrance which has ever been
peculiar to the Auftnan blood; and in executing
them he could employ the magnanimity and bold-
ness of his Bir-tndian anceitors. His abilities
~vere equal to his power, and neither of them
owould have been inferior to his designs, had not
Providence, in pity to mankind, and in order to
preserve them from the worst of all evils, universal
monarchy, ,aifed up Francis I. to defend the li-
hbrty of Europe. His dominions were less ex-
tensive, but more united, than the emperor's.
His flbjecs were numerous,'active, and warlike,
lovers of glory, and lovers of their king. To
Charles, power was the only object of desire, and
he pursued it with an unwearied and joyless in-
dultry. Francis could mingle pleafuire and ele-
rgance with his ambition; and though he ne-
glectcd some advantages, which a more phleg-
Inatic or more frugal prince would have im-
proved, an active and intrepid courage supplicd
;a!I his deftils, and checked or defeated many of
ti'e emperor's designs.

The relt of Europe observed all the motions of

lrkefe mighty rivals with a jealous attention. On
hicl one lidc, the Italians liaw the danger which
threatened Chritlendom, and, in order to avert

2z it,

it, had reco!rfe to the expedient wh ich they had
often employed with fucccfsa They endeavoured
to divide the power of the two contending mo-
narchs into equal fcalcs, and, by the union of
several small fitates, to ccunterpoile hiim whole
power became too great. But what they con-
certed with i uch wisdom, they were able to
execute with 1;:tle vigour; and intrigue and re-
fincment were feeble fenccs Iagainit the incroach-
ments of miiitaly power.

On the oilier lide, Henry VIII. of England

held the balance with ]ess delicacy, but with a
ihtonger hand. He was the third prince of the
age ui dignity and in power ; and the advantage-
ouS situation of his domillions, his dolmelfic tran-
quillity, his iinmcniile wealth, and abiolute autho-
wity, rendered him the natural guardian of the li-
berty of lEurope. Each of the rivals courted him
with emulation ; he knew it to. be his interell to
keep the balance even, and to reilrain both, by
not joining entiirly with either of them. But
he was seldom able to reduce his ideas to prac-
tice; he was governed by caprice more than by
principlie; and the paflions of the man were an
overmatch for the maxiln; of the king. Vanity
and refelinlmet were tle great springs of all his
undertalkings, and his neighilbours ealily found the
waly, br touchingl these, to force him upon many
rallt and iniconiiiltCnt ciiterprifcs. His reign was
a pe)lretual ferics of blunmders in politics ; and
while lie ellccemed hlinmfelf the wisest prince ill
Europe, lie was a conitant dupe to those who
found it lecefllry, and could submit to flatter
him.

In

In this situation of Europe, Scotland, which

Ibad hitherto wafted her itrength in the quarrels
between France and England, emerged from her
<,,'lfcti';ty, took her Itation in the fylteim, and be-
rlf to have some influence upon the fate of dif-
t,. it nations. Her afliftance was frequently of
i.-ifirquence to the contending parties, and the
til;ince was often so nicely adjuiled, that it was
in her power to make it lean to either fide. The
pairt affilgned her, at this jundcure, was to divert
'eniry from carrying his arms into the continent.
'nalt prince having routed the French at Gui-
ncrt and inveited Terouinlnc, France attempted
. . .1ividc his forces, ,; enraging James IV. in
',;it unhappy expedition which ended vith Ilis
:l.. Forthe fame reason Francis encouira-ed and
iriik'td the duke of Albany to ruin the families

A; -\ngus and Home, which were in the intereit

, f s''gland, and would willingl have persuaded
ti:: Scots to revenge the death of their king, and.
:;i erltc into a new war with that kingdom.
Irnry anld Francis having united not long after
;i.iilini the emperor, it was the interest of both
ki inr that the Scots lhould continue inacive;

a:ld i, long tranquillity was the effett of their

uifon. Charlce' endeavoured to break this, and
o crbarrafs Henry y

by aother inroad of the

S.otr:. For this end lie nl;ade great advances to
Jl;tics V. flattering the vaniity of the young mo-
i:;rtch, by cleting hinm a knighlt of the golden
(flc(, and by offering him a nmatcl in the im-
perial family; while, in rcturn for these empty
hltlmotlur, lie demanded of him to renounce his
al;llanc with lFrance, anld to declare war againlf
l',gland. But James, swho hadl much to loft,

1 3 and

:tad who could gain little by cl.;iffn whtl the
emperor's proposals, rejeted them , ith decency,
and, keeping firln to his ancient allics, left Henry
at full liberty to act upon the continent with his
whole ltrength.

Henry hinifelf began his reign by imitating

the example of his anceltorl with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in fIch extreme con-
tempt, that lie wVas at no pain:; to gain its fi-iend-
flip ; but, on the contrary, lie irritated the wvholi
nation, by r-eivin'r the antiquated pretenfionls of
the cro.wn of England to the fovercignty over
Scotland. But his own experience, and the ex-
ramples of his enemies, gave him a higher idea us
its importance. It was impofible to defend an
open and extenive frontier againlt the incursion-
of an active and martial people. During any wai
on the continent, this obliged him to divide the
strength of his kingdom. It was necessary to
maintain a kind of army of observation in the
north of England; and after all precautions, the
Scottifll borderers, wllo were flperior to all man-.
kind in the practice of irregular war, often made
filccefsful inroads,and fpreadterror and desolation
over many counties. He fell, at lafl, upon the
true secret of policy, with respeCt to Scotland,
which his predecessors had too little penetration
to discover, or too much pride to employ. Thl
situation of the country, and the bravery of the
people, made the conquest of Scotland impoflibll;
but the national poverty, and the violence of sac-
tion, rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to
govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former
design, and resolved to employ his utmofl address
inl txecutinlg thel lattr. It lad not yet beconm

honour-

# BOOK II.

hono'nrable for one prince to receive pay from an.
,thcr, under the more decent name of a fublidy.
.3ut inl ail ages the fame argruments have been
g'uod in courts, and of weight with minilters, sac-
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the ar-
:rninlents by which Henry brought over so many

i!o his interclt during the minority of James V. we

know by the original warrant fill] extant P, for
cm.itil;g considerable fnums iltd oScotland. By a
iroper ditributionl of there, many persons of note
wrc gain:ed to his party, and a fatstion which held
;'rcr t corrcfpondence with England, and received
Al its dirceions from thence, appears; hencefor-
,:'t'd in onr doeieltic colntets. In the sequel of
rlle hiltory, we flnail find Henry labouringi to ex-
.cld his influence in Scotland. His fic'cefors
;i!>pted tlic faine plan, and improved upon it.
iil.: afitirs of the two kingdoms became inter.
w'nven, ilad their interests were often the fame.
Iliz'aheth divided her attention alnolt equally
)'tv\.:ell tlhem, and the authority iwiiclh lhe in-
ji:l-'ted in the one, .was not greater than that
which ihe acquired in the other.

B1OOK II.
l, ,At .Yv (queen of Scots, the daughter of Ja mes V.

and of Mary of Guile, was born a few days

IJ.foi- the deathl of }Ier father. The lituation in
Whlich he left the kingdom alcarmed all ranks of

p Burn. Hilt. Ret' vol. i. p. 7.

men

men with tie profpet of a turbulent and dif-
altrous rcign. A war againiI England had been
undertaken without necessity, and carried on
witlhot success. Many perlbois of the firit rank
had fai!':n into the hands of the English, in th.:
unfortunate route near the firth of Solway, and
Vrce still prisoners at London. Among the refl.
of the nobles there was little union either in theil
views or in thtir afieftions; and the religions
disputes occasioned by the opinions of the re-
formers, growing every day more violent, added
to the rage of those fations which are natural to
a form of government nearly ariJtocratical.

The government of a queen was unknown n:

Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in
the minds of a martial people. The government
of an infant queen was ltill more dellitute of real
authority ; and the profpe& of a long and feeble
minority invited to faction by the hope of impu-
nity. James had not even provided the common
remedy againit tile disorders of a minority, by
committing to proper perlons the care of hii'
daughter's education, and the adminliiration of
affairs in her name. Though lie saw the clouds
gathering, and foretold that they would quickly
burll into a Ilormn, hce ivas so little able to difperle
'them, or to defend his daughter and kingdom
agaiiillt the inminicnt calamities, that, in mIre de-
ipalil, he abandoned thcin both to tile mercy of
fobritic, and left open to every pretender the
office of regent, whiclh he could not lix to his
onv fatisfalnion.

Cardinal Bealoun, whlo had for many ycars

bccn colfidered as priime iinlltllie, was the lirfl
that clailmcd tliit Ilighl dignity; and in support of

hi6

his pretensions, he produced a testament a, which
he hlieiilf had forged in the name of the late
king; and, without any other right, initantly
afliuned the title of regent. He hoped, by
the aflilance of the clergy, the countenance of
Framnce, the connivance of the queen dowager,
and the fipport of the whole popifli faction, to
'shold by force, what he had seized on by fiaud.

But Beatoiul had enjoyed power too long to be
a favourite of the nation. T'hose among the
i nobles who wifled for a reformation in religion

<l'ea-dcd his severity, and others confidered the

? rit vation of a churchman to the highest office in
' tle lingdom as a depression of themrlclves. At

their inlligatior, James Hamilton earl of Arran,
; and next heir to the queen, roused himself fromr

lhis ilnativity, and was prevailed on to aspire to
that {tation, to which proximity of blood gave
him a natural title. The noblei, who were as-
fecmbled for that purpofI, unaninmonfly conferred
<in ,nii the office of regent; and the public voice
applauded their choice h.

N two

t rltw r ever differed more widely in dif-

potli()n and cliaclrer than the earl of Arran and
cicrdinal Beatoun. The cardinal was by nature
If immoderate ambition; by long experience Lie
'ia, iicquired address and refinement; and info-
'iie tl'evw upon hlin from continual ficcefs.
>i's igll station in tle church placed hmiin in the
wiay of great civil employments ; his abilities
werr equal to the greatelt of theft; nor did he
rtckon anly of them to be above his merit. As

a Sadler's Lett. 6Y, Haynes, State Parars, 486.
l:' pill. Rqg. Scot. vol. ii. p. 398.

his

his own eminence was founded upon the power
of the church of Rome, he was a zealous de-
fender of that fuperltition, and for the famre rea-
son an avowed enemy to the dotrine of the re-
formers. Iolitical motives alone determined him
to lupport the one, or to oppose the other. His
early application to public business kept himi un-
acquainted with the learning and controversies of
the age; he gave judgment, however, upo: ;all
points in dispute, with a precipitancy, violence,
and rigour, which contemporary historians men-
tion with indignation.

The character of the earl of Arran was, in al-

:noft every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He
was neither infected with ambition, nor inclined
to cruelty: tle love of ease extinguiflied the for-
mer, the gentleness of his temper preserved him
fiom the latter. Timidity and irresolution were
his predominant failings, the one occasioned by
his natural conflitution, and the other ariiing from
a confcioufiefs that his abilities were not equal to
his station. With these dispositions he might have
enjoyed and adorned private life; bhut his public
condluct was without courage, or dignity, or con-
liflencc: the perpetual Ilave of his own fears,
and, by consequence, the perpetual tool of those
who found their advantage in praCtising upoi
them. But as no other perlon could be set in (op-
position to the cardinal with any probability o,
fuccef;, the nation declared in his favour with
fuchl general content, that the artifices of lhis
rival could not withltand its united llrength.

The carl of Arran had scarcely taken poffeflion

of his new dignity, when a negociation was open-
ed with England, which gave birth to events of

the

the ioft fatal consequence to himielf, and to the
kingdom. After the death of James, Henry
VIII. was no longer afraid of any interruption
from Scotland to his designs againll France; and
imendiately conceived hopes of renderilng this
' security perpetual, by the marriage of Edward

,his only lu n with the young queen of Scots. He
communicated his intention to the prisoners taken
at Solway, and prevailed on them to favour it, by
athle proiife of liberty, as the reward of their
i'ccefs. In the mean time he permitted them to
re'ttiln into Scotland, that, by their presence in
the parliament which the regent had called, they
might be the better able to perfiade their coun-
trymen to fall in with his proposals. A cause,
intrutted to such able and zealous advocates,
could not well nifs of coming to an happy issue.
All those who feared the cardinal, or who desired
. ch.ange in religion, were fond of an alliance,
:vhlich afforded protefiion to the doctrine which
they had embraced, as well as to their own per-
sons, against the rage of that powerful and
htlaughty prelate.

But Henry's rough and impatient temper was

incapable of improving this favourable conjlinc-
ture. Address and delicacy in managing the fears,
and follies, and interelts of men, were arts witlh
which lie was utterly unacquainted. The deligns
hie h;ld formed upon Scotland were obvious fiom
tlhe narrlliage which he had proposed, and he had
notl dexterity enough to difgnile or to conceal
tllhn. Intlead of yielding to the fear or jealousy
<f the Scots, what tinme and accidents would soon
have enabled him to recover, he at once alarmed
and irritated the whole nation, by demanding that

the

the queen's person flhould be immediately com-
mitted to his cuJtody, and that the government
of the kingdom ffiould be put into his hands
during her minority.

Henry could not have prescribed more igno-

minious conditions to a conquered people, and
it is no wonder they were rejected, with indii-
nation, by men who scorned to purchase aa
alliance xwith England at the price of their owa
Jibertv. The parliament of Scotland, ho.'.
rsvr influenced by the nobles who returned frc-.
England ; desirous of peace with that kingdom;
;Ind delivered, by the regent's confining the cal-
dlill;! as a prisoner [March 12, 1543], from any,
oipposltion to which he might have given rile;
consented to a treaty of marriage and of unioln,
but upon terms somewhat more equal. After
some dark and unficcefsful intrigues, by which
his ainbaffador endeavoured to carry off the
young queen and cardinal Beatoun into England,
Henry was obliged to give up his own proposals,
and to Iaccept of theirs. On his lide, he consented
that the queen should continue to reside in Scot-
land, and himself remain excluded from any fharn
in the government of the kingdom. On the
other hand, the Scots agreed to fend their fove-
reign into England as soon as flie attained the
full age of ten years, and instantly to deliver fix
perrfins of the firit rank to be kept as hoftagce
by Henry, till the queen's arrival at his court.

The.treaty was still so manifeltly of advantage

to Ellgland, that the regent loft much of the
public confidence by consenting to it. The car.
dinal, who had now recovered liberty, watched
so,: ftclrn opportunity of rcgaining credit, htd

1 h:

hc did not fail to cultivate and improve'this to
the utmost. He complained loudly that the re-
gent had betrayed the kingdom to its molt inve-
terate enemies, and facrifieed its honour to his
own amnbition. He foretold the extinction of the
trile catholic religion, under the tyranny of an
excoumnulinicated heretic; but above all, lie la-
rmted to fee an ancient kingdom consenting to
ts owll fervitudc, descending into the ignomi-
niiuiis Itatioir of a dependent wpovince ; and in one
ilonrl, the xveakllefi or treachery of a single man
It 'irl, dering every thing for which the Scottili
nation had liruggled and fought during so many
-:Ics. rllefe remonniltrances of the cardinal were
not without effet . They were addrell;d to pre.
.dlices iand pafions which are deeply rooted in
tl.e human leart. The fame hatred to the an-
cienlt nllemies of their country, the fame jealoafy
o£f ntional honour, and prile of independence,
which, at the beginning of tie present century,
went near to prevent thle Scots friom conrenting
to a ll union with Engllld, upon terms of great
illnlltage, did at that time induce the whovle la-
tion to declare agailil the allianle which lhad
Lecr concluded. fn the one perind, an hundred
al(i fifty years of peace between tie two nations,
tlie habit of being flubjeCted to the famle king,
andd governed by the fime maxilns, had conli-
derably abatcd old aiilmolties, and prepared both
p,cople for incorporating. In the other, injuriet

e're llil firelhi, the woulds on both fides were
l)'"i, and, in tile warmth of resentment, it waa.
;iltlnr;l to seek revenge, and to be avcrfe from
Tt'oncileiilint. At tile union in one thousand
cfven hundred and fievcn, tle wildme of parlia-
VoL. . 'a_ InCInt

ment despised the groundless murmtirs occasioned
by antiquated prejudices; but in one thousand
five hundred and forty-three, the complaints of
the nation were better founded, and urged with
a zeal and unanimity, which it is neitherjult nor
safe to disregard. A rash measure of the Englilh
monarch added greatly to the violence of this
national animosity. The Scots, relying on the
treaty of marriage and union, fitted out several
ships for France, with which their trade had
been interrupted for lome time. These were
driven by flrefs of weather to take refuge in dif-
ferent ports of England ; and Henry, under pre-
text that they were carlying provitions to a king.
dom with which he was at war, ordered them to
be seized and condemned as lawful prizesc.
The Scots, aftonilled at this proceeding of a
prince, whose intereit it was manifestly, at tha:
juncture, to court and to sooth them, felt it not
only as a.- injury, but as an insult, and expressed
all the resentment natural to an high-fpirited peo-
ple d. Their rage role to such a height, that the

Englilh

c Keith, 32. 34. Epift. Reg. Scot. ii. App. 311. Ha.

milton MSS. vol. i. 389.

'1 In the MS. colletion of papers belonging t; the duke of

l-lamilron, fir Ralph Sadler dcfcribes the spirit of the Scots
as extremely outrageous. In his letter from Edinburgh,
September I, 1543, he fays: "' The lay of the Ilips hlis
brought the people of this town, both men and women, and
elpecially the merchants, into fudh a rage and fury, that the
whole town is commoved against me, and swear great oaths,
that if their flilps are not reltored, that they would have their
amends of me and mine, and that they would set my house
here on fire over my heId, so that one of us /hould not escape
alive; and also it hath much inccnfed and provoked the peo-
ple againit the govcrnur, faying, that he hath coloured a peace

with

Englilh ambassador could hardly be proteded
from it. One spirit seemed now to animate all
orders of men. The clergy offered to contribute
a great fum towards preserving the church from
the dominion of a prince, whose fyltem of re-
formation was so fatal to their power. The
nobles, after having mortified the cardinal so
lately in such a cruel manner, were now ready to
applaud and to second him, as the defender of the
honour and liberty of his country.

Argyll, Hiuntly, Bothwell, and other power-

fill barons, declared openly against the alliance
with England. By their assistance, the cardinal
fcized on the persons of the young queen and
her mother, and added to his party the splendour
and authority of the royal name c. ie received,
at the fame time, a more real acceflion to his
strength, by the arrival of Matthew Stewart, earl

with your majefly only to undo them. This is the unrea-
fonablenefs of the people, which live here in such a beastly
liberty, that they neither regard God nor governor; nor yet
justice, or any good policy, doth take place among them;
alluring your highness that, unless the ships be delivered,
there will be none abiding here for me without danger."
Vl. 451. Jn his letter of September 5, he writes, that
th. rage of the people still continued so violent, " that
neither I nor any of my folks dare go out of my doors:
andl the provost of the town, who hath much ado to flay
them from allhulting me in my houle, and keepeth watch
theretole nightly, hath sent to me sundry times, and prayed
nre to keep myself and my folks within, for it is (cant in his
power to repress or resist the fury of the people. They fay
I linly, I (hall never pass out of the town alive, except they
have their (hips restored. This is the rage and bealllinefs
of this nation, which God keep all honcft men from."
lb. 471
c Keith's Hist. of Scotl. 30.

K 2 of

of Lennox, whose return fiom France be had
earnestly solicited. This young nobleman was
the hereditary enemy of the house of Hamilton.
He had many claims upon the regent, and pre-
tended a sight to exclude him, not only from
succeeding to the crown, but to deprive him of
the poffelfion of his private fortune. The cardi-
nal flattered his vanity with the profpeA of mar-
rying the queen dowager; and asseted to treat
him with so much refpet, that the regent became
jealous of him as a rival in power.

This furpicion was artfully heightened by the

abbot of Paisley, who returned into Scotland
fume time before the earl of Lennox, and a&tcl
in concert with the cardinal. He was a natura!
brother of the regent, with whom he had great
credit; a warm partisan of France, and a zealous
defender of the e{tablifled religion. He took
hold of the regent by the proper handle, and en.
deavoured to bring about a change in his senti-
ments, by working upon his fears. The de-
tertion of the nobility, the difaffe&ion of the
clergy, and the rage of the people; the resent-
ment of Irance, the power of the cardinal, and
the pretensions of Lennox, were all representcd
with aggravation, and with their most threatening
afIped.
' Mean while, the day appointed for the rat;fica-
tion of the treaty with TEngland, and the delivery
of the hostages, approached, and the regent was
Itill undetermined in his own mind. He a&ted to
the lait with that irresolution and inconfifltnce
which is peculiar to weak men when they are lo
iunfortunatl as to have the chief part in the con-
duct of difficult affairs. On the jtlh of Augull,

be(

lie ratified the treaty with Henry f; and pro-
claimed the cardinal, who lill continued to op-
pose it, an enemy to his country. On the third
of September, he secretly withdrew from Edin-
burgh, met with the cardinal at Callendar, re-
nounced the friendlhip of England, and declared
for the interests of France g.

Henry, in order to gain the regent, had not

spared the moit magnificent promicfs. IHe had
offired to give the princess Elizabeth in marriage
to his cldcit son, and to conltitute him king of
tlat part of Scotland which lies beyond the river
Forth. But, upon finding his interest in the
kingdom to he less confidcrable than he had ima-
giicd, the English monarch began to treat hin
oithl lit le refpeft. The young queen was now
in the custody of his enemies, who grew every
day more numerous and more popular. They
formed a separate court at Stirling, and threatened
to clect another regent. The French king was
re:ady to afford them his protection; and the na-
tion, out of hatred to the Englfih, would have
united in their defence. In this situation, the
regcrt could not retain his authority, without a
ftdltlde chanlge of his measures; and though he

lldica'votiretl , by ratifying the treaty, to preserve

tile ap)learances of good faith with England, he
wa;1 obliged to thrlow himself into the arms of the
party which adhered to France.

Soon after this fuddcn revolution in his politi-

cal principles, the regent cllangeld his fentimenlts
c.,oicc rnjg religion, 'The spirit of controverly
w;i; ticn new and warm: books of that kind

{ Rymcr, lirtd. xv. p, 4.
SIIdlrj 33?. 356, lmiinllton MSS. i. 470, &c.

K3 were

wvere eagerly read by men of every rank; the
love of novelty, or the conviction of truth, had
led the regent to express great elteem for the
writings of the reformers; and, having been
-powerfully supported by those who had em-
braced their opinions, lie, in order to gratify
them, entertained, in his own family, two of the
molt noted preachers of the protellant do&trinc;
and, in his lirfl parliament, consented to an ad,
by which tl:t. laity were permitted to read the
fcriptil-es in a language which they underlloodh.
Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an over-
match for error. Absurdities, which had long
iinpofed on the ignorance and credulity of man-
kind, were detected and exposed to public ridi-
ccule; and, under the countenance of the regent,
the reformation made great advances. The car-
dinal observed its progress with concern, and was
at the utmoit pains to obftru&t it. He repre-
sented to the regent his great imprudence in
giving encouragement tx) opinions so favourable
to Lcnnox's pretenlions.; that his own legitimacy
.lepended upon the validity of a sentence of di-
vorce, founded on the pope's authority; and
tlat, by ilflering it to be called in question, lhe
weakened his own title to the fucceflion, and
furnished his rival with the only argument hy
which it could be rendered doubtfull. These in-

fiiluatioll

IT Keith, p. 36, 37.
i The prctcunions of the earl of Lennox to the succession

were thul founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was
married to James lord Hamilton, whom James 111. creatri
oarl of Arran on that account. Elizabeth, a daughter of
that marriage, was the wife of Matthew earl of Lennox, and
the present carl was her grandson. Tl'h regent was likewile

' t~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ike:

jinuations made a deep impression on the regent's
timorous spirit; who, at the profpe& of such
imaginary dangers, nwas as much startled as the
cardinal could have wiflied; and his zeal for the
ritettltant religion was not long proof againll his
rcar. He publicly aljrled the do&frine of the
reformers in tle Franciscan church at Stirling;
;ndl declared not only for tlie political, but the
erligious, opilions of his new confidents.

The proteltant doctrine did not susser much by

lis apoltac.y It had already taken so deep root
1n tL; kingdom, that no discouragement or fe-
vi-ritv could extirpate it. The regent, indeed,
eonfeited to every thing that the zeal of the car-
dinal thought necefalry for the preservation of the
cii bllilhed religion. 'lhe reformers were perle-
cuted with all the cruelty which fuipritition in-
Ipires into a barbarous people. Many were con-
demned to that dreadful death, which the church
has appointed for the punifliment of its enemies;
l1,it they suffered with a spirit to nearly resembling
tlhe p1;tience and fortitludel of the primitive mari-
t\!s, that more were converted tlhan terrified by
fIlc I fpetacles.

The cardinal, however, was now in poffefiotn

i;r every thing his ambition coultd ldeire ; and
'.:'ilreli fed all the authority of a regent, without
!le envy of the name. le lhad noutling to fear

tli grandlror of the princefr M.ry. But his falher having
maniird j[.ect Bcatoun the regertl's mother, astir he had oub-
t.fid a divorcs fromi Elizabetl Homc his ltrmcr wife,
l.cillIx prerlended that lthe ftntence of idivorce wia unjust,
."ld tla the reecnt being born while Eliz:lbetll Home wai
liil alive, ou;lit to be conliidcrd ;s ilLegitimate. Crawf.

Ir;cr(, .ij..from

from

from the earl of Arran; who, having by his in.
conilftency forfeited the public etllemn, was con.
temned by one half of the nation, and little
trusted by the other. The pretensions of the
earl of Lennox were the only thing which rc-
mained to embarrass him. He had very fuc-
cefsfully made use of that nobleman to work
upon the regent's jealousy and fear; but, as lie
no longer itood in need of such an instrument, lie
was willing to get rid of him with deccncy.
Lennox soon began to fufpe&t his intention;
promifcs, flattery, and refpedt, were the only re.
turns he had hitherto received for substantial ser.
-ices; but at last the cardinal's artifices could no
longer be concealed; and Lennox, inllead of at.
taining power and dignity himself, saw that lie
had bren employed only to procure these for
another. Resentment and disappointed ambition
urged hin to seek revenge on tlat cunning pre-
late, who, by facriticing his interest, had io un-
gencroufly purchased the carl of Arran's frienld-
Ihip. He withdrew, for that reason, from court,
and declared for the party at enmity witl the
cardinal, which, with open arms, received a con-
vert who added so much luitre to their cause.

The two factions which divided the kingdon

were still the fame, without any alterations in
their views or principles; but, by one of those
ltrange revolutions, which were frequent in that
age, they had, in the couirf of a few weeks,
changed their leaders. The regent was at Ilie
head of the partisans of France and the defenders
of popery, and Lennox in the fame itation withl
the advocates for the Englifli alliance, and a re-
fprnnatiQon in religion, 'Th one laboured to pull

·( lu l

down his own work, whicli the other upheld with
the fame hand that had hitherto endeavoured to
deitlov it.

I,cnnox's impatience for revenge got the start

of the cardinal's aftivity. He furin-ifed both him.
and the regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
v.itil a numerous army ; and might easily have
crulfied them, before they could prepare for thieir
dcfnee. But be was weak enough to liiten to
propoftals for an accommodation ; and the car-
.iilal aimufed him so artfully, and spun out the
treaty to such a length, that the greater part of
the earl's troops, who served, as is usual wherever
the feudal inil.itutions prevail, at their own ex-
pence, deserted him; and in concluding a peace,
itllead of giving the law, he was obliged to re-
ccivc it. Afecond attempt to retrieve his affairs
cidcd yet more unfortunately. One bo4y of hio
troops was cut to pieces, and-the reft dispersed-
anld with the poor remains of a rtined party, he
Tll;II either have submitted to the conqueror, or
have fled out of the 'kingdom, if the approach
of an Englifl alnry had not brought him a short
relief.

Henry vwas not of a temper to bear tamely the

.;indigllty with which he had been treated, both
by tlie regent and parliamcnt of Scotland, who,
at the time when tluhy renounced their alliance
with hill, had entered into a new and strider

llnfledracy with France. The rigour of the sea-

so, retarded for fume time the execution of his
'tcligcanle. But in the spring, a considerable
h1,c)y of infllntry, which was dcilined for France,

cleived orders to fail for Scotland, and a proper
.ulnuber of cavalry was appointed to joi it by

Iari.

land. The regent and cardinal little expeted
such a visit. They had truited that the French
war would find employment for all Henry's forces;
and, from an unaccountable security, were wholly
unprovided for the defence of the kingdom. The
earl of Hertford, a leader fatal to the Scots in
that age, commanded this army, and landed it,
without opposition, a few miles above Leith. He
was quickly malter of that place ; and marching
directly to Edinburgh, entered it with the fame
ease [May 3, 1544]. After plundering the ad
jacent country, the richest and most open in Scot.
land, he set on fire both these towns; and upon
the approach of some troops gathered together
by the regent, put his booty on board the fleet,
and with his land forces retired safely to the
English borders, delivering the kingdom, in a
few days, from the terror of an invasion, con.
certed with little policy, carried on at great ex.
pence, and attended with no advantage. If
Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expedition; if the mar.
riage he had proposed was still in his view, he lolt
a great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the earl
of Huntly humorously called it, difgulted the
whole nation; their averlion for the match grew
into abhorrence; and, exasperated by so many
indignities, the Scots were never at any period
more attached to France, or more alienated front
England . Tle

k The violence of national hatred between the Englilli

and Scots, in the sixteenth century, was such as can hardly
be conceived by their posterity. A proof of the fierce re-
fentmcnt of the Scots is contained in the note on page. 109
and 1 o. The inflrution? of the privy council of Engl.lld.

(0

The earl of Lennox alone; in spite to the re-
gent and French king, continued a correspondence

with

to the earl of Hertford, who commanded the fleet and army
which invaded Scotland A. D. 1544, are dictated by a na-
tional animosity no less excefiive. I found them in the col-
lection of papers belonging to the duke of Hamilton, and
they merit publication, as they exhibit a Itriking picture of
the spirit of that period.
Tbe Lords of the Council to the Earl of Hertford, lieutenant in

Scotland, April 1o, 1544.

THE inftruaion begins with observing, that the king had

originally intended to fortify Leith, and keep poffeflion of
it; but, after mature deliberation, he had fi.ally determined
not to make any settlement in Scotland at prefenr, and there-
fr- he is directed not to make any fortification at Leith, 'or
any onhfr place :-

" But only for that journey to put all to fire and sword,

butin Elinburgh town, so uled and defaced, that when you
have gotten what you can of it, it may remain for ever a
perpetual memory of the vengeance of God lightened upon
it, for their falfhood and difovalty. Do what you can out
or hand, and without long tarrying to beat down or over-
tirow the cafile; sack houses and as many towns and
villages about Edinburgh as ye may conveniently. Sack
Leith, and ubrvert it, and all the reft, putting min, woman,
and child to fire and sword, without exception, when any
refilance (hall be made againfl you ; and this done, pasi'
over to the Fifeland, and extend like extremities and de-
ItiuCtion to all towns ant villages whereunto you may reach
conveniently; not forgetting, among(t all the rell so to spoil
and turn upside down the cardinal's town St. Andr.-w's, as
tie upper fort may be the nether, and rnot one soke (sand
upon .inother, sparing no creatule alive within the fame,
fpct:ially luch as either in fiiendlhip or blood be allied unto
the cardinal; and if ye fee any likelyhood to win the castle
give (tnie ulout eiTy to the fame, and if it be your fortune
to get it, raze and destroy it piecemeal i and after this fort,
fper:liing one month there, spoiling and deltroying as afore-
lJal, with the wife forefil;ht that his majcfty doubteth not ye

will

with Enigland, which ruined his own interfcl,
without promoting Henry'sl. Many of his own
vassals, preferring their duty to their country bc-
fore their affection to him, refutfed to concur in
any design to favourr the public enemy. After 2
few feeble and unfuc:cefsfuil attempts to diirtl-!,
the regent's adminiftratibn,, he was obliged tl
fly for safety to the court of Eagland, whe'e
Henry rewarded services which he had the in-
clination, but not the power to perform, by
giving him in marriage his niece the lady Mar-
garet D1ouglas. This unhappy exile,. howeve,.
was deftihed to be the father of a race of
kings. Hie saw his son, lord Darnley, morll:
the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual excit!-
lion of that rival, who now triumphed in lih
ruin. From thiat time his pollerity have hlit;.
the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of whlicli
he was cast out as a critminal, and by thre other
received as a fugitive;.

Meanwhile lhofilities were continued by boOt

.nations, but with little vigour on eithlwr idic.

will use that your enemies take no advantage of you, ar.!
that you enterprize nothing but what you flill fce m.iy be
easily atchieved, his majelly thinketh verily, and so all we,
ye ihall find thisi juriny fucceedcth this way most to his ma-
jesty's honour," &c.

These barbarous orders seem to have been executed \ill

a rigorous and unfeeliiiu cxaanefs, as appears from a fcrir
of letters fro.i lord Hertfoid, in the fame et'lleslio'n, givilg
a full account of all his operatlops in Scotland. ! lhey con-
fin several curious particulars, not mentioned by the writcer
of that age, and with which both the hiltorians of the city
ns 'Edinburghl were unacquairiutd i bit tihev'atc of ton gtBatr
Itngth to be infirted here.
I Ryiler, xv, p, z2,

1'h(

Tie historians of that age relate minutely the
circltmftances of several flirmifles and inroads,
which, as they did not produce any considerable
cifeti , at this dittance of time deserve no remem-
brance'l. At lait an end was put to this lan-

guid

m Though this war was diffinguifhed by no important or

decisive action, it was, however, extremely ruinous to indivi-
duals. There itill remain two original papers, which give
us (bime idea of the miseries to which some of the moR ser-
tile counties ia the kingdom were exposed, by the sudden and
deltrit;ive incursions of the borderers. The first seems to
be the report made to Henry by the Englifl wardens of the
marches for the year 1544, and contains their exploits from
the ad of July to the 17th of November. The account it
gives of the different inroads, or F'orrays, as they are called,
ih very minute: and in conclusion, the fum total of mif-
chief tiley did is thus computed:

Towns, towers, ftedes, barnekyns, parifle-churche.;,

baftel-houfes, cal down or burnt - - 9z

Scots slain - - 403
Pri toners taken - - 8S6
Nolt, i.e. horned cattle, taken - - 10,38
Sheep , - - - 12,49z
Nags and geldings - 1,296
Goats - - - 200
13olls of corn - - - 850
Infight gear, i. c. household furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes's State Papers, 43.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the earl of

Hertford, between the 8th and 23d of September, 545 ; the
narrative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt,
rated, ;nd dcltroyed, in the counties of Berwick and Rox-
burgh only,

Monalteries and Flar-houfe - 7
Cafltls, towers, and piles - - 6
Market towns -
Villages - 243
Milns 13
llofpitals - 3
VOL. 5. L All

gi'ld and ilnative vwa,, by a peace, in whil!
Li:!nland, Iraiice, and Scotla.id were conpri-.
lended. Henry laboured to exclude the Scot;
from the benefit of this treaty, and to refertc
thein for that vengeance which his attcnti(n
to the afi':i-s on the continent had hilli.:cr
delayed. But although a peace with England
was of the lalt consequence to I'rancis I. whom
the emperor was preparing to attack with ail
his forces, he was too generollo s to abandonl
allies \ ho liad se-rved him with fidelity, ;)ill hie
chose rather to purchase HcnrV's i fiicndfhip withl
diiadvalntagr to himself, than to leave tlihem x-
posed to danger. By yierlling some things to
tie interell, and more to the vanity of that
haungl!ty prince: by filbmifioln, flattery, ai;l
addrels, he at length pre ailted to have the Scots
included in the peace agreed upon.

An event which happened a ihort time before

the conclulion of this peace, rendered it Inoei
acceptable to tile whole nation. Cardinal t
toun had not used his power with moderation,
equal to the prudence by whici he attained it.
Notwithlianding his grcat ablilities, he had too
many of the pailions and prejudices of a;
angry leader of a fadlion, to govern a divildel
people with temper. I-lis refentmct ag.aiill
one party of the nohility, lis iniolicne towin.ia
the rell, his severity to tlle reformers; alnd
above all, the barbarous aid illegal extctiloll ot

All thele were carl down or burnt. l.i)ne9, 52. As tle

Scots were no Iefs skilful in the pradticc of irregular war, we
nay conclude that the damage which they did in Engl.lnd
sias not inconsiderable ; and that their raids were no Icl
watcful than treJfrn'yi of tie EnLglidt.

tle

the famous George Wilhart, a man of honour-
able birth and of primitive fancity, wore out
lie patience of a fierce age; and nothing but
a bold land was wanting to gratify the public
xwit bLv his dcll-urtion. Private revenge, in-
llaned and fanifiied by a false zeal for religion,
qaickly supplied this want. Norman Lefly,
flt eldelt son of the earl of Rothes, had been
treated by the cardinal with injustice and con-
tempt. It was not the temper of the man, or
:hrt pirit of the times, quietly to digelt an
.dl'ront. As the profcffion of his adversary
:'reellcd him from the effets of what is called
.11 honourable resentment, he resolved to take
ihat fatisfadtion which lie could not demand.
TI'lis relolution deierves as much censure, as the
!iu:ii;tlar courage and conduft with which he put
ci in execution excite wonder. The cardinal at
that time resided in the caltle of St. Andrew's,
awhich lie had fortified at great expence, and, in
ti,: opinion of the age, had rcnderd it impreg-
iable. His retinue was numr:rous, the town at
his devotion, and the neighbouring country full
.' ihis dependents. In this titu;ition, sixteei'
i,'r'(ins undertook to furprize his caftie, and to
.iililliulnat himfltlf; and their fucccfs was equal
to thei Ibidnefs of the attempt. E arly in the

,""l'ing [May 29, I1 6] they seized on the
I;c of the cafile, whicih was set open to the
.i)rl:nll' who were e-niployed in linilhing the

calitil;ationls; iand IaLving placed cenltries at the

1oln otf the cardinal's apartmenllt, tlhey awakened
i;l n0i'rloin s douinmlics one by one, and turning
tlcnl out of the cafile, they, without noise or
tulMult, or viokilce to any other perioii' deli/

L 2 vercd

vered their country, though by a mofi unjufli-
fiable action, from an ambitious man, whose
pride was insupportable to the nobles, as his
cruelty and cunning were great checks to the
Reformation.

His death was fatal to the catholic religion,

and to the French interest in Scotland. The
fame zeal for both continued among a great
party in the nation; but when deprived of the
genius and authority of so flkilful a leader, ope-
rated with less effe&. Nothing can equal the
confterlation which a blow so unexpefted occa-
rioned among such as were attached to him;
while the regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not
only eclipsed his greatness, but almost extin-
guifled his power. Decency, however, th!
honour of the church, the importunity of the
queen dowager and her adherents, his engage.
ments with France, and above all these, the
defre of recovering his eldelt son, whom the
cardinal bud detained for some time at Saint
Andrew's, in pledge of his fidelity, and who,
together with the castle, had fallen into the
hands of the conspirators, induced him to take
arms, in order to revenge the death of a man
whom he hated.

He threatened vengeance, but was unable to

execute it. One part of military fcicnce, thc
art of attacking fortified places, was then im-
perlieRly undcrlfood in Scotland. The weapons,
the discipline, and impetulfity of the Scots,
rendered their armies as unfit for sieges, as they
were aHtive in the field. An hundred and fifty
men, which was the greatefl number the confpil

rat(ns

, a.;l; (' .ver affenmled, rdiited all the eflort's of the
, -l.:.it fur hic moiithls", in a place which a tingle
::l:iin;llh , with a few battering calno!ll, would
i:.,:. :-'..iicc il a it;:\w lmurs. 'This tedious liege
\y ,i' ciniltudel d by a truce. The regenlt under-
tl.'iul to procure for the confpiralors an abfolih-
i,;i frino tlhe pope, and a pardon in parliament;
:,il upon obtaining ihefe, they engaged to fur-
:ci,(lcr the cattle, and to Lft his son at liberty.

It is probable, that neither of them were

tinllt.cr in this treaty. On both fides they fought
onlly to a;nufe, and to gain time. The rcgent
.al applicd to France for assistance, and expcted
lion 'o have te tl coif)tirators at mercy. On the
uther hand, if Lefly and his associates were not
ait is'il incited by Henry to murder the cardinal,
they wcre, in the sequel, powerfully supported
h; h;in. Notwitlhftanding the filencc of con-
:.'!i]poray hiitorians, there are violent prefimp-
i,;!.~ of the forrmer; of the latter there is
*,o.ino;jbtci certainty°. During the siege, the
c,! iiitos had received from England supplies
L,.t1I of money and provisions; and as Henry
ws:, preparing to renew his proposals concerning
tie Inarriapg and the union lie liad projeted,
.id to fecund his negotiations with a nuincrous
a.'imn, ithcy hoped, ly coucurring with him, tQ
i; iia iuation in which they would no longer
'cd a pardon, but might cl.iim a reward P.

The

"n l'i'. RcI. Scot. 2. 3790 ° Keith; 6o.
P I1 tili It c litiun of this work, I cxprellhd my fufpi.

*i')i Cr c,rllepodeiice betwcen the murderers of cardinal
I'1,,lIn and lh-nry V1ll. prior to their conlmiitting that
'm:ne. In the paper. of dukeI Hiamilton is contained the
1 .lcll cvilcince of this, which I publifli not only to cltablifl

'. 3 that

The death of Henry blasted all these hopes.
It happened in the beginning of next year,

[January

that fat, but as an additional confirmation of the remarks
which I made upon the frequency of afaflination in that
age, and the flight opinion which men entertained concern-
ing it.
The Earl of Hertford to tie King's Majefy, Nlewcajis,

April17, 154..

Pleafeth your highneis to underfland, that this day ar-

rived with me the c.rl of Hertford, a Scottifhman calied
Wiflhert, and brought me a letter from the lord of Brinftone
[i. e. Crichton laird of iBunHiane] which I fend your high-
ness herewith, and according to his requcft, have taken or-
der for the repair of the fGid Wi;hert to your majesty by
poll, bLth for the deliveny of such letters ab he hath to your
nmajefi irom the aid Urliiiltoe, and also soir the declaration
of his credcnce, which, as I perceive by him, confifteth in two
*point%, one that the lord of Grange, late trcalurcr of Scrt-
land, the malter of Rothes, the earl of Rothes' eldest iIn,
and John Chaiteris, would attempt either to apptehendi ,r
flay rt') cariaial, at fume time when he fihll pass tlrou::h
the Fifeland, as he duth sundry times in his way to St. An-
drew's, and in cafe they can so apprehend him, will deliver
himo uito your imljt'ty, which attemplate, he faith, ihey
would enterpiize, if they knew yiur majlcy's pleasure
therein, arid what fupportation and maintainance your ma-
jelty would minilter unlto them, after the execution of the
tame, in cafe they Ihould be purlued by any of their enemies;
the other in, that ill cale your majefly would grant unto thels
a convenient entertaimllent to keep a loco or i 5co men il
wacs fit a month or two, they jjourneying with tle power o0
the earl iarlihal, the fail mafler of Rothes, the laird of Cal-
der, and othler tile lnd flienis, will take upon themu,
at fulch tinic as 'our mijeRy's aimy shall be in Scotland, to
dcllroy the abtry a.nd town of Arbroaih, being the cardi-
nal's, and .ll the other bilhopl. houses and countries on that
fide of tlhc water therebout, and to apprehend all thol;s
which they fay be the principal impugnators of amity be-
tween LEiglald and So.tl.md i for which they flall have a

good

[Janluary 28, 1547,] after a reign of greater
iplenidoirl than true glory; butling rather than
atlc:; uppreffive in donmeflic government, and
in f'rcitn politics wild and irregular. But the
vices of this prince were more beneiicial to man-
kind, than the virtues of others. His rapaci-
oifnicfs), his profulion, and even his tyranny, by
deprefling the ancient nobility, and by adding
rew property and power to the commonit, laid or
ftiRngtlhenJl the foundations of the English
l.crLnv. Iis other paffons contributed no iefs
to;,,:*''l, the dowlfal of popery, and the eltabliffi-
mcinll oA religious fieedom in the nation. His
rclfin lelnt led him to abolifl the power, and his
cr,vetoiufnefs to seize the wealth, of the church ;
and, hb withdrarwing these supports, made it
cafy, il Ilhe following reign, to overturn the
swole fabric of fupcrllition.

good opportunity, as they fay, when the power of the said
Jiihops and abbots llall resort towards Edinburgh to refilt
yor nmajefty's army. And for the execution of these things,
the said Wilhert faithl, that the earl marlhal aforenamed, and
others, will capitulate with your majelty in writing, under
their hands and leals, afore they (hall desire any supply or aid
of moncy at your mnajcly's hands. This is the efect of Ihis
crednrce, with sundry other advertisements of the great di-
vision that is at this present within the realm of Scotland,
which we doubt not he will declare unto your majesty at
good Ilegth. Hamilton, MSS. vol. iii. p. 38.

N. 1. T'his is the letter of which Dr. Maclcenzie, vol. iii.

p. it. and Bilhop Keith, Hilt. p. 44. publilhed a fragment.
It does not authorize us to conclude that Mr. George Wifi-
art, known by the name of the Martyr, was the person who
rclorid to the earl of Hertford. It was more probably John
Wifl.art of Pitarrow, the chief of that name, a man of abi-
'i1ics, ztaloiIfly attached to the reformed doarine, and deeply
eiga'ued in all the intrigues and operations of that bus9
l:"-'j,. JIcilh', 96. 1, 1) ...3. 5.

rranciu

Francis I. did not long survive a prince, lwho

had been alternately his rival and his friend; but
his fucccflor, Henry II., was not neglc'tful of
the French interelt in Scotland. lie sent a
coniiderable body of men, under tile command of
Leon Strozzi, to the regenlt's afliltance. Ly
their long experience in the Italian and Germal,
wars, the French had become as dexterous in
the condu' of sieges, as the Scots were ig-
norant ; and as the boldnef, and despair vs
the conspirators could not defend tlnli againit
tie superior art of these new aflaiianit, they,
after a 1Ihort relilance, surrendered to Strozzi,
who engaged, in the name of the king hli
imafier, for the security of their lives ; and, ai
his priloners, transported them into Fran':c.
The caitle itself, the monument of lBatouni'
pl,\ser and vanity, was demolilh.d, in obedience
to the canon law, which, with admirable policy,
delnounces its anathemas ,e'.n againlt the houies
in which the sacred blood of a c-rdinal happen.
to be ihcd, and ordailns them to be laid ill ruins 1.

The ;irchbithop of St. Andrew's was hctlow-

cd by tle regent pon llis natural brother, John
-Ha;iiilton, abbot of Pailley.

The delay of a few weeks would have saved

the conspi'rators. Those mil itters of Henry V II.
v\ ho had the chief direltion of affairs dllilrg lhe
mi nority of his son Edward VI. condlucted
thcmnfcl es \ith regard to Scotland, by the nmaC-
ims of their late nalter, and resolved to frighten
the Scots into a treaty, which they had not abi-
lities or address to bring about by any other
metlhod.

s Burn. Hilt. Ref. 1. 338.

Bnut

But before we proceed to relate the events

which their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we
shall flop to take notice of a circumltance unob-
served by contemporary historians, hut extremely
remarkable for the discovery it makes of the
sentiments and spirit which then prevailed among
the Scots. The conspirators against Cardinal
Beatoun found the regent's eldest son in the
cattle of St. Andrew's; and as they needed the
proteftion of the English, it was to be feared
that they might endeavour to purchase it, by
delivering to them this important prize. The
prefilnptive heir to the crown in the hands of
the avowed enemies of the kingdom, was a
dreadful profped. In order to avoid it, the
parliamelnt fell upon a very extraordinary expe-
dicnt. 1ly an aft made on purpose, they ex-
cluded " the regent's eldelL son from all right

of ficceffion, public or private, so long as he

" houtld be detained a prifoncr, and substituted
' in his place his other brothers, according to

t' heir seniority, and in failure of them, those

" wlho were next heirs to the regent'." Suc-
ceflion by hereditary right is an idea so obvious
anld so popular, that a nation seldom ventures to
snake a breach in it, but in cafes of extreme ne-
c(iity. Suclh a necefity did the parliament
dirovclr in the present lituation. Hatred to
Englalll, founded on the memory of paft'hof-
Xlitics, and theightened by the smart of re-
cr'it injurites, was the national paflioll. This
!hitated that uncommon lltatutc, by which the
itlerl of lineal fuccfflion was so remarkably

Epilt. Rcg. Scot. z. 359.

broken.

b:'oken. The modern theories, which reprefciit
this right as divine and unalienable, and that
ought not to be violated upon any conlideration
whatsoever, seem to have been then altogether
unknown.

In the beginning of September, the carl of

Hertford, now duke of Somerfct, and protc qor
of England, entered Scotland at the head (it
eighteen thousand men, and, at the fame time,
a fleet of sixty mhips appeared on the coast to t'.
cond his land forces. The Scots had for foine
time observed this storm gathering, and were
prepared for it. Their army was almost domuble
to that of the enemy, and polled to the g:'catrcl
advantage, on a riling ground, above Muflii-
burgh, not far from the banks of the river E lc.
Both these circumflances alarmed the duke of
Somerset, who saw his danger, and would will.
ingly have extricated himself out of it, by a ncev
overture of peace, on conditions extremely rca-
fonable. But this moderation being imputed to
fear, his proposals were rejeCted with that foIon!
which the confidence of success inspires; and it
the conduct of the regent, who commanded the
Scottilh army, had been in any deree equal lu
his confidence, the detruttion of thc Englilli
mull hlave been inevitable. They were in a
fitualion precisely similar to that of their coun-
trymen under Oliver Cromwell in the followin'.
century. The Scots had chosen their ground
so well, tlat it was impolibl]e to tol.:c therm lt
give battle; a few days hlad exhaulltd the o.-
rage and provision of a narrow country; tlhi
fleet could only furnilh a scanty and prec;rious
fubfiltence; a retreat therefore was necefliry;

bt

bItr dirgrace, and perhaps ruin, were the confe-
ln-lc(;: of retreating.

O)n both thtee occasions, the national heat

ald inlpetutofity of the Scots saved the English,
nd precipitated their own country into the ut -
nioft danger. The undilciplined cou-rage of the
private men became impatient at the fight of an
tnil l'-. The general was afraid of nothing,
Ilt talt tlhe English might escape fiom him by
kl l·; iand leaving his strong camp, he attacked

di;e d(ike of Somerset near Pinkey, [Septem.-

'C IC.t 1547,] with no better success than his
1,1'hnlet. deterved. The proteeor had drawn up
1i; t loops on a gentle eminence, and liad now
,1),. ai;lntage of ground on his iide. The Scot-
til! al inv coniifted almost entirely of infantl-,
; I:.I. cilief weapont wisi a long ipear, and for
1a; rc:ilil their files were very deep, and their
r;i:i::. cloce. They advanced towards the enemy
ii, lici-ce great bodies, and, a:; they passed the
ri.e, were confiderabltl exposed to the fire of
ti' Englifn) fleet, which lay in the bay of Muf-
itil;lrgll, and had drawn near the fllore. T'he
lE;'liih cavalry, flinfied with an advantage which
lir;. lhad gained in a flcimifll some days before,
l,';iil the attack with more impetuosity tlan
;,oid condu&. A body ( lirn and compa& as
dlci: S(ots cafily re/ifted the imprel(lioni of cavalry,
lioke tliemu, and drove theim off the field. Tlhe
3]'i;lii iniflantry, however, adv.aceed, and the
Scots were at once expostd to a flight of arrows,
to a lire in flank firomu four ihundired foreign fir-
file'Ls whlo served the enemy, and to their can-
nirn, w\lhich were planted behlilndl the intfantry on
thLe lighell part oi tle ciminlc(ce. The depth

and

and closeness of their order making it iinpoflil I
for the Scots to Itrnd long in this situation, the
earl of Angus, who commanded the vanguard,
endeavoured to change his ground, and to retie
towards the main body. But his friends unhap.
pily mistook his motion for a flight, and fell into
confusion. At that very inflant, the brokei
cavalry, having rallied, returned to the charge;
the foot pursued the advantage they had gained;
the profpct of .vidtory redoubled the ardour ot
both: and in a moment the rout of the Scottifl
army became tuniverfal and irretrievable. T!i,
encounter in the field was not long nor bloo(i
.but in the pursuit, the English discovered all t!i
rage and liercenefs which national antipatlh,
kindled by long emulation, and inflamed by !c-
ciprocal iljuries, is apt to inflpire. The pinfit
was continued for live hours, and to a great (di'
tance. A11l the three roads by which the Scot,
fled, were strewed with spears, and swords, and
targets, and covered with the bodies of the slain.
Above ten thousand men fell on this day, one nt
the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A fenw
were taken prisoners, and among these some per.
sons of diltintion. The protector had it now il
his power to become maJter of a kingdom, out
of which, not many hours before, he was almoit
obliged to retire with infamy s.

But

s The following pafiage iu a curious and rare journi)

of the protecor's expedition into Scotland, written by W.
Patten, who was joined in coinmifiion with Cecil, aa judge
martial of the army, and printci in 1 548, deserves our no-
tice; as it gives a jull idea of the militdry discipline of the
Scots at that time. *' But what after I learned, fpecilly
touching their order, their armour, and their manner as will

of
1

But this victory, however great, was of no

real utility, for want of icill or of leisure to im-
prove it. Every new injury rendered the Scots
more averse from an union with England; and
the protector negleced the only measure which
would have made it neccflary for them to have
given their consent to it. I-He anused himself
in wailing the open country, and in taking or
building several petty caflcs ; whereas, by for-
tifying a few places which were accessible by sea,

of going to offend, as of landing to defend, I have thought
necefity here to utter. Hackbutters have they few or none,
and appoint their tight most commonly always a-foot. They
come to the field well furnilied all with jack and skull, dag-
ger and buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of exceeding
good temper, and universally so made to lice, that as I never
law none si good, so I think it hard to devise the better.
Helero every man his pike, and a great Iercher wrapped
twice or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting.
In their array towards joining with the enemy, they cling
and thrust so near in the fore anck, shoulder and f(oulder to-
gether, with their pikes in both their hands Itraight afore
them, and their followers in that order so hard at their backs,
laying their pikes over their foregoers Ihoulders, that, if they
do aflil undiscovered, no force can well withitand them.
Standing at defence they thrult shoulders lilewife so nigh
togetler, ithe fore ranks well nigh to kneeling, (loop low be-
fore, their fellows behind holding their pikes with both hands,
:rid therewith in the left their bucklers, the one end of their
pike againlt their right fort, and the other against the enemy
breaft-high; their followers crofling their pike poitts'with
them forward; and thus each with other tb nigh as fiace ani
place will lftfr, through the whole w.ind, fio thick, that as
easily i alla a bare finger pierce through the sic n of Ea angry
hlrlgc hog, as any encounter the front of their pikes." Other
curious paiticulars are found in this journal, from whiltl fir
John Hayward has borrowed his account of this expedition.

site of Edward VI. z79, &c.

The length of the Scotch pike or lpear was appointed hy
At 44 P. 1471, to be fix ells i.e. eighteen feet fix inches.

VOL. 1. 1 h('

he would have laid the kingdbm open to the
English, and, in a flort time, tile Scots must ei-
ther have accepted of his terms, or have submitted
to his power. By such an improvement of it,
the victory at Dunbar gave Cromwell the com-
mand of Scotland. The battle of Pinkey had no
other elffT but to precipitate the Scots into new
engagements with lrance. The situation of tle
English court may, indeed, be pleaded in excul;:-
for the duke of Somcrfet's conduc. That caliAl
of his enemies, which occasioned his tragical end,
was already formned ; and while he triumphed it
Scotland, they secretly undermined his povwe
and credit at home. Self-prefervation, there-
fore, obliged him to prefer his safety before his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of
his vitory. At this time, however, the cloud
blew over; the conspiracy by which he fell was
not yet ripe for execution; and his presence sus-
pended its efiecds for some time. The fuprelmc
power slill remaining in his hands, he employed
it to recover the opportunity which he had lolt
A body of troops, by his command, seized and
fortitied Haddillgtoun [April, 15481, a placc
which, on accoult of its distance from the lia,
and fiom any Englifi garrison, could not be de-
fended withont great expence and danger.

MeCan:lwile the French gained more by tiL

defeat of their allies, than the En1Hglis by lth'l
vi tory. After tlie death of cardi l:;il lcatni ll,
Mary of Czilfc, tle queen dowager, took a uonr
iidLeralle share in tie direction of affairs. '8he
was warmly attached by blood, and b1, inclin:.
tion, to the French( intercl : and, in ordelr tu
promote it, inproved with great dexterity every

cV 'ilt

event which occurred. The spirit and strength of
the Scots were broken at Pinkey; and in an as-
fembly of nobles which met at Stirling co consult
upon the situation of the kingdom, all eyes were
turned towards France, no profpe&t of safety ap.
pearing but in assistance from that quarter. But
HenryII. being then at peace with England, the
queen represented that they could not expea
him to take part in their quarrel, but upon views
of personal advantage; and that without extra-
(rdIhnary concessions in his favour, no affitance,
;; proportion to their present cxigencies, could
be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded these representations of the
queen. What often happens to individuals, took
place among the nobles in this convention; they
wic- (swayed entirely by their passions; and in
order to gratify them, they deserted their former
principles, and disregarded their true interest.
In the violence of resentment, they forgot that
zei;l for the independence of Scotland, which
l}adl prompted them to reject the proposals of
HienrtyVIII.; and by oflfering, voluntarily, their
o(numg' queen in marriage to the dauphin, eldell
flti of Helnry II., and, which was frill more, by
propoling to fend her immediately into France to
b1 olucated at his court, they granted, from a
til1ill of vengeance, what formerly they would
li;t )ield upon any conlideration of their o\w
sal<ty. To gain at once such a kingdom at
iotlalnd, was a matter of no small conllquence
to France. Henry, without helitation, accepted
the offers of the Scottiflh ambafladors, and pre.
aried for the vigorous defence of his new acqui-
litill. Six thousand veteran lfldicrs, under the

IM a coin-

command of Monsieur Defts, afltled by some of
the beit officers who were formed in the long wars
of Francis I. arrived at Leith. They served two
campaigns in Scotland,v ith a spirit equal to their
former fame. But their exploits were not con-
fiderable. The Scots, soon becoming jealous of
their deiigns, neglected to f.pport themn with
proper vigour. The caution of the Enclifh, in
acing wholly npon the defenlive. prevented the
French from attempting any enterprise of con-
fcquence ; and obliged tlem to exhauil their
strength in tedious sieges. undertaken under many
disadvantages. Their efforts, howeer, were not
without tome benefit to the Scots, by compel-
ling the Engliln to evacuate Haddingtoun, and
to surrender several small torts which they pof-
seifed in different parts of the kingdom.

But the effects of these operations of his troops

were ltill of greater importance to the French
king. The diversion which they occasioned en-
abled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands
of the Engliih: and the influence of his armrnv :
Scotland obtained the concurrence of parliament
with the overtures which had been made to inm,
by the assembly of nobles it Stirling, conccrning
the queen's marriage with the dauphin, and her
education in the court of France. In vain did a
few patriots remoiltrate againll such extravagant
conceflions, bv wvhich Scotland was reduced to be
a province of France ; and Henry, from an ally,
railed to be mailer of the kingdom; by \which
the friendfllip of Framnc became more fatal than
the enmity of England ; and every thing was
fondly given up to the one, that had been bravely
dcfended againit the other. A point of so much

confe-

coniequence was haitily decided in a parliament as-
fembled in the camp before Haddinigtoun [June 5,
1548 : the intrigues of the queen dowager, the
zeal outhe clergy, and refcntnment againitlEngland,
bad prepared'a great party in the nation for Iuch a
i.p; the French general and ambaf.!dor, by their
libiralitv and promiles, gained over many more.
Tlhe regent i mf.i'lf was weak enough to itoop
to the oiier of a pension from France, together
with tihe title of duke of Chatelhcrault in that
L.:nedo:n. A c.:>if;iderable majority declared for
tiic Lreaiv, aild the intcrcii ol a faction was prc-
sckrcd bdt'Jre the honlour of the nation.

Hav-il, hui ricd tile Scots inio this rash and

f.t:l rIcoltiton, the source of many calamities
to thilmlelves and to their i;fvcreign, the French
aillct.cd them no time for rdccition or repent-
:'-ice. 'The fict which had brou'it o,.cr their
trces a:i itill in Scotland, and without delay
c,-:i;.'ved the qU InI into F1lance. IVlaiay was
::ii,, .x vears old, and by heir education in that
c;::it, o!ne of tlie polittet but mois ci,'ruipted inl

i-lrop:., :il. acquired eiv:y accomplillnient that

c.''.!1 .'ld to her charins as a woman, and con-
t:,-!ccid malnv of those prejudices wihich occa-
ioitned hler m.iisfortutines :is a queen.

From the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it vwas the intertit of the French to susser
vwar in Scotland to languilh. The recovery of
;:Ce Boulonnois was the obijctl which the French
l;ig i!a d moit at heart: bur a light diverlion ill
I',in...,i was iuflicient to divide rle atte:'tion and
ItirUr!'h01 oc tile Engliri, whose domeltic factions
dtcp:i-vt.d both their arms a:1d councils of their
accultoindd vigour. The govcrnment of Eng-

1 3 luld

land had undergone a great revolution. The duke
of Somerset's power had been acquired with too
much violence, and was exercised with too little
moderation, to be of long continuance. Many
good qualities, added to great love of his country,
could not atone fir his ambition in usurping the
sole direction of affair;. Some of the moll eminent
courtiers combined againit him ; and the earl of
Warwick, their leader, no less ambitious but
more artful than Somcrfet, conducted his mca-
fures with so much dexterity as to raise himself
upon the ruins of his rival. Without the invi-
dious name of protector, he succeeded to all the
power and influence of which Sromerfet was de-
prived, and he quickly found peace to be necef-
fary for the establishment of his new authority,
and the execution of the vail designs he had con-
cciv.d.

Henry was no stranger to Warwick's situation,

and improved his knowledge of it to good pur-
pose, in condu&Eing the negociations for a gene-
rual ce pea. ie prcfcribed what terms lie pleased
to the Englilh nniniiler, who fertuled at nothing,
however advantageous to that monarch and his
allies [March 24, 1550]. England confeuted to
rellore Boulogne and its depetndcncics toFrance,
and gave up all prctentlons to a treaty of mar-
riage with the queen of Scots, or to the conquelt
of her country. A few finall forts, of which the
Englifl troops had hitherto kept pollcfiion, were
rafed; and peace between the two kingdoms was
establishel on its ancient foundation.

Both the Britilh nations loft power, as well as

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It wa;s
on both fides a war of elmulation and rcfcntment,

rather

rathrr than of interet ; and was carried on under
tie inlfuence of national animofties, which were
blind to all advantages. The French, who en-
tered into it with greater coolncfs, condu&ced it

tlih more ikill; and by dcxtcroufly availing

tb emfclwes of every circumntance which occur-
red, recovered poffeiTion of an important territory
whi(ch they had loft, and added to their monarchy
a netw kingdom. The ambition of the English mi-
iitler betrayed to them the former; the incon-
lideate rage of the Scots againit their ancient
cncenicss bellowed on them the latter ; their own
aiddl'-fs and good policy merited both.

Immediately after the conclusion of the peace,

the French forces left Scotland, as much to their
owi-n fltisfadtion, as to that of the nation. The
Scots soon found, that the calling to their aflilt-
ance, a people more powerful than themselves,
Swas a dangerous expedient. They beleld, with
the utmost impatience, those who had come over
to protect the kingdom, taking upon them to
:omrn'iand in it; and on many occasions they rc-
peictd the rall invitation which they had given.
Tin' peculiar genius of the French nation
l, ilitcled tihis difgtut, and prepared the Scots
to tlrow off the yoke, before they had well
J)':A!l to feel it. The Fiencli were, in that age,
wli]tL tley are in the pr.efnt, one of the mnoll
ptiliied nations in Europe. But it is to be ob-
>'arved, in all their expeditions into foreign
',tnltrits', wliether towards tlhe south or north,
Ill.it tlcil' manners Iiave been remarkably inconm-
j;:'ibhl wJll thi manners of every other people.
I ';,!:!i;:,':;:; air tenacious of their own cllfomrn,
,; ,i't;!c cthey wallt knowldge and tallt to dif-

cQvvr

co,:er the reasonableness and propriety of cuf-
tonrs iwhich diffcl; from them. Nations, which
hold the frilr rank, in politencfs, are frequently
no lcl':; tenacious out of pride. The G-eeks
were so in the ancient world; and the French
are the fame in the modern. Full of them-
selves ; flattered by the imitation of their neigh-
bours; and accultomed to conlider their own
modes aS the standards of elegance ; they scorn
to dilfuife, or to lay allide, Llie distinguishing
mllanners of their own nation, or to make anl
allowvance for what may differ from them amol;
others. For this reason, the behaviour of their
arnies has, on every occalion, been infuppori-
ablc to firangers, and has always exposed them
to liatred, and often to deftruCiron. In that
ag'e they over-ran Italy four several times by
their vaiour, and loft It as often by their irfu-
lence. The Scots, naturally an irascible and
higl-fpirited pcople, and who, of all nation,,
can lealt bear the moil dittant inlinuation of
contempt, were not of a temper to admit all tlih
pretenlions of such a/liiming gucets. The fynmp
toms of alienation were soon viible ; they Ic.
conded the military operations of the Frnchl
troops with the utmoil coldness; their diltnt
grew insensibly to a degree of indignation that
could hardly bt: rctlrined ; and on occasion of z
very flight accident, broke out with fatal vin
lence. Aprivate French foldicr engaging in a;
idle quarrel with a citizen of Edinburgh, boti
nations took arms, with equal rage, iln deflnc
of their countrymen. The provoll of Edin
burgl, his son, and several citizens of dilliiition
were killed in the fray; and the French wcr

oblige

obliged to avoid the fury of the inhabitants, by
retiring out of the city. Notwithstanding the
ancient alliance of France and Scotland, and the
]Lng intercourse of good offices between the
two rations, an aversion for the French took its
life at this time among the Scots, the effefts
vwhereof were deeply felt, and operated power-
ftlly through the fubfcquent period.

From the death of cardinal Beatoun nothing

has been said of the state of religion. While
the war with England continued, the clergy had
no lcifr;re to molest the protestants; and they

ct'r- lnot vet confidcrable enough to expe&t any
:ir;ig more than connivance and impunity. The
newi doctrines were Itill in their infancy; but
during this short interval of tranquillity, they
aicqiiired strength, and advanced by large and
firn ftep; towards a fill eftabliflhment in the
lingdom. The firfl preachers against popery
in Scotland, of whom several had appeared
du!riigii the reign of James V., were more eminent
i;lr caal and piety than for learning. Their ac-

ailtilitalce swith the principles of the reforma-

'otll was partial, and at :cond hand; some of
tllcl had been educated in England ; all of
them had borrowed their notions from the books
puhlifhcd there; and in the first dawn of the
icw lilgllt they did not venture far before their
l''{lrcr;. But in a flort time the dotrinies and
w\it;ilg(s of the foreign reformers became gene-
rally known ; the i;iquifitive genius of the age
l.'fle(ld forward in quest of truth ; the difcoverv
if one error /opened the way to others ; the
ilowrnfal of one impoffure drew many after it;
the whole fabric which ignorance and filperfti-

tioln

tion hlad ereted in times of darkness began to
totter; and nothing was wanting to complete its
ruin, but a daring and aative leader to dire& the
attack. Such was the famous John Knox,
who, with better qualifications of learning, and
more extenlive views, than any of his predecef-
fors in Scotland, poffefied a natural intrepidity
of mind, which set him above fear. He began
his public riniftry at St. Andrew's in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-feven,
with that success which always accompanies a
bold and popular eloquence. Instead of aimuni!i
himself with lopping the branches, le struck di-
rectly at the root of popery, and attacked both
the docrine and discipline of the eitablifhed
church, with a vehemence peculiar to himlif,
but admirably suited to the temper and wiflies of
the age.

An adversary so formidable as Knox, would

not have cafily escaped the rage of the clergy,
who observed the tendency and progress of hl;s
opinions with the utmost concern. But, at ftli,
lie retired for safety into the caflle of St. An.
drew's, and while the conspirators kept polLss-
sion of it, preached publicly under their pro-
tectAio,. The great revolution in England,
which followed upon the death of Henry VIII.
contriluted no less than the zeal of Knox to-
wards dclmolil.ing the pLop ilf chlurch in Scotland.
Helnrv had loosened the clains, and lirghteni'
tlhe yoke of popery. n

of he inits o bis lon

EldwardV I. call thcl off altogcthcc,and eftablillh.
ed the protellant rcligion utpon almoit the fiam
footing whereon it nowv sands in that kingdom.
The influence of this example reached Scottland,

andl

and the happy effects of eccleiaftical liberty in
one nation, inspired the other with an equal de-
iLrc of recovering it. The reformers had, hi-
lierlo, leen obliged to conduct themselves wvith
the utmofl caution, and seldom ventured to
preach, but in private hoifes, and at a dillance
fiom court; they gained credit, as happens on
the firif publication of every new religion, chiefly
amlongl persons in the lower and middle rank of
life. But several noblemen of the greatest dif-
tinlion, having, about this time, openly espoused
t!hir principles, they were no longer under the
Incic'iity of acting with the fame reserve; and
w -ith more security and encouragement, thev- had
likc-ife greater filccefs. The means of acquilring
and spreading knowledge became more commion,
;ild thie spirit of innovation, pcciiliar to that pc-
iiod, grew every day bolder and mor unilverfal.

Happily for the reformation, this spirit \as

fill under fotne reflraint. It had not yet at-
tained firmness and vigour sufficient to overrturl
a fylliem founded on the deepelt policy, and fiip,-
plmi ed by the most formidable power. Under
tile prcl.Ct circInmfiances, any attempt towards
:icbiou mull have been fatal to the protelantt
do~crilecs; and it is no finall proof of the antho-
rity, as well as penetration, of the heads of tlhe
ipar., that they were able to reltr:in the zeal of
a: Ii'I- and iihpctuons people, lntil thalt critical
;!:id natilre jiiindulrel when every Rlcp they took
'vis; dlhcilive and ficcefsfill.

lMeanwhile their caute received reinforcement

fi'll two diflferent quarters whence they never
."1!(l have expcdted it. The ambition of the
h'l,.ui of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of

England,

England, hastened the subversion of the papal
throne in Scotland; and by a singular difpofi.
tion of Providence, the persons who opposed the
Reformation in every other part of Europe with
the fiercest zeal, were made instruments for ad.
vancing it in that kingdom.

Mary of Guise pofleffed the fame bold antl

aspiring spirit which diltinguified her family.
But in her it was softened by the feniale cha-
racter, and accompanied with great temper and
address. Her brothers, in order to attain the
high oljets at which they aimed, ventured upon
such daring measures as suited their great cou-
rage. Her designs upon the supreme power
were concealed with the utmost care, and ad-
vanced by address and refinements more natural
toTher sex. By a dexterous application of those
talents, Ihe had acquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation hitherto unacquainted
with the government of women; and, without
the finalleit right to any share in the adminiftra.
tion of affairs, had engrossed the chief direcion
of them into her own hands. But file did not
long rcft satisfied with the enjoyment of this prc-
carious power, wlich the fickleness of the re-
gent, or the ambition of those wVho governed
him, might so eatily dif:urlb; and The began to
set on foot new intrigues, with a delign of un.
dermining him, and of opening to herlelf a way
to fuccced him in that. high dignity. Her
brothers entered warmly into this scheme, and
supported it with all their credit at the court of
France. The French king willingly concu'red
in a meafurc, by which ihe hoped to bring Scot-
land entirely under management, and, hi any ft-

tui

ture broil with EngJand, to turn its whole
force against that kingdom.

In order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

queen dowager had only one of two ways to
clhoofe; either violently to wrest the power out of
the hands of the regent, or to obtain it by his
o(llfent. Under a minority, and among a war-
like and faitious people, the former was a very
uncertain and dangerous experiment. The lat-
ter appeared to be no less impracicahle. To
perft;idce a man voluntarily to abdicate the fit-
pc.nic power; to dcfcend to a level with those
ibov whom he was railed; and to be content
wiLh the second place where he hath held the
si: 1, may well pass for a wild and chimerical pro-
jPct. ''his, however, the queen atterrpted ; and
the pruidence of the attempt wasfufficiently jufti-
tied by its fuceefs.

The regent's ineonftancy and irresolution, to-

gether with the calamities which had befallen
t!ie kingdom under his adminiitration, raised the
prejuldic:es both of the nobles and of the people
a,,aiglit liln, to a great height; and the queen
fecrctlv fonmented these with much induliry.
All who wifled for a change met with a gra-
cious reception in her court, and their spirit of
disaffection was nourished by such hopes and pro-
lirfes, as in every age impose on the credulity of
the factious. 'The favourers of te Reformation
being the moll numerous and spreading body of
the regent's enemies, she applicd to them with a
parlticlar attention ; and the gentleness of her
diltpolition, and seeming indifference to the re-
liiious points in dispute, made all her proinifes

VOL. . N of

of protection and indulgence pass upon them for
sincere. Finding so great a part of the nationI
willing to fall in with her measures, the qucen
set out for France [O&C. 1550], under pietence
of visiting her daughter, and took along with her
thofc noblemen who pofleffed the greate{t pu.-cr
and credit among their countrymen. Soften-rd
by the pleasures of an elegant court, flattered cly
the civilities of the French king, and the carefii;
of the house of Guise, and influenced by the fia-
fonable distribution of a few favours, and the
liberal promise of many more, they were brougilt
to approve of all the queen's pretenlions.

Wh ile ec advanced by those flow but fiore

flcps, tli re ;ent either did not foresee the idan
ger wl'ich threatened him, or negleEted to pri.
vide ao-ainii it. The first discovery of the traisi
vwicih was laid, came from two of his own con!
sidents, Carnegie of Kinnaird, and Panter bifnl,;
of Ross, .'whom the queen had gained over to hri
inte-eid, and then employed as the molt proper
instruments for obtaining his content. T'li
overture was made to him in the name of tiel
French kinfg, enforced by proper thrcateningls,
in order to work upon his natural timidity, anll
sweetened by every promise that could reconcile
him to a proposal so difagrceable. On the
one hand, the confirmation of his French title,
together withl a conliderable pension, the parli.
nientary acknowledgment of his right of fiu.
ceflion to the crown, and a public ratiticatioll (
his condnct during his regency, were offcrcd
him. On the other hand, tihe displeasure of tile
French king, the power and popularity of tlie

qtlIct'l

|i'.''n dowager, the difaffeaion of the nobles,
X\.ih tle danger of an after-reckoning, were re.
il icnted in the fRrongeit colours.

It was not possible to agree to a proposal so

cxtraordinary and unexpedted, without fomle
prcvious struggle; and had the archbiflop of St.
Anldrew's been preeint to fortify the irresolute
;md passive spirit of the regent, he, in all proba-
!i;litv, would have rejcttcd it with disdain.
I-appil) for the queen, the sagacity and ambi-
tion of that prelate could, at this time, be no
. 'i:ruuion t'. her views. IHe- was lying at the
S:int ft, death, and in his absence the influence
'f tilce queen's agents on a flcxible temper coun-
crlbalanced several of the ftrongect pafiolms of
tiiL human mind, and obtained ris consent to a
.,olutiary surrender of the supreme power.

After gaining a point of fuclh difliculty with

i, mluch cafe, the queen returned into Scotland
[Dcc. 1551], in full expectation of taking im-
mediate possession of her new dignity. But by
tli.i time ithe archbiflop of St. Anidrewx's had
rcovered of that dillempcr, wlich the ignorance
of the Scottish phyficiaRs lial prononnced to be
iincuiralel. This he owed to the assistance of'
tlie famous Cardan, one of tllofe irregular ad-.
'.C]entLrIrs in pilofo)phy, of whom Italy pro-
(il.ced 1t niiny about this pcriod. A bold ge-
';ti led him to some uflifll difcovcric, which

li' le eilleem of a imore difcerniing age; a

'.ltl inim;!giationl engaged hlim in tlotfi chime-
Iic;ll Ifinecc, which dlrew the admiriation of his
( tcirnporaries. As a pretender to allrology and
mIagic, hie was revered and consulted by all lEu
rupe ; as a proficicnt in natural philolophy, lie

N 2 was

was but little known. The' archbishop, it is
probable, confidered him as a powerful mag-
cian, when he applied to him for relief; but it
was his knowledge as a philosopher, which ena-
bled him to cure his disease'.

Together with his health, the archbishop re-

covered the entire government of the regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recal that dilhonour-
aible promise, which he had been seduced by the
artifices of the queen to grant. However great
her surprise and indignation were, at this friefl
inflance of his incotllancy, file was obliged to
dissemble, that {he might have leisure to renew
her intrigues with all parties; with the pro-
teftants, whom file favoured and courted more
than ever; with the nobles, to whom file ren-
dered herself agreeable by various arts; and
with the regent himself, in order to gain whom
she employed every argument. But whatever
impreflions her emissaries might have made on
the regent, it was no easy matter to over-reach
or to intimidate the archbifiop. Under his ma-
nagement the negociations were spun out to a
great length, and his brother maintained his
fRation with that address and firmness, which its
importance so well merited. The universal de-
feftion of the nobility, the growing power of
the proteflants, who all adhered to the queen
dowager, the reiterated solicitations of the

t Cardan himself was more delirous of being confidered as

an alfrologer than a philobfpher in his book De Grituiri!,
we find a calculation of the archbishop's nativity, from wlhi.hI
lie pretends both to have prediced his disease, and to havu
efl'etted his cure. He received from the archbishop a reward
It -iSeio crowns ! a great fumn in that age. D evitafua, p. 3?'

Frencll

l;e clich king, and, above all, the. intcrpofi ion of
t!v y,.iltg queen, who was now entering the
t'velfth year of her age, and claimed a right of
njioinltiing whom ihe plafed to be regent",
obliged him at last to resign that high office,
-, lich hl bad held many years. He obtained,
jlowcver, the fame advantag'cous termis fd(r hin-
i: ,l which had. been formerlv ttipuJated.

'. \w in the parliament vlwich met on the

nlt'lh of April one thousand fivt lhundlred and
iiiv-fUtor, that the earl of Aria.i executed this
t.!ri;liiii;naliv relignation ; and at thl faltme time
;'.,;y (,f Guise was raised to lthat dignity whlc'
Ihal Ibeenl so long the obijctic of her wishes.
'J'i; i, with their oIwu approbation, a woman and
llrailiircr was advanced to the supreme authority
..' ; fierce( and turbulell.o people, \\ h feldoin
,.l;ittic(, without reluctancc, to the lral and

i;.:,;.nt govrclnenlt of thieir native monarchs.

V biile the queen dowager of Scotland contri-
iltcd so much towards the progress of the re-
:"''naltion, by the protection which (lie alforded
i:. from motives of ambition, the Eng;lish queen,
ly hl:r indilcrect zeal, lilled the kilgdonm with
Ipcrfons adi;ve in promoting th- famne cause.
Mary ifccnded the throne of England on the
(]i(iaLl of her brother Edward, and soon after
n:t;ric'l Phiilip 1. of Spain. Totile perfeocuting
pinI il f the Roinifi fi'perlil:ion, and the fiecce-

Ois (;' that age, file added the private. rIcfict-

,iCIXt of hler own and of her motiler's fufl(rings,
t''itl i\vlicih he loaded the refornnd reigion;
;ll(l thli peeviilliiinc and severity of her natural

" Lcllcy, tie Rb, Gelt. Scot. np. Jcbb, 1. 187.

N 3 temper

temper carried the acrimony of all tlefe patiio:t:
to the utmoit extreme. The cruelty of her p(1)'-
fecution equalled the deeds of thoie tyrants who
have been the greatelt reproach to human nature.
The bigotry of her clergy could fearce keep pace
with the inpetuolity of her zeal. Even the un-
relenting Phiilip wvas obliged, on onme occalion ,
to mitigate the rigour of her proceedings. Maanv
among the molt emin,. reformers suffered si;:
the doctrines which they had taught; others fled
from the itorm. To the greater part of thefc,
Switzerland and Germany opened a secure as -
lulm; and not a few, out of choice or neceflitv,
fled into Scotland. What they had seen and ftlh
in lEng-land, did not abate the warmth and ze.'l
of their indignation againlt poperl. Their at-
tacks were bolder and more successful than eve:';
and their docirines made a rapid Frogrefs aminoe
all ,ranks of men.

These doftrines, calculated to rctify the opi-

nions, and to reform the manners, of mankiili..
had hitherto prodac d no other effeds ; but the-
soon began to operate with greater violence, aii.
pro ed the occasion, not only of fubyeriting tic
cllabliflid religion, but of ihaking the throne
and endangering the kingdom. The causes which
facilitated the introduction of these new opinions
into Scotland, and which dilleminated them if
fatl through the nation, merit, on that account,
a particular and careful inquiry. The refolra-
tion is one of the greatell events in the hillory ot
mankind, and, in whatever point of light we vicw
it, is inllrultive and interelting.

The revival of learning in the fifteenth and
fixtcnith centul iCs rouscd the world from that l-

thargy

tliargy in which it had been funk for many ages.

I'hc human mind felt its owvn litfcngth, broke

tli tters of authority by which it had been so
lion- r-etrained, and venturing to move in a larger
fplrcl., pufihd its inquiries into every fubjeic
iith great boldness and fuirprifiug success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity

of exerciling their reason, than religion was one
of the Iirll objecs which drew their attention.
Long before Luther publiihcd his iamousThefes,
vl.:c.h thook the papal throne, fcicnce and phi-
iopi phy had laid open, to many of the Italians,
the in;polture and absurdity of the eflabliflhed fu-
i. :-llition. That subtle and refined people, fa-
tihfcd with enioying those discoveries in secret,
n .re little ditpoied to aflume the dangerou)s cha-
I;.ctrr of rcformers, and concluded the know-
kldge of truth to be the prerogative of the wife,
\\ ilt vulgar minds mult be overawed and go-
v-irned by popular errors. But, animated with
ia more noble and diilnterelied zeal, the German
tihologian boldly eredted the itandard of truth,
and upheld it with an unconquerable intrepidity,
hich nmerits the admiration and gratitude of all
l'i:,.'ceding ages.

'hei occa;ion of Luther's being lirft difguflcd

n\ tli the tenets of the Romish church, and how,
floin a fnaUll rupture, the quarrel widened into an
i-re);ii.able breach, is known to every one who
l::t leen the leafi conversant in hiltory. From
the heart of Germany his opinions spread, with
allonillling rapidity, all over Europe; and,lwhere-
ever they came, endangered or overturned the
ancient, but ill-founded fyfteim. The vigilance
a;:(l ddlesrc f t ou of
th court of Rome, co-operating

witit

with the power and bigotry of the Austrian fa-
mily, fupprefied these notions on their firlt ap.
pearance, in the southern kingdons of Europ].
But the fierce spirit of the north, irritated ib
multiplied impolitions, could neither be mollii,.;d
by the fame arts, nor subdued by the faime force;
and encouraged by some princes from piety, aild
by others out of avarice, it easily bore dovwn
the feeble oppolition of an Uiitcrate and immoral
clergy.

The fuiperLition of popery seems to have gro.wn

to the mioft extravagant height in those countrlic
wvhlich are situated towards the difcirent extrcm[.
ties of Europe. The vigour of imagination, and
fenlibility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants (o
southern climates, rendered them susceptible (.,
the deepest imprcfioins of flperriitious terr.or
and credulity. Ignorance and barbarity were re
less favourable to the progress of the fame fpili
among the northern nalions. They knew littlc,
and were disposed to believe every thing. The
mnoft glring absurditics did not Ihock their grot's
liidertiandings, and tlie most improbable fictions
wi·ret received with implicit afncut and admiratioin.

Accoldingly, thal form of popery which pr.-

vailed in Scotland was of tile most bigJotted_ ail:
illiberal kind. Those doAErines which are m(iol
apt to shock the hluman ulndcrttaiidiig, and timhol
legends which farthelt exceed belief, were pro.-
posed to the people without any attempt to pal-
liate or difguif tlhemL ; nor did they ever call
in queflion tlhe reafonablcenefs of the one, or the
truth of the other.

The power alund wealth of the church kept
pace with the progress of fiupcrfition ; for it i;

tlc

the natui,' of that spirit to observe no bounds in
it-i refpcEt and liberality towards those whose cha-
racter it citeerms sacred. The Scottish kings early
dcimoli;rated hlow much they were under its in-
ituence, by theii vast additions to the immunities
a:,d riches (f the clergy. The profuse piety of
i)t.vid . vwho acquired on that account the name
(if Saint, transferred almolt the whole crown
i;l lds, which were at that time of great extent,
ilto the hands of ecclefiallics. The example of
ihat virtuous prince was imitated by his fuccefbfrs.
The spirit ipread among all orders of nmen, who
d.aily loaded the priesthood with new pofieffions,
Tl. riches of the church all over Europe were
:.:orbitant; but Scotland was one of those coun-
:rics wvherein they had fartlhel exceeded the jult
plroportion. The Scottish clergy paid one half
ol every tax imposed on land; and as there is no
rCiatbo to think that in that age they would be
loaded with any unequal share of the burden, we
may conclude that, by the time of the reforma-
tion, little less than one half of the national pro-
perty had fallen into the hands of a society, which
is alvays acquiring, and can never lose.

T'lhc nature, too, of a considerable part of their

property extended the influence of the clergy.
Many ellates, throughout the kingdom, held of
tlie church; church lands were let in lease at an

i.af rutl, and were pofsffe:d by the younger sons

,t d dcfcendants of the best families x. The con-
Ilction betweenlfuperior and va all, between land-
!(1 and tenant, created dependences, and gave
rile to an union of great advantage to the church;
uand in eflimating the influence of the popifli ec-

x Kcith, 521. Not. (b).

clcfiaftics

clefiaftics over the nation, these, as well as the
real amount of their revenues, must be attended
to, and taken into the account.

This extraordinary ihare in the national proper.

ty was accompanied with proportionable weight
in the supreme council of the kingdom. At a
time when the number of the temporal peers n.is
extremely finall, and when the lefier barons and
Teprefentatives of boroughs seldom attended par-
liaments, the ccclefiafics formed a considerable
body there. It appears from the ancient rolls of
parliament, and from the manner of choofinr
the lords of articles, that the proceedings of that
high court muit have been, in a great mealure,
under their diretion Y.

The reverence due to their sacred charater,

wvhich was often carried incredibly far, contri-
buted not a little towards the growth of their
power. The dignity, the titles, and precedence
of the popish clergy, are remarkable, both as
caufcs and effects of that dominion which they
had acquired over the reit of mankind. lThey
were regarded by the credulous laity as beings of
a filperior fpccies; they were neither subject to
the fame laws, nor tried by the faime judges .

y Spots. Hifl. of the Church of Scotland, 449.
a How far this claim of the clergy to exemption from lay

jurildiaion extended, appears from a lemarkable tranfaflioa
in the parliament held in 154-6. When that court was Fpo-
ceeding to the forfeiture of tie murderers of cardinal It'1-
toun, and were ;about to include a prielt, who was one of the
aflfaflins, in the general Sentence of condcmnation, odious .Is
the crime was to ecclefialtics, a delegate appeared in inail.
of the clericll courts, and replc'igld or claimed exemption of
him from the judgment of parliamcnt, as a ipitiriual ani'.
This claim was fultained ; and his name is not inserted in
the aCt of forfeiture. Epifl. Reg. Scot. ii. 350. 361.

Every

Erery guard that religion could supply, vas
placed around their power, their pofleffions, and
thil'i persons; and endeavours were used, not
v, itlhot success, to represent them all as equally
ilicred.

'The reputation for learning, which, however

iiiconliderable, was wholly engrossed by the
clergy, added to the reverence which they de-
rived from religion. The principles of found
pIhilofophly, and of a jufl talte, were altogether
unknoiwn; in place of these wre ftiee tituted tudies
barbarous and unillruiitive ; but as the ecclefi-
::;iics alone were conversant in them, this pro-
credl them esteem; and a very fleRder portioli
of knowledge drew the admiration of rude ages,
whiich knew little. War was the folc profession
of the nobles, and hunting their chief ainufe-
nc1it; they divided their time between thel :
tuiaclqn:iinted w ith the arts, and unimproved by
f;iciice, they diflailned any employment foreign
froim iilitary afilairs, or which required rather pe-
finl ration and addrefts, than bodily vigour. Where-

t.'.C the former were neceiffary, the clergy were

clt ruilted ; because they alone werse properly qua-
iiltitl for the trult. Alinoft all the high offices
in civl government devolved, on this account,
into teilr hands. The lord chancellor was the
lirli filnjel in the kingdom, both in diignity
and in 1- \wev. From the earlietl ages of the
ilonilrcl y, to the dleath of cardinal Beatoun,
lilty-foi.)r perllns had held that high office ; and
of Ilet;, fiorty-three had been eccleliadics T. The
lIls ol fellioln were filprecne judges in all matters
f civil right; 'and by its original constitution,

a Crawf. Oflic. of Siatc,

the

the president and one half of the senators in tlh
court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy, and undiftrafted by those cares, and u,.
incumbered with those burdens, which occupy
and oppress other men, the interest of their order
became their only objeCt, and they were at full
leisure to pursue it.

The nature of their fun&ion gave them access

to all persons, and at all seasons. They could
employ all the motives of fear and of hope, of
terror and of consolation, which operate nioit
powerfully on the human mnind. They haunted
the weak and the credulous; they besieged the
beds of the sick and of the dying; they fuffere
few to go out of the world without leaving mark;
of their liberality to the church, and taught them
to compound with the Almighty for their fins,
by betlowing riches upon those who called them-
selves his servants.

When their own industry, or the fuperftitin

of mankind, failed of producing this effect, tn:
ecclelialtics had influence enough to call in the
aid of law. When a pcrfon died inte/late, the dif.
pofal of his efFcAs was veiled in the bilhop of the
diocese, after paiyilg his funeral charges and
debts, and dittlibhting among his kindred the
fulns to which they were refpctively entitled;
it being prefumedl that no Chritlian wtould lave'
chosen to leave the world without dettinig fore
part of his 'llbftlance to pious uses b. As inui
are apt to trust to the continuance of life with :1

b F.ITay, on Brit. Antiq. 174. Annals of Scotland, by
Sir lavid IDlryliplc, vol. i. Append. No. ii.

{',,lit

fond confidence, and childishly shun every thing
that forces them to think of their mortality, many
dic without fettling their affairs by will; and the
right of adminiltration in that event, acquired
by the clergy, mufl have proved a considerable
Iource both of wealth and of power to the church.

At the fame time, no matrimonial or testa-

mentary cause could be tried but in the spiritual
courts, and by laws which the clergy themselves
had fiamed. The penalty, too, by which the de-
c(iions of thcfe courts were enforced, added to
their authority. A sentence of excommunication
was no less formidable than a sentence of out-
lawry. It was pronounced on many occasions,
and against various crimes: and besides excluding
those, upon whom it fell, from Christian privi-
leges, it deprived them of all their rights as men,
.,r as citizens; and the aid of the secular power
corncrred with the fuperitition of mankind, inl
rendering the thunders of the church no less de-
ftruiCivc than terrible.

To these general causes may be attributed the

i:nlncnfe growth both of the wealth and power
of the popilh church ; and without entering into
any more minute detail, this may serve to discover
the foundations on which a tfru6ture so stupend-
ous was ercted.

But though the laity had contributed, by their

own ltiperftition and profuseness, to raise the cler-
gy froml poverty and obscurity to riches and emi-
nence, they began, by degrees, to feel and to mur-
rill at their encroachments. No wonder haughty
and martial barons should view the power and pof-
feilions of the church with envy; and regard the
lazy and inactive characl of churchmen with the
utinoll contempt; while, at the fame time, the

VOL. 1. 0 inde-

indecent and licentious lives of the clergy gave
great and juit offence to the people, and coni-
derably abated the veneration which they were
accustomed to yield to that order of men.

Immense wealth, indolence, gross ignorance,

and above all, the severe injunction of celibacy,
had concurred to introduce this corruption of mo-
rals among many of the clergy, who, prefumini
too Inuch upon the submission of the people, were
at no pains either to conceal or to disguise their
own vices. According to the accounts of the re-
former:-s, confirmed by several popiih writers, the
mofi open and scandalous dissolution of manners
prevailed among the Scottifll clergy c. Cardinal
JBeatoIn, with the fame public pomp which is
due to a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage
of his natural daughter with the earl of Craw-
ford's son d; and,, if we may believe Knox, he pub-
licly continllcd to the end of his days a criminal
corresponden cce with her mother,who was a woman
of rank. Thl otherlprelates seem not tohave ben
more regular ;and exemplary than their primate C.

c Winzet. ai'. Keith, Append. 2oz. 205. Les. de Reb.
Ge( . Scot. 232.

4 The marriage articles, subscribed with his own hand, in
which he calls her my dir:ghter, are flill extant. Keith, p. 42.

e A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy

is found in the public records. A greater number of letters
of l'itnim.ticn was granted during the firlt thirty years after
the Rcformation, thla duiing the whole period th:tr 1::o. rla;f-
ed since that time. Tliele were obtainJ by the sons of t'.:
popilh clergy. The cclefi.itics, who .'.. ; illoocd to retaii
their benefires, alienated them to their cii!diltrn ; wh,>, when
they acquired wealth, were desirous that lhe lsatn of illegiti.
macy might no longer remain upon their ftiilics. In Keith's
Ca:,tlog:rc .f thes Scoetth BSo.pi, we find ieveral intlances of
such alienations of church lands, by the paopili incumbenta
to their natural children.

.3 MeD

Men of fich charatcers ought, in reason, to

have been alarmed at the first clamours raised
againlt their own morals, and the doetriles of
the church, by the proteitant preachers; but
the popilh ecclcfiallics, either out of pride or
ignorance, negledtd the proper methods for
jilcncing them. Instead of reforming their
lives, or disguising their vices, they asseted to
dcfpife the censures of Lhe people. While the
reformers, by their mortifications and aufterities,
endtavoured to reiemble the firit propagators of
Chrilianity, the popiih clergy were compared
to all thole persons wl;o are moit infamous in
hifto:v for the enormity and scandal of their
crimis.

On the other hand, instead of mitigating the

rigour, or colouring over the abfniditv of the
eitablifhed cdodrines; initead of attempting to
found them lupon scripture, or to reconcile
them to reason; they left them without any
sther support or recommendation than the au-
thority of the church, and the decrees of coun.
cils. The fables concerning purgatory, the vir-
tuc:; of pilgrimage, and the merits of tie faints,
v-ere the topics on which they infilled in their
<lifeourfes to the people; and the duty of preach-
in; beilng left wholly to monks.of the lowelt and
molt illiterate orders, their conpofitions vwre
ilil more wretched and contemptible than the
fubljeds on which they infilled. While the re-
tormiers were attended by crowded and admiring
audietnces, the popith pirechers were either uni-
*verfllly deserted, or listencd to with scorn.

The only device which they employed in or.
.a1' to recover their declining reputation, or to

oA 2 Coniirrm

confirm the wavering faith of the people, was
equally imprudent and unsuccessful. As many
doftrinesof their church had derived their credit
at firit from the authority of false miracles, they
now endeavoured to call in these to their aid .
But such lying wonders as were beheld with un-
suspicious admiration, or heard with implicit
faith, in times of darkness and of ignorance,
met with a very different reception in a more en-
lightened period. The vigilance of the reform.
ers detected these impostures, and exposed not
only them, but the cause which needed the aid
of such artifices, to ridicule.

As the popish ecclesiastics became more and

more the objeds of hatred and of contempt, the
discourses of the reformers were listened to as so
many calls to liberty; and betides the pious in.
dignation which they excited againit those cor-
rupt dotrines which had perverted the nature
of true Christianity; betides the zeal which
they inspired for the knowledge of truth and
the purity of religion; they gave rife also,
among the Scottilh nobles, to other views and
pafions. They hoped to shake off the yoke of
ecclesiastical dominion, which they had long felt
to be oppressive, and which they now discovered
to be unchristian. They cxpe&ted to recover
pofleffion of the church revenues, which they
were now taught to confider as alienations made
by their ancettors, with a profusion no less un-
discerning than unbounded. They flattered
themselves that a check would be given to the
pride and luxury of the clergy, who would be
obliged, henceforward, to confine theifelves

f Spotlwood, 69.

withini

.vwithin the fplierc peculiar to their sacred .cha-
ratier. An aversion for the established church,
which flowed fiom so many concurring caufcs,
which was raised by coniiderations of religion,
lcghtened by motives of policy, and intligated
by profpeits of private advantage, spread faat
tlrough the nation, and excited a spirit that
bulft out, at last, with irrefiftiblc violence.

Religions conliderations alone were sufficient

to lhave routed this fpilit. The points in con-
troverri with the church of Rome were of so
much importance to the happiness of mankind,
and so efilential to Christianity, that they me-
rited all the zeal with swhich the reformers con-
tended in order to elfabliih them. But the Re-
fr-n;L:ion having been represented as the effe&
of fo(rne wild and enthuliallic, frenzy in the hl-
maln mind, this attempt to account for the ea-
(-Irnel.f and zeal with 'which our anceltors em-
h;aced and propagated the protestant dostrines,
by taking a view of the political motives alone
whic)L influenced them, and by fllewing ltw na-
:lrally these prompted them to ad with so
much ardour, will not, perhaps, be deemed an
utinniccflhaly dilreltion. We now return to the

i'urlfe of the lulfory.
1554.] The qiueep's elevation to the office

of regent seems to have transported her, at firlf,
beyond tlhe known prudence and moderation of
her chalaFter. Slhc began her admninilration
!)y onlferring upon forcignelrs several oflices of
truit and of dignity; a Itep which, both liomn
tlhe inability of llrangers to difeharge thefc
sllices with propriety, and from the envy which
Wicii preferitnct excites among thte ilrtivCe, it

* 3 uivcr

never attended with good consequences. Vii.
mort was made comptroller, and entrulled with
the management of the public revenues; Bonot
was appointed governor of Orkney; and R.-
bay honoured with the custody of the greai
feal, and the title of vice-chancellorg. It wzas
'with the highest indignation that the Scots be-
held offices of the greateit eminence and autho-
rity dealt out among ftrangersh. By these pro.
motions they conceived the queen to have offered
an insult both to their understandings and to
their courage; to the former, by fuppoling them
unfit for those itations which their ancestors h;td
filled with so much dignity; to the latter, by
imagining that they were tame enough not to
complain of an affront, which, in no former age,
rwould have been tolerated with impun;i)y.

While their minds were in this difpoiition, an

incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highest degree.
Ever since the famous contell between the houftl
of Valois and Plantagenet, the French had beel
accustomed to embarrass the Engliflh, and to di-
vide their ltrength by the sudden and formidable
3ncnrfions of their allies, the Scots. But, as
these inroads were seldom attended with any
real advantage to Scotland, and exposed it lo
the dangerous rcfentment of a powerful neigh-
bour, the Scots began to grow less tractabll
thlin formerly, and scrupled any longer to ferse
an ambitious ally at the price of their own

g Lefley de Reb. Get. Scot; igg.
h The rcfentmcint of the nation againfl the French rose to

such a lhcight, tlhat an at of parlianent was pafl'ut on purpifc
to reltrain or modcrate it. Pail, . Q, Maiy, c. 60.

quict

quiet and security. The change too, which
was daily introducing in the art of war, ren-
dered the afliftance of the Scottish forces of
kcfs importance to the French monarch. For
these reasons, Henry having resolved upon a
war with Philip II. and foreseeing that the
queiien of England would take part in her hus-
band's quarrel, was extremely solicitous to secure
in Scotland the assistance of some troops, which
ivotuld be more at his command than an undifci-
plincd army, led by chieftains who were aimoil
inl. pendent. In prosecution of this delign, but
under pretence of relieving the nobles fiom the
cxpence and danger of defending the borders, the
quere regent proposed, in parliament [Ij55],
t, register the value of lands throlughout the
kingdom, to impofc on them a filall tax, and to
apply that revenue towards maintaining a body
of regular troops in conflant pay. A fixed tax
upon land, which the growing expence of go-
vernment hath introduced into alnoft every part
of Europe, was unknown at that time, and
fi.tnld altogether inconsistent with the genius
of feudal policy. Nothing could be more
fliockilg to a generous and brave nobility, than
1he cnltrufling to mercenary hands the defence of
t)lolf territories which had been acquired, or
pr I't'ved, by the blood of their anceflors.
'J'liy received this proposal withl the utnmot
(lillatisftadion. About three hundred of the
Ih l'cr barons repaired in a body to the queen rc-
re1t, and reprcfented their feinf of the intended
innovation, with that manly and determined
buldnlefs which is natural to a free people in a
msariail age. Allairmd at a renmoitrance deli-

vered

vered in so firm a tone, and supported by such
formidable numbers, the queen prudently aban-
doned a scheme which she found to be univer.
sally odious. As the queen herself was knowni
perfectly to underitand the circumstances and
temper of the nation, this measure was imputed
wholly to the suggestions of her foreign coun-
fellors; and the Scots were ready to proceed to
the molt violent extremities against them.

The French, initead of extinguifhling, added

siel to the flame. They had now comm,.ncld
hostilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed
on the queen of England to reinforce his army
with a considerable body of her troops. in
order to deprive him of this aid Henry had rc-
course, as he projetted, to the Scots; and at-
tempted to excite them to invade England. But
as Scotland had nothing to dread from a prin-
cess of Mary's chara&er, who, far from any an-
bitious scheme of dilturbing her neighbours, was
wholly occupied in endeavouring to reclaim her
heretical fiubjets; the nobles, who were affiem-
bled by the queen regent at Newbattle, lillened
to the solicitations of the French monarch with
extreme coldness, and prudently declined en-
gaging the kingdom in an enterprise so danger-
ous and unneceffr;ly. What flie could not ob-
tain by persuasion, the queen regent brouhlilt
about by a ftratagein. Notwithltanding tile
peace which fublilted between the two kingdonsu,
Ihe commanded her French soldiers to rebuild a
finall fort near Berwick, which was appointed, by
the lalt treaty, to le rafed. Tlhe garrison of Ber-
wick sallied out, interrupted the work, and Ia-
;vaged the adjacent country. This insult roured

. 1.&

the fiery spirit of the Scots, and their prompt-
ncfs to revenge the leait appearance of national
injury diflipated, in a moment, the wife and
pacific resolutions which they had so lately
formed. War was determined, and orders in-
itantly given for raising a numerous army. But
before their forces could assemble, the ardour of
their indignation had time to cool, and the
Englifl having discovered no intention to pufl
the war with vigour, the nobles resumed their
pacific system, and resolved to stand altogether
upon the defensive. They marched to the banks
of the Tweed [5566], they prevented the in-
curfions of the enemy; and having done what
they thought sufficient for the safety and honour
of their country, the queen could not induce
them, either by her entreaties or her artifices, to
advance another ftep.

While the Scots persisted in their inaaivity,

D'Oyfel, the commander of the French troops,
who possessed entirely the confidence of the queen
regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to
engage the two nations in hloftilities. Contrary
to the orders of the Scottifli general lie marched
over the Tweed with his own soldiers, and in-
vcllcd Wcrk caltle, a garrison of the English..
The Scots, inllead of seconding his attempt,
were enraged at his presumption. The queen's
partiality towards France had long been sus-
lic'tcd; but it was now vilible that Ihe wan-
tolly sacrificed the peace and safety of Scot-
lanld to the intereit of that ambitious and as-
f;inhlng ally. Under the feudal govcrnmentt
it was in camps that fitbjc&s were accustomed to
aiddrcfs the bolderl renmonflrannce to their fove-

reigns.

reigns. While arms were in their hands, they
felt their own strength; and at that time all
their representations of grievances carried the
authority of commands. On this occasion the
resentment of the nobles broke out with such
violence, that the queen, perceiving all at-
tempts to engage them in action to be vain, ab-
ruptly difmifled her army, and retired with the
utmot si lame and difguit ; having discovered the
impotence of her own authority without effeel-
ing any thing which could be of advantage to
Franc i.

It is observable, that this firl& instance of

contempt for the regent's authority can in no
degree be imputed to the influence of the new
opinions in religion. As the queen's pretenfionl
to the regency had been principally flipported
by those who favoured the reformation, and as
Ike fill needed them for a counterpoise to the
archbi.flop of St. Andrew's and the partifani
of the house of Hamilton, file continued to
treat them with great refpeat, and admitted
them to no incolsliderable share in her favour and
confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange, ald the
other surviving conspirators againfi cardinal Bca.
toun, were about tllis time recalled by her from
banifimcnt; and through her connivance the
protctlant preachers enjoyed an interval of trani
quillity, which was of great advantage to their
cause. Soothed by these inilances of the queen's
nioderatio and humnanity, the protestants left to
others thec oflice of rcnonilltrating, and tlhe
.eadelrs of the oppolile faaions fct them tlhe

I Strypc's Memor. iii. Appendix,274.. L ey, 196.

* s~~~~~~~~~~il lt

first example of disputing the will of their fove-
reign.

As the queen regent felt how limited and

l)prcarious her authority was, while it depended
on the poise of these contrary fa&ions, ihe en-
,(i' ;voured to eltablifl it on a broader and more
ftiire fouLldation, by hatlleing thle conclusion of
I. da(ulghter's nma.liage with the dauphin. Ami-
lable as the queen of Scots then was, in the
bloom of youth, and considerable as the tcrrito-
ri;cS wre whliclh fle would have added to the
I'r-ench monarchy, reasons were not wanting to
diffrilde Henry from completing his first plan of
.;arrying her to his son. The conltable Mont-
inorenlcy had employed all his interest to defeat
1il alliance whiich rcfleied so much lultre on the
pri;nes of Lorrain. He had represented the
imlpofiibiliry of maintaining order and tranquil-
l iy among a turbulent people during the ab-
i.'e,: of their sovereign ; and for that reason
!.:!t ad lted Henry to beltow the young queen
>lT,)' one of the princes of the blood, who, by

'cld(l,:i in Scotland, might preserve that king-
dtlom an useful ally to France, which, by a
nc:arc union to the crown, would become a
nl!tinrlois and ungovernable province k. But at
li;. tirne the conttable was a prisoner in the
h;id l;os the Spaniards ; the princes of Lorrain
wclt ;at the height of their power ; and their in-
!lilrnict, icconded by the charms of the young
tIl.Ien, triumpl(ied over the prudent, but envious
cri nicllr llces of their rival.

T'le French king accordingly applied to tile
tl;lianlieit of Scotland [December 14, 1557],

k: Mclwv. Mcm, i.i

wnhickr

which appointed eight of its members1 to re.
present the rwhole body of the nation at the
marriage of the queen. Among the persons on
whom the public choice conferred this honuer-
able chara-ser, were some of the most avowed
and zealous advocates for the reformation; by
which may be estimated the degree of refpcet
and popularity which that party had now at-
tained in the kingdom. The inilru&ctins of the
parliament to thofi commifioners still remain ',
and do honour to the wisdom and integrity ou.
that assembly. At the fame time that the) ma-
nifefted, with refpet to the articles of marriage,
a laudable concern for the dignity and interect ou
their Sovereign, they employed every precaution
which prudence could dictate for preserving the
liberty and independence of the nation, and for
securing the fuccellion of the crown in the house
of Hamilton.

With regard to each of these the Scots ob-

tained whatever fatisfation their fear or jealousy
could demand. The young queen, the dauphin,
and the king of France, ratified every article
with the molt solemn oaths, and confirmed them
by deeds and form under their hands and feall.
But on the part of France all this was one con.
tinued scene of ifudied and elaborate deceit.
Previous to these public tranfafions with the
Scottish deputies, Mary had been persuaded to
subscribe privately three deeds, equally unjuR
and invalid ; by which, failing the heirs of her

t Viz. The archbiflop of Clafgow, the biflop of Ross,

the bilhop of Orkney, the earls of Rothes and Caflils, Irord
Flcming, lord Scto), the prior of St. Aadrew's, and John
Erlkinc of Dun.

l Kcith, Append. 13.

OYw

own body, she conferred the kingdom of Scot-
land, with whatever inheritance or fucceflion
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the crown
of France, declaring all promises to the contrary,
which the neceflity of her affairs and the solicit-
ations of her fubjcds had extorted or might
extort from her, to be void and of no obliga-
tion ". As it gives us a proper idea of the cha-
rafter of the French court under Henry II. we
nay observe tlat the king himself, the keeper of
the great feals, the duke of Guise, and the car-
dinal of Lorrain, were the persons engaged in
conduding this perfidious and diihonourable pro-
jcEt. The queen of Scots was the only innocent
astr in that fccne of iniquity. IIcr youth, her
inexperience, her education in a foreign country,
and her deference to the will of her uncles, muit
go far towards vindicating her, in the judgment
of every impartial person, from any imputation
of blame on that account.

This grant, by which Mary bestowed the in-

lheritance of her kingdom upon firangers, was
concealed with the utmoit care from her fubjefts.
'lhey Ieem, however, not to have been unac-
quainted with the intention of the French to
overturn the settlement of the fucceflion in fa-
vour of the duke of Chatelherault. The zeal
with which theArchbiflop of St. Andrew's op-
puscd all the mcafures of the queen regent, evi-
l'ntly proceeded from the fears and suspicions of
that prudent prelate on this head o

n (Crps Diplomat. tomn. v. 2z. Keith, 73.
° About this time the French seem to have had rome

dleign of reviving the earl of Lennox'a prctenfiont to the
llccrilion, in order to intimidate add alarm the Duke of
Chutelherault. Haynes, 215. 319. Forbetc', Collca.
vol. i. 1t9.
vro. I. The

The marriage, however, was celebrated with

great pomp [April 14, I55] ; and the French,
who had hitherto affe&cd to draw a veil over
their designs upon Scotland, began now to unfold
their intentions without any disguise. In the
treaty of marriage the deputies had agreed tlat
the dauphin should afflume the name of King of
Scotland. This they confidered only as an ho-
norary title; but the French laboured to annex
it to tome solid privileges and power. They in-
lifted that the dauphin's title should be publicly
recognised ; that the Crown latirimnonial should
be coinferld upon him ; and that all the rights
pertaining to the lhuland of a queen should be
vested in his person. By the laws of Scotland
a person who married an heiress kept poflleflion
of her ettate dnring his own life, if he happened
to survive her and the children born of the mar.
riage P. This was called the courtesy of Scotland.
The French aimed at applying this rule, which
takes place in private inheritances, to the fuccci-
sion of the kingdom ; and that seems to be implied
in their denand of tle Crown Alalrnmonial, a
phrase peculiar to the Scottifhl lifforians, and
which they have neglected to explain9. As

the

P Reg. Mag. lib. ii. 58.
q As far as I can judge the hnfland of the queen, by the

grant of the CrowVn Ilatrimonial, acquired a right to aflimie
the title of king, to have his name ltamped upon the cur-
rent coin, and to sign all public itnfrunients together with
the queen. In consequence of this the fLIbjets took an oalt
of fidelity to him. Keith, Append. . . His authority be.
came, in some mearure, co-ordinate with that of the queen
and without his concurrence, manitilted by signing his
name, no public deed seems to have been confidered as valid.
By the oath of fidelity of the Scottilh romminifionexs to the

a.iuphin

tie French had reason to expeft difficulties in
carrying through this measure, they began with
obunding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The Englifli in the marriage-articles between
their queen and Philip of Spain, had set an
example to the age, of that prudent jealonlfy and
reserve with which a foreigner should be admitted
so near the throne. Fall of the fame ideas the
Scottilh deputies had, in their oath of allegiance
to the dauphin, exprcffed themselves with re-
reniarkable cautionr. Their answer was in the
famie spirit, refpeU'ful but firm ; and discovered a
fixed resolution of consenting to nothing that
tended to introduce any alteration in the order
of succession to the crown.

Four of the deputies a happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident'was
universally imputed to the eJffets of poison, which
was supposed to have been given them by the
emissaries of the house of Guise. The historians
of all nations discover an amazing credulity with
rcfpet to rumours of this kind, which are so
lvell calculated to please the malignity of tome
men, and to gratify the love of the marvellous
wlich is natural to all, that in every age they
have been fvallowed without examination, and
belireed contrary to reason. No wonder the
Scots flould ealily give credit to a fuifpicion,
dauphin it is evident that, in their opinion, the rigbts belong-
ing to the Crouwn Matrimonial fub(iited only during the con-
tinuance of the marriage. Keith, Append. 20. But the con-
ijiirators against Rizio bound theinflves to procure a grant
of the Crown Mtlrimoonial to Darnley during all the days of
his life. Keith, Append. xzo. Good. i. 227.

r Keith, Append. zo.
i The bishop of Orkney, the earl of Rothes, the earl of
Calils, and lord Fleming.

P svwhicl

which received such strong colours of probabilit),
both from their own resentment, and from the
known character of the princes of Lorrain, ft
little scrupulous about the juitice of the endi
whichl they pursued, or of the means which
they employed. For the honour of human
nature it muit, however, be observed, that as nw
can discover no motive which could induce any
man to perpetrate such a crime, so there appears
no evidence to prove that it was committed.
But the Scots of that age, influenced by na-
tional animofities and prejudices, were incapable
of examining the circumitances of the cafe with
calmness, or of judging concerning them with
candour. All parties agreed in believing the
French to have been guilty of this dtteftable
adtion; and it is obvious how much this tended
to increase the aversion for them, which wa;
growing among all ranks of men.

Notwithstanding the cold reception which

their proposal concerning the Crown Matrimonial
met with from the Scottish deputies, the French
ventured to move it in parliament. The parti-
fans of the houlfe of Hamilton, suspicious of
their designs upon the fucceflion, opposed it with
great zeal. But a party, which the feeble and
unsteady conduct of their leader had brought
under much difreputation, was little able to with-
itand the influence of France, and the address
of the queen regent, seconded, on this occasion,
by all the numerous adherents of the reforn-
atlion. Bclides, that artful princess dref'ed out
the French demands in a less ofcenfive garb, arnd
threw in so many limitations, as feemeld to render
them of finall consequence. These either de-

ceived

ceived the Scots, or removed their scruples ; and
in compliance to the queen, they pasTed an at
conferring tile Croewn MAatrimonial on the dau-
phin; and with the fondelt credulity trusted to
the frail security of words and statutes agzinft
the daingerous encroachments of power .

The concurrence of the proteitants with the

queen regent in promoting a measure so accept-
able to France, while the popish clergy, under
tlhe influence of the archbishop of St. Andrew's,
opposed it with so much violence", is one of
ihofe lingular circumstances in the conduct of
parties, for which this period is so remarkable.
It may be ascribed, in some degree, to the dex-
terous management of the queen, but chiefly to
the moderation of those iwlio favoured the re-
fonnation. The proteitants were by this time
almolt equal to the catholics both in power and
in number; and, conscious of their own llrength,
they submitted with impatience to that tyranni-
cai authority with which the ancient laws armed
the ecclesiastics againit them. They longed to
be exempted from tils oppressive jturifdi'lion,
and publicly to enjoy the liberty of profefling
thllf opinions, and of exerciling that worlhip
which so great a part of the nation deemed to
be founded in truth, and to be acceptable to the

t The act or parliaiment is worded with tle utmof- care,
]:li a view to guard againti any breach of the order of fuc-
:-iron. But the duke, not relying on this alone, entered
a folcmn protcftationl to secure his own light. Keith, 76.
It i: pl.in that he fufpeled the French of having some in-
ttithin to set alide his right of fucceflion and, indecd,
if rhry had no drfign of that kind, the eageinefs with which
Ihcy iurcd their demand was childifl.

blelv. 47,

p 3 cityv

Deity. This indulgence, to which the whvle
weight of priestly authority was opposed, thl c
were only two ways of obtaining. Either v..-
lence must extort it from the reluCtant hand ot
their fovercign, or by prudent compliances they
might expea it from her favour or her gratitude,
The former is an expedient for the redress of
grice\ances, to whicl no nation has recourse fud.
denly; and fubjeAs seldom venture upon reift-
ance, which is their last remedy, but in cafes of
extreme neceflity. On this occasion the reform-
ers wilely held the oppolite course, and by thdir
zeal in forwarding the queen's designs, they
hoped to merit her prote&ticn. This disposition
the queen encouraged to the utrmof, and amufci
them so artfully with many promises and fomc
concessions, that, by their affiitance, fle fur-
mounted in parliament the force of a national
and laudable jealousy, which would otherwise
have swayed with the greater number.

Another circumstance contributed fomewhla

to acquire the regent such considerable influence
in this parliament. In Scotland all the bilhop-
rics, and those abbeys which conferred a title to
a feat in parliament, were in the gift of the
crown X. From the time of her accclfion to the
regency the queen had kept in her own hands
almost all those which became vacant, except
such as were, to she great difgiult of the natiol,
bellowed upon foreigners. Among these, hey
brother the cardinal of Lorrain had obtained th,'
abbeys of Kelfo and Melrofs, two of the mroll
wealthy foundations in the kingdom Y. By thli

x Sec Book I. Y Lefy, 2oz.

condu t

c (ndun flhe thinned the eccleliaftical bench z,
vtji(cilv was entirely under the influence of the
arih:lilhop of St. Andrew's, and which, by its
numbers and authority, usually had great weight
in the house, so as to render any opposition it
could give at that time of little coifeieucnce.

The earl of Argyll, and James Stewart prior

.F St. Andrew's, one the moit powerfil, and
the other the most popular leader of the pro-
tcfltaits. were appointed to carry tlle crown and
,!h.Cr- clfigns of royalty to the dauphin. But
frn. ihis they were diverted by the part they
were called to as in a .more inrtrelltintg Icene,
.liicl now begins to open.

iefore we turn towards this, it is neceffaryr to

obf'rve, that on the seventeenth of November,
onc tlioufald five hundred and fifty-eight, Mary
;,f England finifled her flort aind inglorious
reign.. Her sifter Elizabeth took poffelfion of
tile throne without oppoiition and the pro-
teit.lnt religion.was once more ellabliflled by law
iu England. The acceflion of a queen who,
ntn-er vcry difficult circumstances, had given
Iltrllg indications of those eiinellt quallities,
'vllicll, in the sequel, rendered her reign so illus-
:rious, attracted the eyes of all Eturope. Among
tile Scots both parties obfer.ed her firll motions
wsith tiie utmofl solicitude, as they ealily foresaw
I.ilt the would not remain longr an indliffrcit
1l'cd:,ttor of their tranftacilons.

I iider many difcoutrageientl:s and much op-

i.,l lion, the reformation advanced towards a fill

z It aIppcals from the rolls of this parlilment, which

!..I!; c:!ls a very fill one, that only lcvuel bifihos. and lix-
'ieul .ibot6 were yPteinlt.

ciltblilll-

eltablifhment in Scotland. All the low country,
the mnoit populous, and ar that time the mnut
warlike part of the kingdom, was deeply tinc.
tured with the protestant opinions; and if the
fame impreflions were not made in the more
dillant counties, it was owing to no want of the
fame ditpolitions among the people, but to the
scarcity of preachers, whose most indefatigable
zeal could not satisfy the avidity of those who
desired their inftrutions. Among a people
bred to arms, and as prompt as the Scots to a&
with violence, and in an age when religious
pallions had taken such Itrong possession of the
human mind, and moved and agitated it with so
much violence, the peaceable and regular de-
meanour of so numerous a party is aitonifhing.
From the death of Mr. Patrick Hamilton the
firit who suffered in Scotland for the protestant
religion, thirty years had elapsed, and during so
long a period no violation of public order or
tranquiliity had proceeded from that fed' ; and
though roused and irritated by the most cruel
exceftls of tcclcfiaflical tyranny, they did, in no
iniitance, tran fgrefs thole bounds of duty which the
laiw prelcrics to subjeCts. Besides the prudence
of their own leaders, and the proteAion which the
queen regent,fiom political motives,afforded their,
the moderation of the archbiflop of St. Andrew's
encouraged this pacific difpolition. That pre-
late, whose private life cotemporary writers tax
with great irregularities b, governed the churlh,

a The murder of Cardinal Bcatnuli was occasioned by [pi-

vate revenge; and being contrived and executed by lixteen
peifon, only, cannot with juflice be imputed to the whole
pr.jtcfant party.

b Knox, iul har.an, Kcith, zo3.

for

fur sone years, with a temper and prudence of
: llich there are few examples in that age. But
so!me time before the meeting of last parliament,
thc archbiflop departed from thol humane
:-laxims by which he .had hitherto regulated his
condtlct; and whether in spite to the queen,
.vho had entered into so close an union with the
protestants, or in compliance with the inportu-
riiies of his clergy, he let loose all the rage of
peIfecution againit the reformed, fwltenced to
the flames an aged priest, who had been con.
i'Ated of embracing the proteltant opinions;
and summoned several others, fufpeted of the

mame crime, to appear before a fynod of the
cler' 'J which was loon to convene at Edinburgh.

INsothing could equal the horror of the pro-

trilalnts at this unexpeCted and barbarous exe-
cu:iion, but the zeal with which they cfpoufed
the defence of a cause that now seemed devoted
to dellruction. They had imiediate recourse to
the queen regent; and as her success in the
parliamcnt, which was then about to meet, de.
pr::idcd on their concun'ence, flhe not only fhel-
tcrcd them from the impending tlorm, but per.
miltled them the exercise of their religion with
Imore freedom than they had hitherto enjoyed.,
Unfltisfied with this precarious tenure by whicl
tl!"y held their religious liberty, the protcltants
laiioured to lender thei' poffcifion of it more
flri're and independent. With this view they
detrmilned to petition the parliament for fomc
l";al proteftion againll the exorbitant and op-
;,>,ff'vc jurifdi&ion of the ecclcfiallical courts,
vhllicl, by their arbitrary method of proceeding,

founded

founded in the canon low, were led to sentences
the moif {hocking to humanity, by maxims the
inofl repugnant to justice. But the queen, who
dreaded the cffet of a debate on this delicate
subje&t, which could not fail of exciting- high
and dangerous passions, prevailed on the leaders
of the party, by new and more solemn promises of
her protection, to defilt from any application to
parlianent, where their numbers and influence
would in all probability have procured them, if
not the entire redress, at leait some mitigation of
their grievances.

They applied to another aflembly, to a convo.

cation of the popish clergy, but with the fame
ill success which hath always attended every
proposal for reformation addressed to that order
of men. To abandon usurped power, to re-
nounce lucrative error, are sacrifices which the
virtue of individuals has, on some occasions, of-
sered to truth; but from any society of men no
such effort can be expected. The corruptions of
a society, recommended by common utility, and
juitified by universal practice, are viewed by its
members without Ihame or horror; and reform.
ation never proceeds from themselves, but is
always forced upon them by some foreign hand.
Suitable to this unfeeling and inflexible spirit was
the behaviour of the convocation in the prcfent
conjunctiure. All the demands of the protelt-
ants wrc rijccted with contempt; and the
popilh clergy, far fiom endeavouring, by any
prudent concellions, to footll and' to reconcile
fiuch a numerous body, asserted the doetrines of
tJiqil church, concerning some of the molt ex.

ceptionable

ccptionable articles, with an ill-timed rigour,
which gave new offence c.

5.59.] During tlhe fitting of the convoca-

tion, the protestants first began to fufpeEt some
change in the regent's disposition towards them.
Tliolgh joined with them for many years by in-
ter cl, and united, as they conceived, by the
itroigelt ties of affction and of gratitude, fle
difcovCred on this occalion evident fymptonts,
not only of coldness, but of a growing difguit
;:i!(! aversion. In order to account for this ous
ilitorians do little more than produce the trite ob-
it';liatos concerning tlhe influence of proflerity
tu adter the characcter and to corrupt the hlart.
T he qilccl, fay they, having reached tlie ut.ofit
poi;;t to which her ambition aspired, no loIIgrer
preflrved her accullomed moderation, buit, with
ain insolence ufilal to the fortunate, looked down.
upon those by whose assistance nie had been en-
abled to rife so high. But it is neither in the de-
pravity of the human heart, nor in the ingrati-
tude of the queen's difpolition, that we must
fie:arh for the motives of her present condut&.
Thele were derived from another and a more re-
mote source, which, in order to clear the fubfe-
iqu't tranfadions, we shall endeavour to opoe
with some care.

The ambition of the princes of Lorrain had

been no less successful than daring; but all their
Clhemnes were diftinguiflied by being valt and un-
bounded. Though itran rers at the court of
France, their eminent qualities had raised them,
il a lhort time, to an height of power fiiperior
to that of all other fubjefs, and had placed them

c Kdith, 81.

UO

on a level even with the prilces of the blood
themselves. The church, the anny, the revenue,
were under their direaion. Nothing but the
royal dignity remained unattained, and they were
tlevated to a near alliance with it, by the mar-
riage of the queen of Scots to the dauphin. In
order to gratify their own vanity, and to rendl-;
their niece more worthy the heir of France, they
set on foot her claim to the crown of England,
which was founded on pretences not unplaufible.

The tragical amours and marriages of Hen-

rv VIII. arc known to all the world. Moved by
the caprices of his love, or of his resentment, that
impatient and arbitrary monarch had divorced or
beheaded four of the fix queens whom he mar-
vied. In order to gratify him, both his daugh-
ters had been declared illegitimate by at of par-
liament ; and yet, with that fantastic inconsistence
which distinguishes his character, be, in his lalt
will, whereby he was empowered to fettle the
order of fuccefion, called both of them to the
throne upon the death of their brother Edward;
and, at the fame time, pafling by the posterity of
his eldest filler Margaret queen of Scotland, lie
appoint:d the line of fucceflion to continue in the
deecendants of his younger filler the duchess of
Suffolk.

Il consequence of this deflination, the validity

whereof was admitted by the English, but lever
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in
England without the Icaft complaint ofneigh-
bouring princes. But the fame causes which fa.
cilitated her accefllon to the throne, were obftl
cles to the elevation of her filter Elizabeth, and
rendered her poffeffiou of it precarious and in.

1 ficur'e.

feltire. Rome trembled for the catholic faith,
rnder a protestant queen of fuich eminent abilities-
Thle fame fuperfitious fears alarmed the court of
Spain. France beheld with concern a throne, to
which the queen of Scots could form so many
prcteniions, occupied by a rival, whose birth, ira
the opinion of all good catholics, excluded her
from any legal right of succession. The impotent
hatred of the Roman pontiff, or the flow coun-
cils of Philip II. would have produced no sudden.
or fonnidable effeat. The ardent and impetuous
;nmbition of the princes of Lon-ain, who at that
time governed the court of France, was more de-
cifivc, and more to be dreaded. Instigated by
them, Henry, soon after the death of Mary, per-:.
uiadcd his daughter-in-law, and her husband, to-
aiFime the title of king and queen of England.
They affected to publish this to all Europe. They
i;fd that ltyle and appellation in public papers,
tlnic of which itill remain'l. The arms of Eng-
l.::nd were engraved on their coin and plate, and
borne by them on all occasions. No preparations,.
however, were made to support this impolitic and
premature claim. Elizabeth was already feated
on her throne ; flie poflefled all the intrepidity of
qpirit, and all the arts of policy, which were ne-
ciralry for maintaining that itation. England
was growing into reputation for naval power.
l'he nmarine of France had been utterly negle&t
(cd; and Scotland remained the only avenue by
1hlich the territories of Elizaheth could be ap-
i)oached. It was on that fide, therefore, that
the princes of Lorrain determined to make their

I1 Anders, Diplom. Scot. No. 68 and 164.
VOL. 5. x attack;

attack e; and, by using the name and pretensions
of the Scottish queen, they hoped to rouse tih
Englilh catholics, formidable at that time lby
their zeal and numbers, and cxafperated to the ut-
mnoil aaiinllt Eilizabeth, on account of the change
which flie had made in the national religion.

It was vain to cxped the afliftance of the Scot-

. tilh.protcftants to dethrone a queen, whom all Eu-
rope began to confider the mollt powerful guardi.i)
and defender of the reformed faitl. To break the
power and reputation of that party in Scotland
became, for this rea;on, a neceflary slep towaris
the invalion of England. With this the prlince:
of ILorrain resolved to open their filheme. And
as perfccution was the only metlhod for fiiplpr)cl
ing religious opinions known in that age, or dic-
tated by the despotic and sanguinary spirit of tlih
Romifll fuperflition, this, in its utmoll violence,
they dclcrmiined to employ. Tile earl of Argyll,
the prior of St. Andrew's, and other leaders of
the party, were marked out by them for imme-
diate deltlruc'on f; and they hoped, by punihli-
ing them, to intimidate their followers. Inliruic-
tions for this purpose were sent fiom France to
the queen regent. That humnane and faacious
princess condemned a mealure which was equally
violent and impolitic. By long residence in Scut-
land, ihe had become acquainted with the eager
and impatient temper of the natio l; flie well
knew the power, the numbler, and popularity of
lhe protestant leaders ; and had been a witness to
the intrepid and unconquerable resolution which
religious fervour could inspire. What then could

e Sorbes, Colle. i. . z53. z69. 279. 404.
f Sorbes, i. 1 52.

bwe

he gained by rousing this dangerous spirit, which
hitherto all the arts of policy had fcarccly been
able to restrain ? If it once broke loose, the au-
thority of a regent would be little capable to filb-
due, or even to moderate, its rage. If, in order
to quell it, foreign forces were called in, this
would give the alarm to the whole nation, irri-
tated already at the excessive power which the
French possessed in the kingdom, and suspicious
of all their designs. Amidli the Ihock which this
might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate
the proteffant dotrine, it would be well if the
.whole fabric of the eftabliflied church were not
ihaken, and perhaps overturned from the founda-
tion. These prudent remontlrances made no im-
pression on her brothers ; precipitant, but inflexi-
ble in all their resolutions, they infiited on the full
and rigorous execution of their plan. Mary, pas-
fionately devoted to the intei-eft of France, and
ready, on all occasions, to sacrifice her own opi-
nions to the inclinations of her brothers, prepared
to execute their commands with implicit fubmif-
lion g, and, contrary to her own judgment, and
to all the rules of found policy, she became the
Iiltirnnent of exciting civil commotions in Scot-
liand, the filtal termination of which the foresaw
and dreaded.

From the time of the queen's competition for
lie regency with the duke of Chatlhelrault, the
popifix clergy, under the direcftio of the arch-
bifllhp of St. Andrew's, had set thcmnfelves in
oppolition to all her meaftires. Her firlt flep
toward the execution of her new scheme, was to
regain their favour. Nor was this reconcilement
C Melv. 48. Mem. de Caftlenat, ap.Jeb, vol. ii. 446.

._2 a mat-

a matter of difficulty. Tke popilh ecclcfiaiics,
separatcd from the reft of mankind by the law ,f
celibacy, one of the boldest and moil successful
efforts of human policy; and combined amonig
themselves in the clofelt and most sacred uniol,
*have been accullomcd, in every age, to sacrifice
all private and particular paflions to the dignity
and interest of their order. Delighted on thli,
occasion with the prospeCt of triumphing over a
faftion, the encroachments of which they had
long dreaded, and animated with the hopes of re-
eftablifling their declining grandeur on a firmer
bails, they, at once, cancelled the memory of pall
injuries, and engaged to second the queen in ,ll
her attempts to check the pvogrefs of the reform:..
tion. The queen, being secure of their affiftancc,
openly approved of the decrees of the convoca-
tion, by which the principles of the reformers
were condemned; and at the fame time she iflied
a proclamation, enjoining all persons to obferv:
the approaching feltival of Easter accordin, to
the Romifl ritual.

As it was no longer poffille to miflake the

queen's intentions, the proteflants, who saw the
danger approach, in.order to avert it, employed
the earl of Glencairn, and fir .Hugh Campbell ot
London, to expostulate with her concerliig tiis
change towards severity, which their former ser-
vices had so little merited, and whic heer re-
iterated promises gave them no rcafon to cxpcd.
83he, without dilfgife or apology, avowed to thclu
lier rcfoultion of extirpating the reformed rcli-
gion.out of the kingdom. And, upon their ur-
ging her former engagements will an ullcourtl',
but honclt boldness, - le so far forgot her ufuil

modera.

inoderation, as to utter a sentiment, which, how-
ever apt those of royal condition may be to en-
tertain it, prudence should teach them to conceal
as much as possible. " The promises of princes,"
fays fie, " ought not to be too carefilly remem-
berecld nor the performance of them exacted, un-
less it suits their own conveniency."

The indignation which betrayed the queen into

tlis raIt expreflion, was nothing in conparifon of
that with which (he was animated, upon hearing
that the public exercise of the refornred religion
had been introduced into the town of Perth. At
once nle threw off the mafl;, and ifnued a mandate,
fummonling all the protellant preachers in the
kingdom to a court of jutice, which was to be
held at Stirling on the tenth of May. The pro-
tr-fants, who, fiom their union, began about this
time to be diftingihlied by the name of the CON-
GREGATION, were alarmed, but not intimidated
by this danger ; and instantly resolved not to
a,)bandon the men to whom they were indebted for
tile molt valuable of all blessings, the knowledge
of truth. At that time there prevailed in Scot-
iland, with refpeft to criminal trials, a cuftlon, in-
troduced at i-ift by the inllltitutions of vafl'alage
and clalnhip, and tolerated afterwards under a
fe:ble government ; persons accused of any crime
were acconlpanied to the place of tri:!l by a re-
tinue of their fiiends and adherents, afitlllbled for
lhat lpurpolc from every quarter of the kingdom.
Atlllorilted by this ancient plnadicc, the reformed
con\ivned in great numbers, to attend their paflors
to Stirling. The queen dreaded their approacl
with a train so numerous, though unarmed ; and
in order to prevent them from advancing, Ihe em-

. 3 powered

powered John Erskine of Dun, a person of emi-
nent authority with the party, to promise in her
name, that file would put a stop to the intended
trial, on condition the preachers and their retinue
advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erikine, being
convinced himself of the queen's sincerity, served
lher with the utmost zeal; and the protestants.
averse from proceeding to any a& of violenc,.
liflened with pleasure to so pacific a propoitioin.
The preachers, withl a few leaders of the pnirtv,
remained at Perth ; the multitude which had ga-
thered from different parts of the kingdom dif-
perfed, and retired to their own habitations.

But, notwithstanding this solemn promise, tl:e

queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to
trial the persons whoVi had been ulmmoned, aind
upon their non-appcarance tlie rigour of jlltice
took place, and they were pronounced outla.-.
By this ignoble artifice, so incompatible with re-
gal dignity, and so inconsistent with that integrity
which flould prevail in all tranfations betwcii
sovereigns and their fu'bjefts, the queen forfritcd
the eleeln and confidence of the whole nltioll.
The proteilants, llocked no less at the indecency
with which hfle violated the public faith, than at
the danger which threatened themselves, prepared
boldly for tlleir own defeuce. Erfiine, enraged
at having been made the inltrunment for deceivin}g
his party, instantly abandoned Stirling, and i:-
pairing to Perth, added to the zeal of his afoci-
ates, by his representations of the queen'sl inflei
ble resolution to fipprclf their religion 1.

The popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully le.
condcd ils repIreenttations: hle lihvilig been car.

h Kith, p. 84.

lir'l

,icd a prisoner into France, together with the
other persons taken in the castle of St. Andrew's,
(lon made his escape out of that country; and
reflding sometimes in England, sometimes in
Scotland, had at last been driven out of both
kingdoms by the rage of the popill clergy,
and was obliged to retire to Geneva. Thence
he was called by the leaders of the protefl-
ants in Scotland; and, in compliance with their
llicitations, he set out for his native country,
where he arrived a few days before the trial ap-
pointed at Stirling. He hurnied instantly to Perth,
:o hlare with his'bretlhren in the common danger,
or to aalllt them in thecommon cause. While their
mind(s were in that ferment, which the queen's per-
!'i. uoilfefs and their own danger occalioned, he
molunted the pulpit, and by a vehement harangue
againlt idolatry, .italamed the multitude with the
itinolt rage. The indiferetion of a priest, who,
illnediately after Knox's fernon, was preparing
to celebrate mass, and began to decorate the altar
for that purpofc, precipitated them into immedi-
ate action. With tunultuary, but irreiiftible
violence, they fell upon tlhe churches in that city,
overturned the altars, defaced the pi&ures, broke
ir pieces tle images; and poroceeding next to the
mionaltcries, they in a few hours laid those ftinp-
t tions fabrics allnoll level with the ground. This
,:iotous iniirreaion was not the es'ec.. of any con-
('Li!, or previous deliberation: censured by the

f toulcd preachers, and publicly condemned by
pi' sons of .most power and credit with the party,
11 muill be regarded merely as an accidental erup-
ien of populhr rage 1.

I Knox, Hill. 127, 128.

B1ut

Bnt to the queen dowager these proceedings

appeared in a very different light. Besides their
manifelt contempt for her authority, the protcil.
ants had violated every thing in religion which fice
deemed venerable or holy ; and on both these ac.
counts the determined to infli&c the 'evereftl vel.
geance on the whole party. She had already
drawn the troops in French pay to Stirling ; with
these, and what Scottish forces she could levy of a
sudden, she marched directly to Perth, in hepes
of furp-ifing the protestant leaders before they
could alicmble their followers, whom, out of conl-
fidence in her disingenuous promises, they had
been rashly induced to dismiss. Intelligence of
these preparations and menaces was soon convey-
ed to Perth. The proteltants would gladly have
soothed the lueen, by addrelles both to herself and
to the persons of greatell credit in her court;
but finding her inexorable, they, with great vi.
gour took meafires for their own defence. Their
adherents, animated with zeal for religion, and
eager to exp)ose themselves in so good a caufc,
flocked in such numblers to Perth, that they not
only secured the town from danger, but within
a few days were in a condition to take the ficl(,
and to face the queen, who advanced with an
army seven thousand (Irong.

Neithcr party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men whom the fervour of religion rail'(e
above the fenfc of fear or of danger. The lpr-
teftants beheld with regret the earl of Argy!l,
the prior of St. Andrew's, and fomne other elmi-
nent persons of their party, itill adhering to the
I'ncen; and dctitute of their aid and colnfel,

declined

declined hazarding an aifon, the ill success of
which might have proved the ruin of their cause.
The profpeEt of an accommodation was for tlefe
reasons highly acceptable to both fides: Argyll
and the prior, who were the queen's commis-
!;oitrs for conducting the negotiation, feern to
.'ave been sincerely desirous of reconciling the
contending fa&ions ; and the earl of Glencairn
arriving unexpeacedly with a powerful reinforce-
ment to the congregation, augmented the queen's
;;eg-erncr£ for peace. A treaty was accordingly
conlhluded, in which it was stipulated that both
armies fliould be dibanded, and the ,atcs of
Pctl s(et open to the queen; that ind-emnity
shou,!d be granted to the inhabitants of that city,
anl to all others concerned in the late infurrec-
tion ; that no French garrison should be left in
T'ertb, and no French soldier (hould approach
swithin three miles of that place ; and tliat a par-
liament should immediately be held, in order to
compo)se whatever differences might itill remain k.

Mav 2t9.J The leaders cf the congregation,
lifirulltfil of the queen's sincerity, and feniible
that ccmtceflions, flowing not .from inclinatiol,
llt extorted by the necelfity of her affairs, could
lot long remain in force, entered into a new as-
fociation, by which they.bound th.emselves, on
thle firl f iifringemcnt of the present treaty, or on
the lcaft appearance of danger to their religion,
lo rc-afliemblc their followers, and to take arms
,I t(efelcc of what they deemed the cause of God
andl o(f their.country i.

JThe queen, by her condult, demonstrated these
1,1rcciuationl to be the rcfult of no groundless or

k Keith, 89. 1 Knox, 138.

unlinC-

unneceftary fear. No sooner were the proteflant
forces difinffed, than flie broke every article in
the treaty. She introduced French troops into
Perth, fined some of the inhabitants, banished
others, removed the magistrates out of office,
and, on her retiring to Stirling, fle left behind
her a gai-ifon of fix hundred men, with orders
to allow the exercise of no other religion than the
Roman catholic. The situation of Perth, a place
at that time of some strength, and a town amolng
the molt proper of any in the kingdom for the
Rtation of a garnifon, seems to have allured the
queen to this unjustifiable and ill-judged breach
of public faith; which flie endeavoured to colour,
by alleging that the body of men left at Perth
was entirely composed of native Scots, though
kept in pay by the king of France.

The queen's scheme began gradually to un.

fold; it was now apparent, that not only the
religion, but the liberties of the kingdom were
threatened; and that the French troops were to
be employed as instruments for subduing the
Scots, and wreathing the yoke about their necks.
Mairtial as the genius of the Scots then was, the
poverty of their country made it imponfible to
keep their armies long aflembled; and even a
very finall body of regular troops might have
proved formidable to the nation, though conlilt-
ing wholly of soldiers. But what number of
1Frcnch forces were then in Scotland, at what
times, and under what pretext they returned,
after having left the kingdom in one thoufanld
five hundred and fifty, we cannot with any cel-
tainty determine. Contemporary historians often
fclet with little judgment the circumftallccs

which

which they transmit to potferity ; and with re-
fpeA to matters of the greatest curiosity and imn-
portallce, leave 'ucceeding ages altogether in
the ldark. We may conjecturc, however, from
some paflages in Buchanan, that the French, and
Scots in French pay, amounted at lease to three
thotufalld men, under the command of Moniieur
1)'Ovfel, a creature of the house of Guise; and
llcey were soon augmented to a much more form-
idab;lc number.

The queen, encouraged by having so confider-.

able a body of well-difcipiined troops at her com-
mand, and instigated by the violent counsels of
D'Oy)fll, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and by that rash ac-
tion, once more threw the nation into the most
iL:iirrc-lis convuliiuns. The earl of Argyll and
tie prior of St. Andrew's, inItantly deserted a
court where faith and honour seemed to them to
be no longer regarded; and joined the leaders
of the congregation, who had retreated to the
calt rin part of Fife. The barons fiom the neigh-
horiillg coullties repaired to them, the preachers
rifcl;: the people to arms, and wherever they
c;mnc, the fame violent operations which accident
li;: occasioned at Perth, were now encouraged
,nt of policy. The enraged multitude was. let
l ole, and churches and monaftfrics, the monu-
11n it; of ecclefiattic pride and luxury, were facri-
.,1l to their zeal.

Ii order to check their career, the queen,

Witllout losing a moment, put her troops in mo-
tit,; but the zell of the congregation got the
Il;,it trnce more of her vigihlnce and actinvty. il
tWJl wartlike age, w:hcn all men were accultomed

to

to arms, and on the least profped of danger wern
ready to run to them, the leaders of the protedt
ants found no difficulty to raise an army
Though they set out from St. Andrew's wits
a slender train of an hundred liorle, crowdl
flocked to their itandards from every corner oi
the country through which they marched; ant.
before they reached Falkland, a village only tcl
miles diflant,- they were able to meet the queer
with superior forcem.

The queen, surprised at the approach of si

formidable a body, which was drawn up by it
leaders in such a manner as added greatly in ap.
pearance to its numbers, had again recourse to
negotiation. She found, however,.that the pre-
servation of the protestant religion, their zeal for
which had at firit roured theIleaders of the cun-
gregation to take anis,, was not the only object
they had now in view.. They were animated
-With the warmest love of civil liberty, whic!
they conceived to be in imminent danger froil
the attempts of the French forces; and tlhti'
two paflions mingling, added reciprocally to eacI'
other's itrength. Together witl more enlar'igc
notions in religion, the reformation filled the 1ti-
man rnint with more liberal and' generous senti-
ments concerning civil government. The genius ,f
popery is extremely favourable to the power of
princes. T'he implicit filbrniffin to all her dc-
crees, which is. exacted by the Romiifh churchl
prepares and breaks the nind for political lervi-
tude; and the dodlrines of the reformers, by
overturning the eptabliflhed fyfemn of fnperl'ition,
weakened the firmetl foundations of civil ly-

m.Knoxx, 14.
*. , .ra ony,

ranny). That bold spirit of inquiry, which led
mecl to rejcc theological errors, accompanied
ihein in other sciences, and discovered every

e!;r-e tlhe fame manly zeal for truth. A new

tlluly, introduced at the fame time, added
-alcrcrar force to the spirit of liberty. Men be-
::inic nmore acquainted with the Greek and Ro-
ina authors, who described exquiiite models of
fice government, far superior to the inaccurate
and oppreflive system eftablilhed by the feudal
aIn; and produced such iululhrious examples of
public virtue, as w-onderfully suited both the
circulnftances and spirit of that age. Many
amrong the most emninent reformers were them-
fcves conliderable Ti:fers i'l ancient learning,
and all of them eagerly ad'opled the maxims aAd
spirit of tlie ancients with regard to govern.
ment 1. The most ardent love of liberty accom-
,paticd the protestant riiigiol throughout all its
'r-orrer,;; and whlerever it was embraced, it
olic-da an independent fiii'i, vhich rendered men
attentive to their privileges as ftlbjeads, and jea-
iils of the encroaclmentit; of their sovereigns.
Kn,;x, and the other preachers of the reform-
ation, infiifed generous sentiments concerning go-

n The excessive admiration of ancient policy wat the occa-

finll of Knox's famous book concerning the Government, of
I1';nei, wherein, conformabic to the maxirns of the ancieilt
!gidmitoris, which modern cxpericnce has proved to be ill-
itotindd, lie pronounces the elevation ,f women to the fu,
i''irc authority to be utterly deiruftive of good govern-
meilt. Ilis principles, authoriries, and examples wereall
drawn from ancient writers. The tfame obfervatiols may
be made with reg.rd to Bu.ialn.in's Dialo;ue, De :eure Regni
2pud Scotos, It is founded not on the: maxims of feudalj but
of ancient republican governments.
VOL. i. p. vernmlnt

vernmcnit into the minds of their hearers; ai,:
the Scottlfh barons, naturally firee and boli,
were prompted to aTlert thcir rights with non;c
freedom aind boldness than ever. Inite: (

n

obeying the queen rcgent, xwho had enjoi:l
them to lay down their arms, they demandii.
not only the redress of their religious grievance.
but, as a preliminary towardl fettling the naticl;
and securing its liberties, required the immediiat
expulsion of the French troops out of Scotlaid.
It was not in the queen's power to make so imptr
tant a concession without the concurrence of tii
French monarch ; and as some time was rcquiTint
in order to obtain that, lic hoped, dtrig this i!
terv:ll, to receivefuch reintfolccm; ni s from l'rall,
as would infulre the accomplifliment of thii'
delign which the had twice attempted witl
unequal strength. Meanwhile ihe agreed to
cessation of arms for eight days [June 13], alc
before the expiration of these, engaged to tranf
port the French troops to the south fide of til
Forth, and to fend comminfioners to St. An
drew's, who fiould labc.ir to bring all differcnce
to an accormodation. As lhe hoped, by mcaln
of the French troops, to overawe the protclt
ants in the southern counties, the former articl
in the treaty was punitually executed ; the lit
ter, having been inserted merely to amuse tin
congregation, was no longer remem bered.

By these reiterated and wanton inifanccs ,n

perlidy, the queen lotl all credit with her ade'cr
saries; and no fifety appearing in any othc
course, they again took arms with more iiflan.
refentinent, and with bolder and more extenllil
views. The removing' of the Fre'nch fotrcei uha~

' l&i

lail operi to them all the country situated be-
twncl Forth ;rnd Tay. Tlle inhabitants of
Pertl alone rcm-;aiiinlg fubjcetd to the insolence
anld exaioins of the garrison which the queen
hrid left there, implored the aflitance of the

A.;ilregationl for their relief. Thither they
r:',bed, and having without effect required the
,lilt: n to evacuate the town in terms of the for-
I;cr t-reaty, they prepared to bcliege it in form.
T'I1 queen employed the earl of Huntly and
lord Erikine to divert them from this enterprise.
ilr her wvontcd artilices were now of no avail;
i-npcated so often they could deceive no longer;
tid xwithout listening to her offers, the proteltants
,oltinuced the liege, and soon obliged the garri-
fin r, capitulate.

A iltcr the loss of Perth, the queen endeavomued

to ifize Stirling, a place of some tr-engtli, and,
fronl its command of the only bridge over the
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of
the congregation having intelligence of her de-
sign, prevented the execution of it, by an hally
march thither with part of their forces. The
ilillabitants, heartily attached to the cause, set
pent to then tlhe gates of their town. Thence
thly advanced with the fame rapidity towards
ldinlbirlgh, which the queen, on their approach,

ailindoiied with precipitation, and retired to

l)nhiar.

The protestant army, wherever it came, kin-

I'd( or spread the ardour of reformation, and
i,. utinolt excefies of violence were committed
ip)on chtlrches and monasteries. The former
vcre spoiled of every decoration which was then
ditec(iled sacred; the latter were laid in ruins.

R 2 lvWe

vernment into the minds of their hearers; aii
the Scottifi barons, naturally siee and bold
were prompted to afert their rights with lo'i
freedom and boldness than ever. Inlte;lad
obeying the queen regent, who hlad enjoi:n.
them to lay down their arms, they demandi
not only the redress of their religious grievance.
but, as a preliminary toward fettling the natioi
and securing its liberties, required the immediat
expulsion of the French troops out of Scotland
It was not in the queen's power to imake so impor
tant a concession without the concurrence of t[i
French monarch ; and as some time was rcqucit
in order to obtain that, (he hoped, d,!iingl this i!1
tcrval, to receivefuch reinforcce; nl s fron Flrar, .
as would inIl're the accomplifimelt , f th;a
delign which she had twice attempted wiil
unequal Itrcngth. Meanwhile lhe agreed to
cessation of arms for eight days [June 13], aI!
before the expiration of these, engaged to trani
port the French troops to the south fide of lil
Forth, and to fend commiflioners to St. Al
drew's, who flould labc'.r to bring all differcnci
to an accommodation. As flhe hoped, by ine;a
of the French troops, to overawe the protell
ants in the southern counties, the former artlic
in the treaty was puniiually executed ; the lal
ter, having been inserted merely to amuse tlh
congregation, was no longer remembered.

By these reiterated and wanton inltanlcq ,

perlidy, the queen loft all credit with her adve
saries; and no fitfety appearing in any othu
course, they again took arms with more inflanlc
resentment, and with bolder and more extelnli
views. Tle removing, of the French forces; Ih;

, 1;ih

laid open to them all the country situated be-
tw-een Forth and( Tay. Tle inhabitants of
Perth alone rcmaining fubiecced to tile insolence
ald exacions of the garrison which the queen
bI'd left there, imnpored the afliftance of the
,:,,lregation for their relief. Thither they
ii;n-hcdil, and having 1witilout effedi required the
.l.:in to evacuate the town in terms of the for-
I!Cr treaty, they prepared to beliege it in form.
Ti'e. queen employed the earl of Huntly and
lord Erikine to divert themi from this enterprise.
i.>t lier wonted artifices were now of no avail;
ni'!)'at'd so often they could deceive no longer;
tilli without listening to her offers, the proteltants
.contin ued the siege, and soon obliged the garri-
f;,n r. capitulate.

:\ i'tc the loss of Perth, the queen endeavoured

to fiize Stirling, a place of some strength, and,
froi; its command of the only bridge over the
Forth, of great importance. But the leaders of
the congregation having intelligence of her de-
sign, prevented the execution of it, by an hally
inarch thither with part of their forces. 'The
ildhabitants, heartily attached to the eaufe, set
open to them the gates of their town. Thence
they advanced with the fame rapidity towards
FJ diihiirgh, which the queen, on their approach,
.iabiadoned with precipitation, and retired to
l)nall- ar.

The protestant army, wherever it came, kin-

'l(.1 or spread the ardour of reform-ation, and
titi utlnolt exeflcs of violence were committed
uIpon churclles rind monasteries. The former
uc'r'c Ilpiled of every decoration which was then
eiltoicred sacred; the latter were laid in ruins.

R We

We are apt, at this diikance of time, to condemn
the furious zeal us the reforme:s, and to rteret
the overthrow of so many itately fabrics, the
nionumncnts of our anceitors magn.:icencc, arii
among the ncblett ornaments of the k';:;-oni.
But a.nidlt the vk.i!ence of a reformatioil, curriL(
on in opposition to legal authority, in:e irrc.r.-i
Iarities were unavci:;able; and perhaps no <.:
could ha.e been permitted more proper to a!ilii-
and interest the mult:tude, or mnor fatal to the
grandeu' of the tcia;lit!hed clurch. Hov a'-
iurd soever and ill-foiii.ded the ipcc!lativc t.ri rs
of pope'.' may be, foue enquiry and attcntiun
are rcquilite towards difeovering them. T:i:
abuses and corruptions which hlad crept int.o il-
public worf!ip of that chu:ch, lay more opc;i ;'
obfcrvation, and by triking the senses, ex,-ted
more u:!ilSvfial diifull. Under the long r{ign
of heatlhcifmi, fupertiition seems to have cx.
haulled its talent of invention, so that when a
fulperltitious spirit ftiezd Christians, they were
obliged to imitate the heathens in the pomp and
magnificence of their ceremonies, and to boLromw
fiom them the ornaments and decorations of
their ttmples. To the pure a(nd limple wor(hip
of the primitive Chrliliaiis, there succeeded a
species of fplc:idid idolatry, iearly rcfembliig
those paganl originals whence it had been copic!.
The contrariety of fitch ohfervances to t},~
fpi it of ( l!riltinaity, 'a-i almotl the firl} tlhi?,
in the Rloilnh fyiltn1i, shichl awakened tihe i.-
dig'nation of the rei;llrmrs, \who, appllyingl t
thltfe the denunciations in the Old T'ilami;t
agalinll idolatry, imagined that they could not
tndcavour at fuipprlitlling tlhem witi t:o ';i'r

y: J.

zc~al. No taik could be more acceptable to the
;nultitude than to overturn those feats of super-
lition ; they ran with emulation to perform it,
ald happy was the man whose hand was most
adventurous and successful in executing a work
dLemed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour
t, r:clrain this impetuous spirit of reformation.
Ir-rcgular and violent as its sallies were, they
te :ledi diretlv to that end which they had in

:-r '; for l-v demolilhing the monasteries
'",- ;unhout the kingdom, and icrtirn at liberty
t;.r wretched inhabitants, they hoped to render
i: ::poiible ever to rebuild the one, or to re-
L:nle tnhe other.

3.i:, anlidlt these irregular proceedings, a cir.
'mi mt:ince, which does honour to the condut.
and humanity of the leaders of the congregation,
' -erres notice. They- so.far restrained the rage
s, their followers, and were able so to temper
t':ir heat and zeal, that'sew of the Roman

.,' !;cs were expoled to any personal ilnfult,

a t
'o a iingle man fuffired death O.

't tie fame time wss di'cover, by the facility

v. *: vniieli thes.e gzrat revolutions werr eftfcclcd,
i ' .-iocntlv the cur-rent of national favour ran
't.v..:l - the refornmttio. No more than three
, .:11:' mI';n Im;a'!ichd out of Perth under the
.' o Arv'vll and prior of St. Andrew's P
..'i tlhs incofliderable force thev advanced.
!i:t wli rcvcr they ce.ai, the people :'joicd them

i !jev ; thcir iarnt' was seldom llFs Inmn!:cii.i.

*1 li'.: thiuulad men ; the gates of 'eerc.
:-.!i xvce thrown open to receive thc:n ;. aid,

' Lefly, iap. Jcib, vjl. i. Zj . P Kcihh, 94.

K 3 , i'ltlout

without itriking a single blow, they took poffeffimo
of the capital of the kingdom [June 29].

This rapid and astonishing success seems to

have encouraged the reformers to extend their
views, and to rife in their demands. Not fais-
sied with their irfit claim of toleration for th,'ir
religion, they now openly aimed at eitahli(hi:i-
the proteitant doclrilne on the ruins of popery.
For this reason they determined to fix their rtii-
dence at Edinburgh ; and, by their appointment,
Knox, and some other preachers, taking poffeflion
of the pulpiti, which had been abandoned by
the affrilghtencd clergy, declaimed againfl tl)c
errors of puperv with such fervent zeal as could
niot fail of gaining many proselytes.

In the mean time the queen, who had plu-

dently given way to a torrent which she couli
not resist, obfcrved with pleasure that it now
began to fublide. The leaders of the congre-
gation had been above two months in arms, and
by the expences of a campaign protratced so
long beyond the usual time of service in that
age, had exhausted all the money which a coun-
try, where riches did not abound, had been able
to supply. The nmultitude, dazzled with thell
success, and concluding the work to be alrac;ly
done, retired to their own habitations. A fcw
only of the more zealous or wealthy barons re.
mained with their preachers at Edinburgh. As
intelligence is procured in civil wars with litti
difficulty, whatever was tranfaecd at Edinburgh
was soon known al Dunbar. The queen, regu-
lating her own cenduct by the fitiiation of her'
advcrlsarics, artfully ainufed them with the pro.

fprtt

ipft of an immediate accomilmio(ition ; while,
.it the fame time, she by itudied delays fplun out
thi negotiations for that purpofc to such a
length, that in the end the party dwindl: d to an
ir!on!'idc-rable number; and, as if peace had

i',
n ircady re-eltahlilhed, becamc careless of mi-

J!tairy discipline. The queen, who watched for
Iibh an opportunity, advanced uncxpe&edly, by
d f'dden march in the night, with all her forces,
aiil 1 ppearing' before Edinburlh, filled that
city r,;th the utinofi conllernation. The pro-
tiltaints, weakened by the imprudent difperlioii
el' tleir followers, d!rift not encounter the
i', nich troops in tle open field; and were even
i':.bljc to defend an ill-fortilied town agailit
their aflaults. Unwilling, however, to aball-
i(,n the citizens to the queen's meicy, they en-
de'.oured, by facing the enemy's army, to
,;,'ii time for collecting their own aflociates.
But tle queen, in spite of all their resistance,
"Viild have easily forced her way into the town,

ti ihe seasonable corlclulion of a truce had not
l:i,)(urcd her admifilon without the cffufion of
i'lod.

Thelir dangerous situation easily induced the

!'ilcrs of the congregation to liften to any
o r't tIi's of peace ; and as the queen was look-
ihii daily for the arrival of a llrong reinforcement
f;i'ln lFrance, and exlctcd gi-rcit advantlages
fn"in a ceftation of arns, fle also agreed to it
t:ii)m no uncqual conditions. Together with a
I ilinlllion of hostilities:, from the 24th of July
to the loth of January, it was tlipulated in
lhi; treaty, that, on the one hand, the protest.
tlli Ihould open the gates of Edinburgh next

Inorning

morningl to the (qiieen reg- )nt; rec;lma ill 11 dtisl'i
fubjtection to hicr governllmenllt; abfilln fiom all
fiuture violation of religious houses ; and i;vc
no inte;'trr)tionl to the ellablilihcd clerg'y, rfthycr
in the diliharge of their fundions, or in llii
ciljoxynnl' of theil bciitfices. On the other
h!anld, the (cucen agreed to give no nioldllatioll to
tile preachers or profeflors of tile protel[lat i-
liion ; to allow the citizens of Ediinburgi,
durinl the cefiation of hollilities, to enjoy tilh
excreife of religious worfllip according to ti c
firm molt agreeable to the coiiflciicc of each
individlual; and to pci init the free and public
p'!-iffl'iol of the proteltant faith in ci t'ry part
of the kingdom q. 'Fie queen, by thief liberill
conceflions in belhalf of thelir religion, hopi,1 to
f{ootlthhe proteflaits, and expeced, from inidul-
ginig their favourite paflion, to render them mo;-'e
compliant with refpe& to other articles, partictu-
larly the expulsion of the French troops out .t,
Scotland. The anxiety which the queen cx-
prestkd for retaining this body of men, rcndei-cl
them more and more tle ohjects of natnuii:l
jealoify and averlion. Tihe immediatc expulli, i
of them was therefore demanded anew, a;ni
with greater warmth ; but the queen, takintg
nadiantiige of the diltrcfs of the adverfC ]eat\,
cluded the request, and would confernt t , nothing
more than that a French garrifioi flhould nitv Li.
introduced into Edinburgh.,

TI e defperatc flatc of thcil affairs imposed (c

t)le (ongregation the necefiity of agrecingh to
this ;rticle, whicll, however, was very tar tflrol
giving themn fatisfadion. Whatever apprllcii.

s Kcith, 98. Maiilida, Hilt, of Edinb. 16, 17

Jjik i

!;,;s the Scots had conceived from rctaining tile
l'trculCh i ces in the kingdom, were abuindantly
itdtlicd during the late commotions. A firnll
ibody of those troops, maintained in conllant pay,
a.ml rendered formidable by regular discipline,
;had checked the progress of a martial people,
,Ioiugh anirnated with zealboth for religion and
i;l)cty. The finalleft addition to their number,
ai; a (.onfidcrable one was daily expected, might
plove f!tal to the public liberty, and Scotland
,ii;ltt be exposed to the danger of bring re-
,!,iced from an independent kingdom, to the

:,n condition of a province, annexcd to the
cd]iiniions of its powerful ally.

in -rder to provide againit this imminent ca-

lamnity, the duke of Chatelleraullt, and carl of
-Huantly, immediately after concluding the truce,
'( !ilrci an interview with the chiefs of the con-
: egation. These two mnollemen, the molt po-
trt at that time in Scotland, were the leaders
cf the party which adhered to the established
church. They had followed the queen during
t,, l.te commotions, and having acceis to ob-
i;ve nmore narrowly the dangerous tendency of
I:Lr councils, their abhorrence of the yoke which
w;is ,preparing for their country filrmounted all
-thller considerations, and determined them rather
tit rndanger the religion which they profefiled,
tliti to give their aid towards the execution of
1i(T p'u'licious designs. They proceeded far-
licr, and promised to Argyll, Glencairn, and

p lirior of St. Andrew's, who were appointed

int eet them, that if the queen llould, with her
Iff.l insincerity, violate any article in the treaty
''" I lce, or refuse to gratify the wilhes of the

wmlm.,l

whole nation, by difmifling her French trov>:,
they would then instantly join with their colui-
trynen in compelling her to a mneafure which t!:c
public safety, and the preservation of their li-
berties, rendered neceffaryr.

July 8.] About this time died Henry II. :f

France, just when he had adopted a ifltti
with regard to the affairs of Scotland, wllicl
would, in all probability, have restored u.jii 1
mId tranquillity to that kingdoms. Towx:l i

.

the close of his reign, the princes of Lorrai;:
began visibly to decline in favour, and the coi-
flable Montmorency, by the affiitance of th,,
duchess of Valentinois, recovered that afcendar,
over the ipirit of his mailer, which his great ex
perience, and his faithful, though often unforti,.
nate, service:;. seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister imputed the infurredions I,
Scotland wholly to the duke of Guise and the
cardinal of Lorrain, -lhofe violent and prec!.
pitant councils could not fail of transporting,
beyond all bounds of moderation, men whose
minds were poffefled with that jealousy which is
inseparable from the love of civil liberty, or in-
flamed with that ardour which accompanies re.
ligious zeal. Montmorency, in order to con-
vince Henry that lie did not load his rivals with
any groundless accusation, prevailed to have
Mclvil t, a Scottifnl gentleman of his retinue, (litf
patched into his native country with inlll'iolls
to obfcrve the motions both of tihe regent and
of her adversaries; and the king agreed to ic-
gulate his futu.re proceedings in that kingdom
by Melvil's report.

Kno, 154. 5 Melv. 49. t The author of the Memiri

Did

l)id history indulge herself in these fpecula-

tims, it would be amusing to inquire what a
: dilkarnt dir'ction might have been given by thii

U'ln'llion to the national fpilit; and to what a
l:&;.rnt issue Mclvil's report, which would have
i:, tie c(,nditl of tlhe malecontents in the molt
I :. ,i;al) light, might have conducted the pub-

,.: rders. Perhaps by gentle treatment and

..!fili policy tle progress of tlhe reformation
: ,iot have been checked, and Scotland brought
t, tidcLplnd upon France. Perhaps, by gaining pos-

,i'i!t of this avenue, the French might have
,; .:,i thelii way into England, and, under colour
o iLp 'p'irting Mary's title to the crown, they

i
,t n;t only have defeated all Elizabeth's

..l res in favour of the reformation, but have
.-c,l!ifhcd tle Roman catholic religioni, and

- o .:-!.oyed the liberties of that kingdom. Buit

i:,;o this boundless field of fancy and conjecture
i2 !;; h!i:orian must make no e:ecurfions; to relate
3: :ll2 o clc'rrences, and to explain their real cauitcs

i .ui efflecs, is his peculiar and only province.
l 'Jli' tragical and untinely death of the French
i] ion;aiclh put an end to all mod,'rate and pacific
,!I,:'ilis with regard to Scotland. The duke
,i'(t, ifc, and the cardinal his brother, upon
t!lc accelfion of Francis II. a prince void of
ci;(tls and without experience, af'tuned the
tili';f dirceL'ioy of French affairs. Allied so
i,:r'ly to the throne, by the marriage of their
ncu the queen of Scos with the young
kill, tley now wanted but little of regal dig-
niy, and nothing of regalpower. This power
dAl niot long remain lactlive in their lanwds.
Tlic fane valt fchlcmca of ambition wlicl they

had

had planned out under the former reign, wver
again refumied; and they were enabled, by pof.
felling such ample authority, to pursue them
with more vigour and greater probability of
success. They beheld, with infinite regret, tllc
pr:ogress of the protefiant religion in Scotlandl;
and, sensible what an unsurmountable obstacle it
would prove to their designs, they bent all theci
strength to check its growth, before it rose to
any greater height. For this purpose they carried
on their preparations with all poflible expedition,
and encouraged the queen their fitter to expem,
in a short time, the arrival of an army so powerful
as the zeal of their adversarics, however defpe.
rate, would not venture to oppose.

Nor were the lords of the congregation eitlti

ignorant of those violent counsels which prevai'k.
in the court of France since the death of Henry,
or carelcfs of providing agailft the danger which
threatened them from that quarter. The fuccels
of their cause, as well as their personal safety, de.
pending entirely on the unanimity and vigour of
theil own resolutions, they endeavoured to gnard
againll diviiion, and to cement together morn
closely, by entering into a ftri&er bond of con
federacy and mutual defence. Two persons con-
curred in this new association, who brought a
great acceltion both of reputation and of power
to the party. These were, the dake of Chatil.
heratltr, and his eldell son the earl of Arran.
This young nobleman, having reiided some years
in France, where he commanded the Scottifl
guards, had imbibed the protestant opinions con.
cerning religion. IlHuried along by the heat of
youth and the zeal of a proftlyte, he had uttered

feCti

sentiments with refpc(d to the points in contro-
verfy, which did not suit the temper of a bigot-
ted court, intent at that junciure on the extinc-
tion of tile protestant religion; in order to ac-
complifh which, the greateit excesses of violence
were committed. The church was fiffered to

reak its utmolt fury upon all who were suspeCt-
ed of heresy. Courts were cre&ed in different
parts of France, to take cognizance of this crime,
and by their fent;ncec fcveral persons of diftinc-
tion were condemned to the flames.

But, in -oder to infpile more universal terror,

the princes of Lorrain resolved to felcE, for a fa-
crifice, some person whose fall miht convince all
ranks of men, that neither splendour of birth, nor
eminence in itation, could exempt from pulilm -
ment thote vho fflould be guilty of this unpair-
,aonable transgression. The earl of Arran was the
person deltined to be the unhappy victim U. As
he was allied to one throne, and the preflmptive
leir to another; as he poflefed the firfl rank in
his own country, and enjoyed an honourable fla-
tion in France: Ilis condemnation could not fail
of making the dcfred impression on the whole
kindom. But the cardinal of Lorrain having
let iall lome expressions, which raised Arran's
fulpicions of the design, he cfcapetd the intended
bluw by a timely flight. Indignation, zeal, resent-
iilenl, all prompted him to seek revenge upon
tilel: persecutors of Iimfelf and of the religion
which lie profefled ; and as he passed through
tIlnlnld on his return to his native countly,
Elliz.:heth by hopes nud promises inflamed thoie
pallions, and sent hin back into Scotland, ali-

' Thuan. lib. xxiv, p. 462, Edit. Francof.
VUL. i. S inatecd

mated with the fanie imnplacable aversion to
France which possetcd a grreat part of his comII.
trymen. He quickly comimuniet.tcd these feiti-.
incets to his fatherthe dukeof Clatelhlrault, who
was already! extremely distiulteld with the mealfi!.ca
carrying on in Scotland; and as it was the fit,
of that noblenlma to be govelr.cd in every initaii,:e
by those about him, he ni( liufTr-c(ld hiirnmfelt to
be drawn fioin tle queen rcgrent; and, having
joined the congregationl-, was cunfidered, fiom
that time, as tile llead of the party.

But, ;ith rcfpcct to him,i this diilintion was

mcrely nominial. James Stewart, prior of St. An.
drew's, v'asl the p)lefon who moved and alll ated
tl]e: w hole body of tle proteitants, anlo ng wh'oin
he po!il';ied tliat unbounded con!i(enlce whici
his i art'lious adlicrcn ce to rheir inte relt anid is
great abilities so juftlv mnrited. lie s as tile
natural ton of James V. by ; daughter of lord
Erfline ; and a;s that aimorous illo;ilrchl ba;d left
several others a buirdeln upo;i tihel crow\n, tiq'
were all deltined for tlie chliurlc, h lr-e t?0' couii
be placed in flat;ois of dignity and a!liuIIc
In confeqiienice of tiMis refoitioin, tile prlioly oft
St. Andre's Lhad been conferred upon james:
but, duiilnp so lutf a period, ihe soon became
difgulled witlh tihe indolence and reitijement of ;
Inolallic lie: ; and his enterpriling gecnitis called
1lim fortl Io1 ; a a princilpal part ori a more p1ub-
lie' nnd col)fieuouLs theatre. lThe fcencl in whieh
ho: appeared required talents of diil'cercnt kinls:
military virtue and political difcerilinmet w ere
cqually necelgary in order to render him illulilri
ous. These lie poffefled in an clincllt d(I
grec. To the molt unqucllonable personal bra-

VCye,

very, be added great kl ill n the art of war, and
inl ev:ry enterprise his arms were crowned with
fi.ccefs. His sagacity and penetration in civil
i:t afair enabled him, amidst the reeling and turbu-
k:s lenie of faitions, to hold a prosperous courf;

'5.' while his boldness in defence of the reformation,
* i tg cthli wtith the decency, and even itverity, of
,i ll;s w;inncrs, iecured hin tle reputation of being

f.' liic.rcl attachefd to religion, without which it

:1 "'i inpoffiible in that age to gain an ascendant
'*, o',' .ii:a kind.

It wis not without reason that the queen dread-
' ed tlc eninity of a man so capable to obitruft her

&li'ns. As Pi(c could not, with all her address,
Jj!i.;.c the leall impreflion on his fidelity to hi1
:.! a ciac s, flte endcavoured to lessen his influence,

a;i to k'atter among them the feeds ofjealoufy and

'il' itillt, iby iinuating that the ambition of the
, :'ior alpired beyond the condition of a subjea,

' ;,: ;imned at nothing Icfs than the crown itself.
; An accusation so improbable gained but little
i creiit. Whatever thoughts of this kind the pre.
I Jli:[)ptlon cf iiexped.ed success, and his elevation
tl th, IliglheiL digiity in tlhe kingdom, may he
,'! ;,'cd Lo lhave inlpired at any fubilqucnt period,
i e

i; ccrtain that at this junclure lie could fornl

!,i ltilch vast design. To dethrone a queen, who

a;n. lineal heir to an ancient race of monarclhs;
!,,,> had been guilty of no adtion by which flie
cItuli forfeit the elleem and allction of her sub-
i'cl ,; oVho could employ, in defence of her rights,
t:it forces of a killrtlom much more potwerfutl tlhan

ni'v on.i; and to iulbltiutte in 1)er p!acc, a perl'fn
'loin the illegitimacy of his lhit h, by the prac.
It:v of tall civilized nations, reindd(lt illc;ip;lhl of

lq' inheritance eiterl public or private ; wa; a

s 2 lp'oje'

projeEt so chimerical as the molt extravagant am
bition would hardly entertain, and could neve
conceive to be pradticable. The promise too
which the prior made to Melvil, of residing con
tiantly in France, on condition the public griev
ances were redrefltd x; the confidence repoied ir
hiin by the duke of Chatelherault, and his son
the presumptive licirs to the crown; and the con
currence of ahnoil all the Scottiih nobles, in pro
moting the nmeafures by which he gave offenc
to the French court; go far towards his vindica.
tion from those illegal and criminal deiigns, wit}
the imputation of which the queen endeavourec
at that time to load him.

The arrival of a thousand French soldiers corn

penfated, in some degree, for the loss which th1
queen sustained by the defeEtion of the duke GI
Chatelherault. These were immediately comn
manded to fortify Leith, in which place, on ac.
count of its commodious harbour, and its fitna.
tion in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in
a plentiful country, the queen resolved to fix the
head-quarters of her foreign forces. This unpon
pular measure, by the manner of execelting
it, was rendered itill more unpopular. In
order to bring the town entirely under tllir
command, the French turned out a great part
of the ancient inhabitants, and taking pof
session of the houses, which they had obliged them
to abandon, presented to the view of the Scoti
two obje&s equally irritating and offensive; on
the one hand, a number of their countrymen ex.
pelled their habitations by violence, and wander.
ing without any certain abode ; on the other, a
colony of fore:igners fettling \illi their wives and

x Melvil, 5.c

chlildrmt

children in the heart of Scotland, growing into
ltrength by daily reinforcements, and openly prc-
p;'rn. a yoke, to which, without some timely cx-
rtiol; of national spirit, the whole kingdom Inuft
cf InIrcelity frubmit.

It was with deep concern that the lords of the

congelgation beheld this bold and dccifive flep
taken by the queen regent: nor did they hesitate
a momenit, whether they flould employ their
v, ollle flrength, in one generous effort, to rescue
lhI-ir religion and liberty from impending deftrtc-
tio'l. But, in order to juifify their own conducl,
Ianl t to throw the blame entirely on their adverfa.
rics, they resolved to preserve the appearances of
decency and refpet towards their superiors, and
to have no recourse to arms without the most
;:r;cint and apparcnt necessity. They joined.
with this view, in an an address to the regent
[Sept. 29], representing, in the strongest terms,
their diff:itisfaction with the meafilres lhe was pur-
uing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and
jealoifics of the nation by defilting from fortifiv
i;ln Leith. The queen, conscious of her prefellt
adn antaglleos fituntion, and elated with the hopes
offi: li iccours, was in no difpufition for listening
to (cmlands utterly inconfitflnt with li r views,
al i.I rged with that bold importunity which is so
little acceptable to princes Y.

'i'le fuggeilionls of her French conlnfellors con.

trihibted, without doubt, to alienate hetr fill fau-
t!ilr fiom anl fcllenie of accommodation. At
the queeln w:a rtady on all ocealions to discover
an extraordinary deference fio tlhe opinions of her

y I-l1a)rls, ZJll

· S countryv'

countrymen, her brothers, who knew her secret
disapprobation of the violent ineafures they were
driving on, took care to place near her such per-
sons as betrayed her, by their insinuations, into
many aftions, which her own unbiafTcd judgment
would have highly condemned. As their success
in the present junuure, when all things were
hastening towards a crilis, depcnded entirely on
the queen's firmness, the princes of Lorrain did
not trull wholly to the inlluenc': of their ordinary
agents; but, in order to add the greater weight
to their councils, they called in aid the minitters
of religion; and, by the authority of their sacr.-d
charafter, they hoped effectually to recommend
to their lifter, that system of severity which they
had espoused z. With this view, but under pre-
tence of confounding the protc{tants by the {kill
of fiucl able mailers in controversy, they appoint-
ed several French divines to relide in Scotland.
At the head of thele, and with the charafter of
legate from the pope, was Pelleve bifflop of
Amiens, and afterwards archbilhop and cardinal
of Sens, a furious bigot a, servilely devoted to the
houie oi Guise, and a proper inllrument for re,
commending or executing the molt outrageous
measures.

Amidst the noise and danger of civil arms,

thefc do&ors had little opportunity to display
their address in the use of their theological wea.
pons. But they gave no finall offence to the na.
tion by one of their a'ions. They persuaded
the queen to seize the church of St. Giles in
Edinburlgll, hliich had remained, ever since the

z Lefy, 215, Caflelncau, ap, Jcbb, vol. ii. 44.6. 473.
* l)arili, Brantone.

late

late truce, in the hands of the protestants; and
having, by a new and folenn consecration, puri-
sied the fabric from the pollution with which they
supposed the profane minifirations of the protest-
ants to have defiled it, they, in dire& contradic-
tion to one article in the late treaty, re-eftabliflied
there the rites of the Romish church. This, add-
ed to the indifference, and even contempt, with
which the queen received their remonitrances,
convinced the lords of the congregation, that it
v,as not only vain to expeft any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely necessary
to take arms in their own defence.

The eager and impetuous spirit of the nation,

as well as every consideration of good policy,
prompted them to take this bold ftep without de-
lay. It was but a small part of the French auxi-
liaries which had as yet arrived. The fortifica-
tions of Leith, though advancing fait, were still
far from being complete. Under these circum.
stances of disadvantage, they conceived it poflible
to iurprife the queen's party, and, by one fidden
111d decisive blow, to prevent all future bloodshed
and contention. Full of these expectations, they
advanced rapidly towards Edinburgh with a nu-
rlt.lOls army [Oft. 6.,. But it was no cafy
niatter to deceite an adversary as vigilant and at-
toritive as the queen regent. With her uftal saga-
c v h, he both foresaw the danger, and took the
o:vly proper course to avoid it. Initead of keepl
iig the field againit encmies superior in number,
and formidable on a day of battle by the ardour
of their courage, she retired into Leith, and de.
tvrmined patiently to wait the arrival of new ret
inforccmcnts. Slight and unfinishcd as the forti,

fications

fications of that town then werc, fie did not
dread the efforts of an army, provided nei!ltr
with heavy cannon, nor with military flores, and
little acquainted witl the method of attacking
any place fortified with more art than tlofe an-
cient towers ercsted all over the kingdom in de.
fence of private property ag'ainl( the incm'fiuiis of
banditti.

Nor did the queen men while neglec to have

recourse to those arts whlich flhe had often enm-
ploycd to weaken or divide her adversaries. B)y
private solicitations and promises flie ihook tiic
fidelity, or abated lte ardour oft ome. By opcnmi
reproach and accu.'atioln fie lailed the reouta-
tion, and diminilhlcd the authority of others. Her
emissaries were every where at work, and notwith-
flanding the Yeal for religion and lilerty which
then animated thl nation, they seem to have la-
boured not without lfccefs. We find Knox, about
this period, aboundi ;g in complaints of the lukc-
warm and languid spirit which had begon to Ipr-cad
among his party b. But if thcil zeal slackened a
little, and fuflered a momentary intermiflion, it
soon blazed up with fre(h vigour, and rose to a
greater height than ever.

The queen herfllf gave occasion to this, by the

reply which file made to a lnew rcmonl.rance from
the lords of the congregation. Upon their arrival
at Edinhurgh, they once more represented to her
the dangers arising froml the Increase of the French
troops, tme fortifyilng of Lcitlh, and her other
inclafuls, which they conceived to be deltruttive
to the peace and liberty of the kingdom ; and
in this addrces they spoke in a irnncr tone, and

b Knox, iSo.

avowcel,

avowsed, more openly than ever, their resolution
of proceeding to the utmost extremities, in order
to put a stop to such dangerous encroachments.
'so a remonfirance of this nature, and urged with
so much buldnefs, the queen replied in terms no
less vigorous and explicit. She pretended that
fie was not accountable to the confederate lords
for any part of her conduEt; and upon no repre-
'entation of theirs would the either abandon mea-
fures which fle deemed necefiary, or dismiss
forces wvhich ihe found useful, or demolih a forti-
fication which might prove of advantage. At the
fame time The required them, on pain of treason,
to diband the forces which they had assembled.

This haughty and imperious flyle founded

harfilv to Scottifli nobles, impatient, from their
national character, of the slightest appearance of
inl'ly; accustomed even from their own monarchs
o the nmoff refpetful treatment; and poffefling,
under an ariftocratical form of government, such
a :l]are of power, as equalled, at all times, and
nften controlled that of the sovereign. They
were sensible, at once, of the indignity offered
to, thcmfelves, and alarmed with this plain
rrclaration of the queen's intentiofns; and as
there now remained but one ftep to take, they
wanted neither public spirit nor resolution to
take it.

But that tlhcymight not seem to depart from the
eftablifled forms of the conltitution, for which,
even amidst their moit violent operations, men al.
ways retain the greateit reverence, they aflembled
all the peers, barons, and representatives of bo-
rniuhs,who adheredto their paity [ 0 c.2 i. .Thef:
formed a convention, which exceeded in number,
and equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of par-

liament.

liament. The leaders of the congrcgation lai(
before them the declaration which the queen lac
given in answer to their remonstrance; represent.
ed the unavoidable ruin which the measures Nh(
therein avowed and juflitied would bring upor
the kingdom; and requiring their direction witli
regard to the obedience due to an adminiftratioi
so unjust and oppressive, they submitted to thcil
dccilion a qulellionl, one of the inoft delicate and
interelting that can possibly fall under the con.
fideration of ful)jects.

This assembly proceeded to decide with no Icfs

dispatch than unanimity. Strangers to ltiofe firms
which protrat bulilcfs ; unacquainted with the
arts which make a figure in debate; and much
more fitted for aAihon than discourse ; a warlik
people always haften to a conclution, and bring
their deliberations to the shortest ifiue. It was
the work but of one day, to examine and to re.
solve this nice problem, concerning the bchav'i-
our of fubjefts towards a ruler who abuses his
power. But however abrupt their pi-oceedingi
may appear, they were not deftil utc of foleminily.
As the determination of the point in doubt was
conceived to be no less tlle oufic- of divilns tlita
of laymen, the former were called to alilt with
their opinion. Knox and W\illx appeared for the

llwhol order, and pronounced., withont lclitatioll,
both from the precepts and examples in fcripturc,
that it wa: lawful for fubjeas not only to refill
tyrannical princes, but to deprive then of that
authority, whill, in their haIld:;, Ibcomes all ill
ltrument for dellroying tlofe whomt the Almighty
ordailed them to protef. Tlhe decilion of per.
fonsl revered so hli;'lily for their fanred characlltr,
but more for tleir zeal and their piety, had great

weight

weight with the whole assembly. Not satisficd
with the common indilcriminate manner of figni-
fying consent, every person present was called in
his turn to declare his sentiments, and rising up
il; order, all gave their suffrages, without one dif-
i;fctini voice, for depriving the queen of the of-
w!ce of regent, which lhe exerciifd lo much to the
dtt in'enit of the kingdom c.

T'his extraordinary fntencne was olving no less

t tlc lovc. of liberty, than to zeal for religion.
Ji, the -t't of dep:ivation, religious grievances are
:;:::; }) nc-ntioned ; and the dangerous encroach-

In; its ol' the queen upon the civil conillitution are
i'.,'cd, by the lords of the congregation, in
i.:' to prove their collduA to have been not

' (!! jflt but nccefl:ary. The ilntroduci:g foreign
:ips into a kingdom at peace with all the

b .!i; t le seizing and fortifying towns in dif-

tCireit parts of the country; the promoting
i; n ,ge'; to offices of great power and dignity;
t!, (dll.iing the current coin d; thle fitbverting
tl!: anicicnt laws; the imposing of new and bur-
i lc':,ic taxes; and the attempting to subdue the
infdrlom, and to oppress its liberties, by open and

c- KR x, 184.
'!'! flanidard of money in Scotland was continually

I'.!. n the 16th of James V. A. D. 1529, a pound

ucirl t of gold, when coined, produced xo8 pounds of cur-
r,: :, orry. But under the queen regert's adminifiration,
A. 1. 156, a ouind weight of goll, although the quan-
bIt of alloy was considerably increaled, produced 144.1.

,er rmoneey. In 1i59, a pound weil:rt of silver, when
ulIld; poduccd o. z s. but in 6, it produced

l 1.

corinell moncy, iuddiman. Pitfat. ad Anderl. Diplom.t.
Stti', p. 8o, 81, from wlich it appears, that tlis co'n-
}i1l i, lwhich the malecontents often repeated, was not alto-
ic:l,c cflitute of loundation.

repeated

repeated ats of violence, are enumerated at great
length, and placed in the Itrongeit light. On all
thele accounts, the congregation maintained, that
the nobles, as counsellors by birth-right to their
monarchs, and the guardians and defenders of the
ctuniitution, had a right to interpose ; and there.
fore, by virtue of this right, in the name of the
king and queen, and with many exprellions of
duty and fubinilion towards them, they deprived
the queen regent of her office, and ordained that,
for the future, no obedience fliould be given to
her commands C.

Violent as this acion may appear, there wanted

not principles in the c(,aititution, nor precedents
in the hillory of Scotland, to juitify and to au-
thorifc it. Under the ariltocratical form of go-
vernment eftablifled among the Scots, the power
of the sovereign was extremely limited. The
more conliderable nobles were themselves petty
princes, pofleffing extensive jurifdiEtions, almoit
i; lependent of the crown, and followed by nu.
Incrous vaflals, who, in every conteit, espoused
their chieftain's quarrel, in opposition to the king.
Hence the many inltances of the impotence of
regal authority, which are to be found in the
Scottish history. In every age, the nobles not
only claimed, but exercised the right of control-
ing the king. Jealous of their privileges, a:ud
ever ready to take the field in defence of them,
every error in administration was observed, every

c M. Catcelnau, after condemning the dangerous council,

of the princes of Lorrain, with regard to the affairs of Scot.
land, acknowledges with hit usual candour, that the Scto
declared war agiinft the queen regent, rather from a desire
of vindicating their civil liberties, than from any motivtol
religion. Mear. 446. enroa

:.,Kro'ac)Hment upon the rights of tie aritlocracy
xccitel indignation, and no prince ever ventured

' t, trant'refis the boundaries which the law had

; icl'fcrbcd to prerogative, without meeting resist-
.!:lac, which shook or overturned his throne. En-
cauaged by the spirit of the constitution, and
coi;ntenaiced by the example of their ancestors,
tl!i lords of the congregation thought it incum-
b !)CL on them, at this juniture, to inquire into
t!i' mial-adminiftration of the queen regent, and
r pr efierve their country from being enslaved or
coiiquered, by depriving her of the power to exe-
cutr such a pernicious scheme.

The at of deprivation, and a letter from the

, !t'ds of the congregation to the queen regent,
.l. itill extantf. They discover not only that maf-
\ ulile and undaunted spirit, natural to men capa.
Hle of so bold a resolution; but are remarkable
i ,r a precision and vigour of expression, which we
arL surprised to meet with in an age so unpolifled.

lie fame observation may be made with refpe&t
o tllce other public papers of that period. The
ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the
compufitions of authors by profession obscure, or
.l;:ded, or absurd; but the language of business
i; nearly the fame at all times; and wherever men
think clearly, and are thoroughly interested, they
cxprefs themselves with perspicuity and force.

f Knox, 184.
vOL. i, r BOOK

# BOOK III.

BOO K II.
T HE lords of the congregation soon found,

that their zeal had engaged them in an ;:i-

dertaking, which it was beyond their utrn l!
ability to accomplish. Thie French garrifunl,
defpiing their numerous but irregular forccs,
refuied to surrender Leith, and to depart (il:
of the kingdom ; nor were they sufficiently ikiliil
il the art of war to reduce the place by force, ;
pofiefted of the artillery, or magazines, requiti',
for that purpose; and their followers, thoughi
of undaunted courage, yet being accustomed
decide every quarrel by a battle, were tirang,:;
to the fatigues of a long campaign, and soon 1.-
came impatient of the severe and conitant duty
which a liege requires. The queen', ; emif.
saries, who found it easy to mingle with their
countrymen, were at the utmost pains to height .,
their disgust, which dilcovered itself firtl in
murmurs and complaints, but ou occalion of t!ic
want of money for paying the army, broke out
into open mutiny. The mos. eminent leaders
were hardly secure from the unbridled insolence of
the soldiers; while some of inferior rank, inter-
poling too ralhly in order to quell them, fell vic-
tims to their rage. I)iflord, contternation, and
perplexity, reigned in the camp of the reformers.
The duke, their general, funk, with his usual ti.
midity, under the terror of approaching danger,
and dilcovered manifeil: symptoms of repentance
for hii raflieefs in efpouling such a desperate cause.

In

In this situation of their affairs, the congrega-

i ti;,l had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose pro-

trctd!ll they could derive their only reafinable
'hopl of success. Some of their more fagaeious
I'ladrl.;, having foreseen that the party might pro-
bal)' be involved in great dificulties, had early
, i!;Iw.iuul'ed to iccure a refonree in any ifch exi-
cCllcy, by entering into a secret correftondlellce
i.tlh the court of England .l Elizabeth, aware

l; Ithe dangerous deIlgns which the princes of

Lourain hIad formed againfi her crown, was early
ifcnliblc of how muclh importance it would be,
eno i, vy to check the progress of the French in
Scotlald, but to extend her own influence in that
i'ingdonllb; and perceiving how effectually the pre-
: it inflirreftions would contribute to retard or
dJ.f;:t the :liehines formed againit England, the
lillncd witl pleasure to these applications of the
ma;licoitents, and gave them private allhrances of
powerful support to their catfe. Randolph c, an
agenlt extr,'mely proper for conducting any dark
iitrigue, was dilpatclled into Scotland, and refid-
[i, :ceretly among the lords of the congrega-
tion, observed and'quickened their motions. Mo-
ii y v eelmed to be the only thing they wanted at
t.l 1t tine; and it was owing to a seasonable re-
ilui:tince fiom England d, that the Scottith no.
I1l:, l Id been enabled to take the field, and to ad-
la,ie towards Leith. Bu3t as Elizabeth was dif
i.llilful of the Scots, and Itudious to prefcrve ap.
iatranees with France, ller fubfdies were bestow.

Bumn. Hist. Rs. 3. Append. 278. Keitl, Append. a1.

I Sie Append. No. I. c Keidh, Apcpnd. 29,
* KnOx,J 24. Keith, Append. 44.

T 2 tl

ed at first with extreme frugality. The subsistence
of an army, and the expences of a siege, ib')!i
exhausted this penurious supply, to which the
lords of the congregation could make little ad.
dition from their own funds; and the ruin and
dispersion of the party mufi have instantly fol.
lowed.

In order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormi!fon

was sent, with the utmost expedition, to the go-
vernors of the town and castle of Berwick. As
Berwick was at that time the town of great-it
importance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph
Sadler and Sir James Crofts, persons of confidel.
able figure, were employed to command there,
and were entrusted with a discretionary power of
supplying the Scottish malecontents, according to
the exigency of their affairs. From them Cock.
burn received four thousand crowns, but little to
the advantage of his associates. The earl of Both.
hvell, by the queen's instigation, lay in wait for
him on his return, dispersed his followers, wound.
ed him, and carried off the money.

This unexpeted disappointment proved fatal

to the party. In mere despair some of the moi
zealous attempted to assault Leith; but the Freric
beat them back with disgrace, seized their can.
non, and pursuing them to the gates of Edin.
burgh, were on thle point of entering along will
them. All the terror and confusion which t il
profpe& of pillage or of massacre can excite in a
place taken by itorm, filled the city on this occa;
lion. The inhabitants fled from the enemy by
the oppolite gate; the forces of the congreoga
tion were irresolute and dismayed; and the queen';
partisans in the town openly insulted both. At

lall,

lait, a few of the nobles veitured to face the ene.
my, who, after plundering some houfcs in the
f.:iarbs, retired with their booty, and delivered
the city fiom this dreadful alalm.

A second fkinnifh, which happened a few days

after, was no less unfortunate. The Fir-cch feut
out a detachment to intercept a convoy of pro.
viliil;is which was designcd for Edinburgh. The
i,,,l' (oif cie congregation, having intelligence of
t!::, marched in all baile wsith a considerable body
es tlheir troops, and falling upon the enemy be-
t<1cn R dialrig and Leith, with more gallantry
laian gJr!d conduf, were almost surrounded by a
fi'cond party of French, who advanced in order
It,, I'ppot their own men. In this situation a re-
:at was the only thing which could save the
i.s,,s; but a retreat over marshy ground, and in
t'ic face of an enemy superior in number, could
nTot long be condu&ed with order. A body of
the enemy hung upon their rear, horse and foot
'11 into the utmost confusion, and it was entirely
ow-ing to the over-caution of the French, that
;ny ut( the party cfcaped being cut in pieces.

Oni this tfcond blow, the hopes and spirits of

t!l, congregation funk altogether. They did
i.)t think themselves fccure even within the walls

Eit I;linburgh, but instantly determined to retire

io lfime place at a greater diitance from the
(ir-n)-. In vain did the prior of St. Andrew's,
,n1ii a few others, oppose this cowardly and ig-
inomlilious flight. The dread of the present
dllnger prevailed over both the sense of honour
andl ze;al for the cause. At midnight [Nov. 6.]
l'cy set out from Ediaburgh in great confusion,

T 3 and

and marched without halting till they arrived at
Stirling C.

During this last insurrection, the great body of

the Scottifn nobility joined the congregation.
The lords Seton and Borthwick were the only
persons of rank who took arms for the queen, and
assisted her in defending Leith f. Bothwell openly
favoured her cause, but resided at his own houfl
The earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty
policy which diflinguiihes his charaacer, amiifc.i
the leaders of the congregation, whom he had
engaged to assist, with many fair promises, hut
never joined them with a single man g. The earl
of Morton, a member of the congregation, tlluc
tuatcd in a state of irrcfolution, and did not a.
heartily for the common cause. Lord Erfkinlc,
governor of Edinburgh cattle, though a pro.
teftant, maintained a neutrality, which he deenmed
becoming the dignity of his office; and having
been entrusted by parliament with the commandl
of the principal fortress in the kingdom, he re-
solved that neither fadtion fiould get it into their
hands.

A few days before the retreat of the congrce

gation, the queen suffered an irreparable loss 1);
the defecion of her principal secretary, William
Maitland of Lethington. His zeal for the rce
formed religion, together with his warm remonl
ftrances againf the violent meafurcs which the
queen was carrying on, exposed him so much
to her resentment, and to that of her French coun.
fellors, that he, fufpe&ing his life to be in danger,

* Keith, Appcnd. zi-45. f Keith, Append. 1p.
g Keith, Append. 33. Knox, ,zz.

wit l,

r:;ithdrew secretly from Leith, and fled to the
lords of the congregationh; and they with open
:rlms received a convert, iwhofe abilities added
boll ll rength and reputation to their cause. Mait-
l:nd had early applied to public business admir-
1li nlatural talents, improved by an acquaintance
v.ilh the liberal arts; and, at a time of life when
lii cotUltrylmen of the fame quality were follow-
i;,;- tlhe pleallres of the chace, or serving as ad-
r,. rel rs in the armies of France, lie was admitted
into all the secrets of the cabinet, and put upon a
i, vcl with persons of the most confuminate expe-
iucnce in the management of affairs. ITe possessed,
i': an eminent degree, that intrepid spirit which
dit rlihts in pursuing bold deligns, and was no less
iulalier of that political dexterity which is neceflary
f)r carrying them on with filccefs. But these
qil;ilities vwre deeply tindured wi:h the neigh-
h ,Jiring vices. His address sometimes degenerated
illt cunning; his acuteness bordered apon excefa;

I;;: invention, over-fertile, suggested to him, on
loine occalions, chimerical fyitems of policy, too
ic(iaied for the genius of his age or country ; and
his cniiterprihiug spirit engaged him in projters vast
and splendid, but beyond his utmost power to cx-
ccute. All the coternporary writers, to whatevtr
faliion they bclongc, nmention him with an admin-
ittio whlich nothiilg could have excited bht the
gire:!ctlt fiiperiority of penetration and abilities.

l'h: precipitate retreat of the congregation in.

ri'lfcd to such a dcgree the terror and confifion
\ liiihl had ftized the party at Edinburgh, that,
I),fo¢re tle army reached Stirling, it dwindled to
;i ncorfidencble nnl;er. Tlllc spirit of Knox,

b Knox, 9:a. how'veli

however, still remained undaunted and erect, a;i,
having mouznted the pulpit, he i'ddreffed, to hib
desponding hearers, anexhortation whlich vx onr.'r.
fully animated and rcvived themn. The heald (,f
this difcourfc are infert:d in his hittory , alin as.
ford a striking example of the boldnefis and !f e.
dorn of reproof aflumcd by the firnf reforn :,
as well as a fpecinien of his own skill in chou,;iir
the topics moit fitted to influence and route his
audience.

A meeting of the leaders being called, to c, ".

fider what course they fliould hold, now tl,:
their own resources were all exhausted, and their
deftrution appeared to be unavoidable v.'it.
out foreign aid, they turned their eyes once il,,l
to England, and resolved to implore the aifiht::c
of Elizabeth towards finilhing an entc(-prift:, i
which they had so fatally experienced their i,
weakness, and the strength of their adverfai-i¢
Maitland, as the mofl able negociator of the pai
ty, was employed in this embafiy. In hi: .
fence, and during the ina&tive fcafon of the )yar
it was agreed to dismiss their followers, worn on
by the fatigues of a campaign which had so f,
cxcerdcd the ufial time of service. But, in ordc
to preserve the counties most devoted to tliei
intereft,the ;prior of St ./.'ndrew's,wmith part ofth
leaders, reti, i( into Fife. The duke of Cliatel
hc 'aL'it, with the reft, fixed his refidcnce at Ha
ni;lton. There was little need of Maitland'
address or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to tll;
lIi ronlltry uinder her protection. She obhfcrv
tlhc prcva;l-nce of the Frelnch counsels, and th
progrcis of their arms in Scotland, with grti.

Knox, 193.

COllCCIll

concern ; and as Ihe well forefaiw the dangerous
.indency of their schemes in that kingdom, she
Ilad already come to a refulution with regard to
ie part lhe herself would at, if their power
Tr!i:re lhould grow still more formidable.

In order to give the queen and her privy

council a full and diftin& view of any important
rlttttr which might come before them, it seems
t, have been the pratice of Elizabeth's miniiters
p
i prepare memorials, in which they clearly stated
i ;e point under deliberation, laid down the
grounds of the condu& which they held to be
:tillt reasonable, and proposed a method for car-
r, ing their plan into execution. Two papers of
;iis kind, written by Sir William Cecil with his
own hand, and submitted by the queen to the
cjlllideration of her privy council, still remain k;
they are entitled, " A short difcuflion of the
w in-ighty matter of Scotland," and do honour to
the industry and penetration of that great minis-
t el. The motives which determined the queen
t. C'rpoufe so warmly the defence of the congrce
gation, are represented with perfpicuityand force;
and the consequences of filffering the French to
cltablifl themielves in Scotland, are predi6ted
with great accuracy and discernment.

Ile lays it down as a principle, agreeable to the

laws both of God and of nature, that every so-
cicty hath a right to defend itself, not only from
p:clcmnt dangers, but from such as may probably
cIlie ; to which he adds, that nature and reason
te;kilti every prince to defend himielf by the fame
mnCalls which his adversaries employ to distress

k B.ri. vol. iii. Append z83. Forbcs, i. 387, &c.
!citli, Append. 24.

him.

hlin. Upon thelf c grounds he establishes the :,
of England to interpoife in the affairs of S.>.
land, aid to prevent the conquest of that kin
dom, at wb.Ich the French openly aimed. T|
French, lhe oblleves, are the ancient and ir{L!
cable tenemies ,t Lilgland. Holtlities h:id i
fitled between the two nations for many centlr .
No treaty of peace into wh;cl they etelred '
ever been cordial or sincere. N, gootd efle:, ,'
thierfore to be expeEted fic(,rl the peace lat
agr.Cd upon, which, being extorted by prf.
lne cfitx, would be n;egligtnltly olbfrved, -:
broken on the flightei pten :lces. In a very iho
time, lrance \v(c. d r;,tevi r its fonmrer opulcnct
and thoughl now drained ;:i men and money !-
te(';um.B and un'lfccefsfil \\;'r, it \would qiic.;
be in a co!ndition i ;or i;)1c ., and the restless ;:i'
nmartial ge;irus of the pc, ple wou!d render aciic
rTccefl',r. "TIhe plinces ti Lorrain, who at thi
time liad lhte ci;lire directionl of French assai:'
were animatedl l it, the moil virulent h:ir'
againlt thle EI'"glihil nation. 'lTey openly calic
in o'.elion th, lghtiinacy cf the queen's ,1,-'
and Lb advancing the titlec 1nd pretenlions of thc
niece the queeln its cotland, (ludied to depri'
EIil.aheth of her crown. Witll this view, thl
had labourcd to exclude the Englifli from t'
treaty of Chateau en Cambrflis, and endeav olir
to coclucde a separate peace with Spain. 'l
had pcrluadi . d Icnry I.. to prmlit his daiugl:t
in-law to aliluinc tl e title and arms of qu<,n
lingland ; and even since tihe coniclufion' of t.
peace, they had solicited at Rome, and obt.ljll
a bull declaring Ellizabetlh's birll to be illcg':
mate. Though the wisdom and modcratiur.'

l':

ti clon1itabIc Mrontmorency had for some time
,i Ilucked their career, vet these reiltaints bein-
,In i,,, removed by the death of Henry II. and the

disiriace of his minifler, the utmolt excefls of
vilekn:e were to be dreaded from their furious
a ;!t,!tln, armed with sovereign power. Scot!land
i- the quarter where they can atta, k Eln'iland
:, itnl it advantage. A war on the boriirs of
;i;!l country, exposes France to no dank? :, but
:'C tI.il'lccersful action there may haz..rd the
cl o;n, :I id overturn tle government, of I7' glan:d.
: n ,,litical conduct, it is childish to wait till the

si 'iig:is of an enemy be ripe for Cixecuti;:.. The
,:;:i;;i iicnbles, after their utmoll cff,,, %, have
I:c.' ,',li;, .d to quit the field ; and, i'l I oml .:.-
, !Isi- tli, invaders of their libertici:, !iy behoi.l
;.'e Si n11 '!i power daily incrcafing, and must at lall
cia!c f:'om ftrugglingi any longer in a col. -ci io
i niequll. The invading of England wviil inme-
i iiatelx follow the reduction of the Scottilh Mialc-
: ni!l'clits, by the abandoning of whom to the
!i,,i1rc of the French, Elizabeth will open a way
i:.' h:l clnemiies into the heart of her own king-
d,,:n, and expose it to the calamities of war, and
thi dainler of conquest. Nothing therefore re-
ilaile_'dt but to meet the enemy while vet at a dif-
tatl.e from England, and by fipporting the con-
tr'cgatio' withapowerful armlly,to rendierScotland
thl tl;iatre of the war, to crulh t he designs of the
]l'lices of Lorrain in their infancy, and, by such
:l early and unexpelt ed effort, to expel the
Irench out of Brihiin, before thlir power had
time to take root and grow up to any formidable
}hiilit. But as the matter was of as much im-

portance

portance as any which could fall under the con.
fideration of an Englifl nmonarch, wifdlom
mature counsel were neceffry in the first place,
and afterwards vigour and expedition in contiu&,
the danger was urgent, and, by losing a liigle
moment, might become unavoidable1.

These arguments produced their full ciffc

upon Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extrmi:c
degree, of every pretender to her crown, and no
less anxious to preserve the tranquillity and hail.
piness of her fubjets. From these motives ilie
had afted, in granting the congregation an early
supply of money; and from the fame principle
she determined,in their present exigency, to afford
them more effeetual aid. One of Maitland'l
attendants was instantly dispatched into Scotlar(l
with the ifrongeit assurances of her protetio;i,
and the lords of the congregation were dcfired
to fend commissioners into England to concludei
treaty, and to fettle the operations of the cant-
paign with the duke of Norfolk rn.

Meanvwhile the queen regent, from whom no

motion of the congregation could long be crln
cealed, dreaded the success of this negotiation
with the court of England, and foresaw how little
she would be able to refilt the united effort of the
two kingdoms. For this reason she determined,
if poflible, to get the iart of Elizabeth; and by
venturing, notwithltanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the ralecontents in their

1 The argumenta which the Scots employed, in order tQ

obtain Elizabeth's alfifance, are urged with great fotce, in
a paper of Maltland'%. See Append. No. 11.

' Keitlt, 114, Rymcr, xr. p. 569.

4 p)rci:t

1,,I Lcflt d;iperfed and helpless situation, the hoped
o put an end to the war before the arrival of
tici,. Englif i allies.

,1 conliderable body of her French forces,
1 i.) x cICL augmented aibout this time by tile ar-
; .!1 )f thle count de Martigues, with a tloufand
'itcran foot, and fonme cavalry, were commandel
0, inni h to Stirling. Having there crossed the

i:u tlh, tley proceeded along the coast of Fife, de.

*I' .'i) g ;I ii(pluinderilig,witl excefiveoutrage,the
l I s aiid lands of tlihofie whomn they deemed their

F

is. ife was the molt populous ald power-

,il county in the kingdom, and molt devoted to
,' ic conlrcgation, whlo had hitherto drawn from
rii,':. their molt conlfdeiable supplies, both of
,i.i mIand ptoviions; and therefore, belides punifll-
i ,; tlie dlfaffccion of the inliabitants, by pilla-
i i:; the country, the French proposed to seize
;:a', tortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a
;:;r ; ifon fullicient to bridle the mutinous spirit of
1 t:' ploincc, and to keep poffeltion of a port
it:l trie oil the main oceann.

1) it,ioi this occalion,tll prior of St.Andrew's,

1,:: ( R.ulliven, ( irkaldy of Grange, and a few of
ti'i ioit aftivc leaders of the congregation, per-
fii.icl, by their bravery and go(od condudt, a
il .e' of lie utilllt inplortancc to tleir party.
1 l.i\ ig aflcmbled Iix hlrndred liorfc, they infested
tlil` 'cnlch with contin ual incurlions, beat up their
(iti l'ers, intcrcepted their convoys of provilion.;,
cl olr their {traggling parties, and so harassed
tIlu with ]perletual alarlms, that they prevented
i llcm for more tlhan three weeks from advancing0

" Hlaynes, 221, &c. o Knox, o02.
V'l. I. U 15(0

156o0. At last the prior, with his feeble I:,r.

ty, was constrained to retire, and the French set
out from Kirkaldy, and began to move along the
coast towards St. Andrew's [Jan. 23.]. T'he
had advanced but a few miles, when, from ;11,
eminence, they descried a powerful fleet fteerin:
its course up the Frith of Forth. As they knii,
that the marquis D'Elbeuf was at that time pre.
paring to fail for Scotland with a nnumcrnois
army, they hastily concluded that these ship lhe.-
longed to 1him1, and gave way to the molt iml!mo-
derate tianlports of joy, on the prospect of t ;l,
long-expetled ulccotlr. Theilr great gunIs .1i
already lired to welcome their friends, and to
spread the tidings and terror of their arrival a,: '.' :
thei- enemics, when a frmall boat friorl the o I:[-
rite coast landed, and blaitld their ptrmatutlr ;.;d
Ihort-livcd trinniph, by informnng them, t!,t !:
was the fleet of England which was in light, i:i
tcnded for the aid of the congregation, andl

.
soon to he followed by a formidabic land arl.; ?.

Throughlout her wholc reign, Eli.abeth .!'

cautious, but dcciive ; and by h er prompt; : iic
in executing her resolutions, joined to the 0-i.
beration witih lwhich Ihe fornned themn, hl' ;'!(
minifiration bIcalne remarkable, no less for il
vigour, than for its wildom. No- sooner didi !.t
detcrmine to aflord her prote&ion to the lorls of
the congregation, than they experienced the nL
tivity, as well as the extent of her power. '11
season of the year would not permit her l11:!
army to take the field ; but left the French floullli
in the mean time, receive new reinforcements, llt

l' Knox, zo3.
7 insaitlS

iraitanlly ordered a itrong squadron to crtife in
the Frith of Forth. She seems, by her inftruc-
tiolls to XWinter her admiral, to have been defirotu
;:, prefcrvi)ngi he appearances of friendfhiptoyards
t!i French q. But there were only appearances;
if any French fleet flould atlcmtpt to land, he was
conlir.an! d to prevent it, by every aa ofhoftilit
and violence. It was tu liglht of this fquadro4
i- ic!l occasioned at first lb inuch joy among the
!'rcndi, but which soon inspired them with such
u:rror as saved Fife from the efifed of their ven-
,:;t1:?cc. Apprelenfive of being cut off from their
companions on the opposite ihorc, they retreated
: ow.rds Stirling with the utmost precipitation, and
in a dreadful season, and through roads almot
inpalltible, arrived at Leith, harassed and ex-
h.,ulted with fatigue r.

'!'he Englifil fleet cast anchor in the road of
,eith, and continuing in that station till the con-
clulion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
I.,ith from receiving succours of any kind, and
considerably facilitated the operations of thlei
own\ forces by land.

Soon after the arrival of the Englifil fqttadron,

the conumilfioners of the congregation repaired
to Berwick, and concluded with the duke ds
Nuifolk a treaty [Feb. 27.], the bond of that
Illlin iwith Elizabeth whichl was of so great ad-

,ntilgcc to tle caluf. To tive a check to the
,l.irolts and rapid progref; t of the French arms
i! Scotland, was llhe profcnfed dceign of the con-
':-u:;;ing partic;. 'In order to this, the Scots en-
!ryedl ilever to fufler aly closer union of their
*:otlillty with Franace; and to defend themselves

i Kih, AppcnJix, 45. IFynes, 3'1. r Knox, ao3.

U 2 to

to the uttermoit against all attempts of. qnqueft.
Elizabeth, on her part, promised t 'emifploy in
Scotland a powerful army ,ffor their afliftance,
which the Scots iiudertooil ' j'oin with all tihrh
forces; no place in Scotlind v.as to remain in
the hands of the Englif ; whatever (nould be
taken from the enemy, ovas either to be rafed, cr
kept by the Scots, at their choice ; if an inva-
sion should be made upon England, the Scots
were obliged to affit Elizabeth with part of thlir
forces; and to ascertain their faithful oblcrvancc
of the treaty, they bound themselves to. dl.i cr
hostages to Elizabeth, before the march of T^lr
army int6 Scotland; in conclusion, the S(otu
made many protestations of obedience and lIoy;:i i
towards their own queen, in every thing not iii-
consistent with their religion, and the liberties us
their country '.

The English army, coInifiing of fix thousand

foot and two thousand horse, under the command
of lord Gray of Wilton, entered Scotland earl-
in the spring [April 2.]. The members of tie
colngregation afCeirbled fiom all parts of the
kingdoml to meet their new allics; and having
joined them, with great multitudes of their fol-
lowers, they advanced together towards Leithi.
The French were little able to keep the sic!ld
againit an enemy so inmch fitperior in Iinmbllr.
A itrong body of troops, dcllined for their re-
lief, had been fcattcicd by a violent florm, aril
had either pceilhed on tihe coalt of France, or
with tifficulty had recovered the ports of that
kingdom t. But they hoped to be able to defeld

a Know, 2T7. Hlaynts, 253, &c.
t Mem. de Catlel. 450.

Leith,

Leith, till the princes of Lorrain should make
good thle magnificent promises ofaffiftance, with
which they daily encouraged them; or till scar-
city of provilons flould confirain the Engliflh to
cttil c into their own country. In order to haftef
lthis lltter event, tlhey did not neglect th'ufual,
thouiLh barbarous precaution for distressing an
i!nvading enemy, by burning and laying waste al
thel adjacent country v. The zeal, however, of
the nation frustrated their intentions; eager to
contribute towards removing their oppressors, the
people produced their hidden stores to support
tilil fl-icds ; the neighbouring counties fuppliedl
every tiing necefsany, and far from wvanting sub-
'i'nic, "the English found in their camp all forts
(,! provisions at a cheaper rate than had for fomre
i:.c been known in that part of the kingdom x

On the approach of the English army, the

iit'cn regent retired into the cafile of Edinburgh.
I cr health was now in a declining slate, and her
li'nd broken and deprefled by the misfortunes of
}lr adlmniill-ation. To avoid the danger and
fatig;lu of a siege, fie committed herself to tl;e
plrot:ctioLn of lord Errkinc. This nobleman itfll
prcfcrveld l is neutrality, and by his integrity, and
!i.: of li; coluntry, merited equally the esteem
(f hboth parties. He received the queen herself
w'tl tlie lutmolt holnour and rclp)e&,' but took
c;il' to admit no such retinue as might endanger
)is colmmand of the caitle Y.

A few days after they arrived in Scotland, the
l'nglitl invetced Leith [April 6.]. The galTifon
flipt up within the town was almoll half as nu.

IKnox, 225. x Knox, ibid.
Y 'orbes's ColldA. vol. i. 503. Kcitht, Aza.

u 3 merous

rncrous as the army which fat down before it,
and by an obstinate defence protratred the ficge
to a great length. The circumfianccs of this ficg',
related by contemporary h1iftolians, men weitloin
knowledge or experience in the art of wnrl, a;
often obfcurc and imperfect, and at this ditalnrl
of time are not considerable enough to he ent(e,-
taining.

At ii-rt the French endeavoured to keep po1"

feflion of the Hawk Hill, a rillng ground not s;:i
difiant from the town, but were iVat fiom it
[April 15.] with great slaughter, chiefly by tl,:i
furious attack of the Scottif cavalry. Wit;,
a few da-ys the French had their full revengc:
having sallicd out v.itn a (rong body, tlheyent c,. i
the Engllifi trenches, broke their troops, naii.{i
part of tlieir cannon, and killed at leafl d(:ulil
the number they had loft in the former nliriniii,
Nor were the l'nglifil more fortunate in an .t.
tempt \vllhh they made to take the place hir
alTault; they were met with equal courage, alti
repulsed with confideralhle loss [May 7.]. From°
the detail of Lliefr ciircnilnanccs by the wlritirs
of that age, it is easy to (;bfer-vc tile differcni
charaters of the Freuch and Englilh troopp.
Tlhe former, trained to war, during the aci.'
reisg,,; of FrancisI. and H1enry II. d(efen'de thlc'.
selves not. only i

it.l the bravery but wili the i. ill

of veterans;. The latter, wlluo had been molr ac
customed to peace, itill preserved the intrepid an
desperate valour peculiar to the nation, but dli
covered few marks of military genius, or of ex
perience in the practice of war. Every misfi(,
tune or dilnppoinntient during the ficge must h
imputed to manifcll errors in condut. The fit

,.'1

cess of the besieged in their sally was owing en-
tirelyto the fecurityand negligence of thcEnglifh;
many of their officers were absent; their soldiers
had left their Jlations, and their trenches were al.
m,,R without a guard . The ladders which had
bccr provided for the assault, wanted a great deal
,oi rle necessary length ; and the troops employed
;,! that service were ill supported. The trenches
Svere opeied at lirit in an improper place ; and as
;t wmas found expedient to change the ground,
i.tli time and labour were loit. The inability
of tliir own generals, no less than the strength
of the French garrison, rendered the progress of
le( I:Egliilh wonderfully flow. The long con.
iinuilce, hlowever, of the liege, and the loss of
i':lt of thtir magazines by an accidental fire,
:ncl:c'd the French to extreme diltrcfs for want
;,1 provisions, which the profpea of relief made
them bear with admirable fortitude.

While the hopes and courage of the French
r'otracted the siege so far beyond expectation,
rth leaders of the congregation were not idle.
Bv ni(' associations and confederacies, they la-
Ib;lred to unite their party more perfctly. By
i)tl),l(ly ratifying the treaty concluded at Ber-
v ,ii lk, they cndeavoured to render the alliance
\i;hli England firm and indissoluble. Among
tlC lllfcribers of these papers we find the earl
of lulltly, and some others, who had not hi-
1l lito concurred with the congregation in any
of thleir neafilres a. Several of these lords, par-
ticllal-ly the earl of Huntly, Itill adhered to the
ji"Iiih church ; but on thlis occasion neither their

llayncs, 294 . 28. 305, &c.
* iurn, vol. iii. 287. Knox, 2z21 Haynes, 26r. 263.

religiouM

religiolus sentiments, nor their former cautions
maxims, were regarded; the torrent of national
resentment and indignation against the French
hurried them on b.

The queen regent, tlheinftrument, rather than

the cause of involving Scotland in thofc calamities
under whicll it groaned at that time, died duiing
the heat of the liege [June o.]. No princcih
ever polTefied qualities more capable of rendering
her aldminillrationi illu'trious, or the kingdom
happy. Of much difccrimclt, and no lels ad-
dress; of great intrepidity, and equal prudence;
gentle and humane, without weakncfs ; zeailoi>
for her religion, without bigotry; a lover ns
juitice, without rigour. One circumflance,hoi,.
ever, and that too the excess of a virtue, r;ai:;r
than any vice, poisoned all these great qualitiY,
and renldered her government unfortunate, a;li
her name odious. Devoted to the interell oif
France, her native country, and attached to tlir
princcs of Lorrain, her brothers, with molt }'if.
fionate fondlnefs, file departed, in order to grati.;
thlln, from every maxim which her own wiilUoi
or luilmanity would have approved. She outlivdl,

b The dread of the French power did on many oceali'),

fminount the zeal which the catholic nobles had for 'Ir
religion. BUcfidrs the prelmniptive evidence for this, al.i,~
fiom the mcmnorial mentioned by lurnet, Hilt. of tl:c lRc.
formation, vol. iii. zSi. and publiiled by him, Appci.n'
p. 278; the inftrutions of Elizabeth to Randolphl Il,
agent, put it beyond all doubt, that many zealous p).'iill
thought the alliance with England to be necessary for pr,
serving the liberty and independence of the kingdom. KeItr
158. Huntly himlelf began a correlpondence with Eliza.
beth's miniRters, before the march of the Englilh army i'r'
Scotland. Haynes' StatePapcrs, i6l. 263. St cApptnl
No. Ill.

ill a great ineafure, that reputation and popularity
whichl had finoothed her way to the higheit ita-
tion in the kingdom; and many examples of
ttl'cllood, and some of severity, in the latter
pa t of her administration, alienated from her the
afK'rions of a people who had once placed in her
,n unl(tboluded confidence. But even by her ene-
mies these unjultitiable aA&ons were imputed to
t!h facility, not to the malignity, of her nature;
awl;, while they taxed her brothers and French
coinfellors with rashness and cruelty, they still
allowed her the praise of prudence and of lenityc.
A few days before her death, Ihe desired an in-
terview with the prior of St. Andrew's, the carl
of Argyll, and other chiefs of the congregation.
IT them (he lamented the fatal iffne of those
violent counsels which flhe had been obliged to
follow; and, with the candour natural to a ge-
nrrous mind, confessed the errors of her own ad-
rmililfration, and begged forgiveness of those to
whom they had been hurtful; but at the fame
i;me (he warned them, amidlt their ilruggles for
li!rlty and the shock of arms, not to lose fight
(,f ihe loyalty and fuiljedion which was due to
their foverleign d. The remainder of her time fie
employed in religious meditations and excrcifes.
S;Ie e'en invited the attendance of Willox, one
I1 the molt eminent arnong the reformed preach-
I Is, lilleled to his inftrutAionis with reverence and
:lcntion %, and prepared for the approach of

.>atli with a decent fortitude.
Nothing could now save the French troops

Ihul up in Leitl, but the immediate conclusion

c iluchannan, 3z4. d Leley, dcRebus GCet. Scot. 2Z2.
Knox, 228.

of

of a peace, ol tile arrival of a powerfil anny
from the continent. 'lhe princes of Lorrllin
amuled theil party in Scotland with continual
cxpesrations of the latter, and had thereby kept
alive their hopes andtheir courage ; but atlalt,tli
lituition of France, rather thlan the terror of thle
lnglihb arls, or the remonftlances of tle Seo:.
tith malecontents, conrlitained them, though ilh
reluEtance, to turn their thoughts towards pacilic
councils. The proteltants in France were at tlia:
time a party formidable by their number, ; d
more by the valour and enterprising genius i,,
their leaders. Francis II. had treated them wv:r
extreme rigour, and discovered, by every flte h!
took, a fettled resolution to extirpate their .
ligion, and to ruin those who profefled it. At thl
profpea of this danger to theinfelves and to tllci
cause, the protestants were alarmed, but not
terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflamed with
resentment, they not only prepared for their owil
defence, but resolved, by some bold atlion, to
anticipate the schemes of their enemies; ani as
the princes of Lorrain were deemed the antliii,
of all the king's violent measures, they nlarkl
them out to be the first vidtims of their indigna.
tion. Hence, and not fiom disloyalty to ti!
king, proceeded the fimous conspiracy of Am.
boile [March 15.] ; and thlough the vigil;al:c
;and good fortune of tlhe princes of Lorrailn ti:I
covered andn dil. fpointed that delign, it was caly
to obfervr new llorms g;atlheril.g in every provili'
of the kingdom, and ready to Ibur1 out with all
the firy and outrage of civil war. In this situ.
ation, the amnllition of the house of Lorrain w'i
;alled off fiom tlhe thloughts of foreign conlueill,

to defend the honouri and dignity of tlhc rench
crown ; and iniltcad of fending new reinforccmelntg
into Scotland, it became neceflary to withdraw
the veteran troops already cmployed ill that king.

I[n order to condldnt an affair of so mlch nn-
orltance and delicacy, the pr'ices of Lorrain
; i;dc choice of Molilue bilhol of Valence, and of
1te ;iceurI de Randan. As both thcfe, especially
t11 former, were reckoned inferior to no perfone
of' thl;t are in addrcts and political rclinement,
I]';i/i:!tll opposed to them amibanflidos of equal
!hilii'es ; Cecil her prime miniltcr, a man perhaps
( :i t! c greitefi capacity who had ever held that

si.'; '; anld Wotton dean of Canterblt y, grownl
oI! iin the art of negociating utnder tllhre tIncef-
i\ Illoi mlilrChs. The intcrells of tlie Frenich and
l' .glilh courts were soon ad juited by nmen of so
a: e;t dexterity in buiinefs ; and as 1;rance easily
,ifcnited to witlidraw thof;i forces which had
Lcii the chief occalion of the war, the other
)oinis in dilifutc betwveen that kingdom and Eng-
laid ;x erc not matters of tedious or of difficult
til;ilflioll.

'Pelc grievances of the congregation, and their

(]'lain(Is upon their own sovereigns for redrcfs,
iemlpl)oyed longer time, and required to be treated
wil a rmore delicate hand. After si many open
Itt Inl)pts, carried on by conmmand of the king ald
(Icentl, il order to overtuti the ancient contlitu-
tion, alnd to suppress the religion wllic:i they had
embraced, the Scottidh nobles could not think
tlieilfclves fccure, without lixing some new bar-
ri'ir ;gainlt the future cncroachments of regal

I L'cflcy, zz4.

power.

power. But the legal itcps towards accompllilh
ing this were not so obvious. The Frenclh ;a
bafladors confidered the entering into any tlieat
with fnbjets, and with rebels, as a condefcenlll,
unsuitable to the dignity of a sovereign ; and tlli
scruples on tllis head might have put an end t
the treaty, if the impatience of both parties i'
peace had not fuggctled an expedient, wLlci
teemed to provide tor the security of the fubj.ct
without derogating fiom the honour of tl,
prince. The Scottitll nobles agreed, on tii
occalion, to pass from the point of right and prin
lege, and to accept the redress of their grievalnrc
as a matter of favour. Whatever additional fccu
rity their anxiety for personal safety, or their .ca
for public liberty, prompted them to demand, \a
granted in the nane of Francis and Mary, as ac;;
of their royal favour and indulgence. And li!
concessions of this kind should seem prcearioi:
and liable to be retraetd by the fame power wlhici
ihad made them, the French ambassador agrcc
to insert them in the treaty with Elizabeth, :
thereby to bind the king and queen inviolably i
observe them r,

In relating this tranfafion, contemporary h lifli

rians have confounded the conceflions of Fraiii
and Mary to their Scottifl filbjc&s, with lth
treaty between France and England; the latter
besides the ratification of former treaties bets c'r
the two kingdoms, and llipulations with reigal;
to the time and manner of removing both armic
out of Scotland, contained an article to tlililh
as the source of many important events, we Ihal
often have occasion to refer. The right of E1l
zabcth to her crown is thereby acknowledgcd 11

s Ketih, 134, &c.

til:

r)le Itrongef terms; and Francis and Mary so-
Icrnnly engage neither to aflinme the title, nor to
bear tht arms of king and queen of England im
any time to come 1'

Jutly 6.] Honourable as tllis article was for

Ilil. ibctlh herself, the conditions hle obtained f;r
her allies the Scots were no leis advantageous to
them. Monluc ' ..d Randan consented, in the
naTl of Francis and Mary, that the Frenchl forces
il . cotland should inltlntlv be sent back into their
o\:1 colntry, and no foreign troops be hereafter
introduced into the kingdom w\ithout the know-
ledge and content of parliament; that the forti-
iiattions of Leilh and Dunbar should immediately
ec rafed, and no new fort be ereaced without the
.r'r-:lfTlonl of parliamnent; that a parliament (hould
i, held on the firit day of Augutt, and that as-
f.inbly be deemed as valid in all rcfpeAs as if it
lhad been called by the express commandment of,
the king and queen; that, conformable to the
ancient laws and cultoms of the country, the
kilg and queen ihould not declare war or con-
(lide peace without the concurrence of parlia-
nillt ; that, during the queen's absence, the ad.
iilliltr-atioji of government should be veiled in a
coutncil of twelve persons, to be chosen out of
tw enlty-four named b) parliament, seven of which
council to be ele&ted by the qucen, and live by
thel parlliiament; that hereafter the king and qucc
llnilld not advance foreigners to places of trust
or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the offices
ofr lealurer or comptroller of the revenues upon
iay) ccclefiaftic; that an a& of oblivion, abolifll-

I lKeith, 134, Rymcr, xv. p. 581. 591, &c. Haynes,

.. .
64.
'01.. 1. x ing

inR the guilt and mcinory of all offences committed
since the lixth of March one thousand five hundred
and fifty-eight, (liould be passed in the enfinug
parlianiniit, t.nd be ratilied by the king and queen;
that the king and queen ihould not, under the
colour of punishing any violation of their utlho-
rity during that period, seek to deprive any of
their subjects of the offices, benefices, or eifatt:
which they now lield; that the redress due to
churchmen, for the injuries which they had fils
tained during the late infurreEtions, flould be
left entirely to the cognizance of parliament.
With regard to religious controversies, the am.
baffadors declared that they would not prefiunm
to decide, but permitted the parliament, at til;r
firit meeting, to examine the points in differencec
and to r-irefent their sense of them to the king
and qtiec '.

To such a memorable period did the lords of

the congregation, by their courage and perfevcl-
ance, condncTl an enterprise which at first promised
a very difft rent issue. From beginnings extremely
feeble, and, even contemptible, the party grevw by
degrees to great power; and being favoured by
m.any fortunate incidents, baffled all the efforts of
their own (jucen, aided by the forces of a more
considerable kingdom. The sovereign authority
was by this treaty transferred wholly into the
hands of the congregation ; that limited prrro.
gative, which1 the crown had hitherto poflfl'cd,
was a]moft cntircly annihilated ; and the ariilocra-
tical power, which alwrays predominated in lthc
Scottilh government, became supreme and in-
controlablc. .By this treaty too the ituflullnc of

I Keitl, 137, &C.

IF;anl c

Fralce, which had. long been of much weight in
the affairs of Scotland, was greatly diminifiled;
and not only were the pr'fcnt encl-oachnliints of
that ambitious ally reitrained, but, by confederat-
ing with England, protedion was provided against
any future attempt from the fame quarter. .At
the fame time, the con.troversies in religion being
left to the conlideration of parliament, the p'o-
tcftants might reckon upon obtailing whatever
decision was moll favourable to the opiniunsii whiAl
tleiy profefltd.

A few days aftcr the conclusion of the treaty,

both the French and English armies quitted Scot-
hand.

The eyes of every man in that! kingdom were

ttiried towards the approaching parliament. A
meeting, summoned in a manner if extraordi-
nary, at such a critical juncure, and to deliberate
a lon matters of so much consequence, was ex-
peEted with the utmolt anxiety.

A Scottish parliament ifitable to the arin ocra.

tical genius of the government, was properly an
ailembly of the nobles. It was composed of bi.
lhops, abbots, barons, and a few commnilloners
Of boroughs, who met altogether in one house.
The leflel barons, though pofefiucd of a right to
hE present, either in person or by their reprefenta-
tires, feldorm cxercifed it. 'Tie cxpence of at-
t.lding, according to the fafliion-of the times,
tvhll a numerous train of valfals and dependants;
the inattention of a martial age to the forms and
detail of civil government ; but above all, the cx-
orbitant authority of the greater nobles, who hadl
lrawn the whole power ilto their own hand'l;,
made this privilege of so little value, as to bh al-

x z mnll

molt neglected. t appears from the ancient rolls,
that during times of tranqoillity, few commilifi)n
crs of boroughs, and almost none of the lesser ha.
ros, appeared in parliament. 'The ordinalr :d-.
Iniistration of governlment was abondoned, wiih-
out scruple or jealoiify, to th! king' and to tihe
greater barons;, but in extraordinary conjunsturs,
wher thec struggle for liberty was violent, and tie
spirit of opposition to tile crown rose to an height,
the burglles and lefier barons were roused frlom
their inactivity, and stood forth to vindicaie t1e
rights of their country. The turbulent reigJn of
James III. affords examples in proof of this hb.
servation k. The pullic indignation againit the
rash designs of that weak and ill-advifed prinic,,
brought into parliament, besides the greater rl.
bles and prelates, a conliderable number of the
lefler barons.

The fame causes occasioned the unusual coc.

fluence of all orders of men to the parliament,
which met on the first of Auguf. The 1niviCi-
fal passion for liberty, civil and religious, whicl
had seized the nation, suffered few persons to
remain unconcerned spectators of an afl'embly,
whose at., were likely to prove decisive witl rc.
fpe&t to both. From all corners of the kingd n
men flocked in, eager and determined to aid,
with their voices in the senate, the fame calfe
which they had defendeld with their swords in
the field. Belides a full convention of pees,
temporal and lfpiritual, there appeared the repre.
ilntatives of almoll all the boroughs, and above
an lhundred barons, who, though of tlec lefilr or:
der, were gentlemen of the lirlt rank and fortune
il the nation 1.

* Keith, 147. 1 Ibld. 146.

Tli(

The parliament was ready to enter on hufinefs

V:ith the utmost zeal, when a difficulty \-as ilarted
concerning the lawfilnefs of the inectng. No
coninmiflioner appeared in the name of tile king
and queen, and no ligniication of their colnfnt
and app.robation was yet received. These were
deemned by many essential to the very being of a
parliament. But in oppolition to this sentiment,
tile express words of the treaty of Edilburglh
WvK-r urged, by which this affcinfly was declared
to be as valid, in all refpet;, as if it had been
called and appointed by the express command of
thl kilg and queen. As the ad!erents of the
coilgregalion greatly outnumbered thCeir adver-
laries, the latter opinion prevailed. Theilr boideft
lcaders, and those of molt approved zeal, were(
cholen to be lords of the articles, wshc formed a
committee of ancient use, and of great importance
in the Scottish parliament m. The deliberations
ol thc lords of the articles were carried on with
the molt unanimous and acivc zeal. The a&t of
oblivion, the nomination of twenty-four persons,
out of whom the council, intrutced with fupremne
.uthority, was to be clcted; and every other
thing prescribed by the late treaty, or which
e' ,nied necessary to render it etf'tiual, pafled
vithout difputc or delay. The article of religion
employed longer time, and was attended with
greater difficult-y. It wras brought into parlia-
ment by a petition from those who adopted the

in From nn original letter of Hamilton, archbilhop of Sr.

Anldrtvw's, it appears, trhat the lords of articles were chofcn
in the manner atierwards appointedl by an at of parliament,
'lfi33. Kcith, p. 487. Spottifwood leems to confider this to
Ilc ibeen the comnior pratice. HiRf. 149.

X 3 princi

principles of the reformation. Many doEr-iinc
of the popifl hchurch were a contradittion to rca-
son1 and a disgrace to religion ; its di(i.;plinc had
become corrupt and oppressive; and its rev.enus
were both exorblitant amd ill-applied. Againif
all tlcefes the protellants remonlfrated with the
Uitnfio7 alpceity of Ityle which indignation at
their albfurdity, or experience of their pcrniciilu
tendency, could ifrpirc ; and encouraged, hby Lhe
mnumber as well as zeal of their friends, to impr.nt
fich a favourable junit'llrc, the) aimed the blow
at the whole fabric ot popery ; and besought the
parliamrent to interpose its autllorityfor reftifying
these multiplied abuses .

Several p:cl;ntes, zealoufy attached to the an.

cient fuplenlitio) , were present in this parlia.
ment. 13ut dning these vigorous proceedings oi
the protestants, they flood confounded and at
gaze ; and perfevcred in a silence which was fatal
To their cause. They deemed it impoflible to re.
fill or divert that torrent of religious zeal, wliich
was still in its full tllength ; they dreaded that
their ol)pofition would irritate their adverfarice
and excite them to new ads of violence; thly
hloped that the king and queen would soon be at
Icifinre to put a flop to the career of their insolent
l'lujedts, and that, after the rage and havoc oI
the present ilorm, the former tranquillity and
order would le reltored to the church and king
lonl. They were willing, perhaps, to facrifict
the doArine, and evcn the power of the church,
in order to enitre the safety of their own per.
foas, and to preserve the possession of those re.
venues which were fill in their hands. lrom

a Knox, 237,

wliatca

-ii;. vc'lr Ilotives thev ated, thei('r iilelce, which
v-ns iinputed to tlhe conf'ioufilelfs if ia bad auf ie,
aftird!cd matter of great triumph to the protct-
ants, and encouraged them to proceed with more
boldneis and alacrity °.

The parliament did not think it enough to

crindicmn those dorilnes mentioned in the perti.
i., i of the proteitants; they moreover gave the
t.inciril of their approbation to a conft-feflio of
litil presented to them by tle rciorined teach-
r-s P ; and cornpofed, as might be expefted fiom
tilch a pcrfolriance at that jundtnur, ,n purpose
to expose the absurd tenetS and plradices of the
Roifih chltii)r'l. By another ad, the jlnrifdicion
tf the eccltfialiical courts was abholilld, and the
ct'aLl!s which formlerly canie under their cogni-
zalce were transfrred t to the decilion of civil
ilidges . By a third statute, the cxcrcife of re-
ligious worfilip, according to the rites of the
Romniifl church, was prohibited. The manner
in which the parliament enforced thc observation
of this law dilfovers the zeal of that afeil)ly;
the firfi tranfgreifioni ful)jetcd the ofilnder to
the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corporal pu-
niininicnt, at the difcretiol of the judge ; banifli-
ment was the penalty of a second violation of the
law ; and a third aA of difohcdience was declared
to be capital r. Such Itranlgers were men at that
time to the flpirit of toleration, and to the laws
of humanity ; and with such indecent haile did
tile very persons who had juit escaped the rigour
of ccclciiatlical tyralny, proceed to imitate those

o Knox, Z.5. P Id. ibid.
'1 Keith, r5c. I Knox, 254..

example.

r examples of fevrity of which they themftl;cs
' hlad so jufly complained.

The vigorous zeal of the palliament overtturned

in a few days the ancient fyltem of religion whih
had been eldblilhied fl many ages. In refornling
thle (dolrilc and difeipline of the church, the
nobles kept pace with the ardour and expela.
tions even of Knox lumfelf. But their proceed.
ings, wvith rcfpec to these, were not more rapid
and impetuous, than they were flow and dilatory
when they entered on the consideration of ecele-
fiailical revenues. Among the lay members, foni:
were already enriched with the spoils of the
church, and others devoured in expectation tlle
wealthy benefices which itill remained untouched.
The alteration in religion had afforded many of
the dignified ecclcfiaflics themselves an opportu.
nity of gratifyilg their avarice or ambition. The
dleoloition of the monasteries having set the
monks at liherty from their confinement, they
intlantly dispersed all over the kingdom, and
commonly betook themselves to tome secular em-
ployment. The abbot, if he had been so fortu.
nate as Leo embrace the principles of the refolna.
tion fromn convichtion, or so cunning as to efpoufc
tlren out of policy, fciz' l '' . whole revenues of
tlle fraternity; and, except what he allowed for
the fubfillence of a f:w fuipcrannnated monlks',
applied themn entirely to hih own use. The pro.
polal made by the reibrmed teachers, for apply.
ing these revenues towards the maintenance of
ininifters, the education of youth, and the flip-
),ort of the poor, was equally dreaded by all thcfe

$ Keith, 496. Append, igo, g11.

ordcr;

tlyfcrls of men. They o)pofed it swith tile ut-
:ii,!ul warmnth, and by theil numbers and autho-
rity cafily prevailed on the parliament to give no
(1- to such a disagreeable demand '. Zealous as
t c firi. reformers were, and ainimatc( wMith a fpi-
r;r filperior to the low coliiderations of intcreltl,
they ibeheld thele early fymptoins cf fefillincifs alnd
;iv-r'ice among their adiercnts wi h amazenient
aind sorrow; and we find Knox exprcfling the
urinoft sensibility of that contempt iith wllich
!hey *yere treated by many from whonm he ex-
pectvd a more generous concern for, the fIcceft
i r-eligion and the honour of its minil;itcrs .

A difficulty hath been started with regard to

the acts of this parliament concerning i tg!igon.
This difficulty, which at fich a diflance of time
is of no importance, was founded on tlhe wiords
of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the par-
Iiannent was permitted to take into conlideration
ile'ftate of religion, and to signify tlieirfertinlents
o: iL to the king and queen. But, inlcead ofpre'
ientilnf; their desires to their fovler-cigns in the
humrble form of a filpplication or addless, the
p;i-liament converted them inlu to many adis

:ili.'ll, although they never received the royal af-l

fknt, obtained, all over the kingdom, the weighti
lnd ainthority oflaws. In conmpliance; with their)
ii jutnciisii, thle eftabliilhed fyl r(t of religion w.s
ev:ry whelre overthrown, and1 that !recolmendlled
br tllc rclormers introduced in its place. Tlhe
11T,rti;Llitv and zeal of the people ove looked or
flpplied any defed in the f',inI of tlefe acls of.
Ilr'lintllent, .and rendered the olier'valce of then
iio'er universal than ever hlad been yieldcd to the I
t ,,ec Appnd. No. IV. * Knox, 239. · 50,.

Itatutea

f tatutes of the inioR rcgular or conftitutionili !1
fembly. 3By tlhoi proceedings, it mull, thov.;icer
1 b conifcnld, that the parliamert, or rather thi na.
,tion, violatce- the last article in the treaty ol
Edinburgh, andl even exceeded the powers \viic
belong to fuiljct;. But kwhen once men h;ae
been accultormed to break through the common
boundaries of fubjediol, and their minds ar! 11.
flamed with the passions which civil war inspires,
it is mere pedantry or ignorance to measure tnhci
cond:ft by those rules which can be applic!
only where govLrlnment is in a state of ordae and
tranquillity. A nation, when obl)lge to employ
such extraordinary efforts in defence of its liber.
ties, avails itself of every thing which can promote
this great end; and the necessity of the cafe, a
well as the importance of the objec, justify any
departure from the common and eftablilied rulab
of the constitution.

In consequence of the treaty of Edinburgl,

as well as by the ordinary forms of bufineli '!
became necessary to lay the proceedings of pa i.
amcnt before the king and queen. For this pir.
pose, Sir lames Sandilandls of Calder lord St.johl
was appointed to repair to the court of France,
After holding a course so irregular, the leaders of
the congregation had no reason to flatter tllhell
selves that Francis and Mary would ever appro"v
their condnut, or conlinn it by their royal alent,
Th'l reception of their tanubailadlor was no oilier
than they might have expected. He was treatid
by the king, and queen with the utmnoft coldncfs,
and difinifled without obtaining the ratification
of the parliament's proceedings. From the princs
of Lorrain, and their partisans, he endured all

ti:c scorn and insult which it was natural tor
ilem to pour updn the party he reprenletedx.
Though the carls of Morton, Gicncairn, and

WI itland of Lethington, the ambaflldors of the
pirlihtllnCllt to Elizabeth thilei protetreifs, met
7 withil a cry different rcception, they were not
; rn'c fiiccefsfiil in one part of the negocialion
l ittraned to their care. The Scots, fellible of
the fccusrity which they derived from their union

t;itli England, were deftr-ois of rendering it in.

difiiluble. Witli this view tliy empowered
t!lef eminent leaders of their party to tellif) to
Eizabeth their gratitude for that fcafonable and
f TlEual aid which lie had afforded tllem, and
i at the fame time to beseech her t; render the
' -icnd:ip between the nations perpetual, by con-
{iiccelding to marry the earl of Arran, wlo,
thoiugh a fubijed, was nearly allied to the royal
family of Scotlaid, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the crown.

To the former part of this conllrifrion Eliza-

beth li1tened with the utimof fatisfaioIon, and
encouraged the Sucts, in any future exigency, to
hope for the continuance of ler good oflices; with
regard to the latter, file difcovc-cd thole ienti-
ments to which file adhered throughout her whole
reign. Averse from marriage, as i;,me nma;tain
thr-ough choice, but more probahly out of policy,
thal ambitious princess would never admit any
pirtncr to the throne ; but delighted with the cn-
i:re and uncontrolled exercise of power, file facri-
liced t th e enjoyment of that, the hopes of
transmitting her crown to her vwn poftcrity. Tlc

1 Knox, 255. Buch. 327. State Papers published by
lrl Ilirdwickc, vol. i, i. p 25, &c.

anarriage

marriage witb tlhe earl of Arran could nc;
attelnd(d wirh- any such extraordinary advantag
a. to thake this resolution ; ihe declined it tl\rn
fore, but with many expreflions of goold-w.i
towards the Scottish nation, and of relpect iK
Arn-an himfelfy.

Towards the conclusion of this year, dillir

guifhed by so imany remarkable events, tiler
happened one of great importance. On til
fourth of I)Dcember died Francis II. a prilnce (
a feeble conititution, and of a mean understand
inr. Aj lic did not leave any iftile by the qteel.
no incident could have been more fortunate a
those who, during the late commotions in Scot.
land, had taken part vith the congregation,
Mary, b)y the charms of her beauty, had ac.
quired alt entire ascendant over her hulbliid;
and as (he transferred all her influence to her
uncles the princes of I,orrain, Francis followed
them implicitly in whatever track they I.'ei
pleased to lctad him. The power of Franc,
under Ilclh direction, alarmed the Scottifi m!al.
coi.tents with apprehensions of danger, no Ircs
formidable than well founded. The intltlint
disorders which raged in France, and the feaflo.
able interpolitioni of England in behalf of the
congregation, adl hitherto prevented the princel
of Lorrain from carrying their deligns upol
Scotland into execution. But under their vigor.
ous alnd decilive admininithation, it was iinlolliblt
that the commlotions in France could be of loIg
conltinuanlcc, and many thiims mighit fall in t
divert Elizlabth's attention, fti tlhe fiture, fra1n1
the affairs of Scotland. In either of tlhef es'cjit

Y Burn. 3. Append. 3o8. Keitil, r ., rc.

lht

the Scots would Itand exposed to all tile ven-
gcwance which the resentment of the French court
could inflift. The blow, however long sus-
pended, was unavoidable, and imuit fall at lait
with redoubled weight. From this profpec and
expedtation of danger, the Scots were delivered
by the death of F'rancis; the ancient confederacy
of tlh two kingdoms had already been broken,
and by this event the chief bond of union which
-rmained was dissolved. Catherine of Medicis,
wior, during tle minority of Charles IX. her fe-
cond fun, engrossed the entire direction of the
lFrcnch councils, was far firom any thoughts of
inilicatitl:_ the Scott;fi queen's authority. Ca-
il't1rine and Mary had been rivals in po wer during
thl rcisu of Francis II. and had contecnde d for
tlie goctrlnment of that weak and tuexperienced
pri.nce; but as the charms of the wife ealily tri-
urmphed over tile authority of the mother, Ca-
tlhlriec could never forgive fucl a diitppointment
i her favourite paflion, and b;'leld now, with
f cret plcafure, the diflicult and perplexing fcelne
wi! Whic h her daughter-in-law was about to enter.
M arly, overwhelmed with all thle sorrow which so
!:d i reverse of fortune could occafoii ; flighted
1) the qucen-motherl ; and forsaken by the tribe
of courtiers, vwio appear only ill tile fuifhilne of
profpcrity, retired to Rheiuis, andl there in soli-
tule indulged her grief, orI hid her indignation.
Even the princes of Lorrainl were obliged to
olllltradl their views; to turn them from foreign
to domefiic objeds ; and intead of forming valt
I'n'ijets with regard to B3ritain, they found it

z Henault, 340. Caileln. 454.
VOL. . y neccfTary

necessary to think of acquiring and eftabliflli
an interell with the new adminiltlation.

It is impossible to describe the emotions of jo

which, on all these accounts, the death of ti
French monarch excited among the Scots. The
regarded it as the only event which could giv
firmness and itability to that fytlem of rcligi'(
and government which was now introduced; ;aL
it is no wonder contemporary historians flio(;:!
ascribe it to the immediate care of Providence
which, by unforeseen expedients, can secure th
peace and happiness of kingdoms in those fitua
tions wlhere human prudence and invention woui,
utterly dcfpaira.

About this time the protestant church o

Scotland began to affurne a regular form. It
principles had obtained the fantion of publi;
authority, and some fixed external policy bccait
necessary for the government and preservation u1
the infant society. The model introduced by tlh
reformers differed extremely from that which hai
been long established. The motives which inl
duced them to depart so far from the ancient
fyitem deserve to be explained.

The licentious lives of the clergy, as has )ci'n

already obfclved, feeIm to have been among the
filft things that excited any suspicion concelrni:lg
the truth of the doctines which they tnalllil
and roused that spirit of inquiry which pri\ i,
fatal to the popilh fytecm. As this difgtit at itc
vices of ecclefiaisics was soon transferred to tller
persons, and Ihifting fiom them, by no violec:t
transition, fettled at lalt upon the offices whinci

* Knox, 259.

thmr)

they enjoyed ; the effects of the Reformation
would naturally have extended not only to the
o| (o1trine, but to the form of government in the
poIlilh church; and the fame spirit which abolilfed
the toinrer, would have overturned the latter.
iit in the arrangements which took place in the
(liflercnt kingdoms and fiates of Europe in con-
fequeiictc of the Reformation, we may observe
so, ethlilng similar to what happened upon the
t;i 1 efablifhment of Christianity in the Roman
ir pirc'. In both periods, the form of ecclefi-
a aliil policy was modelled, in some measure,
)lipon that of the civil government. When the
Chiiltian church was patronised and established
by the state, the jurifdiftion of the various orders
of the cclefiaitics, distinguished by the names of
Patriarchs, Archbiflops, and Bishops, was made
to correspond with the various divifiohs of the
empire; and the ecclesiastic of chief eminence in
each of these polTeffed authority more or less
extenlive in proportion to that of the civil magi-
itrate who presided over the fame diftri6t. When
the Reformation took place, tile episcopal form
of government, with its various ranks and le-
:;':cs of subordination, appearing to be mole
confillent with the genius of monarchy, it was
continued, with a few limitations, in several pro-
vi!ccs of Germany, in England, and in the
1n1lthern kingdoms. But in Switzerland and
lo;me parts of the Low Countries where the
poilular form of government allowed imor c11ll
icope to the innovating genius of the Refornma.
ti)n, all pre-eminence of order in the chturch
was delfhoyed, and an equality eftablilfcd more
il'table to the spirit of republican policy. Ag

V, 2 the

the model of episcopal government was copied
from that of the Chriltian church as eftabiilrd
in the Roman empire, the situation of the pli.
nitive church, prior to its eltablifhment by civil
authority, feemns to have suggested the idei, antd
furnifled the model of the latter system, whicth
has slice been denominated Pre/yter.ial. 'I'le
firit Christians, opprefled by continual perfec!i.
tions, and obliged to hold their religious aflrnm.
blies by itealih and in corners, were contented
with a form of government extremely iiinpl.
The influence of religion concurred with the fe!l:
of danger, in extinguilhing among them the fpi'.it
of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rail';,
the effe& of their fuiffcrings, and the caul.c of
many of their virtues. Calvin, whose deciiens
were received among many proteltants of that age
with incredible submission, was the patron alid
restorer of this scheme of ecclesiastical policy.
The church of Geneva, formed under his eye and
by his direftion, was deemed the molt perfect
model of this government: and Knox, ulho,
during his refidenee in that city, had Itudicd atil
admired it, warmly recommended it to the imi.
tation of his countrl)me.ll

Amlong the Scottish nobility, some hated tlh

perfolls, and others coveted the wealth, of tlih
dignifi'd clergy. By abolishing that ordelr ,f
men, the fornmr indulged their resentment, ani
the latter hoped to gratify their avarice. TIh
people, inflalmed with the molt violent avcill(o
to popery, and approving of every scheme tlhat
d(lpiirted farthelt from the plraitice of the Rullilh
Jhimrch, were dclighted wvithi a fyltem so adnlira
bly fi{ted to tlicirl predominant pailioi): xnilc

the

the friends of civil liberty beheld with pleasure
the protestant clergy pulling down with their
own hands that fabric of ecclesiastical power
rwhich their predecessors had reared with so
much art and industry ; and flattered themselves,
thlat by lending their aid to firip churchmen of
their dignity and wealth, they might entirely
dciiver the nation from their exorbitant and op-
;,reflive jurifdi&ion. The new mode of govern-
inent easily made its way among men thus pre.
i'.rcd, by their various interests and passions, for
its rzception.'

BI;:, on the first introduEtion of his system,

1nl.: did not deem it expedient to depart alto-
g.:thl.c from the ancient form b. Initead of bi-
lloi ., he proposed to ellablifh ten or twelve fu-
pcrinltcndants in different parts of the kingdom.
'llTie, as the name implies, were empowered to
;:tpect the life and do&rine of the other clergy.
I'lhey presided in the inferior judicatories of the
!.'r-cl, and performed several other parts of the
'ifcopal funtion. Their jnrifdi&tion, however,
xtended to sacred things only ; they claimed no
;cat in parliament, and pretended no right to the
d1'.i hy or revenues of the former bishops.

'The number of inferior clergy, to whom the

care of parochial duty could be committed, was
i'1;! ex-remely finall; they had embraced the
i iiliples of the Reformation at different times,
alnd from various motives; during the public
.omnotions, they were scattered, merely by
illce. over the different provinces of the king-
tom ; and in a few places only were formed into
r(;ullar clafea or societies. The firt' general

b Spotfwood, 158.

y 3 affcmbly

allembly of the church [Dec. 20.], which was
held this year, bears all the marks of an infntll
and unformed society. The members were but
few in nunmbelr, and of no considerable rank ; no
uniform or consistent rule seems to have bIcn
oblerved! in lcectilng them. From a great part
of the kingldom no reprefentativcs appeared. In
the name of fomre entire counties, but one per.
son was present ; while, in other places, a lingrl
town or church sent several members. A on.
vention, so feeble and irregular, could nut poliit f
extenfivc authority ; and, conscious of their o,.-n
weak ness, the members put an end to thciri d:
bates, without venturing upon any decision of
much importance c.

I56s1. In order to give greater itrengthi a;id

conllttence to the precflvterian plan, Kno:<, witli
the affiltance of his hrethren, composed thie il'.
book of dicfipline, which contains the model or
platform of the intended policy d. They rt.
sented it to a convention of estates, which n:i
held in the beginning of this year [Jan. 15.3.
Whatever regulations were proposed with rcgarI
to eccleiiastical discipline and junifdiAion, w(.ii i
have eal'ily obtained the fanftion of that afliembl)y
but a design to recover tile patrimony of the
church, which is there insinuated, met witi a
very different reception.

In vain did tile clergy display the advantago

which would accriue to the public, by a proper
application of ecclefiatical revenues. In vain did
they propose, by an impartial distribution of tin;
fund, to prormote true religion, to encour'tge
learning, and to support the poor. In vain did

c Kdeilb, 498, d ipotf. 15.

dicy

theyv even intermingle threatenings of the divine
diill;lcaf.ie againlt the unjust detainers of what
,-as appropriated to a sacred use. The noble.
hil fal t he prey which they had seized; and
biiowing lupon the proposal the name of a de.
vo;it n'imritinos, they asseted to conlider it as a
proicd altogether visionary, and treated it with
thi; uitmoll ic~orn e

This oonvention appointed the prior of St.

.r ndrw\'s to repair to the queen, and to invite
icl to return into her native country, and to as-
i;ie the rcins of government, which had been
t,,' long committed to other hands. Though
slome of her subjects dreaded her return, and
oti'lors forcfawv dangerous consequences with
wv}lic it might he attended f, the bulk of them
dlrl-ird it with so much ardour, that the invita.
tiol was given with the greatest appearance of
unianimitv. But the zeal of the Roman catho-
lics got the start of the prior in paying court to
IMar ; and Lefly, afterwards bishop of Ross,
w;rio was colniniflioned by them, arrived before
;:n at the place of her refidenceg. Lefly en-
ilv-,ilr'ed to infuse into the queen's mind sus-
,icliols of her protcetant fubjets, and to pe fuade
il r t) throw herself entirely into the arms of
i'hloe i ho adhered to her own religion. For
this pupol'e, he insisted that fle Ihould land at
Al urdeci); and as the protestant doc. rlnc; liad
nade no coniidcrable progress in that part of the
kingdom, he gave her. atturance of being joined
in a ic.v days by twenty thousand nen ; and
lattered her, that with such ap army, encouraged

e Knox, 256. f See Append. No. V.
I I.cfly, 227.

by

by her lpicfnce and authority, fle ic ight cif;l,
overturn the refoirmed clihrch. before it vls
firmly iettled on il:s foundations.

But, at this jiinclirc, the princes of Lor-.:n

were not difiofed to liften to this cxtra:lvar,:
and daligerolus prolpofal. Intent on dlef'!ldi
thcifnllves agiilnl Catllrine ofMcdicis, \\lii,,c
inlidious policy was employed in ulldcrfin;!
their cx'rbitait power, the'y hlad no lr cif '.
attend to the affairs of Scotland, anl d il li
their icice to tak e poflifllioii of l)r kinrdo)l \\i,,
as little, difnurhance as 1polfillc. 'lic 1:''rL'.
officers too, wlho hadil [rvcd in Scotl (lian,
fuadcd Mary from all vioh i ncafifre' ; aiin, 1
reprcfentiing the ow\\r and iinimbcr of til,
tellants to hc irrcli(ll'!c, de ti r.inocd ler to c(;:'
thlm by1 clcry ;rt ; aln ratlicr to mlpl,oy ':.
leading men of that party ;s inllillers, tlian i,.
provoke them, by a flri itki)i oppitit ioI, to b\', ,
her enemics b. Hence proceeded tlh conlfi(i:l
and affteion with which the prior of St. All.
drew's was received by the (Iqtcen. His re
sent ation of the slate of tl e kiildomn gained I.':':
credit; and Lefly hieield wit 1 r ceret the I,.,
channell in which co!lurt. favouri was likely to n'.;

Another conventlion) of c[llaite was hl (. :

WMay. The arriv;al of :m ainb:il)h(do frmon I: ' l;,
feenis to have been tlh: occalion of this mc.ltil.<.
He was infriluecd to flicit the Scots to 1,;:,:
their ancient alliance with France, to break tii;:
new confederacy with lnglaiud, and to relctll
the popIilh ecclefialtics to the polfeffion of thl&ii
revenues and the exercise of their funtldion,. I:
is no easy matttcr to form any conjeaure c(:l.

b Melv. 6i.

(CC;¢'J

cCrniiig the iltcntions of the French coutt in,
mn;kiiig thlrfe extraordinary and ill-timed propo-
liions. Tlley vere rcjicttecl with that fcora
whlichl miirht well iave been expeced from the
temnper of'the nationll 1.

lu tlis convention, the proteflatlt clergy did

not obtain a more favourable audience than for-
i:irly, and th,'ir profpe''t of recovering the pa.
tr-imnoy of the clurch still remained as diflant
lld lunt.Ilrtaii as ever. But, with regard to ano.
;I11he point, they found the zeal of the nobles in
no Iler-cc al)ated. The book of discipline seemed
t(; requ c that the monuments of popery, whicl
l.il) remnained in the kingdom, llould be de-
niolilhcdk; and, though neither the fame pre-
tence of policy, nor thle fame ungovernable rage
:f the ipeople, remained, to jultify or excuse this
harbarous havoc, the convention, confiderin
ecr)y religious fabric as a relic of idolatry, passe
f nltelce upon them by an adt in form; and per-
fi,ns 1th nioft remarkable for the aftivity of their

e7t'a \vre appointed to put it in execution. Ab-

1i', churches, libraries, records, and even the
(;pulclil-es of the dead, perilhcd in one co'nmon
ruin. The Itorin of popular infurrefoon, thoughli
i:nlictuous and irrefiltible, lad extended only to

f1 f.w counties, and so n spent its rage; but now
;I tl'llerate and universal rI;pine completed the
,c';lbitaioll of every thing venerable and rag-
iil 'c.it wvlhich had lefaped its violence .

Il thle inc;al tiime, Marly was in no haste to re-

1I I:li Sco tlaind. Aceutomned tothe elegance,
II'n!'mIII, and gaiety of a polite court, she fill
1.'lly lingered in IFrance, the scene of all there

I 2ó.", ().' 17,;. k Spotlhood, 153. . i Ibid. 174.

enjoyments,

enjoyments, and contemplated with horror tl
barbarism of her own country, and the turbhl
lence of her fubjeds, which presented her with;
very different face of things. The impatietlce
however, of her people, the perftuafions of ht
uncles, but above all the studied and mortifyi;h
.negleft with which she was treated by the qmlce
mother, forced her to think of beginning thi
disagreeable voyage m. But while she \as p-e
paring for it, there were sown between her ai;
Elizabeth the feeds of that personal jealousy ;1st
discord, which embittered the life and fhortcn{
the days of the Scottilh queen.

The ratification of the late treaty of EI.ion

burgh was the immediate occasion of this fata
animosity ; the true cause of it lay much deeper
Almost every article in that treaty had bee
executed by both parties with a icrupulou!
exa&ncefs. The fortifications of Leith were Ie.
molilfed, and the armies of France and Enrltan
withdrawn within the appointed time. Tilt
grievances of the Scottish malecontents w(r(
redressed, and they had obtained whatever tlhe
could demand for their future fectrity. Witli
regard to all these, Mary could have little rcafoi
to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the ratification
of the treaty.

The sixth article remained tle only fotr-cc ci

contest and difficulty. No ininifter ever entclr
more deeply into tile fcheres of hIis fovrcigrll
or pursued them with inore dexterity and fuclclis
than Cecil. In the conduti of the ncgocialin
at Edinburgh, the found underllaiiding of thli
able politician had proved greatly an overnalcli

ll Brantomc, Jcbb, vol. ii. 4Sz.

'ii

so:' Monluc's refinements in intrigue, and had art.
fillv induced the French ambassadors, not only
t;, acknowledge that the crowns of England and
lrelllad did of right belong to Elizabeth alone,
bult alfh to promise, that in all times to come
Malry llould abstain from uling the titles, or
bc:ihlrng the arms, of those kingdoms.

' The ratification of this article would have

bc(n of the most fatal consequence to Mary.
I1'ih crown of England was an object worthy of
i;ic ail,'bition. Her pretensions to it gave her
gicait dignity and importance in the eyes of all
lutinope. By many, her title was esteemed pre-
iferaibl to that of Elizabeth. Among the
1i: 'ilil themselves, the Roman catholics, who
formed at that time a numnerous and aftive party,
il, nly cfpoufcd this opinion ; and even the pro-
tcltll:L;:, who supported E:lizabeth's throne,
ci;!il not deny the queen of Scots to be her im..
,.(iitte heir. A proper opportunity to avail
-clrf ls of all these advantages could not, in the

col. 'c- of things, be far distant, and many in-
'idcilts inlight fall in, to bring this opportunity
e.al'cr than was expeled. In these circum.
iik',ces, Mary, by ratifying the a; ticle in dispute,
i h1;1 have loit that rank whicl Ilhe had hitherto
.1(' among neighbouring princes; the zeal of her
ilierclut i mull have gradually cooled; and she
lullt have renounced, from th;at moment, all
iics of ever wearing the Englifli crown ".

None of thlole bencficial conlequences cfcaped
lie penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this
Ca'l('c, had recourle to every thing by which flte
.uld hlope either to sooth or fiighten the Scot

a Hanec, 373, &c,

tinl

ti/h queen into a compliance with her demands
and if that princess had been so unadvised a, t
ratify the rash conceflions of her ambafadlr
Elizabeth, by that deed, would have acquireld ;
advantage, which, under her management, nm;
have turned to great account. By such a rl
nunciation, the question with regard to the iig!
of succession would have been left altogether oop
and undecided ; and, by means of that, Eli;
beth might either have kept her rival in perlett:
anxiety and dependence, or, by the autlhorit\
her parliament, (lie might have broken ili iI,
the order of lineal flccelion, and transfcrredl!
crown to tome othelcrdlclendant ofthe royal hl,.
The former condulctfe observed tow;ards Jamin;\ i
whom, during his whole reign, she ]held in Ii
petual fear and ftubjetioin. The latter and inll
rigorous method of proceeding woklll, iin all nl,
bability,liave been employed againitMary, wh,ii
for many reasons, fie both envied and hated.

Nor was this flep beyond her power, unp, '

cedentcd in the hiltor,. or inconliltent witl i;
conflitution of England. Though fiicelfion i.'
hereditary right be an idea so natural and so ;.
pular, that it has been e!lahliflied in almofl ci
civilized nation, yet ]England allords many im
morable inflances of deviation from that rule. 'Ill
crown of that kingdom having once been fcizn
by the hand of a coilniieror, this invittd tli
bold and enterprililng ill every age to imitate ifll
an illuflrious cxamnple of fortunate aml'itilll
From the time of William tile Norman, the re
gtlar course of descent had seldom contilnll
through three fuccelitve reigns. Those prince
whofl intrigues or valour opened to them a w'al

.,,t he throne, called in the authority of the great
c, !ic'il oftlie nation toconfirm theirdubioustitles.
1 [clce parliamentary and hereditary right became
ii; England of equal consideration. That great
alili'mbly claimcd and actually possessed a power
l;alteriting the order of regal tlcceflion; and evcti
f( !:lte a lI Henry VIII. an at of parliament had
:il!rloile'd that capricious monarch to fettle the
lr'!clr of succession at his pleasure. The Engliflh,
jiclouis of their religious liberty, and averse from
'fie douiiinion of Itranlers, vould have eagerly
ad-opted the palnions ot their sovereign, and might
lhave been cafilv induced to exclude the Scottilil
linet fltn thle right of fulcceeding to the crown.
'Tliefe iemr to have been the views of botli
queens, and these were the difficulties which re-
t.i'dcd tle rati ication of the treaty of l'dinburgh.

But, if the sources of their discord were to be

traced no higher than tils treaty, an inconfider-
blT e alterat ion in the words of it might have
broulght the present queltion to an am.icable iflue.
'flhe indefinite and amibiguoutm cxpreffion which
C
' il lad inserted into the tre:;ty, night have
been clhanged into one more limited hut more
i"(' ilt:; and Mary, initead of ipromifing to ab-
,t;lin fiom bearing the title of' Queen of England
',i all times to come, miglt have engaged not to
afll'ume tliat title during the life of Elizabeth, or
the lives of her lawful poltcrity °.

Such

o This expedient for terminating the difference between

I'liz.libetli ani Mary was so obvious, that it could not fail
"f prelinting itself to the view of the Englifli ministers.
" There hath been a matter rLcrctly thouglt of (fays Cecil
i) a MIter to Throkmorton, July 14, 1561), which I dire
turnnulhicate to you, although I nican nevet to be an an-

v'OL. i. z thur

Such an amendment, )however, did not i';:

tile views of either (queen. Thotiugh Mary ;id
been obliged to ofrfpedld for foint time the ic,.
fecution of lher title to the E.nglish crown, il,
had not however relinquifiled it. Shie determindii
to revive her claiih on the firfl profpeiSt of filcccs,
and was unwiillng to bind herself by a pofitixe
engagement, not to take advantage of any I;fcli
fortunate occurrence. Nort would the altclatiln
have been more acceptable to Elizabeth, wno,
by agreeing to it, would hlave tacitly recogniiik
the right of her rival to ascend the throne after
her decease. But neither the Scottilh nor Eiifllil]i
queen durfl avow thiefe secret sentiments of tihl:
liearts. Any open dilfovery (if an inclinatiol to
dilturb the trintqnillity of England, or to wrc-:ii
the sceptre out of Elaliletlil' hands, might h11a
proved fatal to Mary':; Ilrctenfions. Any ful.
piciCn of a design to alter the order of fucccilTihn,
thor thereof;, and Ihat ih it' in accit rd might be made Lt.
twixt our inifirfl and the Scotrilh quren, that this fl(u.d
by parliament in Sc.tland, &c. furielrder unto the riuet:s
majelly all matter of claim, and unto tle heirs of her bodv;
and in confideratiol thercof, thie Scf,ttlif qiueen's in.eicit
should be ackilowliidged in (tta.ult of h.'irs of the bodly (il t,
queen's in jcfy. WVLU, (Gd fend our millrefs a hilllti,
and by time a boni, lhat we ray hIJpe our polftrity fliall ih:.
a maf;uline fucccfuii. 'I'lTis iatter is too lig tfor rt.il
folks, and too deep for fillple. Thz queen'sinajclly lcite)-
eth of it." Hardw. State Pap. i. 174. Biut with rega(ltO
every point relating to the ucceflion, Elizatcth was fojealous,
and so apt to take offence, that her most conlidential n;i-
niftcrs dulin not uige her to advance one lcep farther than flI
herfelfchufu to go. Crcil, mentioning fonie fcl'emc a;lal
the succession, if the queen should not marry or leave ifcl,
adds, wvilI his ufilal caution: *s This song hath niiny
parts ; but, for my pait, I have no ;ill' but il) plait sone,"
Ibid, 178.

amil to fct afrde tle claim of the Scottinf queen,
..!dild have cxpoeid Elizaleth to much and de-
firv.'d ccnftire, and have raised up aaliinft her
atns and dangeroius en cmiics. 'These, however
calrefilly concealed or artfully disguised, were;
il all probability, the real motives wihich deter-
milned the one queen to solicit, arid the other
t,) refuse, the ratification of thc, traty in its
oiriniil form ; while neither had recourse to that
cilicatioll of it, which to an heart uinwarped
1,; political interelt, and sincerely desirous of
I.lion and concord, would have appeared so ob-
vioul and natural.

lPui though confidcrations of intcreft first occa-

FiKnid this rupture between\ the British queens,
ri;al(hip of another kind contributed to widen
the breach,-and female jealousy increased the
vi(;l:nce of their political hatred. Elizabeth,
wvith all those extraordinary qualities by which
flu equalled or surpassed fich of her sex as have
ewrcited the greatest renown, difcovcred an ad-
miiration of her own person, to a degree which
v,,(,mcn of ordinary underfltndings either do not
rintertaini, or prudently cndeavour to conceal.
lJ.er attention to dress, her folicitudc to display
lIr charms, her love of flattery, were all ex-
cciiive. Nor were these weaknlecnfs confined to
;!iht period of life when they are more pardon-
able. Even in very advanced years, the wisest
uonman of that, or perhap:; of any other age,
wvorc the garb, and affc&ted the manners of a
girl P. Though Elizabeth was as much inferior
to Ma;y iii beauty and graccfulnefs ofperfon, as

P Johnfoin Hist. Rer. Brit lin. 346, 147, Carte, vol. iii.
6,)9. Cataloguc of Royal and Noble authors, article Egix.

2 2 lIC

she excelled her in political abilities and ii :
arts of government, she was weak enotith t;
compare herself with the Scot.tish queen l: api
as it was impoflible fie could be altogetlir ;-.
norant how much Mary gained by the co;.
parison, (he envied and hated her as a rival k.
whom (he was eclipsed. In judging of tlle c'.
dut of printcs, we are apt to ascribe too nuec'
to political motives, and too little to the paffloi.
yhich they feel in common with the reft of rr-l:.
kind. In order to account for Elizabeth's ri.
fcnt, as well as her fubfcqueilt condu towv,: d
Mary, we must not al\ays confider her as a qic:,
we mull fomct imes regard her merely as a lv,!i::!..

Elizabeth, though no stranger to Mary's dii.

ficulties with relecEt to the treaty, continued !t
irge her, by repeated applications, to ratify it'.
Mary, under various pretences, Rtill contri\:d to
gain ting, and to elude the requell. But whikl
the one queeh solicited wvith persevering impim.
tunity, and the other evaded with artful delb:,
they both studied an extreme politeness of 1.,
haviour, and loaded each other with profcflii,';
of sisterly love, wvith reciprocal declarations
unchangeable esteem and amity.

It was not long before Mary was convinced,

that among princcs these expreflions of friendflhi;,
are commonly far dialint from the heart. 11
failing from France to Scotland, the courfc aio
a long the English coall. In order to be li t'
from the infillts of the Englifn fleet, or? in c;i';
of tempeituous weather, to secure a retreat in til
harbours of that kingdom, Mary sent M. 1)'0y
el to demand of Elizabeth a fafc-conduicL dlling

' Mclvil, g9. IKeith, 157. 460, &c.

bec

'I :;~~~~~~~

'p.

>5:

·'.' l~~'

~ n:~~ a B$~
P, N-~-

her voyage. This'requeft, which decency alone
obliged .one prince to grant to another, Eliza-
beth rejected, in such a manner as gave rife to
no flight fifpicion of a design, either to obltrunc
the paflage, or to intercept the person of the
Scoi:tifh queen s.

Mary, in a long conference with Throkmor-

ton; the Englifli ambaflador in France, explained
her sentiments concerning this ungenerous beha-
viour of his mnitrcfs, in a itrain of dignified ex-
poitnlation, which conveys an idea of her abilities,
address, and spirit, as ad vantageoils as any tr:nf-
action in her reign. Mary was at that time only
in her eighteenth year; and as Throkmorton's ac-
count of what passed in his interview with her,
is addressed diredcly to Elizabeth t, that dexterous
courtier, We may be well assured, did not em-
bellifl the discourse of the Scottish queen with
any colouring too favourable.

Whatever resentment Mary migllt feel, it did

not retard her departure from France. She was
accompanied to Calais, the place where the em-
barkcd, in a manner suitable to hei dignity, as the.
queen of two powerful kingdoms. Six princes-of
.Iorrain, her uncles, with many of the molt cmi-
iIent anong the Frenchl nobles, were in her re-
tinne. Catherine, who secretly rejoiced at her
dep:nt'trc, gracce it with every circumstance of
inagnificencc adl refpcC. After bidding adieu
to her mourningl attendants, witll a lad heart,
and eves bathed in tears, Mary left that king-
dom, the Ihort but only scene of her life in which
brtunc fimiled upon her. While the Frcnch coait

Keith, 17r. Camden. Sce Appendix, No. VI.
t (Calbala p, 374. Keith, 170, $kc.

2 3 continued

coltinued in fight, she intently gaz7.ed upon it,
at;d nmtfing, in a thoughtful polturtr, on that.
lheight of fortlle swhence lle had fallen, and
prcfaging, perhaps, tile difaitrs aud calamities
which embittered the remainder of her days, flic
sighed oftcn, and cried out, " Farcwel, France .
" Farewel, beloved country, wilich I shall never
" more behold !" Even when the darkncfr of
the night had hid the land fiom her view, fih
wvould neither retire to the cabin, nor talle food,
but commanding acouch to be placed on the deck,
ile there waited the return of day with the ut-
moil impatience. Fortune soothed her on this
occasion; the galley made little way during the
niglit. In the morning, the coast of France
wxi:; still within fight, and she continued to fced
her melancholy with the prospec.t; and as long
as her eyes could distinguish it, to utter the fame
tender cxpreilions of regret ". At latl a brilli
gale arose, by the favour of which for some days,
and afterwards under the cover of a tiick fog,.
Mary escaped the Snglifh flleet, which, as ll,
apprehended, lay in wait in order to intercepti
her x; and on tile nineteenth, of Augult, after

atn

u lrentome, 483. H-e hunfclf was in the fame galley
with tile quten.

x Goodall, vol. i. 175. Canideri insinuates, rilth r than

affrms, that it was the objtei of the Englith fleet to inltei-
ceplt Malry. T'iis, however, fiems to bh: doubtful. Eliza-
iclh positively atierts, that, at tlre requelt of tlie king of Spain,
ll|e had fitted out a lew liipsuf nfnder force, in oider to cle.la
the jnarrow seass ofpir.ates, witc.lt insetted them i; and tliC ap-
peals for the trutl of this to Mary'a own Iiniillers. App.
No. VI. Cecil, in a letter to Throlitnurton, Aug. ,6, i56r,
inforins hini, that '" the lueenl's lhips, which were upon ille
fi:ah to cicnfe themn of 1,irites, saw bcr Ci,*. Molryl, andl

Llute.tl

an abieinc of near tilirteen years, lauded safely
ait Leith iu lhi r native kingdom.

Mary r

r. received by her fubijefs with llouts

-ind acclamationls of joy, and with every dcmon-
fi.raion of welcome and regard. But as her ar-
riv\:l waI ulexpected, and no suitable preparation
lhad li'ben made for it, they could not, withl all
tilr i- e rtl: hide from her the poverty of the
country, and were obliged to condu& her to the
'alace of Holyrood-houfe with little pomp. The
cjiiren, accustomed fiom her infancy to splendour
aid magnificen'C, and fond of them, as was na-
t!lral at her age, could not help olifervinig the
d.linlge in her litlation, and feeemd to be deeply
aflthied with it Y.

Never did any prince ascend the throne at a
iiuniurle which called for more wildom in coun-
cil, or more courage anid fleadinefis in aAion. The
r:age of religious controversy was dtill unabated.
T'le menmory of pal} oppression exafperattl the
pioteftlats ; the ii:nart of recent injuries rendered
bhe I)apilts desperate ; oth were zealous, fierce,
,uild irreconcilatbl. Tlhe absence of thcir fove-
!rciln htad accustomed, tie nobles to indepcnd-
enc ; and d(nl-ing the late commotions, they had
aIcquired fuclh an increase of wealth, by the spoils
of the clhurch, as threws great weight into the
scale o(f the ariflocracy, whiih stood not in need

saluted her galley, and (taying her flips, examined them of
pirteS, and difmisild thein gently. One Scortilh l(hp tlcy
e'tlirl as vehemently fuli'cctcd of pirary." Harl. Stitr.
I'apers, i. 176. Caf leliau, who accompinied Mary in this
voyage, confirms the circumflanil;e of lhr galley, beir; in
ihlit of the Englinf flCCt. Mc)l, ap. Jcbl xi. S4.55.
Y/ rant. 48.,D

vS

of any acceflion of power. The kingdom ha(
long been under the government of regents, wht
exer-cfed a delegated jurisdiction, attended witl
litt!c ai;thority, and which inspired no reverence
A . .-.c of pure anarchy had prevailed for the twc
li,!i .-rs, without a regent, without a supreme
c.:!'i.il., without the power, or even the sorn, ol
, 1-''.'' *government . A licentious spirit, un-
ac!:',!i:; l:;i wtith subordination, and disdaining
tih' !,t -iits of law and juflice, had spread
- an..,-;' il,. r.,nls of men. The influence of
Fr:.;.', ;-..' ..rcierit ally of the kifigdom, was
witlhdUi,. ia ,! deipifed. The Englifi, of enemies
becom;;.' . .'ii,'derates, had grown into confidence
with lrie nation, and had gained an ascendant
over all its councils. The Scottish monarchs did
not derive more splendour or power from the
fiicndfilip of the former, than they had reason to
dread injluT and diminution from the interpofi.
tion of the latter. Every consideration, whether
of interelt or of felf-prcfevation, oblliged Eliza-
beth to depress the royal autlloiity in Scotland,
.and to create the prince perpetual difficulties, by
fomenting the spirit of diflatisfaftion among the
people.

In this polftrc, were the affairs of Scotland,
lvhen the admiiiiftration fell into the hands of a
young queen, not nineteen. years of age, unac-
quainted with the manners andlawsof hercountry,
afl;rangerto lerfiubjeEts, without experience, with-
gut allies, and almofl without a friend.

On the'other hand, in Mary's situation, we find
omle circmwniances, which, thoughl they did not
bgalnce tlicfe diladvantages, contributed lio\yever

t Kcithb Appendix. 92,

to glleviate them; and, with flciful planagemnelt,
might have produced great effeas. Her iiibje&s,
naclcuitomed so long to tle refi4ence of their
prince, were not only dazled by the novelty and
Iplendour of the royal presence, but iufpired with
awve and reverence. Belides the places of power
and profit bestowed by the favour of a prince, hii
protedion, his familiarity, and even lis smiles,
confer honour and win the hearts of men. From
all corners of the kingdom, the nobles crowded to
tettify their duty and affedion to their sovereign,
an.d Itudied by every art to wipe out the memory
of past minfcpnduCt, and to lay inpa stock of future
merit. The aimufements and gaiety of her court,
which was filled with the most accompliflhed of
the French iobility, who had attended her, began
to soften and to polifli the rude manners of the
natiqn. Mary herself possessed many of those
qualifications which raise 4ffetikon ar!d procure
elkeem. Tbe beauty and gracefulness of her person
drew universal admiration, the elegance and po-
litenefs of her manners commanded general re-
fpeEt. To all the charms of her pwn sex flhe
added many of tlhe accomplishments of the pther.
The progress she had made in all the arts and fci-
cnces, which were then deemed necelsiry or or,
namental, vas far beyond what is commonly at-
tained by princes; qp4 all her other quglities were
renderdri more agreeable by a courteous affability,
wvhicll, witiot lpffening the dignity of a prince,
itcals on the hearts of fubjeas with a bewitching
injlliuation.

Fron! tlhcre c;rc!rlansces, notivithftanding tlh

tlhreatening. aspei of affair at Mlry's rettirii into
Scotlaind, notwithflandip g the clod Svl wich ga.

tlhered

thered on every hand, a political observer wo.l
have predifedcl a very difFierent iflie of her reign
and whatever ft.ddcen gus'ts of fadion he nmigll
have expefted, he would never have dreaded tllt
desitludive violence of that itormi which followed.

While all parties wvtrrc centending who fllould

discover the moll diitiu!l attachment to the quecl.
the z,'lous and iint'atient ipil-it of the age broL:c
out in a remarkable inhlanice. On the Sunday
after her arrival, the queen commanded mass to
he celebrated in the chaptl of her palace. Tlh
firl[ rumolur of this occalioned a secret nil;rmur-
*ing aimong the proteflants who attended the
courrt; complaints and threatenings soon follow-
ed; Ilie servants belonging! to the chapel wer,
insultcd and abused ; and if the prior of St. An-
drew's had not seasonably interpol(ed, the rioters
might have proceeded to the utmolt exceflesa.

It is impoflible, at this diftancc of time, anrd

under circumitances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal agaitrt popery, which
then poflfifed the nation. 1ivetry infiance of con-
delcenlion to the papiits was deemed an at of
apolsacy, and the toleration of a lingle mass pro-
nounced to he more formidable to the nation
than tlie invasion of ten thousand armed men C .
Under the influence ofthelf opinions, many plro-
tellants would have ventured to go dangcloui
lengths; and, without attempting to convini'
their fovercign ly argument, or to reclaim her
by indulgence, would have abruptly denied hr,'
thel liherty of worflil)ppinlg God in that mannllr
wiliicli alone fie thought aicceptabl) to hlinl. But
dlie prior of St. Andrew's and other leaders of
A Knox, ,p84. Haines, 372. b Knux, 7o87.

tih

the party, not only relt rained this impetuous fpi-
lit, but, in spite of the murmurs of the people
;ind the exclamations of the preachers, obtained
si r the queen and her domestics the undillurbed
(xircifc of lthe catholic religion. Near an hun-
died years astier this period, when the violence of
reliLiols animolities had begun to subside, when
tiln: and the progress of learning had enlarged
t'!C \iews of thl; luman mind, an English house
i co)lilTlons refuled to indulge the wife of their
f,.vcrcinlln llhe private use of the mass. The
)rolel.talt Iaders deserve, on this ocealiun, the
; paite both of wisdom and of moderation for con-
:c,.t if ditifrrnt. But, at the farne time, who-
'.I. It fle s upon the encroaching and fianguilary

o'," of polptry in that afe, will be far from

i ..uing the fears and cautiou: of the more zealors
:-;imers as aLe-gctlher imaginary and deilitute

f,. :iy real loundation.
The leaders of the proteflants, hoswever, by

:[.is prudent comlpliance will the preijudices of
;iii fovereiSyi, obtained fromn her a proelanmatiou
in:glhly favoll-able to their religion, which wvas
li'led l ix days [Aug. 25.z aiter her arrival in
"'c:tiaud. T'Ihl retoinled (loAilne, thoutgh ella-
')'l(id over all the kilgdom li the parlilament,

j.'iel met inl onl'llic.;lce of the treaty of paci-

:ji :tiol, hliad ncvtr rec.:ivcd the colunteliance or
ifliti;llU ofrolval a;tllli;o. In ordLr to quiet the

i:;,ls of thoCl who hlad cmnl:'rced that doCtine,
,;iei ;(, remiove any drcead (o' IllolclLition which
tlhey mnIight entertain, Milry declared, " tlat until
!'I' llould take final orders (.oii(:elliln g religiol,
v, II advice of pal iname nct, any at tlem)pt to alter or
!'lbvert the religioln which Ih found univcrfallly

praucfcd

pracaifed in the realm, should be deemed a capita,
criene ." Next year a second proclamation tc
tlh faime eftet was publiflled .

The queen, conformably to the plan which had

been concerted in France, committed the admi-
niltration of affairs entirely to proteltants. Hri
council was filled with the molt eminent persons
of that party; not a single papiit was admittc!
into any degree of confidence e. The' prior ot
St. A-ndrew's and Maitland of Lethington feenr-
ed to hold the firnt place in the queen's affection,
and possessed all the power as well as reputation
of favourite ministers. Her choice could not
have fallen upon persons more acceptable to her
people; and, by their prudent advice, Mal v
condut&ed herself with so' much moderation, and]
deference to the fcntiments of the nation, ;s
could not fail of gaining the affeEtion of her si!>-
jedts ,-the firmest foundation of a prilnc's
power, and the only genuine fourcc of his iappi-
ness and glory.

A cordial reconcileiment with Elizabeth w.s

another objeCt of great importance to Mary ; ;nl
though Ihe seems to have had it much at heart,
in the beginning of her adminiltration, to accom-
plifh such a dehirable conjunction, yet many events
occurred to widen, rather than to close, tlhe
breach. The formal offices of friendlhip, how.
ever, are seldom negledted among princes; nlld
Elizabeth, who had attempted so openly to ol.
strut the queen's voyage into Scotland, did not
fail, a few days after her arrival, to command
Randolph to congratulate her safe return. Mary,

c Keith, 504. 'I Ibid. 510.
Knoxj 285. f Lclley, 235.

I t thl;

that she might be on equal terns with her, sent
Maitland to the English court, with many cere-
monious exprefilons of regard for Elizabeth g.
Both the ambalffadors were received with the ut-
most civility; and on each fide the professions of
kindness, as they were made with little finccrity,
were litiened to with proportional credit.

Both vwere intrusted, however, with something

more than with mere matter of ceremony. Ran-
dolph urged Mary, with frelh importunity, to
ratify the treaty of Ediubnrglh. Maitland en-
deavoured to arnufe Elizabeth, by apologizing
for the dilatory conductt of his inittrcfs with re-
gard to that point. The multiplicity of public
affairs since her arrival in Scotland, the import-
ance of the queition in difpite, and the ahfence
of many noblemen with whom lih was obliged
in decency to consult, were the pretences of-
sered in excuse for her conduc&; the real canses
of it were those which have already been men-
tioned. But, in order to extricate herself out of
these difficulties, into which the treaty of Edin-
hurgh had led her, Mary was brought to yield a
point, which formerly she teemed determined
itcverto give up, She innltruned Maitland to
signify her willingness to difclain any right to
the crown of Engllnd during the life of Eliza-
beth, and the lives of her polterity ; if, in faillre
of these,. lie were declared next heir by act of
parliament h

Rcalonable as this propofll might appear to

iVTry, who thereby preclhudd herself firom ds-
turbing Elizabetl's poll Ifion of the throne, no-
thing could be more inconsistent with Eliz;i-

r Klcith, 1Sl, &c. h C.Imdcn, 3S7. Buch, 329.
vol;. I. A betlh'o

beth's interftl, or more contradidcory to a paffio
which predominated in the characlcr of that
princtfs. Ntui.vitlitalldingS all the great qualities
w.iich threw fucl li'lre on her reign, we may
obfc-v :, thlil shi; was tinlurcId with a jealousy of
hl'r right to the crown, which often betrayed her
i:,to ';Ca.il atiid tnlgenerous actions. The pe-
culiarity of her iituation hei',htened, no doubt,
alnd iicreafcd, tbut did not inuife this passion. It
dLcfcndcd to her fronm He-ury VII. her grand.
father, whom, in fevcrai features of Ils charaAer,
s{he rncariy tefein.bled. Like hini, lhce fucfliered the
title by which fih held the crown to remain am-
bOi .li'ls and cointlo _rted, rathler than submit
it to :rirlinanen'tar difcufiion, or derive any ad-
dliton to her rit;ltt ftrrcm such authority. Like
hinl, he ubf

L rv'd C;e'ry pretender to the fuccef.

.ion, not only vith that attention which prudence
prelcribes, bi:t with that aversion which suspicion
inspires. The preft.lt uncertainty with regard
to the right of fucccflion operated tor Elizabeth's
advantage, both on her fiubjeds and on her rivals.
Among the frmler, every lover of his country
regarded her life as the great security of the na-
tional tranquillity ; and chore rather tp acknow-
lcdge a title which was dubious, than to search
for one tbat was u nknown. The latter, while
nothing was decided, were held in dependence,
and obliged to court her. The manner in which
Ihe received this ill-timed proposal of the Scottish
queen, was no other than might have been cx-
peaed. She rejeced it in a peremptory tone,
with many exprcflions of a resolution never
to permit a point of so much delicacy to be
touched.

About

About this time [Sept. i.] the queen made

her public entry into Edinburgh with great
pomp. Nothing was neglecAcd which could
cxprefs the duty and affection of the citizens to-
wvard; their sovereign. But, amidst these demon-
ftrations of regard, tlle genius and sentiments of
the nation di'covered tliemfelres in a circulm-
fiance, which, though inconfideriablc, ought not
to be overlooked. As it was the mode of the
times to exhlibit many pageants at every public
solemnity, mool of these, on this occalion, were
contrived to be reprefcntations of the vengeance
whlich the Almighty had inflicted upon idola-
ters '. Even while they iludied to amuse and to
flatter the qucn, her iubjects could not refrain
fro-im teitifying thcir albhorrcnce of that religion
which flie prosierid.

To reitore the reguilar administration of jutlicc,

and to reform the intternal policy of tile country,
became the next object of the queen's care. T'he
laws enacted for pi-cirvation of public order,
and the security of private property, were nearly
the fame in Scotland as; in every other civili'cd
count!). But the at nllre of tile Scottifli con-
flitution, the fceblkneLfs of regall anlto-ity, the
cxorbitant power of the nobles, tile violence of
faction, and th

t fierce manners of the people,

rendered the cc;xec.tion of these laws f;eblc, i-.
rrgular, and partial. In the counties which
border on England, ihis d,:f:c was mill lap.
parent; and tle confeqcnilce of it nioll Ilenibly
felt. The inialitants, Irohngers to indliry,
averfl fi.om labour, and unacqii:inted withl til:
arts of peace, fubfi:ftcl chiclly by spoil and pil-

l Keith, ig9.

A Ad lagc i

lage; and, being confederated in septs or clans,
committed thdle excesses not only with impunity,
but even with honour. During the unsettled
Rate of the kingdom from the death of James V.
this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual
height ; and the inroads and rapine of those free-
booters were become no less intolerable to their
owni coultryincll than to the English. To re-
ltrain and ptiuill thile outrages, was an action
equally popular in both kingdoms. The prior of
St. Aiidrevw's was the person chosen for this im-
portant lervice, and extraordinary powers, toge-
ther with the title of the queen's lieutenant, were
vested in him for that purpose.

Nothing can he more surprising to men ac.

cuitomcd to regular government, than the prepa-
rations made on this occalion. They were such
as might be expected in the rudest and molt im-
perfect itate of society. The freeholders of eleven
several counties, with all their followers com-
pletely armed, were fummnoned to aflit the lieute.
nant in the discharge of his office. Every thing
rcfmrbled a military expedition rather than the
progrefi, of a court of julice k. The prior exc-
cuLted his commiflion wkith filch vigour and pru-
dence, as acquired him a great increase of re-
putation and popularity among his countrymen.
Numbers of the banditti ful'ered the punilhmcnt
dike to their crimes ; and, by the impartial and
rigorous adiiiniiiaition ofj llice, order andtral-
quillity were reltored to that part of the king-
doln.

I)uring the ablence of the prior of St. An-
drew's, tl)e leaders of the popilh faction seem to

k Kvith, JiS.

have

have taken some fttps towards inlinuating them.
felvcs into the queen's favour- and confidence .
But the archbiflhop of St. Andrew's, the inoft re-
markable person in the party for abilities and
pclitical address, was reccived with little favour
at court ; and lwhatever fecrct partiality the queen
nmi;ht have towards those who professed the fame
religion with herfclf, (he dicfovered no inclination
at that tiirre to take the administration of affairs
out of the hands to whlich ftle had already comn
mitrted it.

'The cold reception of lhe archbiihop of St,
-Andrew's was owing to his connetionl with the
houf of Hamilton from which the queen was
mulch alienated. The duke of Guise and the car-
'.ln:.l eculd never -r.-rive the zeal with whlich the
(.ilke of Chatclhc-rauln ald his ion the earl ofAr-
ran had c{lpoued tlie catlfe of the congregation,
Sri;ncc: fu-ldom view their fucceflbrs wvithl ut jen.
Toufy and diitrull. The prior of St. Andrew's,
;:crlaps, dreaded the duke wl a rival in power.
All tlhefe causes concurred in infuling into the
qlteen's mind an averlion for that family. Thec
!te:c, indllging his love of retirement, lived at a
(liflince fromi court, without taking pains to in-l
finlate hisufelf into favour ; and though the earl
,'f A ran 6penly afpilcd to Ilarlry the Lqueen', he,

aiy iz mos np iardolnable act of imprltdence, -was

:ile only nlobleman of diflindliol whllo opposed
;.tiry.', c*iiovinsg thle exerciif of her religion;
ald by ra slily clleriln; a ltllblih( |)lotelatioui a;ainfl
it, ltiirely foirfeitet d her fiavour '". At tlle 1anie
tinic, tihe fordid parfniloiy of his father oblited
l.i citilic' to lide liiihlelf in forane rctiremint,

IKciili, z0o3. liid. z20, q2c. 4, nox, z26.

A 3 or'

or to appear in a manner unbecoming his dignity
as firil prince of the blood, or his high preten-
sions as suitor to the queen ". His love inflamed
by difappointmentand his impatience exasperated
by negleft, preyed gradually on his reason; and,
after many extravagancies, broke out at last in
ungovernable phrenzy.

Towards the end of the year, a convention of

eifates was held [Dec. 2o.j, chiefly on account
of ecclefialtical affairs. The assembly of the
church, which fat at the fame time, presented a
petition, containing many demands with lefpe&t
to the suppressing of popery, the encou-agiing
the proteltant religion, and the providing for the
miaintelnance of the clergy °. The lalt. was a
matter of great importance, and the iteps taken
towards it deserve to be traced.

Though the number of proteflant preachers

was now considerably increased, many more were
Itill wanted in every corner of the kingdom. No
legal provilion having been made for them, the;
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious fib-
fil-encc from tlhe benevolence of their people. To
susser the minillers of an eflablilhed church to
contimne in this Irate ofindigence and dependence,
was an indecency equally repugnant to the prin-
ciples of religion, and to the maxims of found
policy; and would have justified all the imputa.
taons of avarice with which the Reformation was
then loaded by its enemies. The revenues of the
popinl church were the only fund which could
be employed for their relief; but during the three
talL years the fiate of these was greatly altered.
A great majority of abboto, priors, and other

a Kcithll96. e lbid. 2o0.

head1

heads of religious houfir', had, either from a sense
tf} dutJ, or from vicws of interedt, renounced
the errors of popery ; and, novwittllanlding this
change in their fentimcnts, they retained their
,ncient reveniues. Allnoit the -whole order of
billiops, and fcverll of the (othcr dignitaries, still
zdhered to the Romiih f;pertllition; and though
fdebarred from every fplrituial ifltion, continred
.ti eljirt the temporalities of their bcneleices.
Somne lymen, especially thofc who had been
arv;e in promoting the reformation, had, under
v;irious pretences, and amidlt the licence of civil
w;irs, -got into their hands powl;iiions which be-
aonietd to the ch]urch. T'lhs, bf'.hore any part
or the alcient ecclf i;ftical revenues could be ap-
pi.;'d tovwairs the zmaiteinalce of the protestant
miniicn;, many dieretnt interells were to be ad-
iflled; many claims to be examinied, and the
prciiudicrs and paflonrs of the two contendling
pirrtics. required the applicatioin if a delicate
iih:;nd. After mlch contention, the foll>owing
plan was approved lv a lmlajorit of voices, and
atcqlielcc d il even by the popilli elergy thlcn-
i'l\e:; An cxadt account of the valhe of cecle-
ii;altical benelices throughout the kiirlduln rit
appointed to be taken. The prcfent incumbents,
lo vwhaltever party they ;adhered, were allowed tu
k;)c'p poflneionl two-thirds of th(;ir whole re:(e.
oier twvere reserved for their own ulfe, the remitinder
x,.I; annexed to the crown ; and out of that, the
t.t'll llitunertook to aflign a fifficient mainte.
n:;lice for the protestant clergy P.

As molt of the bi(llops and f(evral of the other
il;itit'rieJ wvere flill firmly att:cihctd to the popilh

P Iitldr, ApF:nd. 175. Klnox) 194.

rcligio.n,

it!;.'ion the c:tirpation of the whole order, ra-
ther than 'rn aSt of such extraordinary indulgence,
mi'ilt have been expected from the zeal of the
pie:,ch! s, !ind froim the spirit which had hitherto
a!,iniated the nation. But, on this occasion,
other principles obft-iifted the operations of such
as Vwere purely religirus. Zeal for liberty and
thie I.ve of v'a;tl!, two paifions extremely op-
poit', concurred in determining lthe protestant
leaders to fll in with this plan, which deviated
so manieitly from the maxhins by which they
h;ld hitherto regulated their conduct.

If the reformers hald been allowed to aa with-

out controul, and to level all distinctions in the
chureli, the great rcve\ll;'' annexed to ecclefiafi-
cal dignili s could not, witli any colour of juflice.
ha e been retained by those in whose hands they
now were ; hbt nmuLl either have been distrib.uted
among the proteltant clergy, who performcd
all religions offices, or mullt have fallen to the
queene, from the bounty of whose anceflors the
greater part of them wa.s originally derived.
'he former ficheme, however suitable to the re-
ligious spirit of inany anong the people, was
attended with manifold danger. The popish ee-
clelialtics had acquired a ihare in the national
property, which far exceeded the proportion that
was confillcnt with the happiness of thle king-
domn; and the nobles were determined to guard
againllt this evil, by preventing the return of thole
ponfllfions into tie hands of the church. Nor
was the Lhtter, which exposed the conflitution to
more inmilnent hazard, to le avoided with lefi
cure. Even that circrrumfcribed prerogative which
tlle Scottilli king's )pollelcd, wsas the object of

jealousy

jealousy to the nobles. If they had allowed the
crown to seize the spoils of the church, such an
incrcafe of power mull have followed thait accef-
sion of property, as would have raised the ronva
authority above controul, and have rendered the
pmoft limited *rince in Europe the moll abfloite
and independent. The reign of Henry V Il.
presented a recent and a-arming example of this
nature. The wealth which flowed in upon that
prince, from the ftippreflion of the monalteries,
FIot only changed the maxims of his government,
but the temper of his mind; and he who had
orinerly submitted to his parliaments, and courted
his people, dictated from that time to the former
sith intolerable nlfolence, and tyrannized over
the latter wvih unprecedented feveritv. And if
his policy had not been extremely short-sighted,
if he had not squandered what he acquired' with
a; profusion equal to his rapaciousness, and which
defeated his ambition, he might have established
defpoifin in England, on a basis so broad and
arong, as all the efforts of the fitbjets would
nrevtn have been able to Ihake. In Scotland,
where the riches of the clergy bore as great a
proportion to the wealth of the kingdom, the
a£q.uifition of church lands would have been of
no Ilfs importance to the crown, and no less fatal
to the ariitocracy. T'he nobles, for this reason,
guarlded aIgainll such an increase of the roy.rl power,
nld thereby secured their own indelpendenlce.

Avarice mingled itself with thelc conccrn for
the interest of their order. Tlhe re-uniting tlhe

fxfefliois of the churchl to the crown, or the. b-

"owing thenm on the proteilant clergy, would have
bceo a fatal blo\v, both to thufol nobles who had,

b^

by fraud or violence, fei/ecd part of these revenues,
a;:ll to those abbots and priors who had totally
renotiliced their ecclesiastical charadter. But as
li.e plan which was proposed, gave some fancion
to iheir uftirpation, they promoted it with their
iitnioft influcncic. The popilh ecclefiaflics,
though the lopping off a third of their revenues
was bvd no means agreeable to them, consented,
lnldler their present circuiiiftancc to facrificf a
pnrt of thcir pofrefOli'os, in order to purchase the
iecure enjumevnt of the remainder; and after
deIlingi the whole irrecoverably loit, they con-
sidered whatever they could retrieve as so much
gain. Many of the ancient dignitaries were men
of noble birth ; and as they no longer entertained
lopes of reitoring the popifi religion, they wniflc1
their own relations, rather than the crown, vio tih
proteflant clergy, to be enriched with the fpi:ls
of the church. They connived, for this -reason,
at the encroachments of the nobles; they even
aided their avarice and violence ; they dealt out
the patrimony of the church among their own
relations, and by granting feus and pelrpetual
leafes of lands and tithes, gave, to lie timino of
their power, some colour of legal poffeflion to
what was formerly mere n1urpatiol.. Many vcf-
tiges of such alienations still remain %. The no.
bles, wiith thel conculrrence of the inicinbents,
daily extended their encroachments, and gradu-
ally itripped the ecccliiaftics of their richelt and
n-loil valuable poffefilons. Even that third part,
wvilich was given up in order to filcnce the cla-
moturs of the proteltant clergy, and to be some
(tiuivatlent to the crown for its claims, amounted

q Kci),, 507. SI):is'w. 175.

lto

to no considerable fumn. The thilrds due by the
imore powerful nobles, especially by fuicl as had
crmbraced tie reformiatiol , were almofi universally
remitted. Others, by producing fraudulent rent-
als; by cftimating the corn, and other payments
L;: kind, at an undervalue ; and by the connivance
of cllredors, greatly dilniiillhed the charge againit
rheifelves r: and tile nobles l.d 1much. rceaoln to
be satisfied with a device which, at so finall ex.
,ence, secured to them fich lvaluable poffefiions.

Nor :erte rtle

p'tflia t tclegy conliderabei

ga;ilcrs by tiis necw 'tl !iil.lit, i; tlhey found it to
he a inure caiy matter to kindle :eal, than to
exti;lguilih avall-ice. 'Thoc v:l)y len, vlwhollm r-
inerly they had iv.a d v itlh ifiolitec authority,
uwre noi dieaf to all il;c'; rmcnllllnances. The
prisr of St. iAnJ.i;', lic al of Argyll, the

oiof v'Mottoi, aold Iv't;ailO , all tile moltt zeal-

ca; ic aders of the congregation, wrcle appointed
lo afign, or, as it \ a s called, to nmodli/ tllcir l.i-
Pends. An; Iliutidrd imcrk:; Scottish was the al-
,.;:'anlcc wvlic:l their libcralitv arnil'.d to the
y.Lncr;aity of miititiler. To a few three unldred
tncrks wecre grancdl '. About tivclnty-four thou-
I l:d poundb Scottilh appears to have been the
w:liolc lunm allotted for the nainatcelance of a U;i-
t;olill church cllahllihilcd by law, and elitcoined
tlroullgiour the kingdlom tilc true churchl of
God' . l.ven this iurn was paid with little ex-.
;it:fncs, andt tlie iniillers were kept ill the flune
pO'V.ity and depencdence as formerly.

i562.] ''he lgentlcnefs of the queen's adlni-
niltlation, and tlhc elegance of her court, had

r Kcith, Anppend. IS. Spntlw. 133.
s KIno, 301. tKcith, Append. iS)S.

nlitigated,

mitigated, in some dcgree, the ferocity of the
nobles, and aLccuftomed them to greater mildz.ief
and humanity ; while, at the fame time, her pre-
fence and authority were a check to their sac-
tious and tumultuary spirit. But, as a state of
order and tranquillity was not natural to the feu-
dal ariitocravy, it could not be of long continu-
ance; and this rcar became remarkable for the
moll violent eruptions of intestine discord and
anrinofity.

Among the great and independent nobility ot

Scotland, a monarch could poflels little au-
thority, and excrcife no exteniive or rigorous
jurifldi'ion. T'l interfering of interest, the un-
fettled Ilate of property, the frequency of public
otinnmoLit)ns, and the si rcenefS of their own man-
ners, so\wd among the gre;t families the feeds of
miany quatrrel and contentions. 'Plhce, as we
have alri-ady v oblrved, were frequently decided,
not by law, 'ut by violncc. The offended
barcn, without having recomufe to the monarch,
or acknowiedging his l)iperior aillltority, affemn-
Ilied lisi o\wn followers, lild invaded tie lands of
hlis rival in an llollci :iI, 'lcr. Tocther with
his eflate anll lionoor:i, cvc'y nioblhman tranf.
initt cd fnme hereditary sectd to his polterit., who
were houlld i i lJonoir to adopt and to profccutc
it with itllit'ted r:alncour.

'iSlch ia ;(i'fli;'iion ltld fubfifled between tle

house of I-Jamiltoil and tnh earl of lotlhwell, and
wVa:; lCei!}lttncd ble y Imtitlilal ijilurics during the
-iate cuO!nilntio, l U 'l'he earl of Arran alld Botli-
w\:ll tlil)pplening o attend, the court at the fame
tline [l''cbrt'ry) ], thei, followers qualrelled

u Kecith 2! 5. fre

fn'lueiit'ly

firenuently in the streets of Edinburgh, and ex..
cited dangerous tumults in that city. At last,
the mediation of their fiiends, particularly of
Knox, brought about a reconcilement, but ai
unfortunate one to both thelfe noblkmen .

A few days after, Arran came to Knox, and,

with the utmost terror and confusion, confefied,
frit to him, and then to the prior of St. Andrew's,
that, in urder- to obtain the sole direfion of as-
itirs, Bothwell, and his kinimen the Haminltons
had conifpired to murder the prior, Maitland, and
the other favourites of the queen. The duke of
Chlatelherault regarded the prior as a rival, lwho
had supplanted hlin in thi' queen's favour, and
who filled that place at the helm, which he imna-
,ined to be due to himself, as firit prince of the
blood. Bothwell, on account of the personal
injuries wh'ich he had received from the prior
(urling the hostile operations of the two contend-
ilng parties, was no less exasperated atainftt him.
B13t whether lie and the Iainltlns haad agreed to
cement their new alliance with the blood of thfir
common enemy, or whether the confpiracv ex-
itLed only in the fiantic and dilordered iimaginiar-
tion of the earl of Arran, it is irnpoflible, arlldl
the contraditionl of hifloriail; and the defed'ive~
ieffs of records, politively to determinl. A\niolng
Illcl inflamed with refentinent and impatieni for
revenge, ralh expreflions miight be uttcrcdl, alnd
violent and criminial expedients propotd ; and olt
that foundation, Arran's dillltempered fancy niiglt
rear the whole filperflrufltrc of a conlpirlicy.
iAll the l)crfons acctufed, dicied their guilt witlh
tih utnolt confidence. But the known clharac-

KInox, S30.
9to. l. 11 i. tcr.

t';rs of men, and the violent spirit of the age,
added greatly to the probability of the accufa-
ioili, and abulndantly jullify the condudt of the
qneen's minilters, who confined Bothwell, Arran,
arnd a few of the ringleaders, in separate prisons,
and obliged the duke to lurrender the itrong
cattle of Dutmbarton, which he had held ever since
the time of hi.S religii;ig the oilice of regent r.

Tle (tliigln of the earl of Huntly against the

prior of St. A litlw'S were ciceper laid, and pro-
deicd more memorable anid mnure tragical events.
Gol,)rec Gordonl carl of Ht.ntly, ha ing been one
of the nobles \xiio colifl)ir-d againllt James III.
and whlio raiifcd !:s s'o: James IV. to the throne,
cnlio! ed :a :;.ral fllare in the confidence of that
tcli;r'li..U.i pti.'CC 7. By Iis bounty, great acccl-
iin.; :l .caltll ;tiid pouwr were added to a ta-
n;il ;ilut-l'iy (,;olent and power;ul. On the death
of that moInairch, Alexander the next earl, being,
appoir,ted iord iiiiicieant of all the counties be-
vond Forlth, lcft tie o:.her nobles to contend for
(olice; at court; and rctiring to the north, where
hi.s cilate ;i(l influence lay, resided there in i
kind of pri.ncly independence. The chieftains
i'i ;.hal. part of tlb: kingdoln dreaded thle growinh
dominhioi of flichl a dangerous neighbour, but were
t.lineiic to pire'iell. hi'i; encroaclminents. Some ot
i:ms rivals lie slcretly undermined, others he fid,-
dued by open force. His ellate far cxcecd d(
that of any other fulhje(t, and his /siJeriorities' and
juiifdictiolis c:te;dcd over many of the northern
corliitc:;. With povelr and potlefiions to exten-
live, under two long and feeble minorities, and

idnitlt the ihock of civil colnnnotiols, the carls of
Y Knox, 307, 3(8. z Crawf. Oficcr of State, 56.

Hultly

Hun.ly might have indulged the most elevated
hopes. But happily for the crown, an active and
encrlprifing spirit was not tli ch':;r'.t:(iliic ot
that family, and whatever cbie.tT their -imbition
mili,'ht have in 'icv, they -lhoic raildr ti acquire
it by political addlcfs, than to fcli'e openily aild
hy force of arms.

The conduecr of George the prefeitt :i-!, lurill

tile late commotions, had beea p '.:i :-.l'- I'niablc
to the character of the famili in tlha :;',, dl-
li c'is, variable, and crafi\. While hile ;iccl-f
of the lords of the congieg.atioln was uiicertain,
bh aflitled the queen rege:. i! I' atteCimpt,; to
crnfl thm he

thei. e thir al.i:;s opl.t on a better

alpert, he pretended to join thc:ie, but never
heartily favoured their c;:ite. iic was courted
and feared by each ,f the contending parties;
both connived at hi encroachments in the north;
and, by artifice and force, which he well knew
hew to employ alternately, and in their proper
pl:es, s he ndd'd every dayto the exorbitant power
and wealth which he poifeffe(

He observed the growing reputation and au-

thority of the prior of St. Andrew's with the
glreatef jcaloufy and concern, and confidered him
as a rival who had engrossed that fliare in the
queen's confidence, to which his own zeal for the
!popilh religion leeiecd to give him a preferable
1itli. Personal iijuries foou inerenffed tle mli;
liiilerftandiiig occalliocd by rivalfliil) in power-.
The queenl having dete:lnined to reward tle ser-
,viCees of the prior of St. Andrew's, by creating
liim an earl, (he made choice of Mar, tr; the place
whence lie liould tlake his title ; and, tlint lih
irliglt e better able to fiulpport Ilia new }holl;nr,

IB I 2 liellow'it

bestowed upon him at the fame time the land;;
of that nanme. These were part of the royal
demt-fnes a, but the earls of Huntly had been per-
mitted, for several years, to keep pofiiflion of
them b. On this occalion [Feb. i.] the earl not
onl- complained, with fomc reason, of the loss
vwhich lie fiufained, but had real cause to be
alarmed at the intrulion of a formidable neighbour
into the heart of his territories, who might be
able to rival his power, and excite his oppressed
vaflals to shake off his yoke.

An incident, which happened soon after [June

27. ],increafied and confilmed Huntly's fiufpicion;.
Sir John Gordon, his third son, and lord Ogilvie,
had a dispute about dhe property of an estate.
This dispute became a deadly quarrel. They
happened unfortunately to meet in the fireets of
Edinburgh, and being both attended with armed
followers, a scuffle ensued, in which lord Ogilvic
was dangerously wounded by Sir John. The
magistrates seized both the offenders, and the
queen commanded them to be itriily confined.
Under any regular government, such a breach of
public peace and order would expose the person
offending to certain punifmnent. At this tinm
some severity was necelfary, in order to vindicate
the queen's authority from an insult, the moll
ei'ilioUa which had been offered to it since her rc-
turn into Scotland. But, in an age accustomed
to licence and anlrchy, even this moderate exercise
of her power, in ordering them to be kept in
custody, was deemed an a&t of intolerable rigour ;
and the friends of each party began to convene
their yaflals and dependents, in order to overawe,

s Crawf. Peer. 297, 4 Buch. 334.

or

or to fruftirate the decisions of J;ijt.c(C-. Mei;.n-
vliCicJ Go;rdon made his escape ouw ot ri.iiun, and
1
i ig into ALerdeenfhire, comn;, ,ii: I. loI..i ci

jic 1. dignity with which lie hald bccn itL. ad;

aad as ail the queen's actions were, at this iiuic-
tionr ii'.nuttd to the carl of Mar, this added not
a it! -

t 1.t;I ri-efentment which t-luntly had con-
cci'cd angaiiif that nobleman.

At the very time [August] when tlieft pas-

i,:'-: fcn':ntcd, with the utmost violence, in the
n-inds of the earl of HIuntly and his family, the
queen happened to set out on a progrels into the
northern parts of the kingdom. She wias at-
tended by the earls of Mar and Mornton, Mait-
lan:d, and other leaders of that party. Th'I- prel
fence of the queen, in a countrly where no name
greater than the eari of Huntlys had been heard
of, and no power superior to his had been exer-
ciTed for many years, was an event of itself'
abundantly mortifying to titat liaughty noble-
man,0. Biut vwhile the queen was entirely uindlee
the d(ilrectionl of Mar, all her aDEions were more
apt to lbe if'pre.!ciited, and colnilrledl inrto in
.iii;cs; and a thoufanid circimiltanccs could not
hut occur to awaken H'untly's jealousy, to offend
ils pridel, and to inflaine hlis relnt mnit. Aminidlt
the aliit:.tions of so many violent piallions, fionn
n ill)ti)l: was unavoidable.

On Mary's arrival in the north, IIuntly cm-
i,,oyed his wife, a woman capable of executing
tlh coinillifion with abundance of dexterity, to
:).oth the qi(uenl, and to intercede for pardon to
Ill ir son. But tlhe qluetn peremiiptorly reqLircdl
wi;t lie fliquldagain delivl-r limfclf into tlie hllindl

c Keith, 223.
1J 11 3 us

4 of juPfice, and rely on her clemency. Gordon

('> ' was persuaded to do so ; and being enjoined by

, $ v the queen to enter himself prisoner in the caitlc
I;' of Stirling, he promised likewise to obey that
~
y^ commnand. Iord Erikine, Mar's nncle, ,nvas at
_S't that time governor of this fort. The queen's
.,' severity, and the place in which she appointed
[,.; s Gordon to be conlined, we;-e interpreted to ht

v
i new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmented tli:
¢ hatred of the Gordons aainlt him.
~ Meantime, Sir John Gordon set ott toward:,

't . ,Stirlintg [Sept. I.] ; but initead of performing his
\- i prornife to the queen, made his escape fiom hi{

guards, and returned to take the command of hl'
followers, who were rising in arms all over the
north. These were deltined to second and improve
the blow, by which his father proposed, secretly
and at once, to cut oll Mar, Morton, and Mait-
land, I;s principal advei-faries. The time and place
for perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently
appointed; but the executing of it was wonder.
fully prleented, by foine of tholfe unforeseen
accidents, lwhich so often occur to difconcer!
the fclhmes, and to intimidate the hearts, of al-
{aTlins" . Huntly's own house at Strathbogie
was the latt and mofl convenient scene appointed
for committing the int ended violence. But, on
her journey thilher, the queen heard of young
Gordon's flight ai d rebellion, and rteftfing, in
the lirft transports of her indignation, to enter
mdler the father's roof, by that fortunate exprci-
sion of her resentment saved her miuillers irnom
unavoidable deftlruCion o.

dI Kcitli, ,3o, c Kno, 318.

Trhe

The ill success of these efforts of private re-

venLe precipitated Huntly into open rebellion.
As the queen was entirely under the diredtion of
his rivals, it was impossible to compass their ruin,
witlliout violating the allegialce which he owed
lis sovereign. On her arrival at Invemnefs, the
commandilg officer in the caltle, by Huntly's
,orders, Tfht the gates againit her. Mary was
lbliged to lodge in the town, which was open
and defenceclefs; but this too was quickly fut.
rlintded by a nmultitude of the earl's followers f.
TI'c utmoll conlternation seized the queen, who
: .s attended bWy a very slender train. She every
noillent expected the approach of the rebels, and
l¢jne flips were already ordered into the river to
iccure her escape. The loyalty of the Monroes,
Frasers, Mackintoshes, and some neighbourilg
cl;:ns, who took arms in her defence, saved her
from this danger. By their afiiflatce, she even
folred the cafile to surrender, and inflicted on
lhe governor the punililltlent whichl his inlilenee
t .lItcrv ld.

'IThis open ad: of difohcdiencc was the occasion
.i a iiealitre inore galling to Huntly than any
lic (Iquen lihad hitlhierto taken. Lord Erikine
l,\ ll. g pj'cit ded a right to the carldom of Mar,
:It cwa];rt;igutied it in Itis favour; ,and at the faine'I ·'
ill' Nc- ry conferred upon him tle title of earl of'fl^.
.\lliray, with the ellate alnc';ed to that dignity t,'-
wihch lhad been in the )ponfliion of the earl ofJt.
lmlltly Iince the year 1548e. F'rot this en-.-tt
.,rachllncnt upon his domains he concluded tlht /I
his fimi.lv was devoted to deltrueion ; and dread- '^t:'
igL to bhe hripped gradually of thole pofetSli.onsl;

' Crawf. Oficers of State, 87, g8, g Crawt; Peer. 19.

which,

which, in reward of their iervic(s, the gratitudle
of tl)e crown had betlotwed on himlehlf or his ;'
ceitor;,, lie no longer disguised his in, .'sio'ns, but,
in dcfi,.oice of te queen'so i-CecLmui, n, opt i
took armis. IiLead of yieldinfr thnl pilce

i :

itrTen.th, which Mar) requiii d him r t urr.',
his followerai disperscd, or cut in pIcts, tle paiti h
Vhlich she difpatcied to take pofiLlioll of them
and he himifelf advancing \withi a considerable bod v
of men towards Ab-erdeeni, to which place the
queen, was now retrl-ned, filled ler finall coln:
with consternation. Murray had only a handful
of men in whom he could confide . In order t,.
form the appeai-nce of anl army, lic \\as oblig .
to call in the afTiftance of the neijgboulring 'n::-
rons; but as most of these either favouiic!
I1untly's designs, or flood in a we of his powrt,
from them no cordial or effec¢ual service cotili
be expected.

With these troops,howeve-, Munrrav, who could

gain nothing bydelay, marchcdkriikly t\wards tl;i
enemy [Oc.28.]. Hc foudi them at Corrichi,
poled to great advantage; hIe cnnn.andted 1,.
northern taflciates intiantlv to b-egi th)e attac ;;
but on the firlR motion of the itneiny, they trc;!.
clicroully turned tlheir backs ; uild 1Iunltly's
followvers, throwvirit aede their spears, and biltak-
ing tlieir ranks, drew tlicir f\vods, and ruilh,.;
fol ward to the plurflit. It was then that M ri
gave i'io,f, both of it;tidy c(,ura;e and of prude1it
colidtL.t. -ie flood immnovc;,le on a riil;:
ground, witlh the small but trtii'y body of 1:,:
adhlerents, wvho ])resenting their spears to thli
(.ncmy, rceived them with a determined refolu-

hi Knox, 5, 1 Keitlh, 30.

t'on,

tion, which they little expeced. The Highland
broad sword is not a weapon lit to encounter the
Scottish spear. In every civil commotion, the
upetriority of the latter has been evident, and
has iialwyays decided the contest. On this occalion
the ii-cgula.r attack of Huntly's troops was eafiiy
repulsed by Murray's firm battalion. Before they
recovered fiom the confulion occalioned by this
iunforefeen reiillance, Murray's northern troops,
who had fled so fhamefullly in the beginning of
the acion, willing to regain their credit with the
viEorious party, fell upon them, and completed
the rout. Huntly himself, who was extremely
corpulent, was trodden to death in the purftiit.
His sons, Sir John and Adam, were taken, and
Munray returned in .triumph to Aberdeen with
his prisoners.

The trial of men taken in aftual rebellion againll

their sovereign was extremely illort. Three days
after the battle, Si'r John Gordon was beheaded
at Aberdeen. His brother Adam was pardoned
on account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who
lh;d been privy to his fitllhe's ddign, was seized
ill the south, and upon trial found guilty of tlca-
fiml; but, through the qucen's clemency, the
ntiililment was remittcd. The firit parliament
proceeded agaiinft this great family with the ut-
nol t rigourl of law, nild reduced thcir power and
tortutl to tlhe lowetl bb k.e

As

i: This con fplracy of the earl of lt-hnly i: riL of the moll:

itrric.t, a-d mn) (l i crmi s pailiages itn thll Sc.ltih hiitory. As
it wls a trall!:tioll pIIrly domeftlic, and ii which lte Eng-
i)h we-c little ifltCreled, few oliginal papers concerning it
hivci been ound in Cecil's Collc.tion, tle gia.it llorehoule

of

As the fill of the earl oi Ht-ntly is the mcif
important event of this year, it would have bth,;i

impropri.

of evidencc and information with cga id to the ali'.i:s ,
t,.is pl;,ri d.

Bucihaln ftippnfcr Mary to h.ve flrmed a design ab'i;

this time ot iel i:,2 in., M urray, aiid iO 1 erllo.ini the p'.L i.
et bte earl ol Hunt:' lo r ;his purpole lint hio

, c. I untott!..i

whole tranfalCion ap';:eai to be so void of trutli, anru ti: ci
[ probabiliiy, vs to de(lrve no fr:ukis .xa:ii].tioin. At t:..:

time Mary vwated power, and si clns t:, ii l hd no incli:,.,.
tion to c.-mmit any .ó1 if %iolenice u,'. I'cr brother.

Two other hI p.t!helf. he been adlvaicd, ill order tc

ex:p'.in this m.tterl but he)y ape

, lr to bc equally remuicd'
frum tiu:h.

1. it cannet wllc e onc'ivcd, thatthe qiccn's :ourne', it

the no: th was a ichitre econcrl-ted by Murray, in older .
ruin the earl of Hcntiy. 1. H-untly had re!icd at cot:i ..
nint ever fircethe quren's return. Keith, lS, Appeni. ;,
,&c. This was the proper place in which to have leized i;.,.
To attack Ilim in Aberdeenhlire, the leat of his power, .i;a
in the midit of his varfIs, was a project equally absurd antl
hazardous. 2. The queen was not accompanied with a tlody
of troops, capable of attempting any tbing againt Huntly vy
,violence : her train was not more numerous than was ulual
in times of greatet tranquillity. Keith, 230. 3. Thee re-
main two original letters with regard to this confpiiacy;
one from Randolph the English relident, and another fl, i

laitland, both directed to Cecil. Ihey tallc of Hunti)'s
.measures as n.torioufly treasonable. Randolph mentions hi;.
repeated attempts to affairi)ate Murray, &c. No hint is gives
of any previous resolution formed hy Mary's mini(tel,, ii
ruin Hliitly andl his family. Had any such design ever x;-
ilced, it xa: Rlndolpli's duty to hive dlil'co ereJ it; inor
w.ulil Maitland have labouted to conccul it from the Etignih
fecretaiy. Keith, 229. 23z.

It. To suppose that the earl of HTuntly had laid any pl.i

for seizing the queen and her miniflers, fecnm to be o Jets
impri hable. i. On the queen's arrival in the north, he l.i
hoitred, in good eareilt, to pail her lavur, antd t,, ob t.iin .
pardotn lor his. son. iKnox, 318. z. He met the qulten, 1l*

improper to interrupt the narrative by taking no-
tice of leffIr tranfationis, which may now be
related with equal propriety.

In the beginning of furnmer, Mary, who was

decirous of cntering into a more intimate corre-
fpiondeid cc and familiarity with Elizabeth, em-
ployed Maitland to delire a personal interview
with her fomewhtere il the north of England.
As this proposal could not be rejeced with de-
cenicy, the time, the place, and the circumstances
of the meeting, w'e;e instantly agreed upon.
But Elizaabeth was prudent enough not to ad-
miL into her kingdom a rival who outflionc her-
fc!ffo fatr in beauty and graccfuliefs of person;

:iJn' i

who excelled lo eminently in all the arts

if iliinliation and address. Under prel ence of
bchn conulied to London, by the attention which
if-c was obliged to give to the civil wars in France,
flc put off the interview for that season l, and
prevented her- ifubjctds froml feeing the Scottish
) Alicrrizi, and ihef at Rothiemay, whither he would not
'i.'t: 'cin'led to conmc, hi id hle ih.rboured any lIch tre.ti ;n-

i..t. i"r,)iiurii'n. K ti.)x, 31 . 3 I is c:niduti was il'rc:ilut
.: I w nc ini, l;le tkh.l £f a man dilconct tcd by .11 untore-
1 i:'] il.lige., nat liki eore executing a i.iucel tedl I 'il . il.
i:i il c.uillcrlbl perlt s rs his i:lrn Lub:litd t to tile queen,
aiil tllltiid ljety to obey her colmr-ln.l-j. Keith, 2z6.

* , I tile earl teen p-'eviul]y d;;c'.itiined t, ritb inii ith .ii. line

ti' iu"ert, ur tu Iiize iher iniiiltcs , it is pTob lle lie \oul i
ji:le inr.llteil it to his princiiAdl ldlolir.r'. nlo' w'Jld they
ii.C.v detr edl hiimn in thi'; mni.n ,:r.

For tiliel reli ons, I i.lve, on the one han.l, vindicated the.

t.,il rt' Munray itmn any) delivcrate inccntion of ruining tl e
f inily ofGordon ; arid, on the other hand, I have inmputed
tile violent conllft ol the carl of Huntly to a ludden (tarr
of reflntinenr, without ch.irging him with Ali v premeditated
p: pose ot' rebellion,
j Keih, z z6.

queen,

queen, the charms of whose appearance and beha-
viour Ihe envied, and had fomt reason to dreaid.

l)uring this year, the aifembly of the church

met twice [June 2, Dec. 25.]. In both thefl
were exlibiited inany complaints of the poverty
and dependence of the church ; and mnany mt!'-
tmurs againfi the negligence or avarice of thole
who had beeCn appointed to collec and to dif-
tribute the finall fuid, appropriated for the
maintenance of the preachers l. A pectition,
craving redress of their grievances, was presented
to the queen ; but lvith.out any effet. Thcre
wras no reason to cxpet tliat Mary would dif-
cover any fol\'rwrdIl.(fS to gral;t the requeit of fusi,]
fupjplicants. As her niiiltcr:;, tlhourgh all in in

, zealous )prtelttari-; tiere tlieihlelvc, growin' riric

(on the inheritance t;f the c:lhurch, theyv wc'
equally regardl-c s of the indigence and demands
of their brethren.

r563.J Mary had- now continued above two

years ini a Itate of ]idowh\llod. ter gentle ad-
nminiftration had feumred the hearts of her sub-
jets, \who were imlat'tient for her marriaS'e, anct
wviihed the clr0own to dlefend in the riliht line firon
thtir alllcitt Imtnoarehs. She lihtrfellfas tle moi
ami;llt: womnan of the: iage alnd tilhe fme of her
aceomplifhnmets, together with the favourallej
circunntlance of her having one kingdu(mn alrendy
in her polle(lionl, alnd the proifpe(' o f mnonlting
the 'lii:uioe of another. prompted many dilffrent
rnlnes to solicit anl alliance so illilllious. Scot.
lnd, by its lituation, threw ft much sweight and
power into whatever scale it fell, that ,al Eu-
iope waited with solicitude for Mary's deter-

m' Kw., 311. 323

liination;

mination; and no event in that age excited
firo:lgcr political fears and jealouiies; none irl-
terested more deeply the passions of fevcral
princes, or gave rife to more contradictory il-
trigues, than the marriage of the Scottilih queen.

The princes of the houle of Autlria remenbered

what valt projecs the French l:id founded ol
their former alliance with the queen of Scots;
and though the unexpected death, firfl of I-enry
and lthen of Francis, had hinderied these fiom
taking effeEt, yet if Mary Ihould aga;il make
choice of a hufland among the French princes,
the fame deiigns might bc r.:evid, and prorecutcd
with better- lccefs;.

In order to prlevnt this, the elmpero' entered

into a neigotiaticn with tile cardinal c,: Lorrain,
\ho had propoli!d to imarry the Scottilf queen
to the archduke Charles, c'Frdinnd's third ion.
The matter was co;mnnlnic;ited to Mihay ; and
Melvil, who at that; time attenlded tlhe elctor
palatile, was comarnitded to inquire into the cha.
ra;tder and fituatcon of thel arclduke ".

lPhli). II.tliough no lelisapprchelc.ive ofMa3-'s

falling once more into tli hands of IFrianc, ;n-
-ied his uncle Ferdinand tlc acquisition of so
important a prize ; and as his own infatiablle al-
Iition grasped at all tie kingdoms of Europe, he
employed his anibaffador at the 'FrencI:1 conut to
solicit tile princes of l.orrain inl behalf of his foil
Don Carlos, at that tine tihe heir of all the ex-
tCtai\ve dominions which belonged to the Spaniflt
nmilarchy °.

n Melv. 63. 6S. Keith, ,q. SccAppcnd. No. VII
0 Cafleln. 461.i Addit a Labour. 501. 503.
VOL. 1. c c Catherine

Cathlerine of Medticis, on the other hanl,

dreaded the marriage of the Scottish queen with
any of the Austrian princes, which would have
added so much to the power and pretenlions of
that ambitious race. Her jealousy of tle princci
of Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an
alliance which, by securing to them the protedion
of the emperor or king of Spain, would give new
boldness to their enterpriling spirit, and enable
them to set the power of the crown, which they
already rivalled, at open defiance : and as file was
afraid that these fpletidid proposals of theAuftrial
family wotrld dazzle the young queen, the in.
Itantly dispatched Cafteblna into Scotland, tn
offer her in marriage the duke of Anjou, the
brother of her former hulband, who soon after
mounted the throne of France P.

Mary attentively weighled the pretensions of so

many rivals The archduke had little to re-
commend him, but his high birth. The etample
of Henry VIII. was a warning against cotlrating
a nmarriage with the brother of her former hus-
band; and she couild not bear the thBughts of
appearing in France, in a rank inferior to that
which fle had formerly held in that kingdom.
She list.ened, therefore, with partiality to the
Spaniilb propolitions, and the profpe.t of such
:villt pofwer and dominions flattered the ambition
of a young .andl afpirinlg princess.

Three fcveral cnrcumitances, however, con-

currld to divLrt Mary from any thoughts of a
foreign alliance.

l'iie.irfl of these was tle murder of her uiclc
thl dkll of Guise. The violence and ambition

'- C ltln.a, '461.

of

of that nobleman had involved his country in a
civil warl; which was conduered with furious
anilnofity and various ficcefs. At lall the duke
laid liege to Orleans, the bulwark of the protest-
ant cause ; and he had reduced that city to the
ladl extremity, when he was afaffinated by the
frantic zeal of Poltrot. This blow proved fatal
to the queen of Scots. The young duke was a
minor; and the cardinal of Lorrain, tlough subtle
and intriguing, wanted that undaunted and en-
terpriling courage, which rendered the ambition
of his brother so formidable. Catherine, instead of
encouraging the ambition, or furthering the pre-
tensions of her daughter-in-law, took pleasure
in mortifying the one, and in disappointing
the other. In this situation, and without such a
protector, it became neceflary for Mary to con-
traa her views, and to proceed with caution;
and whatever profped of advantage might allure
her, [he could venture upon no dangerous or
doubtful measure.

The second circumfallce which weighed with

Marly, was the opin)iion of the queen of England.
The marriage of the Scottish queen intcrefted
Elizabetlll more deeply than any other prince;
and fle observed all her deliberations concerning
it with tle molt anxious atteition. She herself
1 cns early to have formed a rcfolution of living
Imina;lrie'd, and( nfe discovered no finall inelinatiol
to impose the faime law on the queen of Scots.
hlie had already expecienced what use miglht be
made of Mary's power anld prctensions to invade
her drominions, iand to diftulb hcr puolltfion of
the crown. The death of Francis IL, had hap-
pily delivered her from this danger, whiclt me

c c 2 deter.

determined to guard against for the future with
the utmoit care. As the reflleft ambition of the
AuSirian princes, the avowed and bigoted patrons
of the cattolic fuperitition, made her, in a par-
ticular manner, dread their neighbourhood, she
inftru&ed Raindolph to remoniIr'ate, ri the flronl,-
efl terms, agailnf any alliance with them ; and to
acquaint Mary, that as (he herself would con-
fider such a match to be a breach of the perfolal
friendship in which they wrere so happily united;
so the English nation would regard it as the dif-
solution of that confederacy which now sublisted
between the two kingdoms: that, in order to
preserve their own religion and liberties, they
would, in all probability, take 'some fep pr'jtl-
dicial to her right of fuiccefiion, which, as hie
well knew, they neither wanted power nor pre-
tenccs to invalidate and set aside. This threaten-
in: was accompanied with a promise, but ex-
pre.ied in very ambiguous terms, that if Mary's
choice of a husband fiould prove agreeable to
the Englilh nation, Elizabeth would appoint
proper persons to examine her title to the fuc-
ceflion, and, if well founded, command it to he
publicly recogiiifed. She observed, however, a
mysterious silence concerning the person on whom
the wished the choice of the Scottish queen to
fall. The revealing of this secret was reserved for
tome future negotlation. Meanwhile ihe threw out
some obscure hints, that a native of 13Bitain, orone
Tiot of princely rank, would be her faffit aild molt
inoffensive choice'l. An advice offered with fucll
an air of fupcriority and coinnand mortified, no
doubt, the pride of the Scottith queen. But,

q Keith, 24z. a45.

unlder

under her present circumstances, she was obliged
to bear this indignity, Destitute of all foreign
aljillance, and intent upon tle English fuccefflon,
the great object of her wifles and ambition, it
bl:alnm necessary to court a rival, whom, without
i;inliifcft imprudence, fle could not venture to
offcnd.

Thle ininclation of her own subjects was an-

other, and not the Icaft considerable circum-
itance which called for Mary's attention at this
conjuniture. They had been taught, by the
fatal experience of her former marriage, to dread
an union with any great prince, whose power
night be employed to oppress their religion and
Hibrt;es. 'l'hey trembled at the thoughts of a
,;.tch with a foreigner; and if the crown
tiould be {rengtllened by new dominions or alli-
;-nces, they foresaw that the royal prerogative
tnould soon be ftretcled beyond its ancient and
legal limits. Their eagcrnefs to prevent this
coild hardly fail of throwing them once more
into the arms of England. Elizabeth woilld be
read)y to afford them her aid towards ubfttltdincg
a measure so difagriecable to hlerfelf. It was ealy
for them to seize the¢ person of the sovereign.
By the afliftance of the Englifl fleet, they could
render it difficult for any foreign prince to land
,11 Scotland, The Roman catholics, now an in-
considerable party in the kingdom, and dispirited
Ly the 1ofs of the earl of Huntly, could give no
obflrution to their designs. To what violent
extremes the national abhorrence of a forcigl
yoke might have been carried, is rmanifelt friom
what nhi had already fecn,and cxperienced.

c 3 For

For these reasons Mary laid aside, at that time,

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed will-
ing to sacrifice her own ambition, in order to rc-
move the jealousies of Elizabeth, and to quiet
the fears of her own fubjedts.

The parliament met this year [May 26] for

the first time since the queen's return into Scot-
land. Mary's administration had hitherto been
extremely popular. Her ministers poffiffed the
confidence of the nation; and by consequence,
the proceedings of that assembly were condudted
with perfeCt unanimity. The grant of the earl-
do:) of Murray to the prior of St. Andrew's was
confirmed: the earl of Huntiy, and several of
his vassals and drpendants, were attainted: the
attainder agai:it Kirkaldy of Grange, and fon.c
of his accomplices in the murder of cardinal
Beatoun, was reversed r: the adt of oblivion,
mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh, received
the royal fanaion. But Mary, who had de-
termined never to ratify that treaty, took care
that this sanction flould not be deemed any ac-
knowledgment of its validity; she granted her
consent merely in condescension to the lords in
parliament, who, on their knees, besought her
to allay the jealousies and apprehensions of her
fiitbjctls, by fich a gracious law".

No attempt was made, in this parliament, to

procure the queen's afnent to the laws efiablifl-
ing the protestant religion. IHer minifterp,
though zealous protestants .themselves, welc
aware that this could not be urged without m;a-
nifeft danger and imprudence. She had con-

Knox, 330. * Parl. 9. Q Mary, c. 67."Spots . 188.

fenteld,

sented, through their influence, to tolerate and'
protct the reformed doctline. They had even.
prevailed on her to imprison and prosecute the
archbilhop of St. Andrew's, and prior of Whit-
horn, for celebrating mass contrary to her prod|
clamation t. Mary, however, was still passionate-
ly devoted to the Romiflh church; and though,
fi-om political moti'-es, she had granted a tempo-
rary protetion of opinions which fle disapproved,
there were no grounds to hope that Ille would
;ig:ee to eftablilh them for perpetuity. The mo-
deration of those who professed it, was the best
mctlod for reconciling the queen to the protest-
ant religion. Tine might abate her bigotry.
Her prejudices might wear off gradually, and at
lalt file might yield to the wishes of her people,
what their importunity or their violence could'ne-
ver have extorted. Many laws of importance
were to be proposed in parliament: and to defeat
all these, by such a fiuitlefs and ill-timed applica-
tion to the queen, would have been equally in-
jurious to indi'.iduals, and detrimental to tih
public.

lThe zeal of the protestant clergy was deaf to

all these confidrtations of prudence or policy.
Eager and impatient,:it brooked' no delay: severe
and inflexible, it would condefeend to no con-
pliancc;. The leading men of that order infiffed,
that thi'; opportunity of eftabliihing religion by
law, was not to be neglcded. They pronounced
the moleration of the courtiers, ailoftacy; and
their endeavours to gain the queen, they reckon-
'ed criminal and servile. Knox folcmnly renounced i

t Kcith, z39.

the

the friendship of the earl of Murray as a man de-
voted to Mary, and so blindly zealous for her ser-
vice, as to become regardless of those ohjet&s
which he had hitherto esteemed most sacred.
This rupture, which is a Rfrong proof of Murray's
finccre attachment to the queen at that period,
continued above a year and a half .

The preachers being disappointed by the men

in whom they placed the greatest confidence,
gave vent to their indignation in their pulpits.
Thrce echoed more loudly than ever, witl d.:
clarations against idolatry; with dismal preifgc:.
concerning the queen's marriage with a foreign-
er; and with bitter reproaches againfl those w^ ho,
from interested motives, had deserted that caufc
which they once reckoned it their honour to sip.
port. The people, inflamed by such vehement
declamations, which were dicated by a zeal more
sincere than prudent, proceeded to'raflb and un,
justifi;able ads of violence [August]. 1)uril,
the queen's abfepce, on a prqgrefs into the weil,
rnafs continued to be celebrated in her chapel at
Holyrood-houfc. The multitude of those who
openly resorted thither, gave great offence to the
citizens of Edinburgh, who, being free from the
retraint which the royal presence imposed, as-
fembled in a riotous manner, interrupted the ser-
vice, and filled such as were present with the lit-
molt conltcrnation. Two of the ringleaders in
this tumult were seized, and a day appointed for
their trialx.

Knox, who deemed the zeal of these, perfoinf
budable, and their conduct meritorious, contidcr-

u Knoxi 331, · Ibid. 335.

cdl

ed them as sufferers in a good cause; and in order
to screen them from danger, he issued circular let-
ters [O'. 83, requiring all who professed the true
religion, or were concerned for the preservation of
it, to' alemble at Edinburgh on the day of trial,
that by their piefence they might coiifort and
aflift their distressed brethren Y. One of these let-
ters fell into the queen's hands. To assemble the
filbjets without the authority of the sovereign,
was construed to be treason, and a resolution was
taken to prosecute Knox for that crime, before
the privy council [Dec. 5]. Happily for him,
his judges were not only zealous protestants, but
the v'.ry men who, during the late commotions,had
openly refirled and set at defiance the queen'sautho-
rity. ltwaasundcrprecedents, drawnfromtheirown
conduct, that Knox endeavoured to Ihelter him-
self. Nor wtould it have been an easy nmatter for
these counlellors to have found oiuta diftin&ion,
by whichi they could cenitre him, without con-
demning themselves. After a long hearing, to
the aftonifliment of Lethington and the other
courtier.s', he was unanimously acquitted. Sin-
clair Iilhop of Ross, and prelidcnt of the court
of ifefion, a zealous papist, heartily concurred
with the other counsellors in this decision 1; a
remarkable faCt, which (hows the u'nsettlcd fate
of govwrntnent in that arge; the low condition to
wlhic regal authority was then funk; and the
ilnpiliity with which fulbjcEts might invade those
ighlt.s of the crown whicl are now held sacred.
156.4.] The marriage of the Scotti(h queenl con-
t ieucd lillto be the objet of attention and intrilue.

Y Knox, 336. z Caldcrw. MS. Hii i. i.832.
a> K'lox, 343. T

Though

Though Elizabeth, even while she wiched to di-
rect Mart, treated her with a difgultfil reserve;
though she kept her, without neceflity, in a state
of suspense; and hinted often at the person whom
she deflined to be her hlufband, without direfly
mentioning his name; yet Mary framed all her
aations to cxprefs such a prudent refpeft for the
English queen, that foreign princes began to ima-
gine (he had given herself up implicitly to her di-
recsion b. The profpea of this union alarmed
Catherine of Medicis. Tbough Catherine had
taken pleasure all along in doing ill offices to the
queen of Scots though, soon after the duke of
Guise's death, she had put upon her a most mor-
tifying indignity, by fopping the payment of
her dowry, by depriving her fubje& the duke of
Chatelherault of his pension, and by bestowing
the command of the Scottish guards on a French.
man c; she resolved, however, to prevent this dan-
gerous conjunction of the British queens. For
this purpose she now employed all her art to ap-
pease Maryd, to whom (he had given so many
causes of offence. The arrears of her dowry were
infaintly paid; more puncntal remittances were
pron-iied for the future; and offers'made, nnt
only to reltore, but to extend the privileges of the
Scottifn nation in France. It was easy for Mary
to penetrate into the motives of this suddeo
change; she wvell knew the charaaer of her mo-
tlhcr-il-law, and laid little stress upon profeRions
of trielldnhip which came from a princess of such
a false and unfeeling heart.

The negotiation with England relative to the

marriage,; fffered no interruption from this a.p
b ,icJt!J, 24.8. c"ibid. 24. d Sec Append: No, VlII

* ' pIlica;tiot

plication of the French queen. As Mary, in com-
pliance with the withes of her fubjets, andprefled
by the Itrongeft motives of interelt, determined
fpcedily to marry, Elizabeth was obliged to break
that unaccountable silence which (he had hitherto
affected. The secret was disclosed [M;rci,l and
her favourite lord Robert Dudley, after, ,irds earl
of Leicester, was declared to be the happy man
i\<horm he had chosen to be the hulband of a
queen courted by so many princes '.

.Elizabeth's wisdom and penetratio.n were re-
markable in the choice of her miniiiers; in dif-
tinguiiilhing her favourites, those great qtlaitiecs
were less conspicuous. She was influenced in two
cafes so opposite, by merit of very different kinds.
'Their capacity for business, their knowledge, their
prudence, were the talents to which alone fle at-
tended in clufing her miniiters; whereas beauty
and gracefulness of person, polilhed manners, and
courtly address, were the accompliflhments on
which Ihe bestowed her favour. She adted in the
one cafe with the wisdom of a queen, in the other
flle discovered the weakness of a woman. To
this Leicctter owed his grandeur. Though rc-
malknable neither for eminence in virtue nor fil-
jperiolity of abilities, the queen's partiality dif-
tinguinled him on every occasion. She raised him
to the highelt honours, she bellowed on him the
molt important employments, and manifested an
afi'etion lo dilproportionate to his merit, that,
in the opinion of that age, it could be accounted
for only by the power of planetain influence f.

The high spirit of the ScottiSh queen could
lint well bear the first overture of a match with a

Ktith, 2Sz. f CamdUWCP .
51

lutjcAd.

subjet. Her own rank, the splendour of her
former marriage, and the solicitations at this time
of so many powerful princes, crowded into her
thoughts, and made her sensibly feel how hum-
bling and difrefpe&ful Elizabeth's proposal was.
She dissembled, however, with the English refi.
dent; and though flhe declared, in trong terms,
what a degradation the would deem this alliance,
which brought along with it no advantage that
could iuftifv such neglet of her own dignity, fl.e
mentioned the earl of Leicester, notwithstanding,
iln terms full of refpet g.

Elizabeth, we may presume, did not withi that

the proposal should be received in any other
manner.. After the extraordinary marks flie had
given of her own attachment to Leicester, and
whlile he was still in the very height of favour, it
is not probable she could thuik feriousy of
bestowing him upon another. It was not her
aim to persuade, but only to amuse Mary ". Al-
most three years were elapsed since her return il-
to Scotland; aid though solicited by her fulb-
jeEts, and courted by the grcatell princes in Eu-
rope, ihe had hitherto been prevented from mar-
rying, chiefly by the artifices of Elizabeth. If
at this time thle Englilh queen could have engaged
Mary to lilten to her proposal in favour of ;Li-
cefter, her power over this creature of her own
would have enabled her to protraA the negotia-
tion at pleafurc; and by keeping her rival uirnmr-
ried, Ihe would have rendered the profpcd of her
fucceflion less acceptable to the Englifli.

Leicester8s own lituation yas extrelpely delicate
pand enbarraflilg. To gain poffefilon of the molt

g Kiltb, 252. h Mlv. 104, o05.

amiille

amiable worman of the age, to carry aa) thisi
prize from so many contending princes, to Inounlt
the throne of an ancient kingdom, might hlave
flattered the ambition of a subjed liiuch more con-
fiderable than him. He saw all thele advantages,
no doubt; and, in secret, they made their full
impreffon on Lim. But, without ofitnding Eli-
zabeth, he durift not venture on thi mnoft distant
discovery of his sentiments, or take any flep to-
wards facilitating his acquisition of objeis io
worthy of desire.

On the other hand, Elizabeth's partiality to-

wards him, which Ihe was at no pains to conceal',
might inspire him with hopes of attairing the fu-
prere rank in a kingdom more ilhlitrious than
Scotland. Elizabeth had often declared thiat no-
thing blat her resolution to lead a fiigle life, and
his being born her own ftbje&, would have hin,-
dered her from chifing the earl of Leiceiler' for
a husband. Such coniideratidns ofprudelce are,
however, often surmounted by love; and Lci-
cefter might flatter himself, that the violence of
her affeaion would at length triumph both over
the maxims of policy and the icruples of pride.
Tlefe hopes induced him, now and then, to con-
clude the piopofal of his marriage witlh the Scot-
tiih queen to be a projea for his dctlrutionu
and he imputed it to the malice of Cecil, who,
under the fpecidus pretence of doing hibn honour,
intended to ruin him in the good opinion both of
Elizabeth and Mary k.

A treaty of mamrage, proposed by one queen,
who dreaded its success; listened to by another,

I Melv. .

9 94 lbid. joy.
VOL. 1 D nD who

.'w-ho 'was fecrctly determined againf it ; and
fcartcly 'ddired by the man himself, whose inte-
reft and reputation it was calculated, in appear-
anc,: to promote; coulid not, under To many
iifiavouI-rable circunrrmtfcc, , be brought to-a for-
tunate iiTe. Both Elizabeth and Mary conti.
imicd, -howevcr, to aft witii equal difflimulation.
I'ie- fort-r-r, notwithitanding her fears ns lofijig
Icicelter, solicited warmly in his behalf. .The
latter, though (le began about this time to calf
her eyes upon another subject of England, did
noL at once venture finally to reje&. Elizabeth's
favourite -.

The person towards whom Mary began to

turn her thoughts, was Henry Stewart lord
Darnlv, eldest son of the earl of Lennox. That
nobleran, haIn\il been driven out of cotland
under the regency of the duke of Chatelheranlt,
had lived in bauifnimelnt for twenty years. His

ife, lady Marargaret Donglas, was Mary's mois
dangerous rival in her claim upon the Engliis
ficceflion. She was the daughter of Mhargaret,
the eldcel filter of H-enry VIII. by the earl of
Angus, whom that queen married atter the death
of her hufiand James IV. In that age, the rgiht
and order of fucceflion were not fettled with the
famc accuracy as at prcfent. Time, and the de-
eifion of almoil every cafe that can possibly
happen, have at lalt introduced certainty int.
a matter, which naturally is fubjeit to all the va-
riety arilinl from the caprice of lawyers, guidcd
by obscure, and often imaginary analogies. The
iountefs of Lcnnox, though born of a fceont
marriage, was one degree nearer the royal blood
of England than Mary. She was the daughter,

Mary

Mary only the grand-daughter, of Margaret.
This was not the only advantage over Mary
which the countess of Lcnrox enjoyed. She was
born in England, and by a maxim of law in that
country with regard to private inheritances,
' whoever is not born in England, or at least of
parents who, at the time of his birth, were in the
obedience of the king of England, cannot enjoy
any inheritance in the kingdom ." This maxim,
Hales, an Englilh lawyer, produced in a treatise
which he publilhed at this time, and endeavoured
to apply it to the right of fuccefifon to the
crown. In a private cause, these prete::ts might
have given life to a long and doubtful litigation;
where a crown was at flake, such nice difputeb
and fubtilties were to be avoided with the utmost
care. If Darnly ihould happen to contra& a.r
alliance with any of the powerful families iR
England,- or should publicly profess the proteit-
ant religion, these plausible and popular topics
might be so urged, as to prove fatal to the pre.
tensions of a foreigner and of a papist.

Mary was aware of all this; and, in order to

prerent lany danger from that quarter, had early
endcavoured to cultivate a friendly correfpodl.
cnrce with the family of Lennox. In the year,
one thousand five hundred and tixty-tvwo ", hoth,
the earl and the lady Margarwet twere taken into,
custody by Elizabeth's orders, on. account of
their holding a lecret correspondence with. the:
Scottish queen.

From, the. time that Mary became fenllble of
the difitculties.whlicl would.attend her marrying

. ?tcr, Hit. f Elng. »Vl. ill, 4r.o,.. . "',Cnmd. 3R9.

B n 2 a so»

a foreign 'prince, ..lie entered into. a fill .closer
connexion with the carl of Lennox ", and invited
him to return into. Scotland. This she endea-
voured to conceal from ElizabcitL; but.atranf
aftion of so much importance did not cfcape the
notice of that difceruing prihcefi. .. She. observed,
but did not interrupt it. Notbing could fall in
more perfectly with her views concerning ;Scot-
till affairs. She was pleased to fee the pride of
the Scottith queen itoup 2a latl to the thoughts
of taking a fubje& to her bed. Darnly was.in
no ihtuation to excite her jealousy or her fears.
His father's estate lay in England, and by means
of this pledge she hoped to keep the negotiation
entirely in her own hands, to play the fame game
of artifice and delay which Ple had planned out,
if her recommendation of Leiccllcr had beea
more favourably received.

As before the union of the two .crowns, no

fubjeEt of one kingdom could pass into the other
without the permission of both sovereigns; no
sooner did Lennox, under pretence of prosecuting
his wife's claim upon the earldom of Angus, ap-
ply to Elizabeth for her licence to go into.Scot-
land, than he obtained it. Together with it Ithe
gave him letters, warnly. recommending his per.
lon and caufc to Mary's fricnlfhip and protec-
tionl. But at the fame time, as it was her man-
ner to involve all her tranfastions Fvith regard to
Scotland in fu;me degree of perplexity and con-
tradiction ; fle warned Mary, that this indul-
gence of Lennox might, prove fatal to. herself, as
jlis return could not fail of reviving the ancient

n Camd. 396. " Kciuh, - 55. 21C..

animosity

anirrtofity between him and the house of Ha-
miltors.

This admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and

drer,- from her an angry reply, which occasioned
for some time a total interruption cf all corre-
fpondence between the two queens D. Mary was
not a little alarmed at tihis; the both decaded the
effcs of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt fcnfibly
the disadvantage of ewing excluded from a free iir-
tercourfe wtithl England, where her ambafladors
hadal aalong carritd on, wnith fooe success, secret
negotiations, whiich increascd the number of her
part/fans, and paved lier way towards the throne.
In order to remove the causes of the present difi
iculty, Melvil was sent express to the court of
England. He found it no difficult matter to
bring about a reconcilement; and soon re-establish-
ed the appearance, but not the confidence of
frieidfllip, which was all that had fubtilted for

torr.i ti;e between the two queens.

During this nefgotiation, Elizabeth's profef-

:ions of love to Mary, and Mlviil's replies in the
name of his miitreis, were rnadc in tle kiangiuage
nifthe'wrarmlef: and mos codlial frienldhil. IBut
what Melvil trulyr (bferves vitlh rcfpert to Eii.
rabethi may be e.tended, witliout irjutliice, to
hbth queens. " There was neither plain dc:liri.,
nor upright mneaning, but great dissimulation,
en v, and fearl."

Lennox, however, in confetiqence of the li-

rence which he had obtained, let out for Scot.
i;!ld, ahd was received by the queen, not only
vtlh 'the refped due to a nolbleman so nearly al-

PKeilh, =s3. Mclh.S, Mhc!s. Io4
' v n 3 li¢c4

lied to the royal family, but treated with a dif.
tinguilhed familiarity, which could not fail of in..
spiring him with more elevated 'opes. The ru.
mour of his son's marriage to the queen began to
spread over the kingdom; and the eyes of all Scot-
land were turned upon him as the father oftheir
future master. The duke of Chatelherault was the
first to take the alarm. He confidered Lennox as
the ancient and hereditary enemy of the house of
Hamilton; and, in his grandeur, saw the ruin
of himself and his friends. But the queen inter-
posed her authority to prevent any violent rnp-
ture, and employed all her influence to bring
about an accommodation of the difference:.r.

The powerful family of Douglas no less dread-

ed Lennox's return, from an apprehension that he
would wrest the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the queen, vwho well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irrit.ate Morton, and other
gre"t men of. that name, prevailed on Lennox to
pF'rc'hafe their frie.ndship, by allowing his lady's
claim upon tli earldom of Angus to drop'.

After there preliminary steps, Mary ventured

to call a meeting of parliament [December].
The a& of forfeiture paiecd againit Lennox in
the year one thousand five hundred and forty-
live was repealed, and he was publicly reltored
to the honours and cftatc of his ancctoris t.

June 25.] The ecclesiastical tranfitioini of

this year were not conliderable. In the'aifnmblies
of the church [Dec. 25], the fame conplaint:
of the increase of idolatry, tile fame repretrent.*-

Keith, 259. s Ibid, z68. NAte (h).
t Scc Append. No. IX;

tions

.tions concerning the poverty of the clergy, were
renewed. ,The reply which the queen made to
thcfe, and her prornifes of redress, were more
satisfying to the proteitants than any they had
hitherto obtained U. But, notwSithilanding her
declarations in their favour, they could not help
harbouring many suspicions concerning Mary's
dtfigns against their religion. She had never
onceconiented to hear any preacher of the re-
formed do&rine. She had abated nothing of
her bigoted attachment to the Romifli faith.
The genius of that fiperftition, averse at all
times from toleration, was in that age fierce and
unrelenting. Mary had given her friends on the
continent repeated affirances of her refolutioon to
re-establish the Catholic church x. She had in-
dullrioufly avoided every oportunity of ratifying
the ats of parliament one thousand five hundred
and sixty, in favour of the Reformation. Even
the prote&;ion which, ever since her return, lhe
had afforded the proteflant religion, was merely
temporary, and declared, by her- own proclama.
tion, to be of force only " till fIhe fould take
some final order in thc matte-r of religion Y." The
vigilant zeal of ttie preachers was inattentive to
none of these circumstances. The coldness of
their principal leaders, who were at this time en-
tirely devoted to the court, added to theirjea-
loulices nd fears. These they uttered to the
people, in langlage which they deemned fiiituble
to the necessity of the times, and which the
queen reckoned difireilpct ul and insolent. In a

" Keitl, 531. 519. x Carte, vol. iii 415.
V Kcith, 504. 51o.

meeting

meeting of the general aflembly, Maitland pub.l
licly accused Knox of teaching seditious dotrine,
concerring the right of fubjets to refill thofi
sovereigns who trefipafs againlt the duty whici
they owe to the people. Knox was not backward
to ju{tify what he had taught: and upon thii
general dotrine of refiltance, so just in its owx
nature, but so delicate in its application to
particular cafes, there ensued a debate, whici
admirahly diiplays the talents and clara&er o
both the disputants; the acuteness of thi
former, embellilhed with learning, but pronm
to iubtlety; the vigorous underilanding of the
latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fipe
rior to all fear z.

1565.] Two years had already been consumed

in fruitless negotiations concerning the marriage
of the Scottifl queen. Mary had ftll leisure aTrc
opportunity to difccrn the fallacy and deceit o
all Elizabeth's proceedings with refpe& to it
But, in order to set the real intentions of the
Engllih queen in a clear light, and to bring hec
to lomnc explicit declaration of her sentiment.
Mary at lalt intimated to Randolph [Feb. 5.
that, on condition her right of fncceffon to tih
crown of England were publicly acknowledged
the was ready to yield to the solicitations of hi.
mistress in behalf of I,eiccler a. Nothing coulii
be farther than this from the mind and intentio,
of Elizabeth. The right of fucceflion was
myitery, which, during her whole reign, he:
jealousy preserved untouched and unexplained
fihe had promised, however, when fie firit began

Knox, 34r, * Keith, 369,

t<

tu iaterct ,herself in the marriage of the Scott.ill
queenl, allthat was now demanded. T-ow0 to
retreat with decency, how to elude her forimer
offer, was., on that;account, not a little perplex-
ing . '..' .

'IThe.facility with which lord Daraly obtained

pcrniffion. to vitit the court of Scotlaid, was
owing, in .all probability, to that embarrassment.
rrom. the. time of Melvil's embassy, the countess
of Lencox had warmly solicited this liberty for
ler fbon. Elizabeth was no stranger to the am-
bitious hopes with which that young nobleman
fatteFTd himelf. $ he had received repeated ad-
vices fiom her ministers of the sentiments which
Mary began to entertain in his favour b. It was
entirely. in her powter to prevent his iirring out
of London. In the prelent conjuncture, how-
ever, .othling could be of more advantage to her
thlan Darnly's journey into Scotland. She had
alreardybrought one aqor upon the stage, who,
under her management, had, for a long time,
amulfd the Scottilh queen. She hoped, no less
abfolntely, to diret the motions of DIarnly, who
was likewise her subjet; and again to involve
Miary in all the tedious .intricacies of negotiation.
T'i.icfc nmotives determilned Elizabeth and her mi-
iiltcrs to yield to the solicitations of the countess
"f Lennox.

l)Ut thip decp-Iaid fcheme.was in a moment dif.

concerted. Such wilh.epced events, as the fancy
of poctt; afclibe.sto love, uar sometimes really pro-
dlLced4, y that pailion. ASn.affair which had been
the objpsk of so manly political intrigues, and had

b Keith, 259. z6x. z66.

mnoved

!:'itld and intlrcflted so many princes, was at
,tltd 'ccidcd byl tle sudden liking- of two-young
pillons. Lord Dn.rily was at this time in the
irit bloom and vig,'ur of youth. In beauty and
g'r:.eiln.ei-i of person he surpassed all his co-
tcmporaries; he excelled eminently in such artm
as add .'as- and eileance to external form, and
whlich enahi}ed it not only to dazzle, but to please.
Mary was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the
full power of these accomplishments. The iin.
pre'liu;i which lord Darnly made upon het
\was visible from the time of their firit in.
terview [Feb. 13]. The whole business of the
court was to amuse and entertain this illiftrious
guest c; and in all those seenes of gaiety, Darnly,
whtofe qualifications were altogether fuperfitia]
and (howy, appeared to great advantage. 'Hi!
conquest of the queen's heart became complete;
and inclination now prompted her to conclude a
marriage, the firt thoughts of which had been
figgelted by considerations merely political.

Elizabeth contributed, and perhaps not ,ith-

out deign, to increase the violence of this pas.
lion. Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland,
(he, in return to that message whereby Mary
had fignillied her willingness to accept of Lelcef
ter, gave an answer in such terms as plainly un,
ravelled lhr original intention in that intrigue 1.
She promised, if the Scottifi queen's martiage
ewith Leiceller thould take place, to ndvance him
to great honours I but with regard to Mary'j
litle to the Engli)i fucceclion, she wotild neitlhc
fiilrr any legal inquiry to be made concerning

f Knox, 369. d Keith, 270. App, 158.

It

it, nor pernit it to be plJLicly rcccg:nicd, until
ihe heriel. should declare ler reiolutioln ncver to
marry. Notw-ithiar.ding Elizabeth's fornier
promnifes, Mary had realon to expec e;ery thing
contained in this reply; her high spirit, however,
could noL bear with patience such a cruel difcove-
ry of the contempt, the artifice, and mockery,
with which, under the veil of.fiicndfip, ihe had
been so long nbufed. She burf into tears of in-
dignation, and expreffde, with the utmot bitter-
ncfs, her fcnfe of that difingentuous craft which
had ber!t emplc)-ed to deceive her .
:The. anturiI efleft of this ,indignation was to
add to the i.mpetuosity with which file puriucd
her own f, berie. Blinded by refentmieut as
well. as by love, flhe observed no df.ct.d in the
mnn'.iwhoni he I;ad chofin ; and begar to take
the necessary Iteps towards- acconlplili;lg her
delign, with all the impatience natural to those
paflions.

As Darnly was so nearly related to the queenn,

thel canon law made it necceflary to obtain the
pope's difpcnfation bc.fure the celebration of the
marriage. For this purpose flhe early set on foot
. negotiation with the court of Rome .

She was buly, at the fame time, in procuring

the consent of the Frelnchl ling and li;s mother.
Having communicated the dclin, and the mo-
tives whichl dttermtinled her choice, to Cailelnau
the French amballidor, ihe employed him, as the
molt proper perfull, to bring his court to fall in
with-her views. Ainolg (ither argumnenit to this
purpofc; CafLeluiaL mwetio ed Mary's attachment

f Kcith, Append, z5. 5 Cnmd. ;96.

to

to Darnly, wilch li e represented to be so violent
and deep-rooted, that it was no longer in her
own power to break off the match g. Nor were
the French ministers backward in encouraging
Mary's passion. Her pride would never fRoop to
an alliance with a fiubjsc of France. By this
clhice they were delivered from the apprehension
of a match with any of the Aultrian princes, as
well as the' danger of too close an union with
Elizabeth ; and as )arnly profefied the' Roman
catholic religion, tlis suited the bigotted fcehemes
which that court adopted.

While Mary was endeavouring; to reconcile

foreign courts to a measure which she had so mtch
at heart, Darnly and his father, by their belCI-
viour, were railing op enemies at Iomen to obltrlb-
it. Lenro:x had, during the former part of hil.
life, discovered no great compass of abilities or pc.
litical wtiido ; and appears to have been a manl
of a weak inderftanding and violent passions.
Darnly was not' fupcrior to his father in under-
itaniiil, ad ad ll his palfions were ffill more im-
petuoui. '1. To tlefe he added that infolencc,
which the advantage of external form, when ac-
companied with no quality more valuable, is apt
to infiire. Intoxicated with the queen's favour,
lie began already to assume thel haughtiness of a
king, and to put on that imperious air, which
majefly itself can scarcely render tolerable.

It was by the advice, or at least with the con-

;sent, of Murray and his party, that Lennox hIn
been invited into Scotland ; and yet, no sooner
did he acquire a firm footing in that kingdomn,

g Calteln. 464. h Keith, 17:, z%7.
'Knox, 3,s7. Keih, 274,

tlin

than he began to enter into secret cabals with
those noblemen who were known to he avowed
enemies to Murray, and with regard to religion,
to be either neutrals or favourers of poperyk.
Darnly, still more imprudent, allowed some rafli
expressions concerning those favours which the
queen's bounty had conferred upon Murray, to'
cfcape him .

But, above all these, the familiarity lwhlich

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio, contributed
to increase the suspicion and disgust of the nobles.

The low birth and indigent condition of this

man placed him in a itation in which he ought
naturally to have remained ufknown to pdfterity.
But what fortune called him to aa and to susser
in Scotland, obliges history to descend from its
dignity, and to record his adventures. He was
the foi of a musician in Turin, and having ac-
companied the Piedmontefe ambafliador into Scot-
land, gained admission into the queen's family by
his flill in music. As his dependant condition had
taught him filpplenefs of spirit and inlinuatill
manners, he quickly crept into the queen's fa-
Your, aldherFrench fecretaryhappening. to return
at that time into his own country, was preferred
by her to that office. He now began to make
a figure in court, and' to appear as a man of con-
sequence. The whole train of suitors and expe-..
ants, who have an extreme sagacity in discovering
the paths which lead mofl directly to success, ap-
plied to him. His recommendations were ob.
served to have great influence over the queen, and
Ihe grew to be confidered not only as h favourite,
but as a minister. Nor was Rizio careful to abate

k Knox, 397. Keith, 274. I lbid.-z74.
VOL. I.E that

that envy which always attends such an extra-
ordinaryand rapid change of fortune. He studied,
on the contrary, to display the whole extent of
his favour. He asseted to talk often and famis
liarly with the queen in public. He equalled the
greatest and most opulent fubjets, in richness
of dress, and in the aumber of his attendants.
HIe-difcovered, in all his behaviour, that affum-
ing insolence, with which unmerited prosperity
inspires an ignoble mind. It was with the ut-
most indignation that the nobles beheld the
power, it was with the utmost difficulty that
they tolerated the arrogance, of this unvworthy
minion. Even in the queen's presence they could
not forbear treating him with marks cf contempt.
Nor was it his exorbitant power alone which ex-
afperated the Scots. They confidered him, anJ
not without reason, as a dangerous enemy to the
protestant religion, and fufpeted that he held,
for this purpose, a. secret correspondence with
the court of Rome '.

It was Darnly's misfortune to fall under tlt

management of. this man, who, by flattery ana
assiduity, easily gained on his vanity and incwe
perienc. ' All Rizio's infltence with the queen
was employed in his behalf, and contributed.
without doubt, towards etlablilhing him more
firmly in her affetions n. But whatever benefit
Darnly might reap from his patronage, it did not
counterbalance the contempt, and even intamy,
to which he was ec;pofcd, on accouwt of his fa-
miliarity with such an upitart.

Though Darnly daily made progrefu in the
tucen's affEtions, flie conducted herlelfi how-

'n Buhcbia 340. MSlY.Ao7. .lbid. itl.

Cver,

ever, with such prudent refervc, as to impose on
Randolph the Englifl resident, a man othenvife
lhrewd and penetrating. It appears from his
letters at this period, that he entertained.not the
least suspicion of the intrigue which was carrying
on; and gave his court repeated assurances that
the Scottifi queen had no design of marrying
Darnly °. In the midit of this security, Mary dif-
patched Maitland to signify her intention to Eli-
zabeth, and to solicit her consent to the marriage
with Darnly. This embassy was the firit thing
which opened the eyes of Randolph.

April l..] Elizabeth asseted the greatest

surprise at this sudden resolution of the Scottish
queen, but without reason. The train was laid
by herself, and flie had no cause to wonder when
it took effe&t. She exprefled at the fame time
her disapprobation of the match, in the itrongefi
terms ; and pretended to foresee many dangers
and inlconveniencies arising from it, to both king-
doms. But this too was mere affetation. Mary
had often and plainly declared her resolution to
marry. It was impoflible (le could make any
choice more inoffensive. The danger of intro-
duciug a foreign interest into Brtain, which
Elizabeth had so justly dreaded, was entirely
avoided. Darnly, though allied to both crowni,
and poflefled of lands in both kingdoms, could
be formidable to neither. It is evident from all
thefc circunmtancec, that Elizabeth's apprehen,
lions of danger could not poflibly be serious; iind
that in all her violent declarations against Darnly,
there was much more of rimnace thn of reality P,

.* . . . ,,lTh ere

Kelth, 271, and Append. 59g.

P Ever the hiltorians of that age acknowledge, that the
ntarriagu of the Scottifl queen with a lubjdtc was far from

l f z being

There were not wanting, however, political

motives of such weight, to induce that artful
princess to put on the appearance of great dif-
pleaftre. Mary, intimidated by this, might per-
haps delay her marriage; which Elizabeth de-
fired to obflru't with a weakness that little suited
the dignity of her mind and the elevation of her
characetr. Besides, the tranquillity of her own
kingdom was the great objeEt of Elizabeth's
policy; and by declaring her diifatisfaaion with
Mary's conduct, The hoped to alarm that party
in Scotland, which was attached to the Englilih
interefit and to encourage luch of the nobles as
fecrctly disapproved the match, openly to oppose
it. The feeds of difeord would by this means
be scattered through that kingdom. Intelfine
commotions might arise. Amidit these, Mary
could form none of those dangerous schemes to
which the union of her people might have
prompted her.' Elizabeth would become the
nmpire between the Scottifl queen and her con-
tending fubjets ; and England might look on
with security, while a Ltorm, which flie had raised,
vwated the only kingdom which could poflibly
disturb its peace.

In prosecution of tllis fcjieme, ihe laid before

her privy council the meflage from the Scottish
queen [May T], and consulted, them with re-
gard to the anfwcr fle Imould return. Their
being disagreeable to Elizabeth. Knot, 369. 173. Buchan.
3 39, C.lftelnau, who at that time was well acqu.inted with
the intrigues ,f both the Britilh courtt, a:;Ilti, upon grounds
ofgicat plobability, that the mateh was wholly Elizabeth's
own wok ; CfaReln. 462.: and that she cejoiced at the ac-
crnmplilhient of it, appears from the letters of her own am-
billAdors. .ill,_20o. o88.

5 dctern-ii,

determination, it is easy to conceive, was per.
fectly conformable to her secret views. They
drew up a remonstrance againtt the intended
match, fiull of the imaginary dangers with which
that event threatened the kingdom 9. Nor did
flie think it enough, to signify her disapprobation
of the meaffire, either by Maitland, Mary's am-
baffador, or by Randolph, her own resident in
Scotland; in order to add more dignity to the
farce which she chose to ad, she appointed Sir
Nicholas Throgmorton her ambaflador extraor-
dinary. She commanded him to declare, in the
it ,rogeft terms, her difl:atisfation with the ftep
which Mary proposed to take; and at the ftme
time to produce the deterinination of the privy
council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the
nation were not different from her own. Not
long after, she confined the countess of Lennox
as a prisoner, first in her house, and then sent her
to the Towerr.

Intelligence of all this reached Scotland before

the arrival of the Engliflh ambassador. In the
;irit transports of her indignation, Mary resolved
l1o longer to keep any measures with Elizabeth;
and fcnt orders to Maitland, who accompanied
'Throgmorton, to return inliantly to the Englill
court, and in her name to declate to Elizabeth,
that after having been aniufed so long to so little
pur'ofe ; after having been fooled, and imposed
on io grossly by her artifices; file was now re-
solved to gratify her own inclination, and to ask
no other consent, but that of her own fubjeats,
in the choice of an hunband. Maitland, with his
pfilal sagacity, foresaw all the effets of such a
9 Kcith z74. Sec Append. No. XX.r Kcith, AppenA. 16 r.

F E e r. I>li

ralh and angry meflage, and ventured rather to
incur the displeasure of his mistress, by disobeying
her commands, than to be made the initrument
of tearing afinder so violently the few remaining
ties which still linked together the two queens'.

Mary herself soon became sensible of her error,

She received the Englifl ambaflador with refpec ;
jultified her own condcut with decency; and
though unalterable in her resolution, she affected
a wonderful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to
the mcafure; and even pretended, out of com-
plaifance towards her, to put off the confumma.
tion of the marriage for some months'. It is
probable, however, that the want of the pope's
dispensation, and the profpet of gaining the
consent of her own subjects, were the real motives
of this delay.

This consent Mary laboured with the utmost

induflry to obtain.' The earl of Murray was the
person in the kingdom whose concurrence was
of the greatell importance ; but she had reason to
fear that it would not be procured without ex-
treme difficulty. From the time of Lennox'b
return into Scotland, Murray perceived that the
queen's affections began gradually to be fitrangel
from him. JDarnly, Athol, Rizio, all the court
favourites, combined againit him. His ambitious
f)irit could not brook this diminution of his
power, which his former fcrvices had so little
nteritcd. H-e retired into the country, and gave
way to rivals, with wvhom he was unable to con-
lend ". The return of the carl of Bothwcll, his
ivowed enemy, who had been accused of a design

* Keith, Append, 160. t Ibid. 178.
KCithl, 27, 274. ApIend. 159.

lUP)i;

upon his life, and who had resided for some time
in foreign countries, obliged him to attend to his
ownI safety. No intreaty of the queen could per-
fuade linm to a reconcilement with that nobleman.
He intilled on having him brought to a public
trial, and prevailed, by his importunity, to have
a day fixed for it. Bothwell durli: not appear'
in opposition to a man who came to the place of.
trial attended by five thousand of his followers on
horseback. 1He was once more conflrained to
leave the kiilgdon ; but. by the queen's com-
mand, the sentence of outlawry, which is incurred
by non-appearance, was not pronounced against
him X.

Mary, sensible, at the fame time, of how much

importance it was to gain a fiubjie: so powerful
and so popular as the carl of Murray, invited him
back to court [May 8], and received him with
manydemonfirations ofrefpect and confidence. At
lait Ihe desired him to set an example to her other
fubje'As byfubfcrihing a paper, containing aformal
approbation of her marriage withDarnly. Murray
had many reasons to hefitatc, and even lo with-
hold his assent. Darnly had not only undermined
his credit with the queen, but discovered, on
every occasion, a rooted averlioll to his person.
By consenting to his elevation to the throne, lie
would give him fulch an acceflion of dignity and
power, as no man willingly beltows on an enemy.
The unhappy confequellces which might follow
upon a breach with England, were likewiie of
considerable weight with Murray. He had al-
ways openly preferred a confederacy with Eng-

x Kcith, Append. 160.

land,

land, before the ancient alliance with France,
]3y his means, chiefly, this change in the fyfiem
of national politics had been brought about.
A league with England had been eitablilhed;
and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rafl
and youthful passion, an alliance osso much utility
to the kingdom ; and which he and the other
nobles were bound, by every ,bligat.on, to main-
tain Y. Nor was the interest of religion forgotten
on this occalion. Mary, though filr-ounded by
proteltant counsellors, had found means to hold
a dangerous corrcfpc ndence wi-h foreign catholics,
She had even cornted the peoe's protecion, who
lhad sent her a iubfidy of cight choufand crownsz.
Though Murray had hitherto endeavoured to
bridle the zeal of the reforired clergy, and to set
the queen's conduca in the most favourable light,
-et her obflinate adherence to her own religion
cculd not fail of alarlr.ing him, and by her rebo-
lition to marry a papist, the hope of reelniming
her, by an union with a proteitant, was for ever
cut off-, Each of these considerations had its
influence on Murray, and all of them determined
him to decline complying at that time with tile
queen's requft.'

The convention of nobles, which * as afrem.

bled a few days after [May 41i] difeovered a
greatter disposition to gratify the'queen. Many
of thmin, without hesitation; cxprefced their ap-
probation of the intended matcli ; but as other;
Iwere ilartled at the fame dangers which had
alarmed Murray, pr were influenced by his ex.

Y Keith, i4. z lb;d,. 95, Mclv; 114.
a Kcidh, Append, i60,

mtrple

ample to rcfufe their confcnt, another convention
was appointed at Perth, in order to deliberate
mnore fully concerning this matter b.

Meanwhile Mary gave a public evidence of

her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly
titles of 1honour peculiar to the royal family.
The oppoiition she tlad hitherto met with, alid
the many contrivances employed to thwalrt n';d
disappoint her inclination, produced their ufuial
cJFc'c on her heart, they confirmed her passion,
and increafedits violence. The simplicity of that
age imputed an affeaion so exceffivc, to the in-
fluence of witchcraftC. It was owing, however,
to no other charm, than the irreliitiblc power of
youth and beauty over a young and tender heart.
:Darnly grew giddy with his prosperity. Flattered
by the love of a queen, and the applause of many
among her fubjeas, his natural haughtiness and
insolence became insupportable, and he could no
longer bear advice, far less contradidion. Lord
Ruthven, happening to be the firit person wlho
informed him that Mary, in order to soothe Eli-
zabeth, had delayed for some time creating him
duke of Albany, he, in a frenzy of rage, drew
his dagger, and attempted to flab him d. It re-
quired all Mary's attention, to prevent hi, falling
under that contempt to which such behaviour
deservedly expolfed him.

In no fcenc of her life was ever Mary's own

address more remarkably displaycd. Love
Jharpened htr invention, and inade her ltudy every
method of gaiinin her ifbjc;. Many of ilfc
nobles flc wron by her address, and nmore by her

I Keith, Aplprnd. z53. Knox, 373. c Kcith, 283.
5 Jbji. l'Append. 16o.

plromife.t.

promises. On some she bestowed lands, to otherl
lhe gave new titles of honour e. She even coiln
descended to court the protestant clergy; and
having invited three of their fuperintendants te
Stirling, she declared, in flrong terms, her refo.
lution to proteEt their religion, exprefTed het
willingncfs to be present at a conference upon the
points in doArine which were disputed between
the protestants and papists, and went so far as to
shew fcmne desire to hear Inch of their preachers
as were rnoil remarkable for their moderations.
By the e arts the queen gained wonderfully upon
the people, w-ho, unless tleir jealousy be raised
by repeated ilj iri':s, are always ready to view
the a&ions of their sovereign with an indul-
gent eye.

On the other hand, Murray and his affpciates

jwere plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy,
She talked in so high a strain of her difpleafiure
at the intended match; she treated lady Lennox
with so much rigour; file wrote to the Scottish
queen in such high toTn6rs; she recalled the earl
of Lennox and his son in fich a pt-erclptory man-
ner, and with fulch fevelr dcnunciatio;ns of her
vengeance if they should presume to difobeyg;
that all these cxprcffions of aversion fully pei-
filaded them of her finceity. Th'llis elief fr-
tified their scruples with refpe&t to the match,
and encouraged them to oppose it. They bcgi;n
with forming among tlemfelves bonds of coil-
federacy and mutual defence; they entered into
a fcclrt correspondence with the E'nglifl resident,
in order to secure Elizabeth's affiltince when it

e Keith, Append. 2 3. f Knox, 373.
g Keitl, JS5, ;16.

.p...ul

Ihould become needful h ; they endeavoured to
fill the nation with such apprehensions of danger,
as might countelrbalance the influence of those
arts which the queen had employed.

Bcl;des tiefc intrigues, there were fecrctly car-

rie 0 on, by both parties, dark designs of a more
criminal nature, and nmore suited to the spirit of
the age. Darnly, impatient of that opposition,s
which hei; imputed wholly to Murray, and re-
solving at any rate to get rid of such a powerful'
tnemy, formed a plot to a[affinate him, during:
the mectilng of the coiivcntion at Perth. Murray,
o:. his part, clefpaiiilng of preventi:.g t"le ma'-ria re
by any other mecans, hla'i, together .vith the duke
ss Chatellherailt a.Iil the earl of Argyil, cou-
certed incllai-ful f ,or . .ing Darilvy, and carlring
lhiml a prioncr into Emng;..id.

If either of thece conspiracics had taken cffec',

tlhis convention niiglit h'ave been attended with
consequences extremely tra;ir;,al: 'l ut both were
rncldered a!.')rtive by tlhe vigiince or goou for-
tune of thlofe ag tinit whom they wver formed.
Mt[uIr.I3, being warncd of his darnger by some re-
tiiners to the court, who itill fatvoured his in-
terest, avoided the blow by not goiin to Perth.
Mary, recciving intelligence of Murray's enter-

rife, retired with the utmoit expedition , along
with Darnly, to the othcr lidc of Forth. Con-
fcious, on both fides, of guilt, and inflamed wvith
refcitment, it wva, impoflible they could eithcr
firget the violene whlich tllemfe)vc had medi-
tated, or forgive the injuries intended ngainll
lhem. 'Trom that moment all hope of reconcile-
.:wnt was at an 'id, and their mutual enmity

h Kri:h, 189. 29. 298.

1~t *~'bur.a

hurll: out with cvery fympn)to of implacabie
hatred ;.

On

1 The reality of thecr two opposite conspiracies has given

cccafion to many dilputes a:nd much contradiltion. Some
deny that any design was l)rmed against the life of Murray i
ouheis call in qultion the truth of the conspiracy againit
Darnly. There seem, however, to be plaufib!e reasons for
believing that there is some foundation for what has been as-
'erted with regard to both ; though the zeal-and credulity
of party-writers have added to each many exJggerate. cii-

rcumfta.nces. The following arguments render it probabli

that some violence was intended againlf Murray:

1 I. This is politively afterted by Buchanan, 34r. 2. The

; lnglifh resident writes to Cecil, ;lit Murray was afftiredly
inforined that a design was formed of murdering himn at
Petth, and mentions va;ious circumrfances concerning tlhe
manner in which the crime was to be committed. If t!,.

iwhole hadJ been a tiction of his own, or of Murray, it is im-
p:dfiblc that he could have written in this Ptrain to such a
discerning miniller. Keith, 287. 3. Murray himrnif lon-

aintly and publicly persisted in affirming that such a dcfign
was furmed againtt hiis life. Keith, Appeld. roS. He was
required by the queen to transmit in writing an account of the
cni',i)acy which he rretended had been formed against his
lifr. This he did accordingly; but " when it was broughl
to her majeliy by her lfrvants sent for that pull:oil', it ap.
pears be her highness and her council, that his purgation in
that behalf was not so fuflicient as the matter required."
Keith, App. o09. He was therefore tummoned to appeir
within three days before the queen in Iolyrood-houfec and
in order to encourage him to do to, a fafe.condu6 was offered
to him. Ibid. Though he had once consented to appear, he
afterwards declined to do lo. But whoever confiders Mur-
ay't situation, and the charlaaer of those who direCted
Mary's councils at that time, will hardly deem it a decisive
proof of his guilt, that he did not choose to rilk his perfoa
on such security. 4. The furious paflions of Darnly, the
firccnefe of his rcfentment, which scrupled at lno violence,
and the maniners of the age, ;ender the imputation of such A
cime less ipiolbablc. 1

II. Thlat

Oil Mary's return to Edinburgh, she summoned
her vaflals by proclamation, and solicited them by

her

II. That Murray and his aflociates had resolved to seize

Darnly in his return from Perth, appears with fill great/er
certainty; i. From the express testimony of MeTfi, liz.;
althoug Buchanan, p. 341. and Knox, p. 377. affecR,
without realon, to represent this as an idle rumour. z. The
queflion was put to Randolph, Whether the governor of
Berwick would receive Lennox and his son, if they were
delivered at that place ? Hisan(wer was, " that they would
not refuse their own, i. e. their own subjes, in whatsoever
fort they came unto us, i. e. whether they returned to
England voluntarily, as they had been required, or were
brought thither by force." This plainly flews, that some
such design was in hand, and Randolph did not discourage
it by the answer which he gave. Keith, zgo. 3. The pre-
cipitation with which the queen retired, and the reason she
gave for this sudden flight, are mentioned by Randolph.
Keith, 291. 4. A great part of the Scottifi nobles, and
among there the earls ot Argyll and Rothes, who were them-
lelves privy to the design, aliert the reality of the conspiracy.
Good. vol. ii. 358.

All there circumltances render the truth of both cunfpira-

cits probable. But we may observe how far this proofs
though drawn from public records, falls thort, on both fides,
of legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in
their accounts of the conspiracy againlt Murray, difler widely
ill aimoft every circunifance. 'I he accounts of the attempt
upon Darnly are not more confiftcnt. Melvil alleges, that
the delign of the conifpirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner
irto England ; the proposal made to Randolph agrees with
this. Randolph fays, that they intended to cany the queen
to St. Andrew's, and Darnly to Castle Campbell. The lords,
in their declaration, affirm the design of the confprraturs to
have been to murder Darnly and his father, to confine the
qucen in Lochleven during life, and to ufilrp the govern-
milent. 'o believe implicitly whatever they ind in an an.
cicnt paper, is a folly to which, in every age, antiquaries
are extremely prone. Ancient papers, however, often con-
tain no more than the slanders of a partyt and the lie of the
VOL, J. p day.

her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-
teation of her person againll her foreign and do-
meftic enemies k. She was obeyed with all the
promptness and alacrity with which filbjeits run
to defend a mild and popular administration.
,This popularity, however, file owed in a great
neafure to Murray, who had direeted her ad-
miniiftration with great prudence. But the crime
of opposing her marriage obliterated the memory
of his former services; and Mary, impatient of
contradiction, and apt to confider those who dif-
puted her will, as enemies to her person, deter.
mined to let him feel the whole weight of her
vengeance. For this purpose she summoned him
to appear before her upon a flort warning, to an-
fwer to such things as should be laid to his charge .
At this very time Murrav, and the lords who
adhered to him, were aflimbled at Stirling, to
deliberate what course they should hold in such a
difficult conjunEture. But the current of popular
favour ran so flrongly againit them, and notwith-
Itanding some fears and jealousies, there prevailed

day. The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this
kind; it is plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat
of faction. Many things alierted in it are evidently falie or
exaggerated. Let Murray and his confederates be as ambi-
tious as we can suppose, they mull have had lome pretences,
and plaulible ones too, before they could venture to imprison
their sovereign for lite, and to leize the reins of government;
but, at that time, the queen's conduct had afforded no co-
loutablic excuse for proceeding to such extremities. It ic
likewilf remarkable, that in all the proclamations againli
Murray, of which Ib many are publilhed in Keith, Appen-
dix, xoS, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly, nor
that which he is alleged to have formed against the qucen
lcrfelf, are ever once mentioned.

k Keithl zgS. 1 Ibid. Append. zo8.

it

in the nation such a general difpolition to gratify
the queen in a matter which so nearly concerned
her, that, without coming to any other conclu-
sion, than to implore the queen of England's
protedion, they put an end to their inciftfeual
consultations, and returned every mall to his own
house.

Together with this discovery of the weakness

of her enemies, the confluence of lier subje,.s
fiom all corners of the kiugdom afforded Mary an
agreeable proof of her own itrengtil. While the
queen was in this prosperous fittuation, she de-
termined to bring to a period an afflair which had
so long engrossed her lieart and occupied her at-
tention. On the twenty-ninth of July, lhe mar-
ried lord Darnly. The ceremony was performed
in the queen's chapel, according to the rites of
the Romilh church; the pope's bull dispensing
with their marriage having been previously ob-
tained m. She issued at the fame time proclama-
tions, conferring the title of king of the Scots
upon her hufland, and commanding that hence-
forth all writs at law flould run in the joint
names of king and queen ". Nothing can be a
it-onger proof of the violenlce of Mary's love, or
the weakness of her councils, than this lalt: Jlep.
Whether nhe had any right to choose a hulband {
wsitlhot consent of parliament, was, in that age, I
a nittier of sone dispute e ; that Ihe had no right {
to confer upon linim, by her private authority, the
title and dignity of king, or by a liimple prociaL-
nmation to ra;ise her lhulband to be the maitcl of
lher people, feeins to be beyond all doubt. Frau-

m Keith, 307. n Andcrrfn, i. 33. Sec Append, No. XI.
13 bucild. 341.

.. 1' 2 Ci_

cis II. indeed, bore the fame title. It was not,
however, the gift of the queen, but of the nation;
and the consent of parliament was obtained, be-
fore he ventured to assume it. Darly's con-
dition, as a subjet, rendered it still more nec f-
fary to have the concurrence of the supreme
council in his favour. Such a violent and unpre-
cedented firetch of prerogative, as the lubftituting
a proclamation in place of an aft of parliament,
might have justly alarmed the nation. But at
that time the queen poffefll:d so entirely the con-
fidence of her fubjeEs, that, notwithstanding all
the clamours of the malecontents, no symptoms
of general discontent appeared on that account.

Even amidf that fccne of joy which always ac.

companies fuccefsfll love, Mary did not susser the
course of her vengeance against the malecontent
nobles to be interrupted. Three days after the
marriage, Murray was again summoncd to court,
under the severest penalties, and upon his non-ap-
pearance the rigour ofjuftice took place, and he
was declared an out-law P. At the fame time the
queen set at liberty lord Gordon, who, ever fincr
his father's infurrecdion in the year one thousand
five hundred and fix:ty-two, had been detained a
prisoner ; flie recalled the earl of Sutherland, who,
on account of his concern in that conspiracy, had
fled into Slanders; and she permitted Bothwcll
to return again into Scotland. The firit and lall
of these were among the moit powerful fubljedts
in the kingdom, and all of them animated with
implacable hatred to Murray, whom they deemed
the enemy of their families and the author of their
owl ftifferings. This common hatred became

P Keith, 309, 310.

tih,

the foundation of the ftri&(ft union with the
queen, and gained them an ascendant over all her
h councils. Murray higifelf coniidered this confe-
deracy with hlis avowed enemies, as a more cer-
tain indication than any mcafi.lre she had yet
' taken, of her inexorable resentment.

The malecontca'ts had not yet openly taken up

armn sq. But the qreen having ordered her sub-
jectis to march again: i them, they were driven to
the lalt extremity. They found themselves
unable to make head agailnt the numerous
forces which Mary had afsiembled; and fled in-
to Argylefiire, in expectation of aid from Eli-
zabetlh, to whom they had feeretly difpatchci
a meflfnger, in order to implore hler immediate
aflillance ,.

Meanwllile, Elizabcth endeavoured to cmbar-

:als Mary, by a new declaration of difguit at her
conduct. She blamed both her choice of lord
Darnly, and the precipitation with which hle
had concluded the marriage. She required
Lennox and Darnly, whoim n(le still called her
ubtjedts, to return into England: and at the
alime timne fle warnily interceded in behalf of
Murray, whose behaviour lhi rcprefented to be

q After their fiuitlers consultation in Stirling, the lords

retired to their own houses. Keith, 304. Murray was itill
at St. Andrew's on July 2z. Keith, 306. By the places of
re:ndezvous, appointed for the inhabitants of the diflerenr
counties, August 4, it appears that the queen's intention
was to mal:ch into Fife, the county in which Murray,
Rothe. , Kirkdidy, and other chiels of the malecontents re..
ided. Keithl, 310. Their flight into the wel , Keitl, 3i2.
prevented this expedition, and the sorner rcndezvous wag
ailtced.' Kcith, 3Xo.

t Keith, 31.. Knox, 3Xo.

F F 3 not

not only innocent but laudable. This mesSage,
To mortifying to the pride of the queen, and so
full of contempt for her husband wvas rendered
still more insupportable by the petulant and saucy
demeanour of Tamworth, the person who deli.
vered it,. Mary vindicated her own conduct
with warmth, but with great firength of reason;
and rejected the intercefllon in behalf of Murr;)y,
not without signs of reftntment at Eliz:beth's
pretending to intermeddle in the internal govern.
ment of her kingdom'.

She did not, on that account, intermit in the

least the ardour with which (he purfied Mlvurray
and his adherents ". They now appeared openly
in arms ; and having received a finall flpply in
money from Elizabeth ", were eudeavouring to
raise their followers in the weflern counties. But
Mary's vigilance hindered them fiom aflferbling
in any considerable body. All her military ope-
rations at tlat time were concerted with wlfdoin,
executed with vigour, and attended with success.
In order to encourage her troops, (he herself
marched along with them, rode with loaded
pistols 9,.and cndtured all the fatigues of war witli
admlirable fortitudcl. Her alacrity iiifpired her
forces with an invilcible resolution, which, toge-
ther with their superiority in number, deterred

3 Cumnld 398. t Keith, Append. 99.

r The most considerable persons who joined Murray,

were, the duke of Chatelherlult, the earls ot Argyll,
Clencairn, Rothes, lord l;oyd and Ol:hiltree the lailds of
Grange, Cunninghm)icladl, Balcornic, Carmylle, Lawers,
Bar, Dregmhrn, I'ittarrow, Comptioller, and the tutor of
Pitcur. Knox, 382.

x Knox, 38Q. Y Kcihl Appcnd. 164.

the malecontentr fiom facing them in the field;
but having artfully pafled the queen's army, they
marched with great rapidity to Edinlbrgh, and
endeavoured to rouse the inhabitants of h.:t city
to arms [Auguit 31]. The queen did not filffer
tlhem to remain long urmnolclted; and on her
approach, they were forced to abandon that
place, and retire in confusion towards the nwefe ii
borders z,

As it was uncertain, for some time, what route

they had taken, Mary employed that interval in
providing for the fenuritv of the counties in the
heart of the Iingdom. She seized the places of
ftr-ngth lwhich belonged to the rebels; and
obliged the considerable barons, in thofi s(hires
which (he most fufpefed, to join in aflociations
for her defence a. Having? thus left all the
country behind her in tranquillity, fle, with an
army eighteen thoufaud strong, marched towards
Dumfries, where the rebels then were. D)ming
their retreat, they had sent letters to the queen,
fiom almost every place where they halted, full
of submission, and containilng various overtures
towards an accommodation. But M;ar', 5who
determined not to let flip such a favourable op-
portunity of crushing the mutinous spirit of her
fuhjcts, rejected them with disdain. As flte ad.
va'ced, the malecontents rctired; and having re-
c,;ived no cftfetiual aid from Ellizabeth b, they
dic ,;aircd of any other lmeans of lhf'tys, flcd iln
to England, and put thenifelves under the pro-
tli~on of thi earl of Bedford, wsarden of the
marchels LOc. zoJ.

z Keiih, App- d ,1. a Ibid. ix3.
b See Appeud. No. X11. XIII.

Nothing,

Nofhlilg, which Bedford's personal fiieindflip

for Murray could fuipply, was wanting to render
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself
treated them with extreme negleEt. She had
fully gained her end, and, by their means, had
excited such discord and jealousies among the
Scots, as would in all probability long dilract
and weaken Mary's councils. Her utlinefs now
was to save appearances, and to juffifv herself to
the ministers of France and Spain, wvlho accused
her of fomenting the troubles in Scotland by her
intrigues. The expedient she contrived for her
vindication strongly displays her own chalracter,
and the wretched condition of exiles, who are
obliged to depend on a foreign prince. Murray,
and Hamilton abbot of Kilwinning, being ap-
pointed by the other fugitives to wait on Eliza-
beth, initead of meeting with that welcome re-
ception which was due to men, who, out of
confidence in her promises, and in order to for-
:ward her designs, had hazarded their lives and
fortunes, could not even obtain the favour of an
audience, until they had meanly consented to
acknowledge, in the presence of the French and
Spanifll ambassadors, that Elizabeth had given
them no encouragement to take arms. No sooner
did they make this declaration, than she alto-
ilinle( them with this reply: " You have de-
clared the truth ; I am far friom setting an e:-
ample of rebellion to my ownl flubjccs, by coun-
tenancing those who rebel againit their lawful
prince. The trenfon, of which you have been
guilt y, is detestable ; a;,l as traitors I baninf you
trom my prldcncc C." Notwitllltandii this

e Mdv. I12.

fcicle

scene of farce and of falfelood, To dilfonourable
to all the persons who ated a part in it, Eliza-
beth permitted the malecontents peaceably to re-
lide in her dominions, supplied them secretly with
money, and renewed her interceflion with the
Scottish queen in their favourd.

The advantage flie had gained over them did

not satisfy Mary; she resolved to follow the
blow, and to prevent a party, which [he dreaded,
from ever recovering any footing in the nation.
With this view fie called a meeting of parlian ent;
and in order that a sentence of forfeiture might
be legally pronounced against the banilhed lords,
she fuimmoned them, by public proclamation, to
appear before it c.

The duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-

plication, obtained a separate pardon [Dec. i];
but not without difficulty, as the king violently
opposed it. He was obliged, however, to leave
the kingdom, and to reside for some time in
France .

The numerous forces which Mary brought in-

to the field, the vigour with which flhc ated,
and the length of time lie kept them in airms,
rcfimble the efforts of a prince with revenues
inuch more considerable than those which she
poliefl2d. But armies were then levied alnd 'main-
tained by princes at finall charle. The vafiil
fillowed his fiperlior, and the fiipriirr atteoided
the 1monarchl, at li s own expei)\ ce.P Six i hundrled
hIorlemen, however, and three comlmpini' s of foot,
belidcs her guards, received regulalr py froml the
queen. Th'is extraordinary charge, together witlh

1' Kn.a, 389. e Kcitil, 320. f Knux, 389t .

tsiu

the difbhrfements occasioncd by her marriage, ex-
haufled a treasury which was far from being rich.
In this exigency, many devices were fallen upon
for raising money. Fines were levied on the towns
of St. Andrew's, Perth, and Dundee, which
-were suspected of favouring the malecontents.
An unusual tax was imposed on the boroughs
throughout the kingdom; and a great fim was
demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh, by way
of loan. This unprecedented exaction alarmed
the citizens: They had recourse to delays, and
started difficulties, in order to evade it. Thefi
Mary construed to be a&ts of avowed difobe-
dience, and inftantiy committed several of them
to prison. But this severity did not fubduc the
undaunted spirit of liberty which prevailed among
the inhabitants. The queen was obliged to mort-
gage to the city the ifuperiority of the town of
Leith, by which she obtained a conliderable fum
of money g. The thirds of ecclesiastical benefices
proved another source whence the queen derived
some supply. About this time we find the pro-
teftant clergy complaining more bitterly than ever
of their poverty. The army, it is probable, cx-
haulted a great part of that. fund which was ap-
propriated for their maintenance h.

The assemblies of the church were not uncol-

cerned fpcctt.tor-s of the commotions of this tr..
bulent year. In the meeting held the twenty.
fourth of June, previous to the queen's marriage,
several of the malccontent nobles were prcfent,
and seem to have had great influence on its dcci-
lions. The high ltrain in which the afTembly ad-
g Knox, 383. 386. h Mait. Hilt. of Edinburgh, 17.

dre;'..l

dresscd the queen, can be imputed only to thofce
fears and jealousies with regard to religion, which
they endeavoured to infilfe into the nation. Tlhe
aleinmbly complained, with some bitterness, of the
(top which had been put to the progress of the
reformation by the queen's arrival in Scotland;
they required not only the total fupprcflion of
the popish worlhip throughout the kingdom, but
even in the queen's own chapel ; and besides the
tlgal cftablifhment of the proteltant religion,
they, demanded that Mary herself should publicly
embrace it. The queen, after some deliberation,
replied, that neither her conscience nor her inte-
relt would permit her to take fiuch a Itep. T'le
former would for ever reproach her for a change
which proceeded fron no inward conviction, the
latter would susser by the offence which her
apoftacy mull give to the king of France, and
her other allies on the continent i

It is remarkable, that the prosperous fitnation

of the queen's affairs during this year, began to
work some change in favour of her religion. The
earls of Lennox, Athol, and Caflils, openly at-
trnded mass ; he herself atforded the catholics a
more avowed protection than formerly; and, by
her permission, some of the ancient monks ven-
tured to preach publicly to the people k.

A Knox, 374: 376. k Ibid. 389, 390.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
