THE
H I S T 0 R Y

0 F
A M E R I C A.

VOL. I

'VOL. 1.
owl

T H F:
HI ST OR Y

O F
AM E R ICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTORIOGRAPHER

to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.
VOLUME THE FIRST.

D U B L I N:
Printed forMecffrs. PRI C E, WHITEST ONE, W. WATSON, R. CROSS, Co RCOR A

SLEATER, CHAMBERLAINE, POTTS, J. HOLY, WILI.IAMS, E. LYNCH,

M. I-AY, S. WATSON, T. STEWART, \W. COLLES, W. WILSON,

MoNCRIEFF, A, A-ITAG, A LI. MAD, VALKIER, EIXSHAW,

Fl.I:'c, BURNET, FAUI. KNER r, J;N KIN, B31 r
A: TY, G I. 1ll. 1:T,

VA.LI.ANC I, WOG, AN, E. ClR()OS, MI.LLs, GillU.B.I R,

R. ST EWAR'r, WV l I r., M' KI.NLYS, and M .'.c;:

M DCC LXXVII.

# PREFACE.

P R E F A C E.

IN fulfilling the engagement which I had come un-
der to the Public with refped to the History of
America, it was my intention not to have published
any part of it until the whole was completed. The
present state of the British Colonies has induced me to
alter that resolution. While they are engaged in civil
war with Great Britain, inquiries and Speculations
concerning their ancient forms of policy and laws,
which exist no longer, cannot be interesting. The at-
tention and expecation of mankind are now turned
towards their future condition. In whatever manner this
unhappy contest may terminate, a new order of things
must arise in North America, and its affairs will assume
another afpe&. I wait, with the solicitude of a good
citizen, until the ferment subside, and regular govern-
ment be re-established, and then I thall return to this
part of my work, in which I had made some pro-
grefs. That, together with the history of Portuguese

America,

America, and of the settlements made by the several
nations of Europe in the Weft India islands, will
complete my plan.

THE two volumes which I now publish, contain an

account of the discovery of the New World, and of the
progress of the Spanish arms and colonies there. This
is not only the moit splendid portion of the American
flory, but so much detached, that it forms a persetd
whole by itfelf,remarkable for the unity of the subjea.
As the principles and maxims of the Spaniards in
planting colonies, which have been adopted in some
measure by every nation in Europe, are unfolded in this
part of my work; it will serve as a proper introduction
to the hiflory of their efiablifhment in America, and
convey such information concerning this important
article of policy, as may be deemed no less interesting
than curious.

IN defcri bing the atchievements and in situ tions of the
Spaniards in the New World, I have departed in many
inflances from the accounts of preceding historians, and
have often related fads which seem to have been
unknown to them. It is a duty I owe the Public, to
mention the sources from which I have derived such

intelligence.,

intelligence, as justifies me either in placing tranfac-
tions in a new light, or in forming any new opinion
with respect to their causes and effects. This duty I
perform with greater fatisfation, as it will afford an
opportunity of expressing my gratitude to those be-
nefators, who have honoured me with their counte-
nance and aid in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to expeE the most

important information, with regard to this part of nmy
work, I confidered it as a very fortunate circumstance
for me, when Lord Grantham, to whom I had the
honour of being personally known, and with whose
liberality of sentiment, and disposition to oblige, I was
well acquainted, was appointed ambassador to the
court of Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met with
such a reception as satisfied me, that his endeavours
would be employed in the most proper manner, in
order to obtain the gratification of my withes; and I
am perfectly sensible, that what progress I have made
in my inquiries among the Spaniards, ought to be
ascribed chiefly to their knowing how much his Lord-
ship interetfed himself in their success.

BUT did I owe nothing more toLord Grantham,than
his attention in engaging Mr. Waddilove, the chaplain

of

of his embassy, to take the condu& of my affairs in
Spain, the obligations I lie under would be very great.
During five years, that gentleman has carried on re-
searches for my behoof,with such ativity, perseverance,
and knowledge of the subjed, to which his attention
was turned, as have filled me with no less astonishment
than fatisfation. He procured for me the greater part
of the Spanish books, which I have consulted; and as
many of them were printed early in the sixteenth cen-
tury, and are become extremely rare, the colleAcing of
these was such an occupation, as, alone, required
much time and assiduity. To his friendly attention
I am indebted for copies of several valuable manu-
scripts, containing fads and details which I might
have searched for in vain, in works that have been
made public. Encouraged by the inviting good-will
with which Mr. Waddilove conferred his favours, I
tranfinitted to him a set of queries, with refped both
to the customs and policy of the native Ameri-
cans, and the nature of several institutions in the
Spanish settlements, framed in such a manner, that a
Spaniard might answer them, without disclosing any
thing that was improper to be communicated to a
foreigner. He translated these into Spanish, and ob-
tained from various persons who had resided in most
of the Spanish colonies, such replies as have afforded
me much inftrudion.

NOTWITH-

NOTWITHSTANDING these peculiar advantages with

which my inquiries were carried on in Spain, it is
with regret I am obliged to add, that the success with
which they have been attended, must be ascribed to
the beneficence of individuals, not to any communica-
tion by public authority. By a singular arrangement
of Philip II. the records of the Spanish monarchy, are
deposited in the Archivo of Simancas, near Valladolid,
at the distance of a hundred and twenty miles from the
feat of government, and the supreme courts ofjuftice.
The papers relative to America, and chiefly to that
early period of its history, towards which my atten-
tion was dire&ed, are so numerous, that they alone,
according to one account, fill the largest apartment in
the Archivo; and according to another, they compote
eight hundred and feventy-three large bundles. Con-
fcious of poffefling, in some degree, the industry which
belongs to an historian, the profped of such a treasure
excited my most ardent curiosity. But the profped of it,
only, is all that I have enjoyed. Spain, with an excess
of caution, has uniformly thrown a veil over her tranf-
aaions in America. From firangers they are conceal-
ed with peculiar solicitude. Even to her own fubjets
the Archivo of Simancas is not opened without a par-
ticular order from the crown; and after obtaining
that, papers cannot be copied, without paying fees of

VOL. I. a office

office so exorbitant, that the expence exceeds what it
would be proper to beflow, when the gratification of
literary curiosity is the only objec. It is to be hoped,
that the Spaniards will at last discover this system of
concealment to be no less impolitic than illiberal.
From what I have experienced in the course of my
inquiries, I am satisfied, that upon a more minute
scrutiny into their early operations in the New World,
however reprehensible the acions of individuals may
appear, the condu& of the nation will be placed in a
more favourable light.

IN other parts of Europe very different sentiments

prevail. Having searched, without success, in Spain,
for a letter of Cortes to Charles V. written soon after
he landed in the Mexican empire, which has not hi-
therto been published; it occurred to me, that as the
emperor was setting out for Germany, at the time
when the messengers from Cortes arrived in Europe,
the letter with which they were intrusted might pof-
sibly be preserved in the Imperial Library of Vienna.
I communicated this idea to Sir Robert Murray Keith,
with whom 1 have long had the honour to live in
friendship, and I had soon the pleasure to learn, that,
upon his application, her Imperial Majesty had been
graciously pleated to issue an order, that not only a

copy

copy of that letter (if it were found), but of any other
papers in the library, which could throw light upon
the History of America, should be transmitted to me.
The letter from Cortes is not in the Imperial Libra-
ry, but an authentic copy, attested by a notary, of
that written by the magistrates of the colony planted
by him at Vera Cruz, which I have mentioned,
Vol. ii. p. 32, having been found; it was tranfcrib-
ed and sent to me. This, no less curious, and as
little known as the letter which was the obje& of my
inquiries, did not come to my hand till that part of
the history to which it relates was printed; but I
have given some account of what is most worthy of
notice in it, at the end of Notes and Illustrations,
vol. ii. Together with it, I received a copy of a
letter from Cortes, containing a long account of his
expedition to Honduras, with refped to which, I
did not think it necessary to enter into any particular
detail; and likewise those curious Mexican paintings,
which I have described, vol. ii. p. 284, &c.

MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were carried on with

equal facility and success. In examining into the
nearest communication between our continent and
that of America, it became of consequence to obtain
authentic information concerning the discoverics of

a 2 the

the Ruffians, in their navigation from Kamchatka to-
wards the coast of America. Accurate relations of their
firfl voyage, in I741, have been publiihed by Mul-
ler and Gmelin. Several foreign authors have enter-
tained an opinion, that the court of Russia studiously
conceals the progress which has been made by more
recent navigators, and suffers the Public to be amuf-
ed with false accounts of their route. Such conduc
appeared to me unsuitable to those liberal sentiments,
and that patronage of science, for which the present
sovereign of Russia is eminent; nor could I discern
any political reason., that might render it improper to
apply for information concerning the late attempts of
the Ruffians to open a communication between Asia
and America. My ingenious countryman, Dr. Roger-
son, sirs physician to the Empress, presented my re-
quest to her Imperial Majefly, who not only disclaim-
ed any idea of concealment, but inflantly ordered the
journal of Captain Krenitzin, who conducted the only
voyage of discovery made by public authority since
the year I741, to be translated, and his original chart
to be copied for my use. By consulting them, I have
been enabled to give a more accurate view of the
progress and extent of the Ruffian discoveries, than
has hitherto been communicated to the Public.

FROM

FROM other quarters I have received information of

great utility and importance. M. Chevalier de le Pin-
to, the minister from Portugal to the court of Great
Britain, who commanded for several years at Mata-
groffo, a settlement of the Portuguese in the interior
part of Brasil, where the Indians are numerous, and
their original manners little altered by intercourse with
Europeans, was pleased to fend me very full answers to
some queries concerning the character and institutions
of the natives of America, which his polite reception of
an application made to him in my name, encouraged
me to propose. These satisfied me, that he had con-
templated with discerning attention the curious objects
which his situation presented to his view, and I have
often followed him as one of my belt infiruded guides.

M. SUARD, to whose elegant translation of the Hiftorv,

of the Reign of Charles V. I owe the favourable recep-
tion of that work on the continent, procured me an-
fwers to the fame queries from M. de Bougainville,
who had opportunities of observing the Indians both of
North and South America, and from M. Godin leJeune,
who resided fifteen years among Indians in Quito, and
twenty years in Cayenne. The latter are more valuable
from having been examined by M. de la Condamine,
who, a few weeks before his death, made some short

additions

additions to them, which may be confidered as the
last effort of that attention to science which occupied
a long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one region in

America. Governor Hutchinson took the trouble of
recommending the consideration of my queries to
Mr. Hawley and Mr. Brainerd, two proteflant mifli-
onaries, employed among the Indians of the Five
Nations, who favoured me with answers, which dif-
cover a considerable knowledge of the people whose
customs they describe. From William Smith, Efq;
the ingenious historian of New York, I received
some useful information. When I enter upon the
Hiflory of our Colonies in North America, I shall
have occasion to acknowledge how much I have
been indebted to many other gentlemen of that
country.

FROM the valuable Collection of Voyages made by

Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with whose attention to
the History of Navigation and Discovery the Public
is well acquainted, I have received some very rare
books, particularly two large volumes of Memorials,
partly manuscript, and partly in print, which were
presented to the court of Spain during the reigns of

Philip

Philip III. and Philip IV. From these I have learn-
ed many curious particulars with refped to the inte-
rior fRate of the Spanish colonies, and the various
schemes formed for their improvement. As this
Colledion of Memorials formerly belonged to the
Colbert Library, I have quoted them by that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have consulted

with that attention, which the respect due from an
Author to the Public required; and by minute re-
ferences to them, I have endeavoured to authenti-
cate whatever I relate. The longer I reflect on the
nature of historical composition, the more I am con-
vinced that this scrupulous accuracy is necessary.
The historian who records the events of his own
time, is credited in proportion to the opinion which
the Public entertains with refped to his means of in-
formation and his veracity. He who delineates the
tranfadions of a remote period, has no title to claim
aflent, unless he produces evidence in proof of his
assertions. Without this, he may write an amusing
tale, but cannot be said to have composed an authen-
tic hiflory. In those Sentiments I have been confirm-
ed by the opinion of an author *, whom his indus-

' Mr. Gibbon.

try,

try, erudition, and discernment, have deservedly plac-
ed in a high rank among the most eminent historians
of the age. Emboldened by a hint from him, I have
published a catalogue of the Spanish books which I
have consulted. This practice was frequent in the
last century, and confidered as an evidence of lau-
dable industry in an author; in the present, it may,
perhaps, be deemed the effed of ostentation; but
as many of there books are unknown in Great Britain,
I could not otherwise have referred to them as autho-
rities, without encumbering the page with an infer-
tion of their full titles. To any person who may
chufe to follow me in this path of inquiry, the cata-
logue must be very useful.

MY readers will observe, that in mentioning fums

of money, I have uniformly followed the Spanish
method of computing by pesos. In America, the peso
fuerte, or duro, is the only one known, and that is
always meant when any fum imported from America
is mentioned. The peso fuerte, as well as other
coins, has varied in its numerary value, but I have
been advised, without attending to such minute va-
riations, to confider it as equal to four shillings and
fix pence of our money. It is to be remembered,
however, that in the sixteenth century, the effec-

tive

tive value of a peso, i. e. the quantity of la-
bour which is represented, or of goods which it
would purchase, was five or fix times as much as
at present.

VOL. 1. b CONT E N T S.

# CONTENTS.

C O N T E N TS.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

BOOK I.

RO0 GRESS of navigation among the ancients-View of
their discoveries as preparatory to those of the moderns-

ImperfetIion of ancient navigation and geography-Doctrine
of the Zones-Farther discoveries checked by the irruption
of barbarous nations-Geographical knowledge Jfill preserved
in the eafl, and among the Arabians-Revival of commerce
and navigation in Europe-favoured by the Crofades-ex-
tended by travellers into the eaf/-promoted by the invention
of the mariner's compafs-FirJi regular plan of discovery
formed by Portugal-State of that kingdom-Schemes of
Prince Henry-Early attempts feeble-Progrefs along the
wvejern coaji of Africa-Hopes of discovering a new route to
the Eal/ Indies-Attempts to accomplijh this-Profpeds of
success.

B O O K II.
Birth and education of Columbus-acquires naval Jkill in the

service of Portugal-conceives hopes of reaching the Eaqi In-

b 2 dies

Jies hy holding a weJlerly courfe-his JyJ/em founded on the
ideas of the ancients, and knowledge of their navigation-and
on the discoveries of the Portuguefe-His negociations with
different courts-Ob)jiacles which he had tofurmount in Spain-
Voyage of difovery-difficulties-fuccefs-return to Spain-
JAfonifhment ofmankind on this dicovery ofa New World-Papal
grant of it-Second voyage-Colony fettled-Farther disco-
veries-War with the Indians-Fir f tax imposed on them-
Third voyage-He dicovers the continent-State of the Spa-
nljh colony-Errors infirJfl fy/em of colonizing-Voyage of the
Portuguese to the EaJf Indies by Cape of Good Hope--EfeSis
of this-Dficoveries made by private adventurers in the
New WIorld-Name of America given to it-Machinations
againf Colutmbus-Dfgraced and sent in chains to Europe-
Fourth voyage of Columbus-His difcoveries-diaJ/ers-
death.

BO O K III.
State of the colony in Hifpaniola-New war with the Indians--

Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal regulations concerning the
condition of the Indians-Dimunition of that People-DDicove-
ries and fettlements-FirJ? colony planted on the continent-
ConqueJi of Cuba-Difcovery of Florida-of the south Sea-
Great expeitations rated by this-Caufes of diappointment
with refpecl to these for some timne-Controverfy concerning
the treatment of the Indians-Contrary deciSions-Zeal of the
eccleJfafJics, particularly of Las Cafas-Singular proceedings
of Ximenes-Negroes imported into America-Las Cafas's
idea of a new colony-permitted to attempt it-unfuccefsful-
Discoveries towards the we f-rucatan--Cazmpeachy-=-New
Spain-Preparations for invading it.

BOOK

BOOK IV.
J'iew of America qwheen firJ dfcovered, and of the manners

andpolicy of its moJi uncivilized inhabitants--Vaf extent of
America-Grandeur of the objects it presents to view-Its
mountains-rivers-lakes-Its form favourable to commerce-
Tcmperature-predominence of cold-Caufes oJ this-uncul-
tivated-unwholefome-its animals---foil---Inquiry how Ame-
rica was peopled---various theories---what appears moJi
probable---Condition and character of the Americans---All,
the Mexicans and Peruvians excepted, in the fate of avages---
Inquiry confined to the uncivilized tribes--Diffculty of obtain-
ing information---various causes of this---Method observed in
the inquiry---. The bodily conJlitution of the Americans con-
fidered---II. The qualities of their minds---III. Their domeolic
slate-- -IV. Their political fJate and in/fitutions--- . Their
fyflem of war and public fecurity---VI. The arts with which
they were acquainted---VIL. Their religious ideas and inflituti-
ons---VIII. Such Jingular and detached cufloms as are not redu-
cible to any of the former heads---IX. General review and efi-
mate of their virtues and defetls.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

BOOK V.
Hijory of the conquefl of New Spain by Cortes.

BOOK

BOOK VI.
History of the conquest of Peru, by Pizarro---and of the dien-

sions and civil wars of the Spaniards in that country---Origin
---progrefs---and eflts of these.

BOOK VII.
View of injlitutions and manners of Mexicans and Peruvians---

Civilized lates in comparion of other Americans---Recent ori-
gin of the Mexicans---Fats which prove their progress in
civilization---View of their policy in its various branches---
of their arts---Faats which indicate afmallprogrefs in civiliza-
tion---What opinion fJould beformed on comparing those con-
tradictoryfa5ts---Genius of their religion---Peruvian monarchy
more ancient---Its policy founded on religion---Singular efects
of this---peculiar slate of property among the Peruvians---
Their public works and arts-roads- bridges-buildings- un-
uzarlike pirit-View of other dominions of Spain in America-
Cinaloa and Sonora-California-Tucatan and Honduras-
Chili-Tucuman-Kingdom of Tierra Firme-New Kingdom
of Granada.

BOOK VIII.
View of the interior government, commerce, &c. of the Spa-

nif colonies-Depopulation of America firfi efbt of their
fettlements-not the confeguence of any fyJlem of policy-nor
to be imputed to religion-Number of Indians Jfill remaining-

Fundamental

Fundamental maxims on which the Spanj/fyfl em of coloniza-
tion isfounded-Condition of different orders of men in their
colonies- Chapetones- Creoles -Negroes-Indians-EccleJiaJfi-
cal _jate and policy-Character of secular and regular clergy
-Small progress of Chrifianity among the natives-Mines chief
object of their attention-Mode oJ' working thefe-their pro-
ducc--EJdets of encouraging this species of induJfry-Other
commodities of Spanish/ America-FirJ? ejfets of this new com-
merce on Spain-Why the Spanish colonies have not been as
beneficial to the parent-Jfate as those of other nations-Errors
in her fyJfem of regulating this commerce-confined to one
port-carried on by annual/leets-Contraband trade-Decline
of Spain both in population and wealth-Remedies proposed-
View of the wije regulations of the Bourbon Princes-A new
and more liberal fyjem introduced-Beneficial effets of this-
Probable confeguences--Trade between Mexico and the Philip-
pines-Revenue of Spain from America-whence it ariJes-to
what it amounts.

THE

# BOOK I.

THE
HISTOR RY

o F
AMERI C A.

BOOK I.

T H E progress of men in discovering and peopling the B o K
various parts of the earth, has been extremely flow. Several 1
ages elapsed before they removed far from thole mild and ser- The earth
tile regions where they were originally placed by their Creator. ldlY peo-
The occasion of their firfi general dispersion is known; but we
are unacquainted with the course of their migrations, or the
time when they took possession of the different countries which
they now inhabit. Neither hiflory nor tradition furnish such
information concerning those remote events, as enables us to
trace, with any certainty, the operations of the human race in
the infancy of society.

WE may conclude, however, that all the early migrations First migra-

tions by land.

of mankind were made by land. The ocean, which every- yand
where surrounds the habitable earth, as well as the various
arms of the sea which separate one region from another, though

VOL. I. B deitined

B o OK deflined to facilitate the communication between distant coulr-
<- --.i tries, seem, at firll, to be formed to check the progress of

man, and to mark the bounds of that portion of the globe
to which nature had confined him. It was long, we may be-
lieve, before men attempted to pass this formidable barrier,
and became so Ikilful and adventurous as to commit themselves
to the mercy of the winds and waves, or to quit their native
shore in quest of remote and unknown regions.

Firlfat;empts NAVIGATION and ship-building are arts so nice and compl-i-
towards navi-
tion. cated, that they require the ingenuity, as well as experience of

many successive ages to bring them to any degree of perfection.
From the raft or canoe, which first served to carry a savage
over the river that obfiruted him in the chace, to the conitruc-
tion of a vessel capable of conveying a numerous crew with
safety to a difiant coast, the progress in improvement is immense.
Many efforts would be made, many experiments would be
tried, and much labour and invention would be employed, be-
fore men could accomplish this arduous and important under-
taking. The rude and imperfect slate in which navigation is
still found among all nations which are not considerably civil-
ized, corresponds with this account of its progress, and demon-
firates that, in early times, the art was not so far improved as
to enable men to undertake distant voyages, or to attempt re-
mote discoveries.

Introdufion As soon, however, as the art of navigation became known,
of commerce.

a new species of correspondence among men took place. It is
from this aera, that we mull date the commencement offuch an
intercourse between nations as deserves the appellation of com-
merce. Men are, indeed, far advanced in improvement before

commerce

commerce becomes an object of great importance to them. BOOK
They mufi even have made some considerable progress towards -
civilization, before they acquire the idea of property, and afcer-
tain it so perfectly, as to be acquainted with the most simple of
all contracs, that of exchanging by barter one rude commodity
for another. But as soon as this important right is eflablifhed,
and every individual feels that he has an exclusive title to pof-
fess or to alienate whatever he has acquired by his own labour
and dexterity, the wants and ingenuity of his nature suggest
to him a new method of increasing his acquisitions and enjoy-
ments, by disposing of what is superfluous in his own stores, in
order to procure what is necessary or desirable in those of other
men. Thus a commercial intercourse begins, and is carried
on among the members of the fame community. By de-
grees, they discover that neighbouring tribes possess what
they want, and enjoy comforts of which they wish to partake.
In the fame mode, and upon the fame principles, that domestic
traffic is carried on within the society, an external commerce is
established with other tribes or nations. Their mutual interest
and mutual wants render this intercourse desirable, and imper-
ceptibly introduce the maxims and laws which facilitate its pro-
grefs and render it secure. But no very extensive commerce call
take place between contiguous provinces, whose foil and cli-
mate being nearly the fame, yield similar produtions. Remote
countries cannot convey their commodities by land, to those
places, where on account of their rarity they are desired, and
become valuable. It is to navigation that men are indebted for
the power of transporting the superfluous flock of one part of
the earth, to supply the wants of another. The luxuries and
blessings of a particular climate are no longer confined to
itself alone, but the enjoyment of them is communicated to the
mofi distant regions.

B a IN

B 0 K IN proportion as the knowledge of the advantages derived
t'.-o from navigation and commerce continued to spread, the inter-

course among nations extended. The ambition of conquest, or
the neceflity of procuring a new settlement, were no longer the
sole motives of visiting distant lands. The desire of gain
became a new incentive to activity, roused adventurers and sent
them forth upon long voyages in fcarch of countries, whose
products or wants might increase that circulation, which nou-
rifhes and gives vigour to commerce. Trade proved a great
source of discovery, it opened unknown seas, it penetrated into
new regions, and contributed more than any other cause, to
bring men acquainted with the situation, the nature, and com-
modities of the different parts of the globe. But even after a
regular commerce was established in the world, after nations
were considerably civilized, and the sciences and arts were cul-
tivated with ardour and success, navigation continued to be so
imperfect, that it can hardly be said to have advanced beyond
the infancy of its improvement in the ancient world.

Imperfeeion AMONG all the nations of antiquity the ftruacure of their
mos nagigt' vessels was extremely rude, and their method of working them
anciiens. no less defective. They were unacquainted with rome of the

great principles and operations in navigation, which are now
confidered as the first elements on which that science is founded.
Though that property of the magnet, by which it attrals iron,
was well known to the ancients, its mofl important and amazing
virtue of pointing to the poles had entirely escaped their obfer-
vation. Destitute of this faithful guide, which now conducts
the pilot with so much certainty in the unbounded ocean, during
the darkness of night, and when the heavens are covered with
clouds, the ancients had no other method of regulating their

course

course than by observing the fun and stars. Their navigation &,o o K
was of consequence uncertain and timid. They durfi seldom
quit fight of land, but crept along the coast, exposed to all
the dangers, and retarded by all the obstructions, unavoidable
in holding such an aukward course. An incredible length of
time was requisite for performing voyages, which are now
finished in a short space. Even in the mildest climates, and in
seas the leaf tempestuous, it was only during the summer
months that the ancients ventured out of their harbours. The
remainder of the year was loft in inactivity. It would have
been deemed most inconsiderate rashness to have braved the
fury of the winds and waves during the winter a.

WHILE both the science and practice of navigation conti-

nued to be so defective, it was an undertaking of no small diffi-
culty and danger to visit any remote region of the earth. Under
every disadvantage, however, the active spirit of'commerce ex-
erted itself. The Egyptians, soon after the eftabli!hment of Navigation
their monarchy, are said to have opened a trade between the ,,rce of tl,
Arabian Gulph or Red Sea, and the western coafi of the great EL !.:i:
Indian continent. The commodities which they imported from
the east, were carried by land from the Arabian Gulph to the
banks of the Nile, and conveyed down that river to the Me-
diterranean. But if theEgyptians in early times applied them-
selves to commerce, their attention to it was of short duration.
The fertile foil and mild climate of Egypt produced the nc-
ceffaries and comforts of life with such profusion, as rendered
its inhabitants so independent of other countries, that it became
an eftabliflled maxim among that people, whose ideas and

' \''gC'us . c.c R mlii:. 'lb. iv.

B o o K institutions differed in almost every point from those of other
i-..... nations, to renounce all intercourse with foreigners. In confe-

quence of this, they never went out of their own country; they
held all sea-faring persons in detestation, as impious and pro-
fane; and fortifying their own harbours, they denied firangers
admittance into them b; and it was in the decline of their
power, that they again opened their ports, and resumed any
communication with foreigners.

of the Phe- 'THE charaQter and situation of the Phenicians were as favour-
iciians.

able to the spirit of commerce and discovery as those of the
Egyptians were adverse to it. They had no distinguishing pe-
culiarity in their manners and institutions; they were not
addiced to any singular and unsocial form of superstition; they
could mingle with other nations without scruple or reluctance.
The territory which they possessed was neither large nor fertile.
Commerce was the only source from which they could derive
opulence or power. Accordingly, the trade carried on by the
Phenicians of Sidon and Tyre, was more extensive and enter-
prizing than that of any slate in the ancient world. The ge-
nius of the Phenicians, as well as the object of their policy and
the spirit of their laws, were entirely commercial. They were
a people of merchants who aimed at the empire of the sea, and
acdually poiTefled it. Their ships not only frequented all the
ports in the Mediterranean, but they were the first who ven-
tured beyond the ancient boundaries of navigation, and patling
the Streights of Gades, visited the wefiern coafis of Spain and
Africa. In many of the places to which they retorted, they
planted colonies, and communicated to the rude inhabitants

h Diod. Sicul. lib. i. p. 78. Ed. Wefelingi. Amft. 1756, Strabo, lib. xrii.
p. 114.2. Ed. Amfl. rs07.

some

some knowledge of their arts and improvements. While they B 0 0 K
extended their discoveries towards the north and the weft, they Ltv<-
did not neglecd to penetrate into the more opulent and fertile
regions of the south and east. Having rendered themselves
mailers of several commodious harbours towards the bottom of
the Arabian Gulph, they, after the example of the Egyptians,
established a regular intercourse with Arabia and the continent
of India on the one hand, and with the eastern coast of Africa
on the other. From these countries they imported many valu-
able commodities, unknown to the reft of the world, and, dur-
ing a long period, engrossed that lucrative branch of commerce
without a rival .

THE vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired by monopo- Of the Jews.

lizing the trade carried on in the Red Sea, incited their neigh-
bours the Jews, under the prosperous reigns of D'.vid and So-
lomon, to aim at being admitted to some share of it. This
they obtained, partly by their conquest of Idumea, which
itretches along the Red Sea, and partly by their alliance with
Hiram king Tyre. Solomon fitted out fleets, which, under
the direction of Phenician pilots, failed from the Red Sea to
Tarshish and Ophir, which it is probable were ports in In-
dia and Africa that their conductors were accustomed to fre-
quent, and returned with such valuable cargoes as Cuddenly
diffused wealth and splendour through the kingdom of Israel ".
But the singular institutions of the Jews, the observance of
which was enjoined by their divine legislator, with an inten-
tion of preserving them a separate people, uninfeCted by ido-

c See N 0 ' E I. at the End of the Volume.
d Memoire hfr ]e Pays d'Ophir par M. D'Anmille Mem. de 1'Acadcm. dcs In-
:ciiFit. &c. toR. ::Yxx. r.

Iatry.,

Bo o0 K latry, formed a national charaaer incapable of that open and

liberal intercourse with strangers which commerce requires.
Accordingly, this unsocial genius of the people, together with
the disasters which befell the kingdom of Israel, prevented the
commercial spirit which their monarchs laboured to introduce,
and to cherish, from spreading among them. The Jews cannot
be numbered among the nations which contributed to improve
navigation, or to extend discovery.

or the Car- BUT though the inftrutions and example of the Phenicians
t.aginians. were unable to mould the manners and temper of the Jews, in

opposition to the tendency of their laws, they transmitted the
commercial spirit with facility, and in full vigour, to their own
descendants the Carthaginians. The commonwealth of Car-
thage applied to trade and to naval affairs, with no less ardour,
ingenuity, and success, than its parent slate. Carthage early
rivalled, and ioon surpassed Tyre, in opulence and power, but
seems not to have aimed at obtaining any share in the commerce
with India. The Phenicians had engrossed this, and had such
a command of the Red Sea as secured to them the exclusive pof-
feflion of that lucrative branch of trade. The commercial adi-
vity of the Carthaginians was exerted in another direction.
Without contending for the trade of the east with their mother-
country, they extended their navigation chiefly towards the
weft and north. Following the course which the Phenicians
had opened, they passed the Streights of Gades, and pushing
their discoveries far beyond theirs, not only visited all the
coasts of Spain, but those of Gaul, and penetrated at lafl into
Britain. At the fame time that they acquired knowledge of
new countries in this part of the globe, they gradually carried
their researches towards the south. They made considerable

progress,

progress, by land, into the interior provinces of Africa, traded B o0 K
with some of them, and subjeCted others to their empire. t--
They failed along the western coafi of that great continent,
almofi to the tropic of Cancer, and planted several colonies, in
order to civilize the natives, and accustom them to commerce.
They discovered the Fortunate Islands, now known by the name
of the Canaries, the utmofi boundary of ancient navigation in
the western ocean.

NOR was the progress of the Phenicians and Carthaginians

in their knowledge of the globe, owing entirely to the desire of
extending their trade from one country to another. Commerce
was followed by its usual effecs among both there people. It
awakened curiosity, enlarged the ideas and desires of men, and
incited them to bold enterprises. Voyages were undertaken, the
sole objea of which was to discover new countries, and explore
unknown seas. Such, during the prosperous age of the Cartha-
ginian republic, were the famous navigations of Hanno and
Himilco. Both their fleets were equipped by authority of the
senate, and at public expence. Hanno was dire6ted to fleer
towards the south, along the coast of Africa, and feerns to have
advanced much nearer the equinoctial line than any former na-
vigator'. Himilco had it in charge to proceed towards the
north, and to examine the weflern coast of the European con-
tinent g. Of the fame nature was the extraordinary navigation
of the Phenicians round Africa. A Phenician fleet, we are
told, fitted out by Necho king of Egypt, took its departure

c Plinii Nat. Hilt. lib. vi. c. 37. cdit. in ufum Delph. 4to, 1685.
f Plinii Nat Hil. lib. v. c i. Hannonis Periplus ap. Geograph. minores, edit.
Hudfoni, vol. i. p. i.

g Plinii Nat. Hilt. lib. ii. c. 67. Feftus Avienus apud Bochart. Geogr. facr. lib. i.
c. 60. p. 652. Oper, vol. iii. L. Bat. 1707.

VOL. I. C about

B 0 K about fix hundred and four years before the Christian aera,

--- from a port in the Red Sea, doubled the southern promontory

of Africa, and, after a voyage of three years, returned by the
Streights of Gades, to the mouth of the Nile h. Eudoxus of
Cyzicus is said to have held the fame course, and to have ac-
complifhed the fame arduous undertaking'.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner which I have

related, may juitly be reckoned the greatest effort of navigation
in the ancient world; and if we attend to the imperfec state of
the art at that time, it is difficult to determine, whether we
(hould most admire the courage and sagacity with which the
design was formed, or the condud and good fortune with which
it was executed. But unfortunately, all the original and au-
thenticaccounts of the Phenician andCarthaginian voyages, whe-
ther undertaken by public authority, or in prosecution of their
private trade, have perished. The information which we receive
concerning them from the Greek and Roman authors, is not only
obscure and inaccurate, but, if we except a short narrative of
Hanno's expedition, is of suspicious authority k. Whatever ac-
quaintance with the remote regions of the earth the Phenicians
or Carthaginians may have acquired, was concealed from the reft
of mankind with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing relative
to the course of their navigation was not only a myflery of
trade, but a secret of fiate. Extraordinary fads are recorded
concerning their solicitude to prevent other nations from pe-
netrating into what they wished fliould remain undivulged '.
Many of their discoveries seem, accordingly, to have been
scarcely known beyond the precinds of their own flates. The

h I-icrc ot. .

l ib . c. 42. i Plinii Nat. I-lifi, lib. i. -. 6 .

k etc N OTE. II.

l Strab. Gc gr. pil,

i . p.: 5. ;D, b ' F.i:v
i rl . ; .

navigation

navigation round Africa, in particular, is recorded by the Greek - o0 K
and Roman writers; rather as a firange amusing tale, which j
they either did not comprehend, or did not believe, than as a
real tranfadion, which enlarged their knowledge and influenced
their opinion m. As neither the progress of the Phenician and
Carthaginian discoveries, nor the extent of their navigation,
were communicated to the reft of mankind, all memorials of
their extraordinary ikill in naval affairs seem, in a great mea-
sure, to have perished, when the maritime power of the for-
mer was annihilated by Alexander's conquest of Tyre, and the
empire of the latter was overturned by the Roman arms.

LEAVING, then, the obscure and pompous accounts of the Of the

Phenician and Carthaginian voyages to the curiosity and con- Greeks
jeEtures of antiquaries, history must reft satisfied with relating
the progress of navigation and discovery among the Greeks and
Romans, which, though less splendid, is better ascertained.
It is evident that the Phenicians, who inftruded the Greeks in.
other useful sciences and arts, did not communicate to them
that extensive knowledge of navigation which they themselves
possessed; nor did the Romans inbibe that commercial spirit and
ardour for discovery which distinguished the Carthaginians.
Though Greece be almost encompassed by the Tea, which form-
ed many spacious bays and commodious harbours, though it be
surrounded by a vast number of fertile islands, yet, notwith-
standing such a favourable situation, which seemed to invite
that ingenious people to apply themselves to navigation, it was
long before this art attained any degree of perfection among
them. Their early voyages, the object of which was piracy
rather than commerce, were so inconsiderable, tha't the expedi-

" See NOTE III,

C 2 tion

B 00 K tion of the Argonauts from the coast of Thessaly to the Euxine
'---' sea, appeared such an amazing effort of skill and courage, as

entitled the conductors of it to be ranked among the demigods,
and exalted the veifel in which they failed to a place among the
heavenly confiellations. Even at a later period, when the Greeks
engaged in their famous enterprize against Troy, their know-
ledge in naval affairs seems not to have been much improved.
According to the account of Homer, the only poet to whom
history ventures to appeal, and who, by his scrupulous accu-
racy in describing the manners and arts of early ages, merits
this diflinaion, the science of navigation, at that time, had
hardly advanced beyond its rudest fiate. The Greeks in the
heroic age were unacquainted with the use of iron, the most
serviceable of all the metals, without which no considerable
progress was ever made in the mechanical arts. Their vessels
were of inconsiderable burthen, and mostly without decks.
These had only one mast, which they ereced or took down at
pleasure. They were strangers to the use of anchors. All
their operations in failing were clumsy and unskilful. They
turned their observation towards stars, which were improper
for regulating their course, and their mode of observing them
was inaccurate and fallacious. When they had finished a
voyage they drew their paltry barks ashore, as savages do their
canoes, and they remained on dry land until the season of re-
turning to sea approached. It is not then in the early or heroic
ages of Greece, that we can expec to observe the science of
navigation, and the spirit of discovery making any considerable
progress. During that period of disorder and ignorance, a
thousand causes concurred in restraining curiosity and enter-
prize within very narrow bounds.

BUT

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a state of B l0 K

greater civilization and refinement. Government, in its most -.
liberal and perfet form, began to be established in the com-
munities of Greece; equal laws and regular police were
gradually introduced; the sciences and arts that are useful
or ornamental in life were carried to a high pitch of improve-
ment, and several of the Grecian commonwealths applied to
commerce with such ardour and success, that they were con-
fidered, in the ancient world, as maritime powers of the first
rank. Even then, however, the naval victories of the Greeks
must be ascribed rather to the native spirit of the people, and
to that courage which the enjoyment of liberty inspires, than
to any extraordinary progress in the science of navigation. In
the Persian war, those exploits which the eloquence of the Greek
hiflorians have rendered so famous, were performed by
fleets, composed chiefly of vessels that were open, and without
decksn; the crews of which ruffed forward with impetuous
valour, but little art, to board those of the enemy. In the war
of Peloponnefus, their ships seem fiill to have been of inconfi-
derable burthen and of frnall force. The extent of their trade
was in proportion to this low condition of their marine. The
maritime states of Greece hardly carried on any commerce be-
yond the limits of the Mediterranean sea. Their chief inter-
course was with the colonies of their countrymen, planted in
the lesser Asia, in Italy and Sicily. They Sometimes visited the
ports of Egypt, of Gaul, and of Thrace, or pafling through
the Hellespont, they traded with the countries situated around
the Euxine sea. Amazing instances occur of their ignorance,
even of those countries, which lay within the narrow precinats

1 Thucyd. lib. i, c. 14.

to

B 10 KE to which their navigation was confined. When the Greeks
i-_-,,A had assem.blcd their combined fleet against Xerxes at Egina,

they thought it unadvifable to fail to Samos, because they be-
lieved the distance between that island and Egina to be as great
as the difiance between Egina and the Pillars of Hercules °.
They were either utterly unacquainted with all the parts of
the globe beyond the Mediterranean sea, or what knowledge
they had of them was founded on conjecture, or derived from
the informations of a few persons, whom curiosity and the love
of science had prompted to travel by land into the Upper Asia,
or by sea into Egypt, the ancient feats of wisdom and arts.
After all that the Greeks learned from them, they appear to
have been ignorant of the most important fads, on which an
accurate and scientific knowledge of the globe is founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great into the east,. confi-

derably enlarged the sphere of navigation and of geographical
knowledge among the Greeks. That extraordinary man, not-
withstanding the violent passions which incited him, at some
times, to the wildest actions, and the most extravagant enter-
prises, possessed talents which fitted him not only to conquer,
but to govern the world. He was capable of framing those bold
and original schemes of policy, which give a new form to hu-
man affairs. The revolution in commerce, brought about by
the force of his genius, is hardly inferior to that revolution in
empire, occasioned by the success of his arms. It is probable,
that the opposition and efforts of the republic of Tyre, which
checked him so long in the career of his victories, gave Alex-
ander an opportunity of observing the vast resources of a mari-

o Herodot. lib. viii. c. 132.

time

time power, and conveyed to him some idea of the immense B O K
wealth which the Tyrians derived from their commerce, efpe-
cially that with the East Indies. As soon as he had accomplish-
ed the deftrudion of that state, and reduced Egypt to subjec-
tion, he formed the plan of rendering the empire which he
proposed to eflablifh, the centre of commerce as well as the feat
of dominion. With this view he founded a great city, which
he honoured with his own name, near one of the mouths of
the river Nile, that by the Mediterranean sea, and the neigh-
bourhood of the Arabian Gulf, it might command the trade
both of the east and weft P. This situation was chosen with
such discernment, that Alexandria soon became the chief coiS-
mcrcial city in the world. Not only during the fubfiflence of
the Grecian empire in Egypt and in the eait, but amidst all the
successive revolutions in those countries, from tlh time of the
Ptolemies to the discovery of the navigation by the Cape of
Good Hope, commerce, particularly that of the East Indies,
continued to flow in the channel which the sagacity and fore-
fight of Alexander had marked out for it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having opened to the

Greeks a communication with India by sea; he aspired to the so-
vereignty of those regions which furnished the reft of mankind
with so many precious commodities, and conducted h!s army thi-
ther by land. Enterprising, however, as he was, he ,a)y hb- said
rather to have difcovcred, than to have conquered ti.at country.
H-e did not, in his pro- res towards the cadl, arlvarnc beyrond the
banks of the rivers :hat fall into the Indus, wlhich is now the
weflcrn boundary of the vast continent of India. Amidst the

' .I1,:b. Gi :'gr. !. :'. i;. '.ii; z 40

", l/

BOO K wild exploits which distinguish this part of his history, he
t rj _ pursued measures that mark the superiority of his genius, as

well as the extent of his views. He had penetrated as far into
India as to confirm his opinion of its commercial importance,
and to perceive that immense wealth might be derived from in-
tercourfe with a country, where the arts of elegance having
been more early cultivated, were arrived at greater perfetion
than in any other part of the earth '. Full of this idea, he re-
solved to examine the course of navigation from the mouth of
the Indus to the bottom of the Persian Gulf; and if it fhlould be
found praticable, to establish a regular communication between
them. In order to effect this, he proposed to remove the cata-
racs, with which, the jealousy of the Persians, and their aversion
to correfpondcnce with foreigners, had obflruded the entrance
into the Euphrates'; to carry the commodities of the east up
that river, and the Tigris, which unites with it, into the inte-
rior parts of his Asiatic dominions; while, by the way of
the Arabian Gulf, and the river Nile, they might be con-
veyed to Alexandria, and difiributed to the reft of the world.
Nearchus, an officer of eminent abilities, was entrufled with the
command of the fleet fitted out for this expedition. He per-
formed this voyage, which was deemed an enterprise so ardu-
ous and important, that Alexander reckoned it one of the most
extraordinary events which diflinguifhed his reign. Inconfi-
derable as it may now appear, it was, at that time, an under-
taking of no little merit and difficulty. In the prosecution of
it, striking inflances occur of the small progress which the
Greeks had made in naval knowledge '. Having never failed

r Strab. Gcogr. lib. xv. p. 1036. Q. Curtius, lib. xviii. c. 9.
' Strab. Geogr. lib. xvi . p1075. ' See N O T E IV.

beyond

beyond the bounds of the Mediterranean, where the cbl, anll'i 0 '
flow of the sea are hardly perceptible, when they firfl obfcrvcd _ __
this phenomenon at the mouth of the Indus, it appeared to
them a prodigy, by which the gods testificd the displeasure of
Heaven against their enterprize '. During their whole course,
they seem never to have loft fight of land, but followed the
bearings of the coast so servilely, that they could not much
avail themselves of those periodical winds, which facilitate na-
vigation in the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they spent no less
than ten months " in performing this voyage, which, from the
mouth of the Indus to that of the Persian gulf, does not ex-
ceed twenty degrees. It is probable, that amidst the violent
convulsions, and frequent revolutions in the eait, occafionce
by the contefis among the successors of Alexandcr, the naviga-
tion to India, by the course which Nearchus had opened, was
discontinued. The Indian trade carried on at Alexandria, not
only subsisted, but was so much improved under the Grecian
monarchs of Egypt, that it proved a great source of the wealth
which distinguished that kingdom.

THE progress which the Romans made in navigation and Oi t;e RoP

discovery, was still more inconsiderable than that of the Greeks. r'
The genius of the Roman people, their military education,
and the spirit of their laws, concurred in estranging them from
commerce and naval affairs. It was the necessity of opposing a
formidable rival, not the desire of extending tradc, which irft
prompted them to aim at maritime power. 'Though they Toon
perccived that, in order to acquire the univcrfal dominion aftcr
which they aspired, it was necessary to render themfelvcs mailers
of the sea, they still confidered the naval fervic as a fubor-

' Sec N 01' E V. ' Plin Hill, Nl t. lib. vi. c. z3.
VOL. .1. D din:.ltc

; 0 K I dinatc station, and reserved for it such citizens as were not of a
u----y- rank to he admitted into the legions . In the history of the

Roman republic, hardly one event occurs, that marks attention
to navigation any farther than as it was instrumental towards
conquest. When the Roman valour and discipline had subdued
all the maritime states known in the ancient world ; when Car-
thage, Greece, and Egypt, had submittcd to their power, the
Romans did not imbibe the commercial spirit of the conquered
nations. Among that people of foldicrs, to have applied to
trade would have been deemed a degradation of a Roman ci-
tizen. They abandoned the mechanical arts, commerce, and
navigation, to slaves, to freedmcn, to provincials, and to ci-
tizens of the lowest clais. Even after the subversion of liberty,
when the severity and haughtiness of ancient manners began to
abate, commerce did not rife into high estimation among the
Romans. The trade of Greece, Egypt, and the other conquered
countries, continued to be carried on in their ancient chan-
nels, after they were reduced into the form of Roman provinces.
As Rome was the capital of the world, and the feat of govern-
mcnt, all the wealth and valuable produations of the provinces
flowcd naturally thither. The Romans, satisfied with this,
seem to have suffercd commerce to remain almoit entirely in
ihe bands of the natives of the refpedtive countries. The ex-
:ent, however, of the Roman power, which reached over al-
;noii the whole known world, the vigilant infpecion of the
Iloman magifiratcs, and the spirit of the Roman governmelnt,
i.o lets intelligent than ative, gave such additional security to
conmcmrcc, as animated it with new vigour. The union
amongl nations was never so entire, nor the intcrcou-rfc so per-
fecc, as wvithin the bounds of tllis vas empire. ("ominmrcc,

"c i'(,ll)'. Iil. v.

u ndlcr

under their dominion, was not obfirucqcd by the jcaioull of o

i "

rival flates, interrupted by frequent holilities, or limitcd by .---;
partial refiritions. One fupcrintending power moved and re-
gulated the indufiry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits of
their joint efforts.

NAVIGATION felt this influence, and improved under it

As soon as the Romans acquired a taie for the luxuries of
the east, the trade with India through Egypt was pushed
with new vigour, and carried on to greater extent. By fre--
quenting the Indian continent, navigators became acquainted
with the periodical course of the winds, which, in the ocean
that feparatcs Africa from India, blow with little variation
during one half of the year from the cast, and during the
other half fix with equal steadiness in the weft. Encouraged
by observing this, they abandoned their ancient flow and dan-
gerous course along the coast, and as soon as the weilern mon-
soon set in, took their departure from Ocelis, at the mouth of
the Arabian gulf, and firetched boldly across the ocean'.
The uniform diretion of the wind, supplying the place of the
compass, and rendering the guidance of the stars lcfs ncceffary,
conducted them to the port of Mufiris, on the wcftcrn lhorc
of the Indian continent. There they took on board their
cargo, and returning with the caficrn monsoon, finiffed their
voyage to the Arabian gulf within the year. This part of
India, now known by the name of the Malabar coa., iccins to
have been the utmofl limit of ancient navigation in that quar-
ter of the globe. What impcrfc6t knowledge the ancients had
of the immcnfe countries which ftrctch beyond this towards
the cafl, they received from a few adventurers, who had vi!ftcd
them by land. Their cxcurfions were not cxtcnfive, and it is
probable, that while the Roman intcrcourfe with India fiubl-

Plin. I-lill. Nat. lib. vi. c. :3.

D ?, fiflcd.

E o0 K fifled, no traveller ever penetrated further than to the banks of

--.-. the Ganges:. The fleets from Egypt which traded at Mufiris

were loaded, it is true, with the spices and other rich commo-
dities of the continent and islands of the farther India; but
these were brought to that port, which became the flaple of
this commerce, by the Indians themselves, in canoes made of
one tree '. The Egyptian and Roman merchants, satisfied with
acquiring these commodities in this manner, did not think it
necessary to explore unknown seas, and venture upon a dan-
gerous navigation, in quest of the countries which produced
them. But though the discoveries of the Romans in India
were so limited, their commerce there was such as will appear
considerable, even to the present age, in which the Indian trade
has been extended far beyond the practice or conception of
any preceding period. We are informed by one author of cre-
dit b, that the commerce with India drained the Roman empire
every year of more than four hundred thousand pounds; and
by another, that one hundred and twenty ships failed annually
from the Arabian gulf to that country c.

i i..,Icr-iof TH E discovery of this new method of failing to India is the
:!' nc.n; moit considerable improvement in navigation made during the

continuance of the Roman power. But in ancient times, the
knowledge of countries was acquired more by land than by
fca '; and the Romans, from their peculiar disinclination to
naval affairs, may be said to have neglected totally the latter,
though a more cafy and expeditious method of discovery.
The progrcfs, howcvcr, of their vicorious armies contributed
grcatly to extend discovery by land, and even opened the na-
vigation of new and unknown fcas. Previous to the Roman

StLalb. Gcor.lib v . p ico6. 1Io . See N OT E VI.
'lin. Nat 1Iif. lib vi. c . 26. Ibid.
Strab. Gcogr. lib. ii. p. i7i. ' Sec NOTE VII.

conquefis,

conquefis, the civilized nations of antiquity had no communi- B 0 0
cation with those countries in Europe, which now form its -
mofi opulent and powerful kingdoms. The interior parts of
Spain and of Gaul were little known. Britain, separated from
the reft of the world, had never been visited, except by its
neighbours the Gauls, and by a few Carthaginian merchants.
The name of Germany had fearcely been heard of. Into all
these countries the arms of the Romans penetrated. They en-
tirely subdued Spain and Gaul; they conquered the greatest
and most fertile part of Britain; they advanced into Germany,
as far as the banks of the river Elbe. In Africa, they ac-
quired a considerable knowledge of the provinces, which lfretch
along the Mediterranean sea, from Egypt westward to the
firaits of Gades. In Asia, they not only fubjeted to their
power most of the provinces which composed the Persian and
Macedonian empires, but, after their vitories over Mithridates
and Tigranes, they seem to have surveyed the countiics con-
tiguous to the Euxine and Caspian seas, more accurately than
they had been formerly, and to have carried on a more exten-
five trade than that of the Greeks with the opulent and com-
mercial nations, then feated around the Euxine sea.

FROM this succinCt survey of discovery and navigation, which I:,rCi..i:.:

I have traced from the carlieft dawn of historical knowledge to (IC ,Io1, -
the full establishment of the Roman dominion, their progrcfs *':!. )
appears to be wonderfully flow. It seems neither adequate to
what we might have expected from the adivity and cnterprifc
of the human mind, nor to what might have been performed
by the power of the great empires that fucceflively governed
the world. If we rejea accounts that are fabulous and obfcurc;
if we adhere steadily to the light and information of authentic

1 tifo -t'

I o o Kl hiflory, without substituting in its place the conjectures of

1_ , fancy, or the dreams of etymologifls, we must conclude, that

the knowledge which the ancients had acquired of the habitable
globe was extremely confined. In Europe, the extensive pro-
vinces in the eastern part of Germany were hardly known to
them. They were almost totally unacquainted with the vafi
countries which are now subject to the kings of Denmark, Swe-
den, Pruflia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire. The more bar-
ren regions, that firetch within the arctic circle, were quite
unexplored. In Africa, their researches did not extend far
beyond the provinces which border on the Mediterranean, and
those situated on the western shore of the Arabian gulf. In
Asia, they were unacquainted, as I formerly observed, with all
the fertile and opulent countries beyond the Ganges, which
furnish the most valuable commodities that, in modern times,
have been the great object of the European commerce with
India nor do they seem to have ever penetrated into those
immense regions occupied by the wandering tribes, which they
called by the general name of Sarmatians or Scythians, and
now possessed by Tartars of various denominations, and by the
Asiatic fubjets of Rufia.

A remarkl- BUT there is one opinion, that universally prevailed among
able proof of
;,ic pouothe ancients, which conveys a more striking idea of the small

progress they had made in the knowledge of the habitable globe,
than can be derivcd from any detail of their difoveries. They
supposcd the earth to be divided into five regions, which they
diflinguiflhcd by the name of zones. Two of these, which were
ncarcft the poles, they termed frigid zones, and believed that
the cxtrcme cold which reigned )prpetually tlcere, rendered
them uninhabitable. Another, scatcd under the line, and cx-

tcndiln

tending on either fide towards the tropics, they called the torrid 1 o o K
zone, and imagined it to be so burnt up with unremitting heat,
as to be equally defiitute of inhabitants. On the two other
zones, which occupied the remainder of the earth, they be-
flowed the appellation of temperate, and taught that there,
being the only regions in which life could subsist, were allottcd
to man for his habitation. This wild opinion was not a
conceit of the uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fi'ion of the
poets, but a jfftem adopted by the most cnlllightened philofo-
phers, the molt accurate historians and geographers in Grecc;:
and Rome. According to this theory, a vast portion ci the
habitable earth was pronounced to be unfit for fuhaining the
human fpccics. Those fertile and populous regions within ti}
torrid zone, which are now known not only to yield their own
inhabitants the necessarics and comforts of life, with modt
luxuriant profusion, but to communicate their fupcriuous tLorcs
to the rcft of the world, were supposed to be the inaniion ci
perpetual sterility and desolation. As all the parts of the globe.
which the ancients had discovered, lay within the norther:i
temperate zone, their opinion that the other tempelrate zon':
was filled with inhabitants, was founlcd on rceafning and
conjccturc, not on discovery. They even believed that, by tli-
intolerable heat of the torrid zone, fucli an infupcrable barrici
was placed between the two temperate regions of the earth, as
would prevent for ever any intercourfc between theiLir rcfi;cqivc
inhabitants. Thus this extravagant theory not only provcs
that the ancients were unacquaintcd wlith tlh ttrue slate of the
globe, but it tended to render their ignorance of it perpctual,
by rcprcfcnting all attempts towards opening a communicatiorl
witl the remote regions of the earth, as utterly impracticable '

Sc NOTE V111.

DL 'I,

0
, o Ki BUT, however imperfect or inaccurate the geographical
_,'_, knowledge which the Greeks and Romans had acquired may

appear, in rcfpca of the present improved state of that science,
their progress in discovery will seem considerable, and the ex-
tent to which they carried navigation and commerce must be
reckoned great, when compared with the ignorance of early
limes. As long as the Roman empire retained such vigour as
to preserve its authority over the conquered nations, and to
keep them united, it was -an object of public police, as well as
of private curiosity, to examine and describe the countries
which composed this great body. Even when the other sciences
began to decline, geography, enriched with new observations,
and receiving some accession from the experience of every
age, and the reports of every traveller, continued to improve.
It attained to the highefi point of perfection and accuracy to
which it ever arrived in the ancient world, by the industry

-::,;rovc- and genius of Ptolemy the philosopher. He flourished in the
iongs ihy second century of the Christian aera, and published a defcrip-
y: I'olcmy. tion of the terrefirial globe, more ample and exad than that

of any of his predeceflors.

;le invafin BUT, soon after, violent convulsions began to shake the Ro-
o! thc RIigman
m,;pire by man slate ; the fatal ambition or caprice of Constantine, by

L;-ous changing the feat of government, divided and weakened its

force; the barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as
its infiruments to overturn the mighty fabric of the Roman
power, began to aficmble and to mufler their armies on its
fionticrr; the empire tottered to its fall. During this decline
and old ago of the Roman ftatc, it was impoflible that the
sciences should go on improving. The cfforts of genius were,
nt that period, as languid and feeble as those of government.

From'

From the time of Ptolemy, no considerable addition seems to ') K
have been made to geographical knowledge, nor did any im- 7
portant revolution happen in trade, excepting that Conflan-
tinople, by its advantageous situation, and the encouragement
of the eastern emperors, became a commercial city of the firil
note.

AT length, the clouds which had been so long gathering .fses or

their cr-n-

round the Roman empire, burst into a florm. The barbarous quti's on
nations rushed in with irresistible impetuosity, and, in the ge- comm
neral wreck, occasioned by the inundation which overwhelmed
Europe, the arts, sciences, inventions and discoverics of the
Romans, perished and disappeared g. All the various tribes,
which conquered and fettled in the different provinces of the
Roman empire, were uncivilized, firangers to letters, destitute
of arts, unacquainted with regular government, subordination,
or laws. The manners and inflitutions of some of them were
so rude and barbarous, as to be hardly compatible with a slate
of social union. Europe, when occupied by such inhabitants,
may be said to have returned to a second infancy, and had to
begin anew its career in improvement, science, and civility.
The firfi effect of the settlement of those barbarous invaders
was to dissolve the union by which the Roman power had ce-
mented mankind together. They parcelled out Europe into
many small and independent flates, differing from each other
in language and cufloins. No intercourse fubfiiled bctwccn the
members of those divided and hostile communitics. Accuflom-
ed to a simple mode of life, and averse to indufiry, they had
few wants to supply, and no superfluities to difpofc of. The
names offtranger and of enemy became once more words of

r Hlitl. of Charles V. vol. i. p. i'. 72.
Vo .. I. E the

B O K the fame import. Customs every-where prevailed, and even

laws were efiablifhed, which rendered it disagreeable and dan-
gerous to visit any foreign country h. Cities, in which alone
an extensive commerce can be carried on, were few, incon-
fiderable, and destitute of those immunities which produce fe-
curity or excite enterprise. The sciences, on which geography
and navigation are founded, were not cultivated. The ac-
counts of ancient improvements and discoveries, contained in
the Greek and Roman authors, were neglected or mifunder-
stood. The knowledge of remote regions was loft, their situ-
ation, their commodities, and almost their names, were un-
known.

Commercial ON E circumfiance prevented commercial intercourse with
Iti:l p-c;ed diflant nations from ceasing altogether. Conflantinople, though
in tneEa "eln often threatened by the fierce invaders, who spread desolation

over the reft of Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their de-
ftrudive rage. In that city, the knowledge of ancient arts and
discoveries was preserved; a taste for splendour and elegance
subsisted; the productions and luxuries of foreign countries
were in request ; and commerce continued to flourish there,
when it was extina in every other part of Europe. The ci-
tizens of Conflantinople did not confine their trade to the
islands of the Archipelago, or to the adjacent coasts of Asia;
they took a wider range, and following the course which the
ancients had marked out, imported the commodities of the
East Indies from Alexandria. When Egypt was torn from the
Roman empire by the Arabians, the indufiry of the Greeks
discovered a new channel, by which the productions of India
might be conveyed to Conflantinople. They were carried up

' ifn, of Ci ;ulCS\c v.. v if. ;. p --. ,:'-

the

the Indus, as far as that great river is navigable; thence 1: oo0
they were transported by land to the banks of the river Oxus, ,
and proceeded down its fiream to the Caspian sea. There they
entered the Volga, and failing up it, were carried by land to
the Tanais, which condudted them into the Euxine tea, where
vessels from Conflantinople waited their arrival h. This extra-
ordinary and tedious mode of conveyance merits attention, not
only as a proof of the violent passion which the inhabitants of
Conflantinople had conceived for the luxuries of the east, and
as a specimen of the ardour and ingenuity with which they
carried on commerce, but because it demonfirates, that, dur-
ing the ignorance which reigned in the reft of Europe, an ex-
tensive knowledge of remote countries was fiill preserved in the
capital of the Greek empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of light and knowledge broke in and anongn

upon the east. The Arabians, having contracted some relish th Arabipr.
for the sciences of the people whose empire they had contri-
buted to overturn, translated the books of several of the Greek
philosophers into their own language. One of the first was
that valuable work of Ptolemy, which I have already men-
tioned. The fludy of geography became, of consequence, an
early object of attention to the Arabians. But that acute and
ingenious people cultivated chiefly the speculative and scientific
parts of geography. In order to ascertain the figure and dimen-
sions of the terrefirial globe, they applied the principles of ge-
ometry, they had recourse to astronomical obfcrvations, they
employed experiments and operations, which Europe, in more
enlightened times, has been proud to adopt and to imitate.
At that period, however, the fame of the improvements made

h Ranuflo, vol. i .
p 372. F.

Ez by

BO OK by the Arabians did not reach Europe. The knowledge of
,I-v-. their discoveries was reserved for ages capable of comprehend-

ing and of perfecting them.

Revival of BY degrees, the calamities and desolation brought upon the
commerce
and naviga- western provinces of the Roman empire by its barbarous con-
tioin Eu- querors, were forgotten, and in some measure repaired. The

rude tribes which fettled there, acquiring insensibly tome idea
of regular government, and some relish for the functions and
comforts of civil life, Europe began to awake from its torpid
and unactive slate. The first symptoms of revival were dif-
cerned in Italy. The northern tribes which took poffeflion of
this country, made progress in improvement with greater ra-
pidity than the people fettled in other parts of Europe. Va-
rious causes, which it is not the object of this work to enumerate
or explain, concurred in restoring liberty and independence to
the cities of Italy i. The acquisition of these routed industry,
and gave motion and vigour to all the active powers of the hu-
man mind. Foreign commerce revived, navigation was at-
tended to and improved. Constantinople became the chief
mart to which the Italians resorted. There they not only met
with a favourable reception, but obtained such mercantile pri-
vileges as enabled them to carry on trade with great advan-
tage. They were supplied both with the precious commo-
dities of the east, and with many curious manufactures, the
product of the ancient arts and ingenuity that flill subsisted
among the Greeks. As the labour and expence of conveying
the productions of India to Conflantinople by that long and in-
direct courfc which I have described, rendered them extremely
rare, and of an exorbitant price, the induflry of the Italians

i His. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 33.

discovercd

discovered other methods of procuring them in greater abund- E O OK
ance, and at an easier rate. Tney sometimes purchased them
in Aleppo, Tripoli, and other ports on the coast of Syria, to
which they were brought by a route not unknown to the an-
cients. They were conveyed from India by sea, up the Per-
fian Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates and Tigris, as far as
Bagdat, were carried by land across the Defart to Palmyra, and
from thence to the towns on the Mediterranean. But from the
length of the journey, and the dangers to which the caravans
were exposed, this proved always a tedious, and often a preca-
rious mode of conveyance. At length, the Soldans of Egypt,
having renewed the commerce with India in its ancient chan-
nel, by the Arabian Gulf, the Italian merchants, notwith-
flanding the violent antipathy to each other with which Chri-
sians and the followers of Mahomet were then pofffeid,
repaired to Alexandria, and enduring, from the love of gain,
the insolence and exa1tions of the Mahometans, eflablilhcd a
lucrative trade in that port. From that period, the commercial
spirit of Italy became active and enterprising. Venice, Genoa,
Pisa, rose from inconsiderable towns, to be populous and wcal-
thy cities. Their naval power increased; their vefiels fre-
quented all the ports in the Mediterranean; they ventured
sometimes beyond the Streights; visited the maritime towns of
Spain, France, the Low Countries, and England, and, by
distributing their commodities over Europe, began to communi-
cate to its various nations some knowledge of the valuable pro-
dutions of the east, as well as some ideas of manufactures and
arts, with which they had hitherto been unacquainted.

WHLILE the cities of Italy were thus advancing in their career Th1,,;r p.r
of improvement, an event happened, the moit extraordinary S'l,'*.,'":

perhaps baltic

3 0 0 K perhaps in the hiflory of mankind, which, inflead of retarding

the commercial progress of the Italians, rendered it more ra-
pid. The martial spirit of the Europeans, heightened and in-
flamed by religious zeal, prompted them to deliver the
Holy Land from the dominion of infidels. Vast armies,
composed of all the nations of Europe, marched towards Asia,
upon this wild enterprise. The Genoese, the Pifans, and Ve-
netians furnished the transports which carried them thither.
They supplied them with provifidns and military flores. Be-
fide the immense fums which they received on this account,
they obtained commercial privileges and establishments, of
great consequence in the Settlements which the Crusaders made
in Palefline, and in other provinces of Afa. From those
sources, prodigious wealth flowed into the cities which I have
mentioned. A proportional increase of power accompanied
this, and by the end of the Holy War, Venice, in particular,
became a great maritime state, possessing an extensive com-
merce, and ample territories k. Italy was not the only coun-
try in which the Crusades contributed to revive and diffuse such
a spirit as prepared Europe for future discoveries. By their
expeditions into Asia, the other European nations became well
acquainted with remote regions, which formerly they knew
only by name, or by the reports of ignorant and credulous pil-
grims. They had an opportunity of observing the manners,
the arts, and the accommodations of people more polished
than themselves. This intercourse between the east and weft
fubfifled almost two centuries. The adventurers, who returned
from Asia, communicated to their countrymen the ideas which
they had acquired, and the habits of life they had contracted
by visiting more refined nations. The Europeans began to be

' Eflhi de l'l-illoirc du Commercc de Vcnire, p. 52. &c.

sensible

sensible of wants with which they were formerly unacquainted; B 01 O K
new desires were excited; and such a taste for the commodities .---
and arts of other countries gradually spread among them, that
they not only encouraged the resort of foreigners to their har-
bours, but began to perceive the advantage and ncccflity of ap-
plying to commerce themselves '.

THIS communication, which was opened between Europe b;. the cico-

and the weflern provinces of Asia, encouraged several persons ve:l=~- L);
to advance far beyond the countries in which the Crusaders land.
carried on their operations, and to travel by land into the more
remote and opulent regions of the east. The wild fanaticifin,
which seems at that period to have mingled in all the schemes
of individuals, no less than in all the counsels of nations, first
incited men to enter upon those long and dangerous peregrina-
tions. They were afterwards undertaken from profpeds of
commercial advantage, or from motives of mere curiosity. Ben-
jamin, a Jew of Tudela, in the kingdom of Navarre, pofIeffcd
with a superstitious veneration for the law of /Moses, and soli..
citous to visit his countrymen in the eaff, whom he hoped to
find in such a slate of power and opulence, as mighlt redound
to the honour of his sea, fct out from Spain in the year I I6o,
and travelling by land to Conflantinople, proceeded through
the countries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, as
far as Chinese Tartary. From thence he took his route towards
the south, and after traversing various provinces of the farther
India, he embarked on the Indian ocean, visited several of its
islands, and returned at the end of thirteen years, by the way of
Egypt, to Europe, with much information concerning a large
diflrid of the globe, altogether unknown at that time to thl:

lifn. of Charles V. vol. i, p. z
7 , &c

*.vl crpr

B 0O K weflern world m. The zeal of the head of the Christian church

co-operated with the superstition of Benjamin the Jew, in dif-
covering the interior and remote provinces of Asia. All Chris-
tendom having been alarmed with accounts of the rapid pro-
grefs of the Tartar arms under Zengis Khan, Innocent IV. who
entertained most exalted ideas concerning the plenitude of his
:+-6. power, and the fubmiflion due to his injunctions, sent father

John de Piano Carpini, at the head of a mission of Franciscan
monks, and father Afcolino, at the head of another of Domi-
nicans, to exhort Kayuk Khan, the grandson of Zengis, who
was then at the head of the Tartar empire, to embrace the
Christian faith, and to desist from desolating the earth by his
arms. The haughty descendant of the greatest conqueror Asia
had ever beheld, astonished at this strange mandate from an
Italian Priest, whose name and power were alike unknown to
him, received it with the contempt which it merited, though
he dismissed the mendicants who delivered it with impunity.
But as they had penetrated into the country by different routes,
and followed for some time the Tartar camps, which were
always in motion, they had an opportunity of visiting a great
part of Asia. Carpini, who proceeded by the way of Poland
and Russia, travelled through its northern provinces as far as
the extremities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to have landed
somewhere in Syria, advanced through its southern provinces,
into the interior parts of Persia ".
* 53. NOT long after, St. Louis of France contributed farther to-

wards extending the knowledge which the Europeans had be-
gun to acquire of those diflant regions. Some designing

"' Bergeron Rccucil des Voyages, &c. toin. i.p. i.
" Iil.lu yt i. zi . Bcrgcron, tom. i.

impoflor,

impoflor, who took advantage of the slender acquaintance of E 00 K
the Christians with the fiate and charader of the Asiatic nations, v
having informed him that a powerful Chan of the Tartars had
embraced the Chriflian faith, the monarch listened to the tale
with pious credulity, and inflantly resolved to fend ambassadors
to this illustrious convert, with a view of inciting him to attack
their common enemy the Saraccns on one quarter, while he fell
upon them on the other. As monks were the only persons in
that age who possesed such a degree of knowledge as qualified
them for a service of this kind, he employed in it father
Andrew, a Jacobine, who was followed by father William de
Rubruquis, a Franciscan. With refped to the progress of the
former, there is no memorial extant. The journal of the lat-
ter has been published. He was admitted into the presence of
Mangu, the third khan in succession from Zengis, and made a
circuit through the interior parts of Asia, more extensive than
that of any European who had hitherto explored them o.

To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent forth to visit

Asia, succeeded others who ventured into remote countries,
from the profped of commercial advantage, or from motives
of mere curiosity. The first and most eminent of these was
Marco Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Having engaged 1:69.
early in trade, according to the custom of his country, his afpir-
ing mind wished for a fplcire of activity more extensive than
was afforded to it by the eftabliflcd trafic carried on in those
ports of Europe and Asia, which the Venetians frequented.
This prompfd him to travel into unknown countries, in expec-
tation of opening with them a commercial intercourse, more
suited to the sanguine ideas and hopes of a young adventurer.

llakl. i. ti

R..:u! il *dc Voyages par B rgcroin, tomn. i
VoL. I. F As

B oo K As his father had already carried some European commodities
K----' to the court of the great Chan of the Tartars, and had disposed

of them to advantage, he resorted thither. Under the protec-
tion of Kublay Chan, the most powerful of all the fucceiTors of
Zengis, he continued his mercantile peregrinations in Asia up-
wards of twenty-fix years; and during that time advanced to-
wards the eait, far beyond the utmofi boundaries to which any
European traveller had ever proceeded. Instead of following
the course of Carpini and Rubruquis, along the vait unpeopled
plains of Tartary, he passed through the chief trading cities in
the more cultivated parts of Asia, and penetrated to Cambalu,
or Peking, the capital of the great kingdom of Cathay, or Chi-
na, subjed at that time to the fuccenfors of Zengis. He made
more than one voyage on the Indian ocean, he traded in many
of the islands, from which Europe had long received fpiceries
and other commodities, which it held in high efiimation, though
unacquainted with the particular countries to which it was in-
debted for those precious productions; and he obtained infor-
mation concerning several countries, which he did not visit
in person, particularly the island Zipangri, probably the fame
now known by the name of Japan P. On his return, he
astonished his contemporaries with his descriptions of vast re-
gions, whose names had never been heard of in Europe, and
with such pompous accounts of their fertility, their populous-
ness, their opulence, the variety of their manufactures, and
the extent of their trade, as rose far above the conception of
an uninformed age.
:3Z2. AnBOT half a century after Marco Polo, Sir John Man-

deville, an Engliflman, encouraged by his example, visited

P Viaggi di Marco Polo. Ramun , ii. z. Bergeron, tomn. ii.

molt

mofi of the countries in the east which he had described, and, B 0 0 K
like him, published an account of them on his returnq. The t. A
narrations of those early travellers abound with many wild in-
coherent tales, concerning giants, enchanters, and monflers:
but they were not, from that circumfiance, less acceptable to
an ignorant age, which delighted in what was marvellous.
The wonders which they told, moily on hearsay, filled the
multitudc with admiration. The sacs which they related from
their own observation, attracted the attention of the more dif-
cerning. The former, which may be confidered as the popu-
lar traditions and fables of the countries through which they
had passed, were gradually disregarded as Europe advanced in
knowledge. The latter, however incredible tome of them
may have appeared in their own time, have been confirmed by
the observations of modern travellers. By means of both,
however, the curiosity of mankind was excited with refpecd to
the remote parts of the earth, their ideas were enlarged, and
they were not only insensibly disposed to attempt new difcove-
ries, but received such information as direEted them to that
particular course in which they were afterwards carried on.

WHILE this spirit was gradually forming in Europe, a for- an, by thl

tunate discovery was made, which contributed more than all t'h marinc .
the efforts and ingenuity of preceding ages, to improve and comli'L.
to extend navigation. That wonderful property of the mag-
net, by which it communicates such virtue to a slender rod of
iron or needle, as to point towards the poles of the earth,
was observed. The use which might be made of this in direcl-
ing navigation was immediately perceived, and that most valu-
able, but now familiar initrunent, the mariners compnafi, was

' Voyages and Travels, by Sir John Mandcvillc.

F 2 formed:

B oO I formed. When, by means of it, navigators found that at all
-.--~i, seasons, and in every place, they could discover the north and

south with so much ease and accuracy, it became no longer
necessary to depend merely on the light of the flars and the ob-
servation of the sea coast. They gradually abandoned their
ancient timid and lingering course along the shore, ventured
boldly into the ocean, and relying on this new guide, could
fleer in the darkest night, and under the most cloudy sky,
with a security and precision hitherto unknown. The compass
may be said to have opened to man the dominion of the sea,
and to have put him in full poffeflion of the earth, by enabling
him to visit every part of it. Flavio Gioia, a citizen of Amalfi,
a town of considerable trade in the kingdom of Naples, was
the author of this great discovery, about the year one thou-
sand three hundred and two. It hath been often the fate
of those illustrious benefaators of mankind, who have en-
riched science and improved the arts by their inventions,
to derive more reputation than benefit from the happy
efforts of their genius. But the lot of Gioia has been lill
more cruel; through the inattention or ignorance of con-
temporary historians, he has been defrauded even of the fame
to which he had such a just title. We receive from them no
information with refpeA to his profession, his characer, the
precise time when he made this important discovery, and the
accidents or inquiries which led to it : the knowledge of this
event, though produaive of greater effects than any recorded
in the annals of the human race, is transmitted to us without
any of those circumflances, which can gratify the curiosity that
it naturally awakens '. Though the use of the compass might
enable the Italians to perform the (hort voyages to which they

' C ollinns & Tromibcllus de Acus pautic.T Inventore. InfTit. Acad. Bonon. tomr. ii
pa' t iii. p. 372.

were

were accufiomed, with greater security and expedition, its in- BO oo K
fluence was not so sudden or extensive, as immediately to -
render navigation adventurous, and to excite a spirit of dif-
covery. Many causes combined in preventing this beneficial
invention from producing its full effect instantaneously. Men
relinquish ancient habits slowly, and with reluQance. They
are averse to new experiments, and venture upon them with
timidity. The commercial jealousy of the Italians, it is pro-
bable, laboured to conceal the happy discovery of their coun-
tryman from other nations. The art of steering by the con-
pass, with such ikill and accuracy as to inspire a full confidence
in its direction, was acquired gradually. Sailors, long accuf-
tomed not to quit fight of land, durfi not launch out at once
and commit themselves to unknown seas. Accordingly, near
half a century elapsed, from the time of Gioia's discovery, be-
fore navigators ventured into any seas which they had not been
accuflomed to frequent.

THE first appearance of a bolder spirit may be dated from Somami-

the voyages of the Spaniards to the Canary or Fortunate Islands. bno,.'riri,:
By what accident they were led to the discovery of those small in navi;-
isles, which lie near five hundred miles from the Spanish coafr,
and above a hundred and fifty miles from the coast of Africa,
contemporary writers have not explained. But about the mid-
dle of the fourteenth century, the people of all the different
kingdoms into which Spain was then divided, nvere acculomied
to make piratical excur-ions thither, in order to plunder the
inhabitants, or to carry them off as slaves. Clement VI. in
virtue of the right claimed by the holy fee to difpo'e 16f all
countries pofl'efled by infidels, ereced thofo isles into a
kingdom, in the year one thousand three hundred and
f'rty-four, and conferred it on Lewis de la Ccilta, defccndce

fro):li

B O K from the royal family of Castile. But that unfortunate
as,-^ prince, destitute of power to assert his nominal title, having

never visited the Canaries, John de Bethencourt, a Norman
baron, obtained a grant of them from Henry III. of Caffile r.
Bethencourt, with the valour and good fortune which diflin-
guifhed the adventurers of his country, attempted and es-
sected the conquest, and the possession of the Canaries re-
mained for tome time in his family, as a fief held of the
crown of Cafiile. Previous to this expedition of Bethencourt,
his countrymen are said to have visited the coast of Africa, and
-if5, to have proceeded far to the south of the Canary islands. But

their voyages thither seem not to have been undertaken in con-
sequence of any public or regular plan for extending navigation
and attempting new discoveries. They were either excursions
suggested by that roving piratical spirit, which descended to the
Normans from their ancestors, or the commercial enterprises of
private merchants, which attracted so little notice, that hardly
any memorial of them is to be found in contemporary authors.
In a general survey of the progress of discovery, it is sufficient
to have mentioned this event; and leaving it among those of
dubious existence, or of small importance, we may conclude,
that though much additional information concerning the remote
regions of the east had been received by travellers who visited
them by land, navigation, at the beginning of the fifteenth
century, had not advanced beyond the slate to which it had
attained before the downfal of the Roman empire.

}irsarcgular AT length the period arrived, when Providence decreed that
plan ot dif-
co;.;c,.v men were to pass the limits within which they had been so long

confined, and open to themselves a more ample field wherein
to display their talents, their enterprise, and courage. The

' Viera y Clavijo No:i;. dc la -liftor. de Canaria, I 268 &c. Glas I-lilt. c. i.

firfi

firfl considerable efforts towards this were not made by any of B o o K
the more powerful states of Europe, or by those who had ap-
plied to navigation with the greatest assiduity and success.
The glory of leading the way in this new career was reserved
for Portugal, one of the smallest and most inconsiderable of the formedby the
European kingdoms. As the attempts of the Portuguese to P
acquire the knowledge of those parts of the globe with which
mankind were then unacquainted, not only improved and ex-
tended the art of navigation, but roused such a spirit ofcurio-
fity and enterprise, as led to the discovery of the new world of
which I propose to write the history, it is necessary to take a
view of the rife, the progress, and success of their various naval
operations. It was in this £chool that the discoverer of America
was trained; and unless we trace the steps by which his in-
ftrudtors and guides advanced, it will be impossible to compre-
hend the circumfiances which fuggefled the idea, or facilitated
the execution of his great design.

VARIOUS circumstances prompted the Portuguese to exert Circumilan-

ces which led

their activity in this new direcion, and enabled them to ac- to t!:i
complifh undertakings apparently superior to the natural force
of their monarchy. The kings of Portugal, having driven the
Moors out of their dominions, had acquired power, as well as
glory, by the success of their arms against the infidels. By
their vicories over them, they had extended the royal autho-
rity beyond the narrow limits within which it was originally
circumscribed in Portugal, as well as in other feudal kingdoms.
They had the command of the national force, could route it to
ad with united vigour, and, after the expulsion of the Moors,
could employ it without dread of interruption from any domcflic
enemy. By the perpetual hoflilities carried on for several centuries

againfl:

BO0 K against the Mahometans, the martial and adventurous spirit
. that diflinguifhed all the European nations during the middle

ages, was improved and heightened among the Portuguese. A
fierce civil war, towards the close of the fourteenth century,
occasioned by a disputed succession, augmented the military ar-
dour of the nation, and formed or called forth men of such
ative and daring genius, as are fit for bold undertakings.
The iituation of the kingdom, bounded on every fide by the
dominions of a more powerful neighbour, did not afford free
scope to the activity of the Portuguese by land, as the strength
of their monarchy was no match for that of Castile. But Por-
tugal was a maritime slate, in which there were many commo-
dious harbours; the people had begun to make Tome progress
in the knowledge and practice of navigation ; and the sea was
open to the:. prcfenting the only field of enterprise in which
they could diitinguifh themselves.
:.::.t,?;. SUCH was the tlate of Portugal, and such the disposition of

the people, when John I. surnamed the Bastard, obtained fe-
cure pofleflion of the crown by the peace concluded with
Castile in the year one thousand four hundred and eleven.
He was a prince of great merit, who, by superior courage
and abilities, had opened his way to a throne which of
right did not belong to him. He instantly perceived that
it would be impossible to preserve public order, or domes-
tic tranquillity, without finding some employment for the
refilefs spirit of his fubjedcs. With this view, he assembled
a numerous fleet at Lisbon, composed of all the ships that he
could fit out in his own kingdom, and of many hired from
foreigners. This great armament was deffined to attack the
1.112. Moors fettled on the coafi of Barbary. While it was equip-

ping, a few veflels were appointed to fail along the weflern

shore

ihore of Africa bounded by the Atlantic ocean, and to discover B O K
the unknown countries situated there. From this inconsiderable
attempt, we may date the commencement of that spirit of dif-
covery which opened the barriers that had so long shut out
mankind from the knowledge of one half of the terrestrial
globe.

AT the time when John sent forth there ships on this new

voyage, the art of navigation was still very imperfect. Though
Afiica lay so near to Portugal, and the fertility of the coun-
tries already known on that continent invited men to make
farther discoveries, the Portuguese had never ventured to fail
beyond Cape Non. That promontory, as its name imports,
was hitherto confidered as a boundary which could not be
palsed. But the nations of Europe had now acquired as much
knowledge, as emboldened them to disregard the prejudices
and to corret the errors of their ancestors. The long reign of
ignorance, the conflant enemy of every curious inquiry, and
of every new undertaking, was approaching to its period. The
light of science began to dawn. The works of the ancient
Greeks and Romans began to be read with admiration and
profit. The sciences cultivated by the Arabians were intro-
duced into Europe by the Moors fettled in Spain and Portugal,
and by the Jews, who were very numerous in both these king-
doms. Geometry, astronomy, and geography, the sciences on
which the art of navigation is founded, became objecs of flu-
dious attention. The memory of the discoveries made by the
ancients was revived, and the progress of their navigation and
commerce began to be traced. Some of the causes which,
during this century and the last, have obfiruded the cultivation
of science in Portugal, did not exist, or did not operate in the

VOL. I. G fame

B 0 K fame manner, in the fifteenth century s; and the Portuguefc,

I.
.._ j at that period, seem to have kept pace with other nations on

this fide of the Alps in literary pursuits.
its success. As the genius of the age favoured the execution of that new

undertaking, to which the peculiar slate of their country in-
vited the Portuguese, it proved successful. The vessels sent on
the discovery doubled that formidable Cape, which had ter-
minated the progress of former navigators, and proceeded a
hundred and sixty miles beyond it, to Cape Bojador. As its
rocky cliffs, which f.retched a considerable way into the Atlan-
tic, appeared more dreadful than the promontory which they
had passed, the Portuguese commanders durst not attempt to
fail round it, but returned to Lisbon, more satisfied with having
advanced so far, than ashamed at having ventured no farther.

Prince Henry INCONSIDERABLE as this voyage was, it increased the pas-
the dircetorof
the Portu- sion for discovery, which began to arise in Portugal. The ex-
guefe disco-
veries$. traordinary success of the king's expedition against the Moors

of Barbary, added firength to the spirit of enterprise in the na-
,4i5. tion and pushed it on to new undertakings. In order to render

these successful, it was neceflary that they Ihould be conducted
by a person who poffenfed abilities capable of discerning what
was attainable, who enjoyed leisure to form a regular system
for prosecuting discovery, and who was animated with ardour
that would persevere in spite of obstacles and repulses. Hap-
pily for Portugal, flie found all those qualities in Henry duke
of Viseo, the fourth son of king John by Philippa of Lancaster,
sifter of Henry IV. king of England. That prince, in his early
youth, having accompanied his father in his expedition to Bar-

& See NOTE IX.

bary,

bary, diftinguiihed himself by many deeds of valour. To the B OO K
martial spirit, which was the charaderiflic of every man of ---
noble birth at that time, he added all the accomplishments of a
more enlightened and polished age. He cultivated the arts and
sciences, which were then unknown and despised by persons of
his rank. He applied with peculiar fondness to the study of
geography; and by the inftrudion of able mailers, as well as
by the accounts of travellers, he early acquired such knowledge
of the habitable globe, as discovered the great probability of
finding new and opulent countries, by failing along the coafl of
Africa. Such an object was formed to awaken the enthusiasm
and ardour of a youthful mind, and he engaged with the ut-
most zeal to patronize a design that might prove as beneficial,
as it appeared to be splendid and honourable. In order that he
might pursue this great scheme without interruption, he retired
from court immediately after his return from Africa, and fixed
his residence at Sagres, near Cape St. Vincent, where the pro-
sped of the Atlantic ocean invited his thoughts continually to-
wards his favourite project, and encouraged him to execute it.
In this retreat he was attended by rome of the most learned men
in his country, who aided him in his researches. He applied
for information to the Moors of Barbary, who were accuflomecl
to travel by land into the interior provinces of Africa, in
quest of ivory, gold-duft, and other rich commodities. He
consulted the Jews fettled in Portugal. By promires, rewards,
and marks of refpeO, he allured into his service several persons,
foreigners as well as Portuguese, who were eminent for their
flill in navigation. In taking those preparatory fleps, the great
abilities of the prince were seconded by his private virtues. His
integrity,, his affability, his refpct for religion, his zeal for
the honour of his country, engaged persons of all ranks to

G z applaud

B oO K applaud his design, and to favour the execution of it. His

schemes were allowed by his countrymen to proceed neither
from ambition, nor the desire of wealth, but to flow from the
warm benevolence of a heart eager to promote the happiness
of mankind, and which jufily intitled him to assume a motto
for his device, that described the quality by which he withed to
be distinguished, the talent of doing good.

)iicovery cf His first effort, as is usual at the commencement of any new
Porto Santo.

41ts. undertaking, was extremely inconsiderable. He fitted out a

single (hip, and giving the command of it to John Gonzalez
Zarco and Triflan Vaz, two gentlemen of his household, who
voluntarily offered to conduct the enterprise, he infiruded them
to use their utmofi efforts to double Cape Bojador, and thence
to fleer towards the south. They, according to the mode of
navigation which flill prevailed, held their course along the
/hore; and by following that direcion, they must have en-
countered almost insuperable difficulties in attempting to pass
Cape Bojador. But fortune came in aid to their want of skill,
and prevented the voyage from being altogether fruitless. A
sudden squall of wind arose, drove them out to sea, and when
they expected every moment to perish, landed them on an
unknown island, which from their happy escape they named
Porto Santo. In the infancy of navigation, the discovery of
this small island appeared a matter of such moment, that they
instantly returned to Portugal with the good tidings, and were
received by 1-enry with the applause and honour due to for-
tunate adventurers. This faint dawn of success filled a mind
ardent in the pursuit of a favourite objed with such sanguine
1419. hopes as were sufficient encouragement to proceed. Next year,

Henry sent out three ships under the fame commanders, to
whom he joined Bartholomew Perefirello, in order to take pof-

feflion

session of the island which they had discovered. When they B o0o K
began to fettle in Porto Santo, they observed towards the south _-
a fixed spot in the horizon, like a small black cloud. By de-
grees, they were led to conjecture that it might be land, and Of Madeira.
fleering towards it, they arrived at a considerable island, unin-
habited, and covered with wood, which on that account they
called Madeira '. As it was Henry's chief objecd to render his
discoveries useful to his country, he immediately equipped a 1420
fleet to carry a colony of Portuguese to these islands. By his
provident care, they were furnished not only with the feeds,
plants, and domestic animals common in Europe; but as he
forcfaw that the warmth of the climate and fertility of the foil
would prove favourable to the rearing of other productions, he
procured flips of the vine from the island of Cyprus, the rich
wines of which were then in great request, and plants of the
sugar-cane from Sicily, into which it had been latel! introduced.
These throve so prosperously in this new country, that the
benefit of cultivating them was immediately perceived, and the
sugar and wine of Madeira quickly became considerable articles
in the commerce of Portugal ".

As soon as the advantages derived from this firfi settlement Double c..ac

Bojador.

to the weft of the European continent began to be felt, the
spirit of discovery appeared less chimerical, and became more
adventurous. By their voyages to Madeira, the Portuguese
were gradually accuflomed to a bolder navigation, and instead
of creeping servilely along the coafi, ventured into the open
sea. In confequencc of taking this course, Gilianez, who

I-illorical Rclation ofthe firlR Difcovcryof Madcira, irar.fl.tcd from the Portuguese or

Fran. Alcaf:rano, p. r5, &c.

" L.,I. G iar ir!k D ;:it:. c

laefi B ali,

p.
1AC, p. S .

commanded

B OIO K commanded one of prince Henry's ships, doubled Cape Boja-
t.-.-. dor, the boundary of the Portuguese navigation upwards of

twenty years, and which had hitherto been deemed unpaffable.
'433- This successful voyage, which the ignorance of the age placed

on a level with the most famous exploits recorded in hiflory,
opened a new sphere to navigation, as it discovered the vast
continent of Africa, flill washed by the Atlantic ocean, and
firetching towards the south. Part of this was soon explored;

Advance the Portuguese advanced within the tropics, and in the space
within the
tropics. of a few years they discovered the river Senegal, and all the

coast extending from Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

Astonished at HITHERTO the Portuguese had been guided in their dif-
wvhattheydif-
covered there. coveries, or encouraged to attempt them, by the light and

information which they received from the works of the ancient
mathematicians and geographers. But, when they began to
enter the torrid zone, the notion which prevailed among
the ancients, that the excessive heat, which reigned perpe-
tually there, was so fatal to life as to render it uninhabitable,
deterred them, for some time, from proceeding. Their own
observations, when they firfi ventured into this unknown and
formidable region, tended to confirm the opinion of antiquity
concerning the violent operation of the direl rays of the fun.
As far as the river Senegal, the Portuguese had found the coast
of Africa inhabited by people nearly resembling the Moors of
Barbary. When they advanced to the south of that river, the
human form seemed to put on a new appearance. They be-
held men with skins black as ebony, with short curled hair,
flat notes, thick lips, and all the peculiar features which are
now known to distinguish the race of negroes. This fur-
prifing alteration they naturally attributed to the influence of

heat,

heat, and if they should advance nearer to the line, they began B 0I0 K
to dread that its effects would be frill more fatal. Those dan- -
gers were exaggerated, and many other objecions against
attempting farther discoveries were proposed by some of the
grandees, who, from ignorance, from envy, or from that cold
timid prudence which rejeCts whatever has the air of novelty
or enterprise, had hitherto condemned all prince Henry's
schemes. They represented, that it was altogether chimerical
to expet any advantage from countries situated in that region
which the wisdom and experience of antiquity had pronounced
to be unfit for the habitation of men; that their forefathers,
satisfied with cultivating the territory which Providence had
allotted them, did not waste the fircngth of the kingdom by
fruitless projects, in quest of new settlements; that Portugal
was already exhaufied by the expence of attempts to discover
lands which either did not exist, or which nature destined to
remain unknown ; and was drained of men, who might have
been employed in undertakings attended with more certain fuc-
cess, and produCtive of greater benefit. But neither their appeal
to the authority of the ancients, nor their reasonings concerning
the interest of Portugal, made any impreflion upon the deter-
mined philosophic mind of prince Henry. The discoveries
which he had already made convinced him that the ancients
had little more than a conjecural knowledge of the torrid zone.
He was no less satisfied that the political arguments of his op-
ponents with refped to the interest of Portugal were malevolent
and ill-founded. In those sentiments he was fircnuoufly sup-
ported by his brother Pcdro, who governed the kingdom as
guardian of their nephew Alphonfo V. who had filcceeded to I.t...
the throne during his minority; and instead of slackening his

efiforts,

B OO K efforts, Henry continued to pursue his discoveries with fresh

ardour.

Papal orant BUT, in order to silence all the murmurs of opposition, he
to i-,c.tuga[ of
,,hat coun- endeavoured to obtain the sanCtion of the highest authority in
tries it should favour of his operations. With this view, he applied to the

Pope, and represented, in pompous terms, the pious and un-
wearied zeal, with which he had exerted himself during twenty
years, in discovering unknown countries, the wretched inha-
bitants of which were utter firangers to true religion, wander-
ing in heathen darkness, or led affray by the delusions of Ma-
homet. He besought the holy father, to whom, as the vicar
of Christ, all the kingdoms of the earth were fubjeEt, to con-
ser on the crown of Portugal a right to all the countries possessed
by Infidels, which should be discovered by the indufiry of its
fubjeQs, and subdued by the force of its arms. He intreated
him to enjoin all Christian powers, under the highest penalties,
not to molest the Portuguese while engaged in this laudable
enterprise, and to prohibit them from fettling in any of the
countries which they should discover. He promired that, in
all their expeditions, it should be the chief object of the Por-
tuguefe to spread the knowledge of the Christian religion, to
establish the authority of the holy fee, and to increase the flock
of the universal pastor. As it was by improving with dexte-
rity every favourable conjuncure for acquiring new powers,
that the court of Rome had gradually extended its usurpations,
Eugene IV. the pontiff to whom this application was made,
eagerly seized the opportunity that now presented itself. He
inflantly perceived, that by complying with prince Henry's
request, he might exercise a prerogative no less flattering in its

own

own nature, than likely to prove beneficial in its consequences. s o o il
A Bull was accordingly issued, in which, after applauding in
the firongeft terms the past efforts of the Portugnefe, and ex-
horting them to proceed in that laudable career on which they
had entered, he granted them nn exclusive right to all the coun-
tries which they fnould discover, from Cape Non to the conti-
nent of India.

EXTRAVAGANT as this donation, comprehending tfch a

large portion of the habitable globe, would now appear even in
Catholic countries, no person in the fifteenth century doubted
that the pope, in the plenitude of his apostolic power, had a.
right to confer it. Prince Henry was soon sensible of the ad-
vantages which he derived from this tranfation. His schemes
were authorised and fanaified by the bull approving of them.
The spirit of discovery was connected with zeal for religion,
which, in that age, was a principle of such afivity and vigour.
as to influence the condud of nations. All Christian princes
were deterred from intruding into those countries which the
Portuguese had discovered, or from interrupting the progress
of their navigation and conquefis x.

THE fame of the Portuguese voyages soon spread over Eu- Fame and

rope. Men, long accustomed to circumscribe the adivity and the Portu-
knowledge of the human mind within the limits to which they sefo ditco.
had been hitherto confined, were aflonifhed to behold the
sphere of navigation so suddenly enlarged, and a profpet
opened of visiting regions of the globe, the exiflence of which
was unknown in former times. The learned and speculative
reasoned and formed theories concerning those unexpected
difcuveries. The vulgar inquired and wondered ; and enter-

Sec NOTE X.
VOL. I. H prifing

0 0o K prifing adventurers crouded from every part of Europe, so-

liciting prince Henry to employ them in this honourable service.
Many Venetians and Genoese, in particular, who were, at that
time, superior to all other nations in the science of naval affairs,
entered aboard the Portuguese ihips, and acquired a more per-
feEt and extensive knowledge of their profession in that new
school of navigation. In emulation of these foreigners, the
Portuguese exerted their own talents. The nation seconded
the designs of the prince. Private merchants formed com-
,446. panics, with a view to search for unknown countries. The

Cape de Verd islands, which lie off the promontory of that
1449. name, were discovered, and soon after, the isles called Azores.

As the former of these are above three hundred miles from the
African coast, and the latter nine hundred miles from any con-
tinent, it is evident, by their venturing so boldly into the open
seas, that the Portuguese had, by this time, improved greatly
in the art of navigation.
Death of WHILE the passion for engaging in new undertakings was

enrny. thus warm and acive, it received an unfortunate check boy the
1463. death of prince Henry, whose superior knowledge had hitherto

directed all the operations of the discoverers, and whose patro-
nage had encouraged and proteced them. It is true, that dur-
ing his life, the Portuguese, in their utmost progress towards
the south, did not advance within five degrees of the equinocial
line; and, after their continued exertions for half a century,
hardly fifteen hundred miles of the coast of Africa were disco-
vered. To an age acquainted with the efforts of navigation in
its state of maturity and improvement, those essays of its early

From 1412 years mufi necessarily appear feeble and unflilful. But, incon-
to 1463. fiderable as they may appear, they were sufficient to turn the

curiosity

curiosity of the European nations into a new channel, to excite B o 0 K
an enterprising spirit, and to point the way to future disco-
veries.

ALPrONSO, who poifeffed the throne of Portugal at the time The paflion

for difcovily

of prince Henry's death, was so much engaged in Supporting languishes
his pretensions to the crown of Cafiile, or in carrying on his for tme
expeditions againfi the Moors in Barbary, that the force of his
kingdom being exerted in other operations, he could not
prosecute the discoveries in Africa with ardour. He committed
the conduc of them to Fernando Gomez, a merchant in Lisbon,
to whom he granted an exclusive right of commerce with all
the countries of which prince Henry had taken poifeffion. Un-
der the refiraint and oppression of a monopoly; the spirit of
discovery languished. It ceased to be a national object, and be-
came the concern of a private man, more attentive to his own
gain, than to the glory of his country. Some progress, however,
was made. The Portuguese ventured at length to cross the 1471
line, and, to their aflonifhment, found that region of the torrid
zone, which was supposed to be scorched with intolerable heat,
to be not only habitable, but populous and fertile.

JOHi II. who succeeded his father Alphonfo, poiffefed ta- i+i.

Revives with

lents capable both of forming and executing great designs. As additional
part of his revenues, while prince, had arisen from duties on ardour-
the trade with the newly-difcovcred countries, this naturally
turned his attention towards them, and satisfied him with re-
sped to their utility and importance. In proportion as his
knowledge of there countries extended, the poffeflion of them
appeared to be of greater consequence. While the Portuguese
proceeded along the coast of Africa, from Cape Non to the

H 2 river

B o o K river of Senegal, they found all that extensive trac to be sandy,
^..._. barren, and thinly inhabited by a wretched people, professing

the Mahometan religion, and fubjeEt to the vast empire of Mo-
rocco. But to the south of that river, the power and religion
o' the Mahometans were unknown. The country was divided
into small independent principalities, the population was confi-
derable, the foil fertile ', and the Portuguese soon discovered
that it produced ivory, rich gums, gold, and other valuable
commodities. By the acquisition of these, commerce was en-
larged, and became more adventurous. Men, animated and
rendered aCtive by the certain prospeCt of gain, pursued disco-
very with greater eagerness, than when they were excited only
by curiosity and hope.
Its progrcfi. THIS spirit derived no small reinforcement of vigour from

the countenance of such a monarch as John. He declared
himself the patron of every attempt towards discovery, and
promoted it with all the ardour of his grand-uncle prince
1484. Henry, and with superior power. The effects of this were

immediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out, which,
after discovering the kingdoms of Benin and Congo, ad-
vanced above fifteen hundred miles beyond the line, and
the Portuguese, for the firit time, beheld a new heaven, and
observed the stars of another hemisphere. John was not only
solicitous to discover, but attentive to secure the poffeflion of
those countries. He built forts on the coast of Guinea; he
sent out colonies to fettle there; he eflablifhed a commercial
intercourse with the more powerful kingdoms; he endeavoured

y Navigatio Aloyfii Cadamufli apul Novum Orerni Grynai, p. z. 18. Navigat. all
Ifola di San Tome per un pilotto Portugh, Raniufo. i. 1 5.

to

to render such as were feeble or divided, tributary to the crown B o o K
of Portugal. Some of the petty princes voluntarily acknow- _
ledged themselves his vassals. Others were compelled to do so
by force of arms. A regular and well digested system was
formed with refpec to this new objet of policy, and by firmly
adhering to it, the Portuguese power and commerce in Africa
were eflabliflled upon a solid foundation.

BY their conflant intercourse with the people of Africa, the Ho3., o: di-

Portuguese gradually acquired some knowledge of those parts cer'cnre O
of that country which they had not visited. The information tie':afln-
which they received from the natives, added to what they had
observed in their own voyages began to open profpeds more ex-
tensive, and to suggest the idea of schemes more important, than
those which had hitherto allured and occupied them. They
had detected the error of the ancients concerning the nature of
the torrid zone. They found, as they proceedi-i southwards,
that the continent of Africa, instead of extending in breadth,
according to the dodrine of Ptolemy , at that time the oracle
and guide of the learned in the study of geography, appeared
sensibly to contract itself, and to bend towards the east. This
induced them to give credit to the accounts of the ancientPhe-
nician voyages round Africa, which had long been deemed fa-
bulous, and led them to conceive hopes that by following the
fame route, they might arrive at the East Indies, and engross
that commerce, which has been the source of wealth and power
to every nation pofleffed of it. The comprehensive genius of
prince Henry, as we may conjecture from the words of the
pope's bull, had early formed forne idea of this navigation.
All the Portuguese pilots and mathematicians now concurred in

Vide Nov. Orlis Tn'ul. Geograph. Sccund. Ptrlcm. Anil. I -,o.

representing

B o0 K representing it as practicable. The king entered with warmth

-.- into their sentiments, and began to concert measures for this

arduous and important voyage.

aSchemes so BEFORE his preparations for this expedition were finished,
accon plIsll-
ing this. accounts were transmitted from Africa, that various nations

along the coast had mentioned a mighty kingdom situated on
their continent, at a great distance towards the east, the king
of which, according to their description, profeTfed the Christian
religion. The Portuguese monarch immediately concluded, that
this must be the emperor of Abyssinia, to whom the Europeans,
seduced by a miflake of Rubruquis, Marco Polo, and other tra-
vellers to the east, absurdly gave the name Prefier or Presbyter
John; and as he hoped to receive information and affiflance
from a Christian prince, in prosecuting a scheme that tended to
propagate their common faith, he resolved to open, if possible,
some intercourse with his court. With this view, he made
choice of Pedro de Covillam and Alphonfo de Payva, who were
perfect malters of the Arabic language, and sent them into
the east, to search for the residence of this unknown potentate,
and to make him proffers of friendship. They had it in charge,
likewise, to procure whatever intelligence the nations which
they visited cou'ld supply, with refpeód to the trade of India, and
the course of navigation to that continents.

Voyag cos WHILE John made this new attempt by land, to obtain
'artho.lomcw some knowledge of the country, which he wished so ardently
D)iaz.

to discover, he did not neglect the prosecution of this great de-
1486. sign by sea. The conduc of this voyage, the most arduous

and important which the Portuguese had ever projected, was

' Faria y SoLfia Port. Asia, vol i. p. 2z. Latitau Dccouv. de Port. i. 46.

committed

committed to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer whose sagacity, ex- B 0o K
perience, and fortitude rendered him equal to the undertaking. L
He fWretched boldly towards the south, and proceeding beyond 146.
the utmost limits to which his countrymen had hitherto advanc-
ed, discovered near a thousand miles of new country. Neither
the danger to which he was exposed, by a succession of violent
tempefis in unknown seas, and by the frequent mutinies of his
crew, nor the calamities of famine which he suffered from los-
ing his store-ship, could deter him from prosecuting his enter-
prise. In recompence of his labours and perseverance, he at
last descried that lofty promontory which bounds Africa to the
south. But to descry it, was all that was in his power. The
violence of the winds, the shattered condition of his ships, and
the turbulent spirit of his sailors, compelled him to return,
after a voyage of sixteen months, in which he discovered an
extent of country far greater than any preceding navigator.
Diaz had called the promontory which terminated his voyage
Cabo Tornzentofo, or the flormy Cape; but the kin!, his matser,
as he now entertained no doubt of having found the long de-
fired route to India, gave it a name more inviting, and of better
omen, The Cape of Good Hope h

THosE sanguine expectations of success were confirmed by More certain

the intelligence which John received over land, in consequence Vfr~ls O
of his embafly to Abyssinia. Covillam and Payva, in obedi-
ence to their maiter's inftruations, had repaired to Grand Cairo.
From that city they travelled along with a caravan of Egyp-
tian merchants, and crofled over to Aden, on the Red Sea.
There they separated ; Payva failed diredly towards Abyssinia;
Covillam embarked for the East Indies, and having visitcd Ca-

' Falia v Sousa Port. Afil, vol. i. p. 26.

Iccul,

B 0 0 K lecut, Goa, and other cities on the Malabar coast, returned tu

.--, Sofala, on the east fide of Africa, and thence to Grand Cairo,

which Payva and he had fixed upon as their place of rendez-
vous. Unfortunately the former was cruelly murdered in
Abyssinia, but Covillam found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews,
whom John, whose provident sagacity attended to every cir-
cumftance that could facilitate the execution of his schemes,
had dispatched after them, in order to receive a detail of their
proceedings, and to communicate to them new instruCtions.
By one of there Jews, Covillam transmitted to Portugal a jour-
nal of his travels by sea and land, his remarks upon the trade
of India, togther with exad maps of the coafis on which he
had touched; and from what he himself had observed, as well
as from the information of skilful seamen in different countries,
he concludced, that by failing round Africa, a paifage might be
found to the East Indies'.

r anothero THE happy coincidence of Covillam's opinion and report,
v)a ge. with the discoveries which Diaz had lately made, left hardly

any shadow of doubt with refpet to the possibility of failing
from Europe to India. But the vast length of the voyage, and
the furious florms which Diaz had encountered near the Cape
of Good Hope, alarmed and intimidated the Portuguese to
such a degree, although by long experience they were now be-
come adventurous and skilful mariners, that some time was
requisite to prepare their minds for this dangerous and extra-
ordinary voyage. The courage, however, and authority of
the monarch, gradually dispelled the vain fears of his fubjeds,
or made it necessary to conceal them. As John thought himself
now upon the eve of accomplishing that great dcfign, which

Faria ) Soura Port, Asia, vol. i. p. 27. Lafitau Dccouv. i.. R.

had
I

had been the principal objed of his reign, his earneflnefs in E o0 K
prosecuting it became so vehement, that it occupied his thoughts
by day, and bereaved him of sleep through the night. While
he was taking every precaution that his wisdom and experience
could suggest, in order to ensure the success of the expedition,
which was to decide concerning the fate of his favourite pro-
ject, the iame of the vast discoverics which the Portuguese had
already made, the reports concerning the extraordinary intelli-
gence which they had received from the eafi, and the profped Trleattenticn
of the voyage which they now meditated, drew the attention of fid upon it
all the European nations, and held them in fufpence and expec-
tation. By omne, the maritime ikill and navigations of the
Portuguese were compared with those of the Phenicians and
Carthaginians, and exalted above them. Others formed con-
jedures concerning the revolutions which the success of their
schemes might occasion in the course of trade, and the political
slate of Europe. The Venetians began to be disquieted with
the apprehension of losing their Indian commerce, the mono-
poly of which was the chief source of their power as well as
opulence, and the Portuguese already enjoyed in fancy, the
wealth of the east. But, during this interval, which gave
such scope to the various workings of curiosity, of hope and
of fear, an account was brought to Europe of an event no less Suddenly
extraordinary than unexpected, the discovery of a New World turned to a
situated in the weft, and the eyes and admiration of mankind
turned immediately towards that great object.

VOL. L t T HE

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

O F
A M E R I C A.

BOOK II.

A. MO N G the foreigners whom the fame of the discoveries B OO K
made by the Portuguese had allured into their service, was
Chrifiopher Columbus, a subjed of the republic of Genoa. Birth and e-

ducation of

Neither the time nor place of his birth are known with cer- Columbas.
tainty a' but he was descended of an honourable family, though
reduced to indigence by various misfortunes. His anceitors
having betaken themselves for fubfiflence to a Seafaring life,
Columbus discovered, in his early youth, the peculiar charader
and talents which mark out a man for that profession. His
parents, instead of thwarting this original propensity of his
mind, seem to have encouraged and confirmed it, by the edu-
cation which they gave him. After acquiring some knowledge
of the Latin tongue, the only language in which science was
taught at that time, he was inftruded in geometry, cosmo-

Sec NOT E XT.

I a ,taphy,

B 0 0 K graphy, afironomy, and the. art of drawing. To there he ap-

'_v-^ plied with such ardour and predilecion, on account of their

connection with navigation, his favourite object, that he ad-
vanced with rapid proficiency in the fludy of them. Thus
,461. qualified, he went to sea at the age of fourteen, and began his

career on that element which conducted him to so much glory.
His early voyages were to those ports in the Mediterranean
which his countrymen the Genoese frequented. This being a
1407. sphere too narrow for his active mind, he made an excursion to

the, northern seas, and visited the coast of Iceland, to which
the English and other nations had begun to resort on account
of its fishery. As navigation, in every direction, was now
become enterprising, he proceeded beyond that island, the
Thule of the ancients, and advanced several degrees within the
polar circle. Having satisfied his curiosity by a voyage which
tended more to enlarge his knowledge of naval affains, than to
improve his fortune, he entered into the service of a famous
fea-captain, of his own name and family. This man com-
manded a small squadron, fitted out at his own expence, and
by cruising sometimes againfi the Ma-hometans, sometimes
againit the Venetians, the rivals of his country in trade,, had
acquired both wealth and reputation. With him Columbus
continued for several years, no less diftinguifled for his cou-
rage, than for his experience as a sailor. At length, in an
obflinate engagement, off the coast of Portugal, with. some
Venetian caravels, returning richly laden from the Low Coun-
tries, the veflel on board which he served took fire, together
with one of the enemy's ships, to which it was fast grappled.
In this dreadful extremity his intrepidity and prefencc of mind
did not forsake him. He threw himself into the sea, laid hold
of a floating oar, and by the support of it, and his dexterity in

swimming,

fwivnm.ing, he reached the ihore, though above two leagues Bn OO K
difatam, and saved a life' reserved for great undertakings b.

As soon as he recovered strength for thejourney, he repaired He enters

to Lilibon, where' many of his countrymen were fettled. They tug ero fr-
soon. conceived such a favouTrable opinion of his merit, as well vice.
as talerts, that they warmly solicited him to remain in that
kingdom, where his naval skill and experience could not fail of
rendering him conspicuous. To every adventurer, animated
either with curiosity to visit new countries, or with ambition to
diftinguiiflal himself, the Portuguese service was at that time ex-
tremely inviting. Columbus liflened with a favourable ear to
the advice of his friends, and having gained the esteem of a
Portug.uese lady, whom. he married, fixed his residence in
Lisbon. This alliance, inflead of detaching him from a sea-
faring 1ife, contributed to enlarge the sphere of his naval know-
ledge, and to excite a desire of extending it fliil farther. His
wife was a daughter of Bartholomew Pereftrello, one of the
capta-ins employed by prince Henry in his carly navigations,
and who, under his protection, had discovered and planted the
islands of Porto Santo and Madeira. Columbus got possession
of the journals and charts of this experienced navigator, and
from them he learned the course which the Portuguese had held
in making their discoveries, as well as the various circumstances
which guided or encouraged them in their attempts. The
fludy of there gratified and inflamed his favourite passion; and
while he contemplated the maps, and read the dcfcriptions of
the new countries which Pereflrello had seen, his impatience to
visit them became irresistible. In order to indulge it, he made
a voyage to Madcira, and continued during several years to

h Life of Columbus, c. v.

trade'

13 0 o K trade with that island, with the Canaries, the Azores, the set-

tlements in Guinea, and all the other places which the Portu-
guefe had discovered on the continent of Africa c.

The efiCrds BY the experience which Columbus acquired, during such a
of their dif-
coveri:s variety of voyages to almost every part of the globe with which,
upon him. at that time, any intercourse was carried on by lea, he was now

become one of the moit flilful navigators in Europe. But, not
satisfied with that praise, his ambition aimed at something
more. The successful progress of the Portuguese navigators had
awakened a spirit of curiosity and emulation, which set every
man of science upon examining all the circumstances that led to
the discoveries which they had made, or that afforded a profped
of fucceedin. in any new and bolder undertaking. The mind
of Columbus, naturally inquisitive, capable of deep reflection,
and turned to speculations of this kind, was so often employed
in revolving the principles upon which the Portuguese had
founded their schemes of discovery, and the mode in which
they had carried them on, that he gradually began to form an
idea of improving upon their plan, and of accomplishing dif-
coveries which hitherto they had attempted in vain.

Ic sI rmr til To find out a passage by Tea to the East Indies, was the great
,,,~,,l,., objee in view at that period. From the time that the Portu-

'. guefe doubled Cape de Verd, this was the point at which they

aimed in all their navigations, and, in comparison with it, all
their difcovcrics in Africa appeared inconsiderable. The ser-
tility and riches of India had been known for many ages; its
spices and other valuable commodities were in high request
hroughout Europe, and the vast wealth of the Venctians,

rLie ofC Columbus, c. iv. v.

arifine

arising from their having engrossed this trade, had raised the B 0 K
envy of all nations. But how intent soever the Portuguese
were upon discovering a new route to those. desirable regions,
they searched for it only by fleering towards the south, in hopes
of arriving at India, by turning to the east, after they had failed
round the farther extremity of Africa. This course, however,
was still unknown, and, even if discovered, was of such im-
mense length, that a voyage from Europe to India must have
appeared an undertaking extremely arduous, and of very un-
certain issue. More than half a century had been employed
in advancing from Cape Non to the equator; a much longer
space of time might elapse before the more extensive navigation
from that to India could be accomplished. These reflections
upon the uncertainty, the danger and tediousness of the course
which the Portuguese were pursuing, naturally led Columbus
to confider whether a shorter and more direc passage to the
East Indies might not be found out. And, as'er revolving
long and seriously every circumstance fuggefled by his superior
knowledge in the theory as well as practice of navigation, after
comparing attentively the observations of modern pilots with
the hints and conjectures of ancient authors, he at last con-
cluded, that by failing directly towards the weft, across the
Atlantic ocean, new countries, which probably formed a part
of the vafi continent of India, muff infallibly be discovered.

PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, and derived The princi-

from different sources, induced him to adopt this opinion, histheoryvcwa
seemingly as chimerical as it was new and extraordinary. The founded.
spherical figure of the earth was known, and its magnitude
ascertained with some degree of accuracy. From this it was
evident, that the continents of Europe, Asia, and Africa,

formed

B 0o 0 formed but a frall portion of the terraqueous globe. It was

suitable to our ideas concerning the wisdom and beneficence of
the Author of Nature, to believe that the vast space, still unex-
plored, was not covered entirely by a waste unprofitable ocean,
but occupied by countries fit for the habitation of man. It
appeared likewise extremely probable, that the continent, on
this fide of the globe, was balanced by a proportional quantity
of land in the other hemisphere. These conclusions concerning
the exifgence of another continent, drawn from the figure and
structure of the globe, were confirmed by the observations and
conjeEtures of modern navigators. A Portuguese pilot, having
firetched farther to the weft than was usual at that time, took
up a piece of timber artificially carved, floating upon the sea;
and as it was driven towards him by a westerly wind, he con-
cluded that it came from some unknown land, situated in that
quarter. Columbus's brother-in-law had found, to the weft of
the Madeira isles, a piece of timber fashioned in the fame man-
ner, and brought by the fame wind; and had seen like-
wife canes of an enormous size floating upon the waves,
which resembled those described by Ptolemy as productions pe-
culiar to the East Indies d. After a course of westerly winds,
trees, torn up by the roots, were often driven upon the coafis of
the Azores, and at one time the dead bodies of two men, with
singular features, which resembled neither the inhabitants of
Europe nor of Africa, were cast ashore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arising from theoretical

principles and practical observations, led Columbus to expect
the discovery of new countries in the Western Ocean, other
reasons induced him to believe that there must be connected

a Lib. i. c, 17.

with

with the continent of India. Though the ancients had hardly B O K
ever penetrated into India farther than the banks of the
Ganges, yet some Greek authors had ventured to describe the
provinces beyond that river. And, as men are prone, and at
liberty, to magnify what is remote and unknown, they repre-
sented them as regions of an immense extent. Ctefias affirmed
that India was as large as all the reft of Asia. Oneficritus,
whom Pliny the naturalist follows c, contended that it was equal
to a third part of the habitable earth. Ncarchus asserted, that
it would take four months to march from one extremity of it
to the other, in a firaight line'. The journal of Marco Polo,
who travelled into Asia in the thirteenth century, and who had
proceeded towards the east far beyond the limits to which an)
European had ever advanced, seemed to confirm these exag-
gerated accounts of the ancients. By his magnificent descriptions
of the kingdoms of Cathay and Cipango, and of many other
countries, the names of which were unknown in Europe, India
appeared to be a region ofvafi extent. From these accounts,
which, however defective, were the most accurate that the people
of Europe had at that period received, with refpet to the remote
parts of the east, Columbus drew a just conclusion. He con-
tended, that in proportion as the continent of India stretched out
towards the east, it must, in consequence of the spherical figure
of the earth, approach nearer to the islands which had lately
been discovered to the weft of Africa; that the diltance from
the one to the other was probably not very considerable; and
that the most direct, as well as shortest courie, to the remote
regions of the east, was to be found by failing due weft g.

e Nat. Hilt. lib. vi. c. 17. ' Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. lo l.

See N O T E XII.
VoL. I. K This

B 0 K This notion concerning the vicinity of India to the western
.-__--- parts of our continent, was countenanced by some eminent

writers among the ancients, the fanaion of whose authority
was necessary, in that age, to procure a favourable reception to
any tenet. Arifiotle thought it probable that the Columns of
Hercules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not far removed from
the East Indies, and that there might be a communication by
sea between them h. Seneca, in terms still more explicit, as-
firms, that, with a fair wind, one might fail from Spain to
India in a few days . The famous Atlantic island described
by Plato, which many supposed to be a real country, beyond
which a vafi unknown continent was situated, is represented by
him as lying at no great diflance from Spain. After weighing
all there particulars, Columbus, in whose characer the modesty
and diffidence of true genius was united with the ardent en-
thufiafm of a projecor, did not reft with such absolute assurance
either upon his own arguments, or upon the authority of the
ancients, as not to consult such of his contemporaries as were
capable of comprehending the nature of the evidence which; he
produced in support of his opinion. As early as the year one
thousand four hundred and feventy-four, he communicated his
ideas concerning the probability of discovering new countries,
by failing westwards, to Paul, a physician of Florence, emi-
nent for his knowledge of cosmography, and who, on account
both of the learning and candour which he discovers in his
reply, appears to have been well intitled to the confidence which
Columbuns placed in him. He warmly approved. of his plan,
fuggcfled several faEs in confirmation' of it, and encouraged
him to perfevcre in an undertaking so laudable, and which must

h Arifot. dc Ccrlo, lib. ii c. 14. edit. Du Val, Par. 1629, vol. i. p. 4.72.
i Scnec. Q~Qut. Natur. lib. i. in proemn.

redound

redound so much to the honour of his country, and the benefit B o o K
of Europe .

To a mind less capable of forming and of executing great His fchcmes

for carryinj. it

designs than that of Columbus, all these reasonings, and obfer- into executi-
vations, and authorities, would have served only as the foun- 0o.
dation of some plausible and fruitless theory, which might have
furnished matter for ingenious discourse, or fanciful conjecture.
But with his sanguine and enterprising temper, speculation led
direCtly to action. Fully satisfied himself with respect to the
truth of his system, he was impatient to bring it to the test of
experiment, and to set out upon a voyage of discovery. The
first flep towards this was to secure the patronage of some of
the considerable powers in Europe, capable of undertaking
such an enterprise. As long absence had not extinguished the
affection which he bore to his native country, he wished that it
should reap the fruits of his labours and invention. With this
view, he laid his scheme before the senate of Genoa, and making He arplies to
his country the first tender of his service, offered to fail under the Genoese;
the banners of the republic, in quefi of the new regions which
he expected to discover. But Columbus had resided for so many
years in foreign parts, that his countrymen were unacquainted
with his abilities and character; and, though a maritime people,
they were so little accuflomed to distant vogages, that they
could form no just idea of the principles on which he founded
his hopes of success. They inconsiderately rejected his pro-
pofal, as the dream of a chimerical projector, and loft for ever
the opportunity of restoring their commonwealth to its ancient
splendour '.

k Life of Columbus, c. viii.
Herera Hilt. de las Indias Occid. Dec. i. lib. i. c. 7.

K 2 HIAVING

B 0 0 K HAVING performed what was due to his country, Columbus

I1. v--, was so little discouraged by the repulse which he had received,
Portugal;gof that, instead of relinquishing his undertaking, he pursued it

with fresh ardour. He made his next overture to John II.
king of-Portugal, in whose dominions he had been long efta-
blifhed, and whom he confidered, on that account, as having
the second claim to his service. Here every circumfiance seem-
ed to promise him a more favourable reception. He applied to
a monarch of an enterprising genius, no incompetent judge in
naval affairs, and proud of patronising every attempt to dif-
cover new countries. His fubjeds were the most experienced
navigators in Europe, and the leafi apt to be intimidated either
by the novelty or boldness of any maritime expedition. In
Portugal, Columbus's skill in his profession, as well as his per-
fonal good qualities, were thoroughly known; and as the
former rendered it probable that his scheme was not altogether
chimerical, the latter exempted him from the suspicion of any
sinister intention in proposing it. Accordingly, the king
listened to him in the mofi gracious manner, and referred the
consideration of his plan to Diego Ortiz, biihop of Ceuta, and
two Jewish physicians, eminent cosmographers, whom he was
accustomed to consult in matters of this kind. As in Genoa,
ignorance had opposed and disappointed Columbus; in Lisbon,
he had to combat with prejudice, an enemy no less formidable.
The persons, according to whose decision his scheme was to be
adopted or rejeced, had been the chief direcLors of the Portu-
guefe navigations, and had advised to search for a passage to
India, by fleering a course diretly opposite to that which Co-
lumbus recommended as shorter and more certain. They could
not, therefore, approve of his proposal, without submitting to
the double mortification, of condemning their own theory,

and

and of acknowledging his superior sagacity. After teasing BO OK
him with captious questions, and flarting innumerable objec- - *--
tions, with a view of betraying him into such a particular by whm he
explanation of his fyfiem, as might draw from him a full dif-
covery of its nature, they deferred passing a final judgment
with refped to it. In the mean time, they conspired to rob
him of the honour and advantages which he expeted from the
success of his scheme, advising the king to dispatch a vessel,
secretly, in order to attempt the proposed discovery, by follow-
ing exadly the course which Columbus seemed to point out.
John, forgetting on this occasion the sentiments becoming a
monarch, meanly adopted this perfidious counsel. But the
pilot, chosen to execute Columbus's plan, had neither the ge-
nius, nor the fortitude of its author. Contrary winds arose,
no fight of approaching land appeared, his courage failed, and
he returned to Lisbon, execrating the projed as equally extra-
vagant and dangerous .

UPON discovering this dishonourable tranfadion, Columbus He leaves

felt the indignation, natural to an ingenuous mind, and in the Pr''ralo tah
warmth of his resentment determined to break off all inter- court of

Spain.

course with a nation capable of such flagrant treachery. IHe
inflantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spain to-
wards the close of the year one thousand four hundred
and eighty-four. As he was now at liberty to court the
protection of any patron, whom he could engage to ap-
prove of his plan, and to carry it into execution, he rcfolved to
propose it in person, to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that
time governed the united kingdoms of Castile and Aragon.
But, as he had already experienced the uncertain issue of appli- Sends his

brother into
' Life of Columbus, c. xi. Herrcra, decad. i. lib. i. c. 7. England.

cations

B o OK cations to kings and ministers, he took the precaution of fend-

I_', - ing into England his brother Bartholomew, to whom he had

filly communicated his ideas, in order that he might negociate,
at the fame time, with Henry VII. who was reputed one of the
most sagacious as well as opulent princes in Europe.

Obfacles to Ir was not without reason that Columbus entertained doubts
his success in
Spain. and fears with refped to the reception of his proposals in the

Spanish court. Spain was, at that juncture, engaged in a dan-
gerous war with Granada, the last of the Moorish kingdoms.
The wary and suspicious temper of Ferdinand was not formed
to relish bold and uncommon designs. Isabella, though more
generous and enterprising, was under the influence of her hus-
band in all her aaions. The Spaniards had hitherto made no
efforts to extend navigation beyond its ancient limits, and had
beheld the amazing progress of discovery among their neigh-
bours the Portuguese, without one attempt to imitate or to
rival them. The war with the Infidels afforded an ample field
to the national activity and love of glory. Under circumfiances
so unfavourable, it was impossible for Columbus to make rapid
progress with a nation, naturally flow and dilatory in forming
all its resolutions. His character, however, was admirably
adapted to that of the people, whose confidence and proteEtion
he solicited. He was grave, though courteous in his deport-
ment; circumfped in his words and ations; irreproachable in
his morals; and exemplary in his attention to all the duties
and funtions of religion. By qualities so refpetable, he not
only gained many private friends, but acquired such general
eiteem, that, notwithstanding the plainness of his appearance,
suitable to the mediocrity of his fortune, he was not confidered
as a mere adventurer, to whom indigence had suggested a vifi-

onary

onary projea, but was received as a person to whose propofi- B 0 K
tions serious attention was due.

FERDINAND and Isabella, though fully occupied by their His fchleme

operations against the Moors, paid so much regard to Colum- exa[nilf;d by
bus, as to remit the consideration of his plan to the queen's judges,
confessor, Ferdinand de Talavera. He consulted such of his
countrymen, as were supposed belt qualified to decide with re-
speCt to a subjeCt of this kind. But true science had, hitherto,
made so little progress in Spain, that those pretended philofo-
phers, feleded to judge in a matter of such moment, did not
comprehend the firfi principles, upon which Columbus founded
his conjectures and hopes. Some of them, from miflaken no-
tions concerning the dimensions of the globe, contended that a
voyage to those remote parts of the east, which Columbus ex-
pedted to discover, could not be performed in less than three
years. Others concluded, that either he would find the ocean
to be of infinite extent, according to the opinion of some an-
cient philosophers; or, if he should persist in fleering towards
the wefl beyond a certain point, that the convex figure of the
globe would prevent his return, and that he must inevitably
perish, in the vain attempt, to open a communication between
the two opposite hemispheres, which nature had for ever dif-
joined. Even without deigning to enter into any particular
discussion, some rejected the scheme in general, upon the credit
of a maxim, under which the ignorant and unenterprifing
shelter themselves in every age, " That it is preiumnptuous in
any person, to suppose that he alone poffeifes knowledge fu-
perior to all the reft of mankind united." They maintain-
ed, that if there were really any such countries as Columbus
pretended, they could not have remained so long concealed,

nor

B O0 K nor would the wisdom and sagacity of former ages have left the

-._ --. glory of this invention to an obscure Genoese pilot.

who make an IT required all Columbus's patience and address to nego-
unfavourable
report con- ciate with men capable of advancing such strange propositions.
cerning it. He had to contend not only with the obstinacy of ignorance,

but with what is still more intractable, the pride of false know-
ledge. After innumerable conferences, and wafting five years
in fruitless endeavours to inform and to satisfy them, Talavera,
at last, made such an unfavourable report to Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella, as induced them to acquaint Columbus, that until the
war with the Moors should be brought to a period, it was im-
possible for them to engage in any new and expensive enter-
prise.

WHATEVER care was taken to soften the harshness of this

declaration, Columbus confidered it as a final rejection of his
proposals. But happily for mankind, that superiority of ge-
nius, which is capable of forming great and uncommon de-
signs, is usually accompanied with an ardent enthusiasm, which
can neither be cooled by delays, nor damped by disappointment.
Columbus was of this sanguine temper. Though he felt
deeply the cruel blow given to his hopes, and retired immedi-
ately from a court, where he had been amused so long with
vain expectations, his confidence in thejuftnefs of his own fyfiem
did not diminish, and his impatience to demonfirate the truth
of it by an actual experiment became greater than ever. Hav-
ing courted the protection of sovereign fiates without success,
he applied, next, to persons of inferior rank, and addressed
fuccefively the dukes of Medina Sidonia, and Medina Celi,
who, though fubjcets, were possessed of power and opulence

more

more than equal to the enterprise which he projeaed. His o o K
negociations with them proved as fruitless, as those in which - _,
he had been hitherto engaged; for there noblemen were either
as little convinced by Columbus's arguments as their superiors,
or they weie afraid of alarming the jealousy, and offending the
pride of Ferdinand, by countenancing a scheme, which he had
rejected .

AMID the painful sensations occasioned by such a fuccef- Negociation

sion of disappointments, Columbus had to sustain the additional in L ngland.
distress, of having received no accounts of his brother, whom
he had sent to the court of England. In his voyage to that
country, Bartholomew had been so unfortunate as to fall into
the hands of pirates, who having firipped him of every thing,
detained him a prisoner for several years. At length, he made
his escape, and arrived in London, but in such extreme indi-
gence, that he was obliged to employ himself during a confi-
derable time, in drawing and felling maps, in order to pick up as
much money as would purchase a decent dress, in which he
might venture to appear at court. He then laid before the
king the proposals, with which he had been entrufled by his
brother, and, notwithstanding Henry's excessive caution and
parsimony, which renider6d him averse to new and expensive
undertakings, he received Columbus's overtures, with more
approbation, than any monarch to whom they had hitherto
been presented.

MEAN WHILE, Columbus being unacquainted with his bro- Coluniut
ther's fate, and having now no profpeat of encouragement in la.",

piofpcts of
cncouragc-
mentin

" Life of Column c. 1 3. Icerrcra, dec. I. lib. i. c, 7. Spain.
VOL, I. L Spain,

B O K Spain, resolved to visit the court of England in person, in

t/c hopes of meeting with a more favourable reception there. He

had already made preparations for this purpose, and taken
measures for the disposal of his children during his absence,
when Juan Perez, the Prior of the monastery of Rabida, near
Palos, in which they had been educated, earnefily solicited him
to defer his journey for a short time. Perez was a man of con-
fiderable learning, and of some credit with queen Isabella, to
whom he was known personally. He was warmly attached to
Columbus, with whose abilities as well as integrity he had
many opportunities of being acquainted. Prompted by curio-
fity or by friendship, he entered upon an accurate examination
of his system, in conjunction with a physician fettled in the
neighbourhood, who was a considerable proficient in mathema-
tical knowledge. This investigation satisfied them so tho-
roughly, with refped to the solidity of the principles on
which Columbus founded his opinion, and the probability of
success in executing the plan which he proposed, that Perez, in
order to prevent his country from being deprived of the glory
and benefit, which mufi accrue to the patrons of such a grand
enterprise, ventured to write to Isabella, conjuring her to con-
fider the matter anew, with the attention which it merited.

MOVED by the representations of a person whom {he re-

fpeCaed, Isabella desired Perez to repair immediately to the vil-
lage of Santa Fe, in which, on account of the siege of Gra-
nada, the court resided at that time, that ihe might confer with
him upon this important subjee. The first effed of their in-
1491. terview was a gracious invitation of Columbus back to court,

accompanied with the present of a fmnall fum to equip him for
the journey. As there was now a certain profpe6l, that the

war

war with the Moors would speedily be brought to an happy B o0 I1
issue by the reduction of Granada, which would leave the na-
tion at liberty to engage in new undertakings ; this, as well as
the mark of royal favour, with which Columbus had been
lately honoured, encouraged his friends to appear with greater
confidence than formerly in support of his scheme. The chief
of these, Alonfo de Quintanilla, comptroller of the finances in
Castile, and Louis de Santangel, receiver of the ecclefiafiical
revenues in Aragon, whose meritorious zeal in promoting this
great design, entitles their names to an honourable place in
history, introduced Columbus to many persons of high rank,
and interefled them warmly in his behalf

BUT it was not an easy matter to inspire Ferdinand with Is again dif-

favourable sentiments. His cold diftruflful prudence still re- appointed.
garded Columbus's project as extravagant and chimerical,
and in order to render the efforts of his partizans ineffectual,
he had the address to employ in this new negociation with him,
Come of the persons who had formerly pronounced his scheme
to be impracticable. To their aflonifhment, Columbus appeared
before them with the fame confident hopes of success as for-
merly, and insisted upon the fame high recompence. He pro-
posed that a small fleet should be fitted out, under his command,
to attempt the discovery, and demanded to be appointed perpe-
tual and hereditary admiral and viceroy of all the seas and lands
which he should discover, and to have the tenth of the profits
arising from them, fettled irrevocably upon himself and his
descendants. At the fame time, he offered to advance the
eight part of the fum necessary for accomplishing his design,
on condition that he should be entitled to a proportional flarc
of benefit from the adventure. If the enterprize flould

L 2 totally

B OO K totally miscarry, he made no stipulation for any reward or

11.

_- ^ emolument whatever. Instead of viewing this conduct as the

clearest evidence of his full persuasion with refpedt to the truth
of his own system, or being struck with that magnanimity,
which, after so many delays and repulses, would sloop to no-
thing inferior to its original claims, the persons with whom
Columbus treated, began meanly to calculate the expence of
the expedition, and the value of the reward which he de-
manded. The expence, moderate as it was, they represented
to be too great for Spain, in the present exhausted state of its
finances. They contended, that the honours and emoluments
claimed by Columbus, were exorbitant, even if he should per-
form the utmofi of what he had promised; and if all his fan-
guine hopes should prove illusive, such vast concessions to an
adventurer would be deemed not only inconsiderate, but ridi-
culous. In this imposing garb of caution and prudence, their
opinion appeared so plausible, and was so warmly supported by
Ferdinand, that Isabella declined giving any countenance to Co-
lurbus, and abruptly broke off the negociation with him which
The had begun.

THIS was more mortifying to Columbus than all the difap-

pointments which he had hitherto met with. The invitation
to court from Isabella, like an unexpected ray of light, had
opened such profpeds of success, as encouraged him to hope
that his labours were at an end; but now darkness and uncer-
tainty returned, and his mind, firm as it was, could hardly
support the shock of such an unforeseen reverse. He withdrew
in deep anguish from court, with an intention of prosecuting
his voyage to England, as his last resource.

ABOUT

ABOUT that time Granada surrendered, and Ferdinand and B o o K

Isabella, in triumphal pomp, took possession of a city, the re- ,
duation of which extirpated a foreign power from the heart of Proves ;t lai
their dominions, and rendered them maiers of all the provinces, 1492,
extending from the bottom of the Pyrenees to the frontiers of J
Portugal. As the flow of spirits which accompanies success
elevates the mind, and renders it enterprising, Q()intanilla and
Santangel, the vigilant and discerning patrons of Columbus,
took advantage of this favourable situation, in order to make
one effort more in behalf of their friend. They addresscd
themselves to Isabella, and, after exprefling some surprise, that
she, who had always been the munificent patroness of gene-
rous undertakings, should hesitate so long to countenance the
most splendid scheme that had ever been proposed to any mc-
narch, they reprfesnted to her, that Columbus was a man of a
found underfianding and virtuous character, well qualified, by
his experience in navigation, as well as his knowledge of
geometry, to form jufi ideas with refpet to the ftruóture of
the globe and the situation of its various regions; that, by of-
fering to risk his own life and fortune in the execution of his
scheme, he gave the mofi satisfying. evidence both of his inte-
grity and hope of success; that the fum requisite for equipping
such an armament as he demanded was inconsiderable, and the
advantages which might accrue from his undertaking were im-
mense; that he demanded no recompence for his invention and
labour, but what was to arise from the countries which he
should discover; that, as it was worthy of her magnanimity to
make this noble attempt to extend the sphere of human know-
ledge, and to open an intercourse with regions hitherto un-
known, so it would afford the highest fatisfaaion to her piety
and zeal, after re-efiablifling the Christian faith in those pro-

vinlCCe

B OO°K vinces of Spain from which it had been long banished, to dif-
; .--. cover a new world, to which she might communicate the light
1492' and blefflings of divine truth; that if now she did not decide

inflantly, the opportunity would be loft irretrievably; that
Columbus was on his way to foreign countries, where some
prince, more fortunate or adventurous, would close with his
proposals, and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal timidity
which had excluded her from the glory' and advantages that
/he had once in her power to have enjoyed.

THESE forcible arguments, urged by persons of such autho-

rity, and at a juncture so well chosen, produced the desired es-
sect. They dispelled all [fabella's doubts and fears; (he ordered
Columbus to be instantly recalled, declared her resolution of
employing him on his own terms, and regretting the low slate
of her finances, generously offered to pledge her own jewels,
in order to raise as much money as would be needed in making
preparations for the voyage. Santangel, in a transport of gra-
titude, kilTed the queen's hand, and in order to save her from
having recourse to such a mortifying expedient for procuring
money, engaged to advance immediately the fun that was
requisite °.

Thecondi- COLUMBUS had proceeded some leagues on his journey,
agieef his when the messenger from Isabella overtook him. Upon re-
with Spain. ceiving an account of the unexpected revolution in his favour,

he returned directly to Santa Fe, though some remainder of
diffidence still mingled itself with his joy. But the cordial re-
ception which he met with from Isabella, together with the
near profpet of setting out upon that voyage which had so long
been the objea of his thoughts and wishes, soon effaced the

o Hcrrera, dec. , lib. i. c. 8.

remembrance

remembrance of all that he had suffered in Spain, during eight B 0 0 K
tedious years of solicitation and suspense. The negociation now
went forward with facility and dispatch, and a treaty or capi- 3492.
tulation with Columbus was signed on the seventeenth of April,
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two. The chief articles
of it were, i. Ferdinand and Isabella, as sovereigns of the
ocean, constituted Columbus their high admiral in all the seas,
islands, and continents which ihould be discovered by his in-
dufiry; and flipulated, that he and his heirs for ever ihould
enjoy this office, with the fame powers and prerogatives
which belonged to the high admiral of Castile, within the
limits of his jurifdidion. 2. They appointed Columbus
their viceroy in all the islands and continents which he should
discover; but if, for the better administration of affairs, it
should hereafter be necessary to establish a separate governor
in any of those countries, they authorised Columbus to name
three persons, of whom they would chute one for that office;
and the dignity of viceroy, with all its immunities, was like-
wife to be hereditary in the family of Columbus. 3. They
granted to Columbus and his heirs for ever the tenth of the
free profits accruing from the productions and commerce of the
countries which he should discover. 4. They declared, that if
any controversy or law-suit shall arise with refped to any mer-
cantile tranfalion in the countries which should be discovered,
it should be determined by the sole authority of Columbus, or
of judges to be appointed by him. 5. They permitted Columbus
to advance one-eighth part of what should be expended in pre-
paring for the expedition, and in carrying on commerce with
the countries which he should discover, and intitled him, in
return, to an eighth part of the profit P.

P- Life of Columbus, c. 15. Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 9.

THOUGH

B 0 0 K THOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears conjoined with that

11. .--. of Isabella in this tranfadion, his difiruft of Columbus was fiill
I' 92' so violent, that he refused to take any part in the enterprise, as

king of Aragon. As the whole expence of the expedition was
to be defrayed by the crown of Castile, Isabella reserved for her
fubjedts of that kingdom an exclusive right to all the benefits
which might redound from its success.

The prepa- As loon as the treaty was signed, Isabella, by her attention
rationb for
tis voyage. and ativity in forwarding the preparations for the voyage,

endeavoured to make some reparation to Columbus for the
time which he had loft in fruitless solicitation. By the twelfth
of May, all that depended upon her was adjusted; and Colum-
bus waited on the king and queen, in order to receive their
final inftrutions. Every thing refpeaing the deflination and
'conduc of the voyage, they committed implicitly to the disposal
of his prudence. But, that they might avoid giving any just
cause of offence to the king of Portugal, they firidly enjoined
him not to approach near to the Portuguese settlements on the
coast of Guinea, nor in any of the other countries to which
they claimed right as discoverers. Isabella had ordered the
ships, of which Columbus was to take the command, to be fit-
ted out in the port of Palos, a small maritime town in the pro-
vince of Andalusia. As the prior Juan Perez, to whom Co-
lumbus had already been so much indebted, resided in the
neighbourhood of this place, he, by the influence of that good
ecclesiastic, as well as by his own connection with the inha-
bitants, not only raised among them what he wanted of the
fum that he was bound by treaty to advance, but engaged
fevcral of them to accompany him in the voyage. The chief
of there associates were three brothers of the name of Pinzon,

of

of considerable wealth, and of great experience in naval as- B 0 K
fairs, who were willing to hazard their lives and fortunes in -
the enterprise. '492'

BUT, after all the endeavours and efforts of Isabella and

Columbus, the armament was not suitable either to the dignity
of the nation by which it was equipped, or to the importance of
the service for which it was destined. It confifed of three vcf--
fels only. The largest, a ship of no considerable burden, was
commanded by Columbus, as admiral, who gave it the name
of Santa Maria, out ofrefpeEt for the Blessed Virgin, lwho:! he
honoured with singular devotion. Of the second, called the
Pinta, Martin Pinzon was captain, and his brother Francis pilot.
The third, named the Nigna, was under the command of Vin-
cent Yanez Pinzon. These two were light vessels, hardly
superior in burden or force to large boats. This squadron, if
it merits that name, was vidualed for twelve months, and had
on board ninety men, mostly tailors, together with a few ad-
venturers, who followed the fortune of Columbus, and fore
gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom (he appointed to accompany
him. Though the expence of the undertaking was one of the
circumfiances that chiefly alarmed the court of Spain, and re-
tarded so long the negotiation with Columbus, the fum em-
ployed in fitting out this squadron did not exceed four tioulanct
pounds.

As the art of flipbuilding in the fifteenth century was ex-

tremely rude, and the bulk and conflrudion of vcftels were
accommodated to the short and easy voyages along the conil.
which they were accuflomed to perform, it is a proof of
the courage as well as enterprising genius of Columbus, that

VOL. I. M he

13 o0 K he ventured, with a fleet so unfit for a diflant navigation, to

.._ explore unknown seas, where he had no chart to guide him,
A'49/ no knowledge of the tides and currents, and no experience of

the dangers to which he might be exposed. His eagerness to
accomplifll the great design which had so long engrossed his
thoughts, made him overlook or disregard every circumflance
that would have intimidated a mind less adventurous. He
pufhied forward the preparations with such ardour, and was
seconded so effectually by the persons to whom Isabella com-
mitted the superintendence of this business, that every thing
was soon in readiness for the voyage. But as Columbus was
deeply impressed with fentirents of religion, he would not set
out upon an expedition so arduous, and of which one great
objet was to extend the knowledge of the Chriflian faith,
without imploring publicly the guidance and protection of
Heaven. With this view, he, together with all the persons
under his command, marched in solemn procession to the mo-
naflery of Rabida. After confessing their fins, and obtaining
absolution from them, they received the holy sacrament from
the hands of the prior, who joined his prayers to theirs for the
success of an enterprifc which he had so zealously patronized.

IIi depnrture NEXT morning, being Friday the third day of August, in
!: ,;S pain. the year one thousand four hundred and ninety-two, Columbus

set fail, a little before sun-rise, in presence of a vast crowd of
fpedators, who sent up their supplications to Heaven for the
profpcrous ifluc of the voyage, which they wished, rather than
cxpcald. Columbus fleered direcly for the Canary Islands,
Au;.al 1 3. and arrived there without any occurrence that would have de-

served notice on any other occasion. But in a voyage of such
cxpctation and importance, every circumflancc was the objec

of

of attention. The rudder of the Pinta broke loose, the day as- B I OK
ter they left the harbour, and that accident alarmed the crew, --
no less superstitious than unskilful, as a certain omen of the '4
unfortunate defliny of the expedition. Even in the short run
to the Canaries, the ships were found to be so crazy and ill ap-
pointed, as to be very improper for a navigation which was
expected to be both long and dangerous. Columbus refitted
them, however, to the best of his power, and having supplied
himself with fresh provisions, he took his departure from Go-
mera, one of the most weflerly of the Canary Islands, on the
sixth day of September.

HERE the voyage of diScovery may properly be said to begin ; The cotirF

which he

for Columbus holding his course due weft, left immediately the ,.1
usual trad of navigation, and firetched into unfrequented and
unknown seas. The first day, as it was very calmr, he made
but little way but on the second, he loft fight of the Cana-
ries; and many of the tailors, dejeQEed already and dismayed,
when they contemplated the boldness of the undertaking, be-
gan to beat their breasts, and to shed tears, as if they were
never more to behold land. Columbus comforted them with
assurances of success, and the profped of vail wealth, in those
opulent regions whither he was conducting them. This early
discovery of the spirit of his followers taught Columbus, that
he mufl prepare to struggle, not only with the unavoidable dif-
ficulties which might be expeted from the nature of his under-
taking, but with such as were likely to arise from the ignorance
and timidity of the people under his command ; and he per-
ceived that the art of governing the minds of men would be no
less requisite for accomplishing the discoveries which he had in
view, than naval skill and an enterprising courage. Happily

M 2 for

B 0 o K for himself, and for the country by which he was employed,

---^ he joined to the ardent temper and inventive genius of a pro-
'4)2" jetor, virtues of another species, which are rarely' united with

them. He possessed a thorough knowledge of mankind, an
insinuating address, a patient perseverance in executing any
plan, the perfect government of his own paifions, and the ta-
lent of acquiring the direction of those of other men. All there
qualities, which formed him for command, were accompanied
with that superior knowledge of his profession, which begets

viglance confidence in times of difficulty and danger. To unskilful
anid attention
otColu.rbus. Spanish sailors, accuflomed only to coasting voyages in the

Mediterranean, the maritime science of Columbus, the fruit of
thirty years experience, improved by an acquaintance with all
the inventions of the Portuguese, appeared immense. As soon
as they put to sea, he regulated every thing by his sole autho-
rity; he superintended the execution of every order; and al-
lowing himself only a few hours for sleep, he was at all other
times upon deck. As his course lay through seas which had
not formerly been visited, the founding-line, or infiruments
for observation, were continually in his hands. After the ex-
ample of the Portuguese discoverers, he attended to the motion
of tides and currents, watched the flight of birds, the appear-
ance of fifles, of sea-weeds, and of every thing that floated on
the waves, and entered every occurrence, with a minute exat-
ness, in the journal he which kept. As the length of the
voyage could not fail of alarming sailors habituated only to
flort excursions, Columbus endeavoured to conceal from them
the real progrcfs which they made. With this view, though they
run eighteen leagues on the second day after they left Gomera,
he gave out that they had advanced only fifteen, and he uni-
formly employed the fame artifice of reckoning short during

the
4

the whole voyage. By the fourteenth of September, the fleet B o o K
was above two hundred leagues to the weft of the Canary Isles,
at a greater distance from land than any Spaniard had been A;pt49zn
before that time. There they were firuck with an appearance sions and a-

larnis of I.j

no less aflonifhing than it was new. They obfcrved, that the crew.
magnetic needle, in their compasses, did not point exacly to
the polar flar, but varied a degree towards the weft; and as
they proceeded, this variation increased. This appearance,
which is now familiar, though it frill remains one of the myfle-
ries of nature, into the cause of which the sagacity of man
hath not been able to penetrate, filled the companions of Co-
lumbus with terror. They were now in a boundless unknown
ocean, far from the usual course of navigation; nature itself
seemed to be altered, and the only guide which they had left
was about to fail them. Columbus, with no less quickness
than ingenuity, invented a reason for this appearance, which,
though it did not satisfy himself, seemed so plausible to them,
as dispelled their fears, or silenced their murmurs.

HE still continued to fleer due weft, nearly in the fame lati-

tude with the Canary flands. In this course he came within
the sphere of the trade wind, which blows invariably from eaif
to weft, between the tropics and a few degrees beyond them.
He advanced before this steady gale with such uniform rapidity,
that it was seldom necessary to shift a fail. When about four
hundred leagues to the weft of the Canaries, he found the sea
so covered with weeds, that it had a resemblance to a meadow
of vai extent; and in some places they were so thick, as to
retard the motion of the vessels. This firange appearance oc-
cafioned new alarm and disquiet. The tailors imagined that
they were now arrived at the utmost boundary of the navigable

ocean .

B 0 K ocean; that these floating weeds would obftrua their farther

.-i- progress, and concealed dangerous rocks, or some large trad
I492. of land, which had funk, they knew not how, in that place.

Columbus endeavoured to persuade them, that the appearance
which had alarmed, ought rather to have encouraged them,
and was to be confidered as a sign of approaching land. At
the fame time, a brisk gale arose, and carried them forward.
Several birds were seen hovering about the ship ', and direct-
ing their flight towards the weft. The desponding crew re-
fumed some degree of spirit, and began to entertain fresh
hopes.

Thcfc in. UPON the first of Ocober they were, according to the ad-
cle'se. miral's reckoning, seven hundred and seventy leagues to the

weft of the Canaries, but left his men should be intimidated by
the prodigious length of the navigation, he gave out that they
had proceeded only five hundred and eighty-four leagues; and,
fortunately for Columbus, neither his own pilot, nor those of
the other ships, had skill sufficient to correct this error, and
discover the deceit. They had now been above three weeks at
sea; they had proceeded far beyond what former navigators
had attempted or deemed possible; all their prognostics of dif-
covery, drawn from the flight of birds and other circumfiances,
had proved fallacious; the appearances of land, with which
their own credulity or the artifice of their commander had from
time to time flattered and amused them, had been altogether
illusive, and their profpedt of success seemed now to be as dif-
tant as ever. These reflections occurred often to men, who
had no other object or occupation, than to reason and discourse
concerning the intention and circumstances of their expedition,

Sec NOTIE XIII.

They

They made impression, at first, upon the ignorant and timid, u o o:.
and extending, by degrees, to such as were better informed
or more resolute, the contagion spread at length from ihip to 49
ship. From secret whispers and murmurings, they proceeded
to open cabals and public complaints. They taxed their fove-
reign with inconsiderate credulity, in paying such regard to the
vain promises and rash conjetures of an indigent foreigner, as
to hazard the lives of so many of her own fubjedls, in prose-
cuting a chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they had fully
performed their duty, by venturing so far in an unknown and
hopeless course, and could incur no blame for refuting, at lafi,
to follow a desperate adventurer to certain deftrution. They
contended, that it was necessary to think of returning to Spain,
while their crazy vessels were fiill in a condition to keep the
sea, but expressed their fears that the attempt would prove vain,
as the wind, which had hitherto been so favourable to their
course, mufi render it impossible to fail in the opposite direction.
All agreed that Columbus should be compelled by force to adopt
a measure on which their common safety depended. Some of
the more audacious proposed, as the most expeditious and cer-
tain method for getting rid at once of his remonstrances, to
throw him into the sea, being persuaded that, upon their return
to Spain, the death of an unsuccessful projecor would excite
little concern, and be inquired into with no curiosity.

COLUMBUS was fully sensible of his perilous situation. He The:drcrs

had obfcrvcd, with great concern, the fatal operation of igno- f'

~ o;lrnl,

rance and of fear in producing difaffEtion among his crew, and them.
saw that it was now ready to burst out into open mutiny. He
retained, however, perfet pretence of mind. He aflecled to
teem ignorant of their machinations. Notwithfianding the

ag itation

n o o K agitation and solicitude of his own mind, he appeared with a

11.^ cheerful countenance, like a man satisfied with the progress
14 9Z. which he had made, and confident of success. Sometimes he

employed all the arts of insinuation to soothe his men. Some-
times he endeavoured to work upon their ambition or avarice,
by magnificent descriptions of the fame and wealth which they
were about to acquire. On other occasions, he assumed a tone
of authority, and threatened them with vengeance from their
Sovereign, if, by their daflardly behaviour, they should defeat
this noble effort to promote the glory of God, and to exalt the
Spanish name above that of every other nation. Even with
seditious sailors, the words of a man whom they had been ac-
cuflomed to reverence, were weighty and persuasive. They
not only refrained them from those violent excesses, which
they meditated, but prevailed with them to accompany their
admiral for some time longer.
Their fears AS they proceeded, the indications of approaching land

ICUn. seemed to be more certain, and excited hope in proportion.

The birds began to appear in flocks, making towards the
fouth-wefi. Columbus, in imitation of the Portuguese navi-
gators, who had been guided, in several of their discoveries, by
the motion of birds, altered his course from due weft towards
that quarter whither they pointed their flight. But, after
holding on for several days in this new direction, without any
better success than formerly, having seen no object, during
thirty days, but the sea and the sky, their hopes fubtided
fafler than they had risen ; their fears revived with additional
force; impaticnce, rage, and despair, appeared in every coun-

'-v'",: r as tcnancc. All sense of Subordination was loft: the officers, who
'":'"Y' hiad hitherto concurred with Columbus in opinion, and sup-

ported

ported his authority, now took part with the men; they as- B 0 K
fembled tumultuously on the deck, expoflulated with their com- -v
mander, mingled threats with their expostulations, and re-
quired him inflantly to tack about and return to Europe. Co-
lumbus perceived that it would be of no avail to have recourse
to any of his former arts, which having been tried so often,
had loft their effeEs; and that it was impossible to rekindle
any zeal for the success of the enterprise among men, in whose
breasts fear had extinguished every generous sentiment. He
saw that it was no less vain to think of employing either gentle Diar-cfs of
or severe measures, to quell a mutiny so general and so violent. Lolu"bus'
It was necessary, on all these accounts, to soothe paflions which
he could no longer command, and to give way to a tor-
rent too impetuous to be checked. He promised solemnly to
his men that he would comply with their request, provided
they would accompany him, and obey his commands for three
days longer, and if, during that time, land were not disco-
vered, he would then abandon the enterprise, and direCt his
course towards Spainr.

ENRAGED as the sailors were, and inpatient to turn their Enrcouragin

faces again towards their native country, this proposition did tlucrcrC
not appear to them unreasonable. Nor did Columbus hazard
much in confining himself to a term so short. Tie presages
of discovering land were now so numerous and promising, that
he deemed them infallible. For some days the founding line
reached the bottom, and the foil which it brought up indicated
land to be at no great distance. The flocks of birds increased,
and were composed not only of sea fowl, but of such land

r Oviedo, Hifi. ap. Ramur. vol. iii. p. 81. E.
VOL. 1. N birds

B o0 o birds as could not be supposed to fly far from the shore.

The crew of the Pinta observed a cane floating, which seemed
to have been newly cut, and likewise a piece of timber artifi-
cially carved. The sailors aboard the Nigna took up the branch
of a tree with red berries, perfectly fresh. The clouds around
the setting fun assumed a new appearance; the air was more
mild and warm, and, during night, the wind became unequal
and variable. From all these symptoms, Columbus was so con-
fidcnt of being near land, that on the evening of the eleventh
of OCtober, after public prayers for success, he ordered the
fails to be furled, and the ships to lie by, keeping ftric watch,
left they should be driven ashore in the night. During this
interval of fufpence and expectation, no man shut his eyes,
all kept upon deck, gazing intently towards that quarter
where they expeEled to discover the land, which had been so
long the objet of their wishes.

Land disco- ABOUT two hours before midnight, Columbus, flanding on
v(tc'd. the forecafile, observed a light at a difiance, and privately

pointed it out to Pedro Guttierez, a page of the queen's ward-
robe. Gutticrez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comptroller
of the fleet, all three saw it in motion, as if it were carried
from place to place. A little after midnight, the joyful found
of land, land, was heard from the Pinta, which kept always
a-head of the other ships. But, having been so often deceived
by fallacious appearances, they were now become flow of be-
lief, and waited, in all the anguifli of uncertainty and impa-

l.v, licncc, for the return of day. As soon as morning dawned,
(': 1' 2. their doubts and fears were dispelled, they beheld an island

about two leagues to the north, whose flat and verdant fields,
well flored with wood, and watered with many rivulets, pre-

sentcd

sented to them the aspet of a delightful country. The crew B °0 K
of the Pinta inflantly began the Te Deum, as a hymn of thanks- -^-
giving to God, and were joined by those of the other fliips,
with tears of joy and transports of congratulation. This office
of gratitude to Heaven was followed by an ad of jufice to their
commander. They threw themselves at the feet of Columbus,
with feelings of self condemnation mingled with reverence.
They implored him to pardon their ignorance, incredulity, and
insolence, which had created him so much unnecessary disquiet,
and had so often obtlruded the prosecution of his well-concerted
plan; and parting, in the warmth of their admiration, from
one extreme to another, they now pronounced the man, whom
they had so lately reviled and threatened, to be a pcrfon infpir-
ed by Heaven with sagacity and fortitude more than human,
in order to accomplish a design, so far beyond the ideas and
conception of all former ages.

As soon as the fun arose, all the boats were manned and First inter-

view with the

armed. They rowed towards the island with their colours dif- r.ti
played, warlike music, and other martial pomp; and as they
approached the coafi, they saw it covered with a multitude of
people, whom the novelty of the fpedacle had drawn together,
and whose attitudes and geflures expressed wonder and aflonifh-
ment at the flrange objects which presented thcmfelvcs to their
view. Columbus was the first European who set foot in the
New World which he had discovered. He landed in a rich dcrcfs,
and with a naked sword in his hand. His men followed, and
kneeling down, they all kiifed the ground which they had to
long desired to fee. They next ercóted a crucifix, and pro -
firating themselves before it, returned thanks to God for con-
ducling their voyage to such an happy iffuc. They then took

N 2 folinnl

B O O K solemn possession of the country for the crown of Castile and

y-h Leon, with all the formalities which the Portuguese were ac-

cuffomed to observe in ads of this kind, in their new disco-
veries '.

Theirinutual THE Spaniards, while thus employed, were surrounded by
aflonilhmcnt.

many of the natives, who gazed, in silent admiration, upon
astions which they could not comprehend, and of which they
did not foresee the consequences. The dress of the Spaniards,
the whiteness of their ikins, their beards, their arms, appeared
firange and surprising. The vast machines in which they had
traversed the ocean, that seemed to move upon the waters with
wings, and uttered a dreadful found resembling thunder, ac-
companied with lightning and smoke, firuck them with such
terror, that they began to refped their new guests as a superior
order of beings, and concluded that they were children of the
Sun, who had descended to visit the earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at the scene now

before them. Every herb, and flirub, and tree, was different
from those which flourished in Europe. The foil seemed to be
rich, but bore few marks of cultivation. The climate, even
to Spaniards, felt warm, though extremely delightful. The
inhabitants appeared in the simple innocence of nature, en-
tirely naked. Their black hair, long and uncurled, floated
upon their shoulders, or was bound in tresses around their
heads. They had no beards, and every part of their bodies
was perfcaly smooth. Their complexion was of a dusky cop-
per colour, their features singular, rather than disagreeable,
their aspcd gentle and timid. Though not tall, they were

' ife of C(olunihu, c, 22, 23. IHerrern, de:. i. lb. i. c. ;3.

well

well shaped, and acive. Their faces, and other parts of their B o o K
body, were fantaflically painted with glaring colours. They ,---
were shy at firfi through fear, but soon became familiar with
the Spaniards, and with transports of joy received from them
hawks-bells, glass beads, and other baubles, in return for
which they gave such provisions as they had, and some
cotton yarn, the only commodity of value that they could
produce. Towards evening, Columbus returned to his [hips,
accompanied by many of the islanders in their boats, which
they called canoes, and though rudely formed out of the trunk
of a single tree, they rowed them with surprising dexterity.
Thus, in the first interview between the inhabitant of the old
and new worlds, every thing was conduEted amicably, and tco
their mutual fatisfadion. The former, enlightened and am-
bitious, formed already vail ideas with refpe&t to the advantages
which they might derive from those regions that began to open
to their view. The latter, simple and undifcerning, had no
foresight of the calamities and desolation which were now ap-
proaching their country.

COLUMBUS, who now assumed the title and authority of Coi I,; I.

fime :he

admiral and viceroy, called the island which he had discovered tilic ',o ','
San Salvador. It is better known by the name of Guanahani, mirni al:
which the natives gave to it, and is one of that large cluster
of islands called the Lucaya or Bahama isles. It is situated
above three thousand miles to the weft of Gomera, from which
the squadron took its departure, and only four degrees to the
south of it; so little had Columbus deviated from the wcfierly
course, which he had chosen as the most proper.

COLUMBUS employed the next day in visiting the coafs of Procc.: to
the island; and from the univcrfal poverty of the inhabitants, south.

he

B 0 O I he perceived that this was not the rich country for which he
t_.~-~.~ fought. But, conformably to his theory concerning the dif-

covery of those regions of Asia which firetched towards the east,
he concluded that San Salvador was one of the isles which
geographers described as situated in the vast ocean adjacent to
India'. Having observed that most of the people whom he
had seen wore small plates of gold, by way of ornament, in
their nofirils, he eagerly inquired where they got that precious
metal. They pointed towards the south, and made him com-
prehend by signs, that gold abounded in countries situated in
that quarter. Thither he immediately determined to direEt his
course, in full confidence of finding there those opulent regions
which had been the objeEt of his voyage, and would be a re-
compence for all his toils and dangers. He took along with
him seven of the natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring
the Spanish language, they might serve as guides and inter-
preters; and those innocent people confidered it as a mark of
diflindion when they were feleaed to accompany him.

D :covcr: HE saw several islands, and touched at three of the largefi,
C' iba.

on which he beflowed the names of St. Mary of the Conception,
Fernandina, and Isabella. But as their foil, productions, and
inhabitants, nearly resembled those of San Salvador, he made
no flay in any of them. He inquired every where for
gold, and received uniformly for answer, that it was brought
from the south. He followed that course, and soon disco-
vered a country of vast extent, not perfectly level, like
those which he had already visited, but so diversified with
rising grounds, hills, rivers, woods, and plains, that he was
uncertain whether it might prove an ifland,or part of the con-

'Pet. Mart. cpif. 135.

tinent.

tinent. The natives of San Salvador, whom he had on board, ; o O
called it Cuba ; Columbus gave it the name of Juanna. He --,
entered the mouth of a large river with his squadron, and all
the inhabitants fled to the mountains as he approached the shore.
But as he resolved to careen his ships in that place, he font rome
Spaniards, together with one of the people of San Salvador, to
view the interior parts of the country. They, having advanced
above sixty miles from the shore, reported, upon their return,
that the foil was richer and more cultivated than any they
had hitherto discovered; that, besides many scattered cot--
tages, they had found one village, containing above a thou-
sand inhabitants; that the people, though naked, seemed to be
more intelligent than those of San Salvador, but had treated
them with the fame refpedful attention, killing their feet, and
honouring them as sacred beings allied to Heaven; that they
had given them to eat a certain root, the taste of which refem-
bled roasted chefnuts, and likewise a singular species of corn
called maize, which, either when roasted whole or ground into
meal, was abundantly palatable; that there seemed to be no
four-footed animals in the country, but a species of dogs, which
could not bark, and a creature resembling a rabbit, but of a
much smaller size; that they had observed some ornaments cf
gold among the people, but of no great value ".

THESE messengers had prevailed with some of the natives to I-iis cn;.:-c

accompany them, who informed Columbus, that the gold of ,rj t:', 1
which they made their ornaments was found in Cubanacan. By
this word they meant the middle or inland part of Cuba ; but
Columbus, being ignorant of their language, as well as unac-
customed to their pronunciation, and his thoughts running con-

"Life of Columbus, c. 2.-zS. llcrrera, dec. ., lib . i. c. 14.

tinually

B O i 1 tinually upon his own theory concerning the discovery of the
,__- Eafi Indies, he was led, by the resemblance of found, to sup-

pose that they spoke of the Great Khan, and imagined that the
opulent kingdom of Cathay, described by Marco Polo, was not
very remote. This induced him to employ some time in view-
ing the country. He visited almost every harbour, from Porto
del Principe, on the north coafi of Cuba, to the eastern extre-
mity of the island; but, though delighted with the beauty of
the scenes, which every where presented themselves, and
amazed at the luxuriant fertility of the foil, both which, from
their novelty, made a more lively impression upon his imagi-
nation x, he did not find gold in such quantity as was sufficient
to satisfy either the avarice of his followers, or the expectations
of the court to which he was to return. The natives, as much
astonished at his eagerness in quest of gold, as the Europeans
were at their ignorance and Simplicity, pointed towards the east,
where an island which they called Hayti was situated, in which
that metal was more abundant than among them. Columbus
ordered his squadron to bend its course thither; but Martin
Alonfo Pinzon, impatient to be the first who should take pof-
session of the treasures which this country was supposed to con-
tain, quitted his companions, regardless of all the admiral's fig-
nals to flacken fail, until they should come up with him.
1)ircvcrr the COLUMBUS, retarded by contrary winds, did not reach

;til ;lir H-Iayti till the sixth of December. He called the port where

he first touched St. Nicholas, and the island itself Efpagnola,
in honour of the kingdom by which he was employed; and it
is the only country, of those he had yet discovered, which has
retained the name that he gave it. As he could neither meet

x See NOTE XIV.

with

with the Pinta, nor have any intercourse with the inhabitants, B 0D IK
who fled in great confiernation towards the woods, he soon t-
quitted St. Nicholas, and failing along the northern coafi of the
island, he entered another harbour, which he called Concep-
tion. Here he was more fortunate; his people overtook
a woman who was flying from them, and after treating
her with great kindness, difminied her with a present of
such toys as they knew were moll valued in those countries.
The description which she gave to her countrymen of the hu-
manity and wonderful qualities of the firangers; their admira-
tion of the trinkets, which she shewed with exultation ; and
their eagerness to participate of the fame favours; removed all
their fears, and induced many of them to repair to the harbour.
The strange objctós which they beheld, and the baubles which
Columbus beflowed upon them, amply gratified their curiosity
and their wishes. They nearly resembled the people of Guana-
hani and Cuba. They were naked like them, ignorant, and
simple; and seemed to be equally unacquainted with all the
arts which appear most necessary in polished societies; but
they were gentle, credulous, and timid, to a degree which
rendered it easy to acquire the ascendant over them, especially
as their exceflive admiration led them into the fame error
with the people of the other islands, in believing the Spa-
niards to be more than mortals, and descended immediately
from Heaven. They possessed gold in greater abundance
than their neighbours, which they readily exchanged for
bells, beads, or pins; and, in this unequal traffic, both
parties were highly pleated, each confidering themselves as
gainers by the tranfadion. Here Columbus was visited by a
prince or cazique of the country. He appeared with all the
pomp known among a simple people, being carried in a fort

VOL. . O of

B 0 0K of palanquin upon the ihoulders of four men, and attended by

.-^.-. many of his fubjets, who served him with great refped.
x4VJ2 His deportment was grave and fiately, very reserved towards

his own people, but with Columbus and the Spaniards ex-
tremely courteous. He gave the admiral some thin plates of
gold, and a girdle of curious workmanship, receiving in return
presents of small value, but highly acceptable to him Y.

COLUMBUS, fiill intent on discovering the mines which

yielded gold, continued to interrogate all the natives with whom
he had any intercourse concerning their situation. They con-
curred in pointing out a mountainous country, which they
called Cibao, at some diflance from the sea, and farther towards
the east. Struck with this found, which appeared to him the
fame with Cipango, the name by which Marco Polo, and
other travellers to the east, distinguish the islands of Japan,
he no longer doubted with refpedt to the vicinity of the coun-
tries which he had discovered to the remote parts of Asia; and,
in full expetation of reaching soon those regions which had
been the object of his voyage, he direded his course towards the
earl. He put into a commodious harbour, which he called St.
Thomas, and found that difirid to be under the government of
a powerful cazique, named Guacanahari, who, as he after-
wards learned, was one of the five sovereigns among whom the
whole island was divided. He immediately sent messengers to
Columbus, who, in his name, delivered to him the present of a
mask curiously fashioned, with the cars, nose, and mouth of
beaten gold, and invited him to the place of his residence, near
the harbour now called Cape Francois, some leagues towards
the cast. Columbus dispatched fomc of his officers to visit this
prince, who, as he behaved with greater dignity, seemed to

r Life of Columbus, c. 32. llerrera, dec. i. lib. i. . . , &c.

claim

claim more attention. They returned, with such favourable G 0 K

I.

accounts both of the country and of the people, as made Co- -
lumbus impatient for that interview with Guacanahari to which ';92
he had been invited.

HE failed for this purpose from St. Thomas, on the twenty- Ore of h:

fourth of December, with a fair wind, and the sea perfectly sip It
calm; and as, amidst the multiplicity of his occupations, he
had not shut his eyes for two days, he retired at midnight, in
order to take some repose, having committed the helm to the
pilot, with firic injuntions not to quit it for a moment. The
pilot, dreading no danger, carclefsly left the helm to an un-
experienced cabin-boy, and the ship, carried away by a current,
was dashed against a rock. The violence of the shock awakened
Columbus. He ran up to the deck. There, all was confusion
and despair. He alone retained presence of mind. He ordered
some of the sailors to take a boat, and carry out an anchor
astern; but, intfead of obeying, they made off towards the
Nigna, which was about half a league distant. He then com-
manded the maRs to be cut down, in order to lighten the ship;
but all his endeavours were too late; the vessel opened near the
keel, and filled so fast with water, that its lots was inevitable.
The smoothness of the sea, and the timely assistance of boats
from the Nigna, enabled the crew to favc their lives. As Coon as
the islanders heard of this disaster, they crowded to the shore,
with their prince Guacanalari at their head. Inftcad of taking
advantage of the diflrcfs in which they beheld the Spaniards,
to attempt any thing to tliir detriment, they lamented their
misfortune with tears of sincere condolence. Not satisfied with
this unavailing exprefiion of their sympathy, they put to sea
a vail number of canoes, and, under the direction of the

0 2 Spaniards,
/

B 0 0 K Spaniards, affifed in saving whatever could be got out of the
a__-. wreck; and by the united labour of so many hands, almost
'492- every thing of val-ue was carried ashore. As fast as the goods

were landed, Guacanahari in person took charge of them. By
his orders, they were all depositcd in one place, and armed
centinels were posted, who kept the multitude at a diflance,
in order to prevent them not only from embezzling, but from
inspecting too curiously what belonged to their guests z. Next
morning this prince visited Columbus, who was now on board
the Nigna, and endeavoured to console him for his lots, by of-
fering all that he poffefled to repair it a.

Distress of THE condition of Columbus was such, that he flood in need
Columrbus.

of consolation. He had hitherto procured no intelligence of
the Pinta, and no longer doubted but that his treacherous afTo-
ciate had set fail for Europe, that he might have the merit of
carrying the first tidings of the extraordinary discoveries which
they had made, and might so far pre-occupy the ear of their so-
vereign, as to rob him of the glory and reward to which he was
jufily intitled. There remained but one veilel, and that the
smallest and most crazy of the squadron, to traverse such a vast
ocean, and carry so many men back to Europe. Each of those
circumfiances was alarming, and filled the mind of Columbus
with the utmost folicitudc. His desire of overtaking Pinzon,
and of effacing the unfavourable imprlcifons which his mifrc-
presentations might make in Spain, made it necessary to return

RfoIe thither without delay. The difficulty of taking such a number

leave a part
of his crew in of persons aboard the Nigna, confirmed him in an opinion, which
the island.

the fertility of the country, and the gentle temper of the people,
had already induced him to form. He resolved to leave a part

Scc NOTE XV. Ierrera, dec. I, lib, i. c. 18.

of

of his crew in the island, that, by residing there, they might B 0O0 K
learn the language of the natives, fludy their disposition, exa- t.-~
mine the nature of the country, search for mines, prepare for '192'
the commodious settlement of the colony, with which he pro-
posed to return, and thus secure and facilitate the acquisition of
those advantages which he expected from his discoveries. When
he mentioned this to his men, all approved of the design; and
from impatience under the fatigue of a long voyage, from the
levity natural to Sailors, or from the hopes of amassing vast
wealth in a country which afforded such promising specimens
of its riches, many offered voluntarily to be among the num-
ber of those who should remain.

NOTHING was now wanting towards the execution of this Obtains the

content of

scheme, but to obtain the consent of Guacanabari ; and his un- the ati':ls.
suspicious simplicity soon presented to the ad:aii;al a favourable
opportunity of proposing it. Columbus having, in the best
manner he could, by broken words and signs, cxpreffed some
curiosity to know the cause which had moved the islanders to
'fly with fuchl precipitation upon the approach of his flips, he
informed him that the country was much infested by the in-
curfions of certain people, whom he called Carribca7ns, who
inhabited several islands to the south east. These he described
as a fierce and warlike race of men, who delighted in blood,
and devoured the flesh of the prisoners who were so unhappy
as to fall into their hands; and as upon the first appearance of
the Spaniards, they were supposed to be Carribeans, whom the
natives, however numerous, durst not face in battle, they had
recourfc to their usual method of securing their safety, by fly-
ing into the thickest and most impenetrable woods. Guaca-
nahari, while £pcaking of those dreadful invaders, dicfovered

fulch

s o 0 K such symptoms of terror, as well as such consciousness of the

-_, inability of his own people to refifi them, as led Columbus to
t492. conclude that he would not be alarmed at the proposition of

any scheme which afforded him the profpedt of an additional
fecumity againit their attacks. He inflantly offered him the
assistance of the Spaniards to repel his enemies; he engaged to
take him and his people under the protection of the powerful
monarch whom he served, and offered to leave in the island
such a number of his men, as should be sufficient, not only to
defend the inhabitants from future incursions, but to avenge
their pait wrongs.
i.;i DEa fr:. THE credulous prince closed eagerly with the proposal, and

thought himself already safe under the patronage of beings
sprung from Heaven, and superior in power to mortal men.
The ground was marked out for a small fort, which Columbus
called Navidad, because he had landed there on Chrifimas day.
A deep ditch ,-as drawn around it. The ramparts were forti-
sied with pallifades, and the great guns, saved out of the ad-
miral's ship, were planted upon them. In ten days the work
was finiihed; that simple race of men labouring with incon-
fiderate assiduity in erecting this firfi monument of their
own servitude. During this time Columbus, by his caresses
and liberality, laboured to increase the high opinion which the
natives entertained of the Spaniards. But while he endea-
voured to inspire them with confidence in their disposition to
do good, he wished likewise to give them some firiking idea of
their power to punish and destroy such as were the objects of
their just indignation. With this view, in pretence of a vafi
assembly, he drew up his men in order of battle, and made an
ostentatious but innocent display of the sharpness of the Spanish

swords,

swords, of the force of their spears, and the operation of their 1

o o I

cross-bows. These rude people, firangers to the use of iron, .-- ,
and unacquainted with any hostile weapons, but arrows of 1492
reeds pointed with the bones of fishes, wooden swords, and
javelins hardened in the fire, wondered and trembled. Before
this surprise or fear had time to abate, he ordered the great
guns to be fired. The sudden explosion firuck them with such
terror, that they fell flat to the ground, covering their faces
with their hands; and when they beheld the astonishing effect
of the bullets, they concluded that it was impoflible to resist
men, who had the command of such defirudtive instruments,
and who came armed with thunder and lightning against their
enemies.

AFTER giving such imprefflons both of the beneficence and His inltrac-

power of the Spaniards, as might have rendered it easy to pre- tins lfto hose
serve an ascendant over the minds of the natives, Columbus
appointed thirty-eight of his people to remain in the island.
He entrufled the command of these to Diego de Arada, a gen-
tleman of Cordova, investing him with the fame powers which
he himself had received from their Catholic Majesties; and
furnished him with every thing requisite for the subsistence or
defence of this infant colony. He ftricily enjoined them to
maintain concord among themselves, to yield an unreserved
obedience to their cominander, to avoid giving offence to the
natives by any violence or exaction, to cultivate the friendihip
of Guacanahari, but not to put themselves in his power by
firaggling in finall parties, or marching too far from the fort.
He promised to revisit them loon, with such a reinforcement
of strength as might enable them to take full poifeffion of the
country, and to reap all the fruits of their discoveries. In the

mean

o o K mean time, he engaged to mention their names to the king
<_ ~and queen, and to place their merit and services in the most
,' '9 advantageous light

HAVING thus taken every precaution for the security

of the Colony, he left Navidad on the fourth of January,
·a. : one thousand four hundred and ninety-three, and fleering

towards the eafr, discovered, and gave names to most of the
harbours on the northern coast of the island. On the sixth,
he descried the Pinta, and soon came up with her, after a
reparation of more than fix weeks. Pinzon endeavoured to
justify his conduct, by pretending that he had been driven from
his course by firess of weather, and prevented frdm returning
by contrary winds. The admiral, though no firanger to his
perfidious intentions, or the frivolity as well as falsehood of
what he urged in his defence, was so sensible that this was not
a proper time for venturing upon any high strain of authority,
and felt such fatisfation in this junction with his consort,
which delivered him from many disquieting apprehensions,
that lame as Pinzon's apology was, he admitted of it without
difficulty, and reflored him to favour. During his absence
from the admiral, Pinzon had visited several harbours in the
island, had acquired some gold by trafficking with the natives,
but had made no discovery of any importance.

iefolves to FROM the condition of his ships, as well as the temper of his
return to men, Columbus now found it necessary to haflen his return to

Europe. The former, having suffered much during a voyage
of such unusual duration, were extremely leaky. The latter

b Oviedo ap. Ramufio, iii. p. 82. E. Hcrrcra, dec . . ib. i. c. 20. Life of Co-
lumbus, c. 34.

exprefled

cxpreffed the utmnof impatience to revisit their native country, B o o K
from which they had been so long absent, and where they had
things so wonderful and unheard-of to relate. Accordingly, 4193.
on the sixteenth of January, he directed his course towards the
north east, and soon loft fight of land. He had on board some
of the natives, whom he had taken from the different islands
which he discovered; and betides the gold, which was the
chief objeCt of rcfearch, he had colleEted fpccimens of all the
productions which were likely to become fubjeds of commerce
in the fevcral countries, as well as many unknown birds,
and other natural curiosities, which might attract the attention
and excite the wonder of the people. The voyage was pro-
fperous to the fourteenth of February, and they had advanced
near five hundred leagues across the Atlantic Ocean, when the A violent
wind began to rife, and continued to blow with encreafing rage, Rorm arif
which terminated in a furious hurricane. Every expedient that
the naval ikill and experience of Columbus could devise was
employed, in order to save the ships. But it was impossible to
withstand the violence of the storm, and as they were still far
from any land, defirudtion seemed inevitable. The sailors had
recourse to prayers to Almighty God, to the invocation of
faints, to vows and charms, to every thing that religion dic-
tates, or fiperftition suggests to the affrighted mind of man.
No profpea of deliverance appearing, they abandoned them-
selves to despair, and expected every moment to be swallowed
up in the waves. Befidcs the passions which naturally agitate
and alarm the human mind in such awful situations, when cer-
tain death, in one of his most terrible forms, is before it, Co-
lumbus had to endure feelings of distress peculiar to himself.
He dreaded that all knowledge of the amazing discoveries The condu&t
which he had made was now to perish ; mankind were to be ofColumbus.

VOL. I. P deprived

B 0 0 K deprived of every merit that might have been derived from the
- -- happy success of his schemes, and his own name would descend
1493. to posterity as that of a rash deluded adventurer, inflead of be-

ing transmitted with the honour due to the author and con-
dutor of the most noble enterprise that had ever been under-
taken. These reflections extinguished all sense of his own per-
fonal danger. Less affeded with the loss of life, than solicitous
to preserve the memory of what he had attempted and atchiev-
ed, he retired to his cabbin, and wrote, upon parchment, a
short account of the voyage which he had made, of the course
which he had taken, of the situation and riches of the countries
which he had discovered, and of the colony that he had left
there. Having wrapt up this in an oiled cloth, which he in-
closed in a cake of wax, he put it into a cask carefully flopped
up, and threw it into the sea, in hopes that some fortunate
accident might prcferve a deposit of so much importance to the
world .
'rakes shelter AT length Providence interposed, to save a life reserved for

th Azores. other services. The wind abated, the sea became calm, and on

the evening of the fifteenth they discovered land; and though
uncertain what it was, they made towards it. They soon
knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores or western isles, sub-
jedt to the crown of Portugal. There, after a violent contest
with the governor, in which Columbus displayed no less spirit
than prudence, he obtained a supply of fresh provisions, and
whatever else he needed. One circumflance, however, greatly
disquietcd him. The Pinta, of which he had loft fight on the
firfi day of the hurricane, did not appear; he dreaded for some
time that the had foundered at sea, and that all her crew had

I.ifc orColuumb: , c 37. I lrrcra, dec. i. lih ii, c. i, 2. SC: N O' E XVI.

perishcd ·

perihod : afterwards, his former fufplicions recurred, and h :

C o K

became apprehensive that Pinzon had borne away for Spain, -.-
that he might reach it before him, and by giving the firfi ac- 493
count of his discoveries, might obtain some share of his
fa ime.

LN order to prevent this, he left tlhe Azores as soon as the F2b. 24.

Arrives at

weather would permit. At no great diflancc from the coast of LiLfon.
Spain, when almost at the end of his voyage, and beyond the
reach of any difafler, another storm arose, little inferior to the for-
mer in violence; and after driving before it during two days and
two nights, he was forced to take flclter in the river Tagus.
Upon application to the' king of Portugal, he was allowed to Marc'i 4.
come up to Lisbon; and, notwithstanding the envy which it was
natural for the Portuguese to feel, when they beheld another
nation entering upon that province of discovery which they
had hitherto deemed peculiarly their own, and in its first
eflay, not only rivalling but eclipsing their fame, Columbus was
received with all the marks of distinction due to a man who
had performed things so extraordinary and unexpected. The
king admitted him into his pretence, treated him with the
highest refpeEt, and lifiened to the account which he gave of
his voyage with admiration mingled with regret. While Co-
lumbus, on his part, enjoyed the fatisfaqion of dcfcribing the
importance of his discoverics, and of being now able to prove
the solidity of his schemes to those very pcrfons, who, with an
ignorance disgraceful to themrfrlves, and fatal to their country,
had lately rejedted them as the projects of a visionary or de-
signing adventurer''.

d Life of Columbus, c. 40, 41. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 3.

P , CoLUMBUS

B O O K COLUMBUS was so impatient to return Spain, that he re-
<-c- - mained only five days in Lisbon. On the fifteenth of March
Rtu493 he arrived in the port of Palos, seven months and eleven days
Spain. from the time when he set out thence upon his voyage. As

soon as his ship was discovered approaching the port, all
the inhabitants of Palos ran eagerly to the shore, in order
to welcome their relations and fellow-citizens, and to hear
tidings of their voyage. When the prosperous issue of it
was known, when they beheld the strange people, the un-
known animals, and singular productions brought from
the countries which had been discovered, the effusion of
joy was general and unbounded. The bells were rung, the
cannon fired; Columbus was received at landing with royal
honours, and all the people, in solemn processions, accom-
panied him and his crew to the church, where they re-
turned thanks to Heaven, which had so wonderfully conducded
and crowned with success, a voyage of greater length and of
more importance, than had been attempted in any former
age. On the evening of the fame day, he had the fatisfadtion
of feeing the Pinta, which the violence of the tempefi had
driven far to the north, enter the harbour.

Hisreccp THE first care of Columbus was to inform the king and
lion. queen, who were then at Barcelona, of his arrival and success.

Ferdinand and Isabella, no lets afionifhed than delighted with
this unexpected event, returned an answer in terms the most
refpecful and flattering to Columbus, requeffing him to repair
immediately to court, that from his own mouth, they might
receive a full detail of his extraordinary services and discoveries.
During his journey to Barcelona, the people crowded from the
adjacent country, following him every where with admiration

and

and applause. His entrance into the city was conducted, by B 0 0 K
order of Ferdinand and Isabella, with pomp suitable to the
great event, which added such distinguishing lufire to their 143'
reign. The people whom he brought along with him from
the countries which he had discovered, marched first, and by
their singular complexion, the wild peculiarity of their sea-
tures, and uncouth finery, appeared like men of another
species. Next to them were carried the ornaments of gold,
fashioned by the rude art of the natives, the grains of gold
found in the mountains, and dust of the fame metal gathered
in the rivers. After there appeared the various commodities of
the new discovered countries, together with their curious pro-
dudions. Columbus himself closed the procefilon, and attrated
the eyes of all the fpedators, who gazed with admiration on the
extraordinary man,whofefuperiorfagacity and fortitude had con-
ducted their countrymen, by a route concealed from past ages, to
the knowledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella received
him clad in their royal robes, and feated upon a throne, under a
magnificent canopy. When he approached they ilcod up, and
raising him as he kneeled to kifs their hands, commanded him
to take his feat upon a chair prepared for him, and to give a
circumstantial account of his voyage. He delivered it with
a gravity and composure no less suitable to the disposition of the
Spanish nation, than to the dignity of the audience in which
he spoke, and with that modest simplicity which charaderifes
men of superior minds; who, satisfied with having performed
great actions, court not vain applause by an ostentatious display
of their exploits. When he had finished his narration, the
king and queen, kneeling down, offered up a solemn thanks to
Almighty God for the discovery of those new regions, fron

wilichl

*. () o which they expedLed so many advantages to flow in upon the
..___, kingdoms fubjedt to their government. Every mark of ho-

!' ,': nour that gratitude or admiration could fuggelf was conferred

upon Columbus. Letters patent were issued, confirming to
him and to his heirs all the privileges contained in the capitula-
tion concluded at Santa Fe; his family was ennobled; the king
and queen, and, after their example, the courtiers, treated him,
on every occasion, with all the ceremonious iefped paid to per-
sons of the highest rank. But what pleased him mofl, as it
gratified the enterprifin.j activity of his mind, bent continually
upon great objetIs, was an order to equip, without delay, an
armament of such force, as might enable him not only to take
possession of the countries which he had already discovered, but
to go in fearcli of those' more opulent regions, which he flill
confidently cxpedted to find '.

ARonifniment WHILE preparations were making for this expedition, the
ctlf mkind at fame of Columbus's successful voyage spread over Europe, and
his disco-
veries. excited general attention. The multitude, itruck with amaze-

ment when they heard that a new world had been found,
could hardly believe an event so much above their concep-
tion. Men of science, capable of comprehending the na-
ture, and of discerning the effets, of this great discovery,
received the account of it with admiration and joy. They
spoke of it with rapture, and congratulated one another
upon their felicity, in having lived at the period when, by
this extraordinary event, the boundaries of human know-
ledge were so much extended, and such a new field of inquiry

Sc N O T E XVII.
Life of Clumbus, c. 4z, 43. I-Icrrern, dcc. i. lib. ii. c. 3.

and

and observation opened, as would lead mankind to a perfet B 0 0OK

11.

acquaintance with the firudture and productions of the habitable _.-v-`-
globe . Various opinions and conjectures were formed con- 4
cerning the new-found countries, and what division of the
earth they belonged to. Columbus adhered tenaciously to his
original opinion, that they should be reckoned a part of those
vast regions in Asia, comprehended under the general name of
India. This sentiment was confirmed by the observations which
he made concerning the productions of the countries which he
had discovered. Gold was known to abound in India, and he
had met with such promising samples of it in the islands which
he visited, as led him to believe that rich mines of it might be
found. Cotton, another production of the East Indies, was
common there. The pimento of the islands he imagined to be
a species of the Eaft-Indian pepper. He mistook a root, some-
what resembling rhubarb, for that valuable drug, which was
then supposed to be a plant peculiar to the East In..si'. The
birds which he had brought home were adorned A', l the fame
rich plumage that distinguishes those of India. The alligator
of the one country appeared to be the fame with the crocodile
of the other. After weighing all these circumfiances, not only D)itingniflic
the Spaniards, but the other nations of Europe, seem to have lt Zt; ni,
adopted the opinion of Columbus. The countries which ii!-d:-.
he had discovered were confidered as a part of India. In
consequence of this notion, the name of Indies is given to
them by Ferdinand and Isabella, in a ratification of their
former agreement, which was granted to Columnis upon his
return .. '. after the error which gave rife to this opinion
was d .hc true position of the New world Nwas afcer-

'., 134, 135. See NOTE XV11I.
.,... i. c o. Go un, 'ra lli . c. 17.

:cli t' .l,

0 0 K tained, the name has remained, and the appellation of We.l

i_- IIndies is given by all the people of Europe to the country, and

'4y3. that of Indians to its inhabitants.

I :.r:aions THE name by which Columbus distinguished the countries
,o:. C'.. which he had discovered was so inviting; the specimens of their

riches and fertility, which he produced, were so considerable;
and the reports of his companions, delivered frequently with
the exaggeration natural to travellers, so favourable ; that they
excited a wonderful spirit of enterprise among the Spaniards.
Though little accustomed to naval expeditions, they were im-
patient to set out upon another voyage. Volunteers of every
rank solicited to be employed. Allured by the vast profpedts
which opened to their ambition and avarice, neither the length
nor danger of the navigation intimidated them. Cautious as
Ferdinand was, and averse to every thing new or adventurous,
he seemed to have catched the fame spirit with his fubjeds.
Under its influence, preparations for a second expedition were
carried on with a rapidity unusual among the Spaniards, and
to an extent that would be deemed not inconsiderable in the
present age. The fleet confifled of seventeen ships, some of
which were of good burden. It had on board fifteen hundred
persons, among whom were many of noble families, who had
served in honourable stations. The greater part of these being
deflined to remain in the country, they were furnished with every
thing requisite for conquest or settlement, with all kinds of
European domestic animals, with such feeds and plants as were
most likely to thrive in the climate of the Weft Indies, with
utensils and infiruments of every fort, and with such artificers
as might be most useful in an infant colony'.

Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 5. Life of Columbus, c. 45.

BU T,'

BUT, formidable and well provided as this fleet was, For- B 0 0

1.

dinand and Isabella did not reft their title to the poffclion of .---
the newly-difcovered countries upon its operations alone. The .] , ;,93" ,
example of the Portuguese, as well as the superstition of the l) i
age, made it necessary to obtain from the Roman pontiff a crliilm.d by
grant of those territories which they wished to occupy. The th ilr
Pope, as the vicar and representative of Jesus Christ, was sup-
posed to have a right of dominion over all the kingdoms of the
earth. Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every crime that
disgraces humanity, filled the papal throne at that time. As
he was born Ferdinand's fubjedt, and very solicitous to secure the
protecion of that monarch, in order to facilitate the execution
of his ambitious schemes in favour of his own family, he in-
flantly complied with his request. By an adt of liberality which
cofi him nothing, and that served to establish the jurifdidion
and pretensions of the papal fee, he beflowed on Ferdinand and
Isabella all the countries inhabited by Infidels, which they had
discovered, or should discover and in virtue of that power
which he derived from Jesus Christ, he vested in the crown of
Caflile a right to vast regions, to the poffeflion of which he
himfelfwas so far from having any title, that he was unac-
quainted with their situation, and even with their exifgence.
As it was necessary to prevent this grant from interfering witll
that formerly made to the crown of Portugal, he appointed that
a line, supposed to be drawn from pole to pole, a hundred
leagues to the westward of the Azores, flould serve as the limit
between them; and, in the plenitude of his power, conferred
all to the east of this imaginary line upon the Portuguese, and
all to the weft of it upon the Spaniards ". Zeal for propagating
theChriflian faith was theconfiderationemployed byFerdinand in

"' Icrrera, dec. i, lib. ii. c. 4. Torqucmada Mon. Ind. lib. xviii. c. 3.
VoL. I. Q soliciting

B O1 oK Soliciting this bull, and is mentioned by Alexander as his chief
_.-,-.' motive for issuing it. In order to manifest some concern for
"k94" this laudable objed, several friars, under the direcion of Fa-

ther Boyl, a Catalonian monk of great reputation, as apofio-
lical vicar, were appointed to accompany Columbus, and to
devote themselves to the inftruaion of the natives. The Indians
whom Columbus had brought along with him, having received
tome tindure of Christian knowledge, were baptized with
much solemnity, the king himself, the prince his son, and the
chief persons of his court, fianding as their godfathers. Those
first fruits of the New World have not been followed by such
an increase as pious men wished, and had reason to expet.

ScCondv'OY- FERDINAND and Isabella having thus acquired a title, which
age of Co-
lumbus, was then deemed completely valid, to extend their discoveries,

and to eflablifh their dominion over such a vail portion of the
globe, nothing now retarded the departure of the fleet. Co-
lumbus was extremely impatient to revisit the colony which
he had left, and to pursue that career of glory upon which he
had entered. He set fail from the bay of Cadiz on the twenty-
fifth of September, and touching again at the island of Gomera,
he fleered farther towards the south than in his former voyage.
By holding this course, he enjoyed more steadily the benefit of
the regular winds, which reign within the tropics, and was
carried towards a large clufler of islands, situated considerably
to the east of those which he had already discovered. On the
twenty-fixth day after his departure from Gomera, he made
Nov. 2. land . It was one of the Caribbee or Leeward islands, to

which he gave the name of Defeada, on account of the impa-
tience of his crew to discover some part of the New world.

n Oviedo ap. Ramus. iii. 85. B,

After

After this he visited successively Dominica, Marigalante, Gua- B 0 0 K-
dalupe, Antigua, St. John de Porto Rico, and several other .----
islands, scattered in his way as he advanced towards the north- 1493'
weft. All these he found to be inhabited by that fierce race of
people whom Guacanahari had painted in such frightful co-
lours. His descriptions appeared not to have been exaggerated.
The Spaniards, as often as they landed, met with such a re-
ception as convinced them of their martial and daring spirit;
and they discovered in their habitations the relics of those hor-
rid feasts which they had made upon the bodies of their enemies
taken in war.

BUT as Columbus was eager to know the flatc of the colony Arrives a:

which he had planted, and to supply it with those necef- Hifva.T:.
saries of which he supposed it to be in want, he made
no flay in any of those islands, and proceeded directly to
Hispaniola °. When he arrived off Navidad, the flation in
which he had left the thirty-eight men under the command of
Arada, he was astonished that none of them appeared, and
expeced every moment to fee them running with transports of
joy to welcome their countrymen. Full of solicitude about
their safety, and foreboding in his mind what had befallen
them, he rowed inflantly to land. All the natives fiom whom
he might have received information had fled. But the fort
which he had built was entirely demolished, and the tattered
garments, the broken arms and utensils scattered about it, left
no room to doubt concerning the unhappy fate of the garrison P.

° P. Martyr, dec. p. IS. 8. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 7. Lifi of Columibus,
c. 46, &c. P Hilt. de Cura de los Palacios. MS.

Qz While

B o o K While the Spaniards were shedding tears over those fad memo-

_ _ rials of their fellow-citizens, a brother of the cazique Gua-

,lft 3.f canahari arrived. From him Columbus received a particular

T'F C fat: es
the nmn detail of what had happened after his departure from the island.
l horn the left
the :c. The familiar intercourse of the Indians with the Spaniards

tended gradually to diminish the superstitious veneration with
which their firfi appearance had inspired that simple people.
By their own indiscretion and ill conduct, the Spaniards speedily
effaced those favourable impreflions, and soon convinced the
natives, that they had all the wants, and weaknesses, and pas-
sions of men. As soon as the powerful refiraints which the
presence and authority of Columbus imposed was withdrawn,
the garrison threw off all regard for the officer whom he had
invefled with command. Regardless of the prudent inftruc-
tions which he had given them, every man became indepen-
dent, and gratified his desires without controul. The gold,
the women, the provisions of the natives, were all the prey of
those licentious oppressors. They roamed in small parties over
the island, extending their rapacity and insolence to every cor-
ner of it. Gentle and timid as the people were, those unpro-
voked injuries at length exhausted their patience, and rouzed
their courage. The cazique of Cibao, whose territories the
Spaniards chiefly infested on account of the gold which they
contained, surprised and cut off several of them, while they
firaggled in as perfect security as if their conduct had been al-
together inoffensive. He then assembled his fubjeds, and fur-
rounding the fort, set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards were
killed in defending it, the reft perished in attempting to make
their escape by crofling an arm of the sea. Guacanahari, whom
all their cxacions had not alienated from the Spaniards, took

arms

arms in their behalf, and in endeavouring to protect them, had B o 0 K
received a wound, by which he was Rill confined. q

1493.

THOUGH this account was far from removing the suspicions lHis prudccnt

which the Spaniards entertained with respeCt to the fidelity of onL
Guacanahari, Columbus perceived so clearly that this was not
a proper junEure for inquiring into his conduc with fcrupu-
lous accuracy, that he rejeded the advice of several of his offi-
cers, who urged him to seize the person of that prince, and to
revenge the death of their countrymen by attacking his fubjeds.
He represented to them the necessity of securing the friendship
of some potentate of the country, in order to facilitate the set-
tlement which they intended, and the danger of driving the
natives to unite in some desperate attempt against them, by such
an ill-timed and unavailing exercise of rigour. Instead of waft-
ing his time in punishing past wrongs, he took precautions for
preventing any future injury. With this view, he made choice
of a situation more healthy and commodious than that of Navi-
dad. He traced out the plan of a town in a large plain near
a spacious bay, and obliging every person to put his hand to a
work on which their common safety depended, the houses and
ramparts were soon so far advanced by their united labour, as
to afford them shelter and security. This rising city, the firit
that the Europeans founded in the New World, he named Ifa-
bella, in honour of his patroness the queen of Castile .

IN carrying on this necessary work, Columbus had not only rDic'nrc- i
to sustain all the hardships, and to encounter all the difficulties, i'ilo, i

q P. Martyr, dccad. p.'22, &c. -Terrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 7. 9. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 49, 50. Life of Columbus, c. 51. Herrera, dec . . ib. ii. c. so.

to

B o K to which infant colonies are exposed when they set ;( in an un-

k _v- cultivated country, but he had to contend with what was more
'493 insuperable, the laziness, the impatience, and mutinous d:fp si-

tion of his followers. By the enervating influence of a hot cli-
mate, the natural inactivity of the Spaniards seemed to increase.
Many of them were gentlemen, unaccustomed to tie fatigue of
bodily labour, and all had engaged in the cnterprife with the
sanguine hopes excited by the splendid and exaggerated de-
scriptions of those who returned with Columbus from his first
voyage, or by his own mistaken idea that the country which he
had discovered was either the Cipango of Marco Polo, or the
Ophir , from which Solomon imported those precious com-
modities which suddenly diffused such extraordinary riches
through his kingdom. But when, instead of that golden har-
vefi which they had expected to reap without toil or pains, the
Spaniards saw that their profpet of wealth was remote as well
as uncertain, and that it could not be attained but by the flow
and persevering efforts of indufiry, the disappointment of those
chimerical hopes occasioned such dejeEtion of mind as bordered
on despair, and led to general discontent. In vain did Colum-
bus endeavour to revive their spirits by pointing out the fertility
of the foil, and exhibiting the specimens of gold daily brought
in from different parts of the island. They had not patience
to wait for the gradual returns which the former might yield,
and the latter they despised as scanty and inconsiderable. The
spirit of difaffction spread, and a conspiracy was formed, which
might have been fatal to Columbus and the colony. Happily
he discovered it, and seizing the ringleaders, punished some of
them, fcnt others prisoners into Spain, whither he dispatched

P. Martyr. dec. p. 29.

twelve

twelve of the ships which had served as transports, with an B 0O K
earnest requefl for a reinforcement of men and a large supply
of provisions '.

MEANWHILE, in order to banish that idleness which, by E494.

Examin:s in-

allowing his people leisure to brood over their disappointment, to the slate of
nourished the spirit ofdifcontent, he planned several expeditions the countr-.
into the interior part of the country. He ftnt a detachment,
under the command of Alonfo de Ojeda, a vigilant and enter-
prifing officer, to visit the diftrid of Cibao, which was laid to
yield the greatest quantity of gold, and followed him in person Mlarci; 12.
with the main body of his troops. In this expedition, he dif-
played all the pomp of military magnificence that he could ex-
hibit, in order to strike the imagination of the natives. He
marched with colours flying, with martial music, and with a
small body of cavalry that paraded Sometimes in the front and
sometimes in the rear. As those were the first horses that ap-
peared in the New World, they were objeas of terror no lets
than admiration to the Indians, who having no tame animals
themselves, were unacquainted with that vafi acceflion of power,
which man hath acquired by fubjeding them to his dominion.
They imagined them to be rational creatures, that formed but
one animal with their riders. They were astonished at their
foeed, and confidered their impetuosity and strength as irre-
fiflible. But while Columbus endeavoured to inspire the na-
tives with a dread of his power, he did not neglec the arts of
gaining their love and confidence. He adhered scrupulously to
the principles of integrity and juflice in all his tranfadtions with
them, and treated them, on every occasion, not only with hu-

Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. lo, 1l.

rnanity,

B o0 K manity, but with indulgence. The diflridt ofCibao answered the

description given of it by the natives. It was mountainous and
'i'-i' uncultivated, but in every river and brook gold was gathered

either in dust or in grains, tome of which were of considerable
size. The Indians had never opened any mines in search of
gold. To penetrate into the bowels of the earth, and to refine
the rude ore, were operations too complicated for their talents
and indufiry, and they had no such high value for gold as to
put their ingenuity and invention upon the stretch in order to
obtain it'. The small quantity of that precious metal which
they possessed, was either picked up in the beds of the rivers,
or wafled from the mountains by the heavy rains which fall
within the tropics. But, from those indications, the Spaniards
could no longer doubt that the country contained rich treasures
in its bowels, of which they hoped soon to be maflers". In
order to secure the command of this valuable province, Colum-
bus erected a small fort, to which he gave the name of St.
Thomas, by way of ridicule upon some of his incredulous fol-
lowers, who would not believe that the country produced gold,
until they saw it with their own eyes, and touched it with their
hands w.

The diflrefs THE account of those promising appearances of wealth in the
and difaffcc-
tin of the country of Cibao came very seasonably to comfort the despond-
colony in- ing colony, which was affected with distresses of various kinds.
crealc.

The flock of provisions which had been brought from Europe
was mofily consumed; what remained was so much corrupted
by the heat and moisture of the climate, as to be almost unfit

Oviedo, lib. ii. p. co. A. " P. Martyr, dec. p. 3z.
v" Hcrrcra. dec. i. lib. ii. c, 12. Life of Columbus, c. s3.

for

for use; the natives cultivated so finall a portion of ground, 1 o o

0

and with so little skill, that it hardly yielded what was sufficient _-
for their own fubfiflance; the Spaniards at Ifabell: had hitherto '494
neither time nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap any con-
fiderable fruits of their own indufiry. On all these accounts,
they became afraid of perishing with hunger, and were reduced
to live already at short allowance. At the fame time, the dif-
eases predominant in the torrid zone, and which rage chiefly in
those uncultivated countries, where the hand of indufiry has
not opened the woods, drained the marshes, and confined the
rivers within a certain channel, began to spread among them.
Alarmed at their violence and unusual symptoms, they exclaim-
ed against Columbus and his companions in the former voyage,
who, by their splendid but deceitful descriptions of Hispaniola,
had allured them to quit their native country for a bar-
barous uncultivated land, where they mufi either be cut off by
famine, or die of unknown diflempers. Several of the officers
and persons of note, instead of checking, joined in those fe-
ditious complaints. Father Boyl, the apoftolical vicar, was
one of the most turbulent and outrageous. It required all the
authority and address of Columbus to re-eflablifh Subordination
and tranquillity in the colony. Threats and promises were
alternately employed for this purpose; but nothing contributed
more to soothe the malcontents than the profped of finding, in
the mines of Cibao, such a rich flore of treasure as would be a
recompence for all their sufferings, and efface the memory of
former disappointments.

WHEN, by his unwearied endeavours, concord and order Coiuiabu,

were so far restored, that he could venture to leave the island, it:ttscv
Columbus resolved to pursue his discoveries, that he might be

VOL. L R able

i; G KC able to ascertain whether those new countries with which he

had opened a communication, were conneaed with any region
4'-"'4 of the earth already known, or whether they were to be confi-

(lercd as a fcparate portion of the globe, hitherto unvisited. He
appointed his brother Don Diego, with the affiflance of a coun-
cil of officers, to govern the island in his absence; and gave
the command of a body of soldiers to Don Pedro Margarita,
with which he was to visit the different parts of the island,
and endeavour to eftabliih the authority of the Spaniards among
the inhabitants. Having left them very particular inflrudions
with rcfpe to their conduct, he weighed anchor on the twen-
ty-fourth of April, with one ship and two small barks under
his command. During a tedious voyage of full five months,
he had a trial of almost all the numerous hardships to which
pcrfoins of his profeifion are exposed, without making any dif-
covery of importance, except the island of Jamaica. As he
ranged along the southern coast of Cuba ', he was entangled in
a labyrinth formed by an incredible number of small islands,
to which he gave the name of the Queen's Garden. In this
unknown course, among rocks and shelves, he was retarded by
contrary winds, assaulted with furious florms, and alarmed with
the terrible thunder and lightning which is often almost incef-
sant between the tropics. At length his provisions fell short;
his crew, exhaufled with fatigue as well as hunger, murmured
and threatened, and were ready to proceed to the most defpe-
rate extremities against him. Beset with danger in such va-
rious forms, he was obliged to keep continual watch, to ob-
-fcrve every occurrence with his own eyes, to issue every order,
and to superintend the execution of it. On no occasion, was
the extent of his flill and experience as a navigator so much

x Sec NOTE XIX.

tried.

tried. To these the squadron owed its safety. But this unre-i 0 0 IK
mitted fatigue of body and intense application of mind, over- .----
powering his conilitution, though naturally vigorous and robust, 1494'
brought on a feverish disorder, which terminated in a lethargy,
that deprived him of sense and memory, and had almost proved
fatal to his life Y.

BUT, on his return to Hispaniola, the sudden emotion of joy s..p: 27.

(n his re-

which he felt upon meeting with his brother Bartholemew at tur, findshis
Isabella, occasioncd such a flow of spirits as contributed greatly br.,lhc,' Bar-

]Jlomocew a'

to his recovery. It was now thirteen years since the two bro- .L',;cl:.
thers, whom similarity of talents united in close fricnd;hip,
had separated from each other, and during that long period
there had been no intercourse between them. Bartholemew,
after finishing his negociation in the court of England, had
set out for Spain by the way of France. At Paris he received
an account of the extraordinary discoveries which his brother
had made in his firit voyage, and that he was then preparing
to embark on a second expedition. Though this naturally in-
duced him to pursue his journey with the utmost dispatch, Co-
lumbus had failed for Hispaniola before he reached Spain. Ser-
dinand and Isabella received him with the refped due to the
brother of a man whose merit and services rendered him so
conspicuous ; and as they knew what consolation his prefencc
would afford to Columbus, they persuadcd him to take the
command of three ships, which they had appointed to carry
provisions to the colony at Isabella '.

y Life of Columbus, c.54, &c. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 13, 14. P. Martyi.
dec. p. 34, &c. z Herrcra, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 15.

R2 1-

B 0 K HE could not have arrived at any jun6ure when Columbus

II.

Ho- tflood more in need of a friend capable of affifing him with his
1. 1494g . counsels, or of dividing with him the cares and burden of go-
The Indians
take arms vernment. For although the provisions now brought from
againit the
Spaniards. Europe, afforded a temporary relief to the Spaniards from

the calamities of famine, the supply was not in such quantity
as to support them long, and the island did not hitherto yield
what was sufficient for their sustenance. They were threatened
with another danger, fill more formidable than the return of
scarcity, and which demanded more immediate attention. No
sooner did Columbus leave the island on his voyage of discovery,
than the soldiers under Margarita, as if they had been set free
from discipline and subordination, scorned all refiraint. In-
fiead of conforming to the prudent inflrudions of Columbus,
they dispersed in firaggling parties over the island, lived at dif-
cretion upon the natives, wafted their provisions, seized their
women, and treated that inoffensive race of men with all the
insolence of military oppression ;.

As long as the Indians had any profpeL that their susser-

ings might come to a period by the voluntary departure of
the invaders, they Submitted in silence, and dissembled their
sorrow; but they now perceived that the yoke would be as
permanent as it was intolerable. The Spaniards had built a
town, and surroundcd it with ramparts. They had ereCed
forts in different places. They had inclosed and sown fe-
vcral fields. It was apparent that they came not to vilit the
country, but to fettle in it. Though the number of those
firangers was not considerable, the tfate of cultivation among

* P. Martyr,,dec. p. 47.

this

this rude people was so imperfect, and in such exaa propor- B 0o 0
tion to their own consumption, that it was with difficulty they W
could afford fubfifiance to their new guefis. Their own mode '+
of life was so indolent and inactive, the warmth of the climate
so enervating, the confiitution of their bodies naturally so feeble,
and so unaccuflomed to the laborious exertions of industry,
that they were satisfied with a proportion of food amazingly
small. A handful of maize, or a little of the insipid bread made
of the caffada-root, was sufficient to support men, whose
strength and spirits were not exhaufled by any vigorous efforts
either of body or mind. The Spaniards, though the molf ab-
ltemious of all the European nations, appeared to them cxcef-
lively voracious. One Spaniard consumed as much as several
Indians. This keenness of appetite surprised them so much,
and seered to them to be so insatiable, that they supposed the
Spaniards had left their own country, because it did not produce
as much as was requisite to gratify their immoderate dcfire of
food, and had come among them in quest of nourishment b.
Self-prefervation prompted them to with for the departure of
guests who wafted so fafi their slender flock of provilions. The
injuries which they suffered, added to their impatience for this
event. They had long expected that the Spaniards would re-
tire of their own accord. They now perceived that, in order
to avert the deftrudion with which they were threatened, ei-
ther by the flow consumption of famine, or by the violence of
their oppressors, it was neccfTary to assume courage, to attack
those formidable invaders with united force, and drive therm
from the settlements of which they had violently taken pof-
session.

b Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 17.

Suc ct

0 0 K Sucii were the sentiments which universally prevailed among
... the Indians, when Columbus returned to Isabella. Inflamed by

Wa149' the unprovoked outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree of
thcrbi. rage of which their gentle natures, formed to susser and submit,

seemed hardly susceptible, they waited only for a signal from
their leaders to fall upon the colony. Some of the caziques
had already surprised and cut off several of the stragglers. The
dread of this impending danger united the Spaniards, and re-
established the authority of Columbus, as they saw no profped
of safety but in committing themselves to his prudent guidance.
It was now necessary to have recourse to arms, the employing
of which againfi the Indians, Columbus had hitherto avoided
with the greatefr solicitude. Unequal as the conflict may seem,
between the naked inhabitants of the New World, armed with
clubs, flicks hardened in the fire, wooden swords, and arrows
pointed with bones or flints; and troops accuflomed to the difci-
pline, and provided with the infiruments of defirudion known
in the European art of war, the situation of the Spaniards was
far from being exempt from danger. The vail superiority of
the natives in number, compensated many defecs. An handful
of men 'was about to encounter a whole nation. One adverse
event, or even any unforeseen delay in determining the fate of
the war, might prove fatal to the Spaniards. Conscious that
success depended on the vigour and rapidity of his operations,
Columbus inflantly assembled his forces. They were reduced
to a very small number. Diseases, engendered by the warmth
and humidity of the country, had raged among them with
much violence; experience had not yet taught them the art
either of curing these, or the precautions requisite for guarding
againfl them; two-thirds of the original adventurers were dead,

and

and many of those who survived were incapable of service. B 00K
The body which took the field confited only of two hundred tv,-,._
foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs; and how 1rrange Mar'i9i.
soever it may seem, to mention the last as composing part of a
military force, they were not perhaps the least formidable and
deftrutive of the whole, when employed against naked and
timid Indians. All the caziques of the island, Guacanahiari ex-
cepted, who retained an inviolable attachment to the Spaniards,
were in arms to oppose Columbus, with forces amounting, if
we may believe the Spanish hiflorians, to a hundred thousand
men. Inflead of attempting to draw the Spaniards into the
fastnesses of the woods and mountains, they were so imprudent
as to take their tfation in the Vega Real, the most open plain
in the country. Columbus did not allow them time to perceive
their error, or to alter their position. He attacked them during
the night, when undisciplined troops are least capable of ading
with union and concert, and obtained an easy and bloodless
victory. The conflernation with which the Indians were filled
by the noise and havoc made by the fire-arms, by the impetu-
ous force of the cavalry, and the fierce onset of the dogs was
so great, that they threw down their weapons, and fled without
attempting resistance. Many were fain; more were taken
prisoners, and reduced to servitude'"; and so thoroughly were
the reft intimidated, that from that moment they abandoned
themselves to despair, relinquishing all thoughts of contending
with aggressors whom they deemed invincible.

COLUMBUS employed several months in marching through the A t^ ir:-
island, and in fubjeting it to the Spanish government, with- pofd,,u

' Life of Columbus, c. 61. See NO T E XX.

cut

B 0 0 I out meeting with any opposition. He imposed a tribute upon

all the inhabitants above the age of fourteen. Each person
'495- who lived in those difiridts where gold was found, was obliged

to pay quarterly as much gold dull as filled a hawk's bell; from
those in other parts of the country, twenty-five pounds of cot-
ton were demanded. This was the first regular taxation of the
Indians, and served as a precedent for exacions still more in-
tolerable. Such an heavy imposition was extremely contrary
to those maxims which Columbus had hitherto inculcated with
refped to the mode of treating them. But intrigues were car-
rying on in the court of Spain at this juncqure, in order to
undermine his power and discredit his operations, which con-
firained him to depart from his own fyfiem of adminifiration.
Several unfavourable accounts of his condud, as well as of the
countries discovered by him, had been transmitted to Spain.
Margarita and Father Boyl were now at court; and in order
to juflify their own condue, or to gratify their resentment,
watched with malevolent attention for every opportunity of
spreading insinuations to his detriment. Many of the courtiers
viewed his growing reputation and power with envious eyes.
Fonseca, the archdeacon of Seville, who was intrusted with
the chief direction of Indian affairs, had conceived such an
unfavourable opinion of Columbus, for some reason which
the contemporary writers have not mentioned, that he liflened
with partiality to every invective against him. It was not
easy for an unfriended firanger, unpratifed in courtly arts,
to counteract the machinations of so many enemies. Co-
lumbus saw that there was but one method offupporting his
own credit, and of silencing all his adversaries. He muff
produce such a quantity of gold, as would not only juflify

what

what he had reported with refpet to the richness of the coun- B o o K
try, but encourage Ferdinand and Isabella to persevere in pro-
fecuting his plans. The necessity of obtaining it, forced him '9
not only to impose this heavy tax upon the Indians, but to exact
payment of it with extreme rigour; and may be pleaded in ex-
cufe for his deviating on this occasion from the mildness and hu-
manity with which he uniformly treated that unhappy people .

THE labour, attention, and foresight which the Indians were Fatal efl;ei

obliged to employ in procuring the tribute demanded of them, furehat .
appeared the most intolerable of all evils, to men accustomed to
pass their days in a careless, improvident indolence. They
were incapable of such a regular and persevering exertion of
indufiry, and felt it such a grievous refiraint upon their liberty,
that they had recourse to an expedient for obtaining deliverance
fiom this yoke, which demonfirates the excess of their impa-
tience and despair. They formed a scheme of starving those
oppressors whom they durfi not attempt to expel; and from
the opinion which they entertained with refpeEt to the voracious
appetite of the Spaniards, they concluded the execution of it
to be very practicable. With this view, they suspended all the
operations of agriculture; they sowed no maize, they pulled
up the roots of the manioc which were planted, and retiring
to the most inaccessible parts of the mountains, left the uncul-
tivated plains to their enemies. This desperate resolution pro-
duced some part of the effects which they expected. The Spa-
niards were reduced to extreme want; but they received such
seasonable supplies of provisions from Europe, and found so
many resources in their own ingenuity and indufiry, that they
suffered no great loss of men. The wretched Indians were the

c Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. i7,
VOL. 1. S victims

B 0 K vilims of their own ill-concerted policy. A vait multitude

-- (ihut up among barren mountains, without any food but the
1495. spontaneous productions of the earth, soon felt the utmost

difireffes of famine. This brought on contagious diseases;
and, in the course of a few months, more than a third part of
the inhabitants of the island perished, after experiencing misery
in all its various forms f.

Intrigues BUT while Columbus was thus successfully eflablifhing
againIt Co-
lurbus inh thhe foundations of the Spanish grandeur in the New World,
court of his enemies laboured with unwearied assiduity to deprive him

of the glory and rewards to which his services and sus-
ferings intitled him. The hardships unavoidable in a new
settlement, the calamities occasioned by an unhealthy cli-
mate, the disasters attending a voyage in unknown seas,
were all represented as the fruits of his refilefs and incon-
fiderate ambition. His prudent attention to preserve difci-
pline and Subordination was denominated excess of rigour;
the punishments which he inflicted upon the mutinous and
disorderly were imputed to cruelty. These accusations gained
such credit in a jealous court, that a commiflioner was ap-
pointed to repair to Hispaniola, and to infped into the con-
dud of Columbus. By the recommendation of his enemies,
Aguado, a groom of the bed-chamber, was the person to whom
this important trust was committed. But in this choice they
seem to have been more influenced by the obsequious attachment
of the man to their interest, than by his capacity for the fIa-
tion. Puffed up with such sudden elevation, Aguado displayed,
in the exercise of this office, all the frivolous felf-importance,

f Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. xi. c. 8. Life of Colurnbus, c. 61. Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 93.
D. Benzon HiR. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c. 9 P. Martyr, dec. p. .8.

and

and aded with all the disgusting insolence, which are natural n o o
to little minds, when raised to unexpected dignity, or em-
ployed in funaions to which they are not equal. By liflening 'I S
with eagerness to every accusation against Columbus, and encou-
raging not only the malcontent Spaniards, but even the Indians,
to produce their grievances, real or imaginary, he fomented the
spirit of dissention in the island, without establishing any regu-
lation of public utility, or that tended to redress the many
wrongs, with the odium of which he wished to load the admi-
ral's adminifiration. As Columbus felt sensibly how humili-
ating his situation must be, if he should remain in the country
while such a partial infpedor observed his motions, and con-
trouled his jurifdidion, he took the resolution of returning to
Spain, in order to lay a full account of all his tranfations, par-
ticularly with refped to the points in dispute between him and
his adversaries, before Ferdinand and Isabella, from whose jus-
tice and discernment he expected an equal and a favourable
decision. He committed the administration of affairs, during 1496.
his absence, to Don Bartholomew, his brother, with the title
of Adelantado, or Lieutenant-Governor. By a choice less for-
tunate, and which proved the source of many calamities to
the colony, he appointed Francis Roldan chief justice, with
very extensive powers g

IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a course different Returnso

from that which he had taken in his former voyage. He fleered pain.
almost due east from Hispaniola, in the parallel of twenty-two
degrees of latitude; as experience had not yet discovered the
more certain and expeditious method of firetching to the north,
in order to fall in with the south-west winds. By this ill-

t Herrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 18. Lib. iii. c. i.

S 2 advised

0 0 advised choice, which, in the infancy of navigation between
'__ the New and Old Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the ad-
1496. miral as a defeE in naval ikill, he was exposed to infinite fa-

tigue and danger, in a perpetual struggle with the trade-winds,
which blow without variation from the east between the tropics.
Notwithfianding the almost insuperable difficulties of such a
navigation, he perfified in his course with his usual patience
and firmness, but made so little way, that he was three months
without feeing land. At length, his provisions began to fail,
the crew was reduced to the scanty allowance of fix ounces of
bread a-day for each person. The admiral fared no better than
the meanest tailor. But, even in this extreme distress, he re-
tained the humanity which distinguishes his character, and
refused to comply with the earnest solicitations of his crew,
some of whom proposed to feed upon the Indian prisoners
whom they were carrying over, and others insisted to throw
them over-board, in order to lessen the consumption of their
small stock. He represented, that they were human beings,
reduced by a common calamity to the fame condition with
themselves, and intitled to lhare an equal fate. His autho-
rity and remonstrances dissipated those wild ideas suggested
by despair. Nor had they time to recur, as he came loon within
fight of the coast of Spain, and all their fears and sufferings

ended .

ti! rcceFtion COLUMBUS appeared at court with the modest but deter-
there.

mined confidence of a man conscious not only of integrity,
but of having performed great services. Ferdinand and Isabella,
ashamed of their own facility in lending too favourable an ear
to frivolous or ill-founded accusations, received him with

" Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. i. Life of Columbus, c. C4.

such

such distinguished marks of resped, as covered his enemies E o I
with shame. Their censures and calumnies were no more ,_
heard of at that juncture. The gold, the pearls, the cotton, '4-
and other commodities of value which Columbus produced,
seemed fully to refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refpet to the poverty of the country. By reducing the
Indians to obedience, and imposing a regular tax upon them,
he had secured to Spain a large accession of new fubjeIts, and
the establishment of a revenue that promised to be considerable.
By the mines which he had found out and examined, a source
of wealth still more copious was opened. Great and unex-
pedted as those advantages were, Columbus represented them
only as preludes to future acquisitions, and as the earnet of
more important discoveries, which he still meditated, and to
which those he had already made would conduct him with ease
and certainty'.

THE attentive consideration of all those circumfrances made A plan form-
such impression, not only upon Isabella, who was flattered with ed for the

more regular
the idea of being the patroness of all Columbus's enterprises, but efablifhhent

of a colon',.

even upon Ferdinand, who having originally expressed his dif-
approbation of his schemes, was fiill more apt to doubt of their
success, that they resolved to supply the colony in Hispaniola
with every thing that could render it a permanent establishment,
and to furnish Columbus with such a fleet, that he might pro-
ceed to search for those new countries, of whose existence he
seemed to be confident. The measures moit proper for accom-
plifhing both these designs were concerted with Columbus.
Discovery had been the sole objec of the first voyage to the
New World; and though, in the second, settlement had been

Life of Columbus, c. 65. Hcrrera, dec, i. lib. iii. c. i.

proposed,

' o o IK propos d, the precautions taken for that purpose had either been
___. insufficient, or were rendered ineffedual by the mutinous spirit
14t6 of the Spaniards, and the unforeseen calamities arising from

various causes. Now a plan was to be formed of a regular
colony, that might serve as a model in all future establishments.
Every particular was confidered with attention, and arranged
with a scrupulous accuracy. The precise number of adven-
turers who should be permitted to embark was fixed. They
were to be of different ranks and professions; and the propor-
tion of each was established, according to their usefulness and
the wants of the colony. A suitable number of women was to
be chosen to accompany these new settlers. As it was the first
object to raise provisions in a country where scarcity of food
had been the occasion of so much distress, a considerable body
of husbandmen was to be carried over. As the Spaniards had
then no conception of deriving any benefit from those produc-
tions of the New World which have since yielded such large
returns of wealth to Europe, but had formed magnificent ideas,
and entertained sanguine hopes with refpedt to the riches con-
tained in the mines which had been discovered, a band of work-
men, skilled in the various arts employed in digging and re-
fining the precious metals, was provided. All these emigrants
were to receive pay and subsistence for some years, at the
public expencek.

A defea in THUS far the regulations were prudent and well adapted to
it. the end in view. But as it was foreseen that few would engage

voluntarily to fettle in a country, whose noxious climate had
been fatal to so many of their countrymen, Columbus proposed
to transport to Hispaniola such malefators as had been con-

k Herrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. a.

vidled

viaed of crimes, which, though capital, were of a less atrocious Bn o K
nature; and that for the future a certain proportion of the of-
fenders usually sent to the gallies, (hould be condemned to 1496
labour in the mines which were to be opened. This advice,
given without due reflection, was as inconsiderately adopted.
The prisons of Spain were drained, in order to colled members
for the intended colony; and the judges were infiruded to re-
cruit it by their future sentences. It is not, however, with
such materials, that the foundations of a society, defiined to be
permanent, should be laid. Industry, sobriety, patience, and
mutual confidence are indispensably requisite in an infant fettle-
ment, where purity of morals must contribute more towards
establishing order than the operation or authority of laws. But
when such a mixture of what is corrupt is admitted into the
original constitution of the political body, the vices of those
unsound and incurable members will probably infeCt the
whole, and mufi certainly be productive of violent and unhap-
py effects. This the Spaniards fatally experienced; and the
other European nations having successively imitated their prac-
tice in this particular, pernicious consequences have followed in
their settlements, which can be imputed to no other cause '.

THOUGH Columbus obtained, with great facility and dif- Executed

fiowly.

patch, the royal approbation of every measure and regulation
that he proposed, his endeavours to carry them into execution
were so long retarded, as mufi have tired out the patience of
any man, less accuflomed to encounter difficulties and to fur-
mount them. Those delays were occasioned partly by that te-
dious formality and spirit of procrastination, with which the

i Herrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. z. TouronIift. Gener. de 1'Amerique, i.. p 5.

Spaniards

B 0 0 K Spaniards conduct business; and partly by the exhausted fate

of the treasury, which was drained by the expence of celebrat-
9 ing the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's only son with

Margaret of Aufiria, and that of Joanna, their second daughter,
with Philip archduke of Austria "; but must be chiefly imputed
to the malicious arts of Columbus's enemies. Astonished at
the reception which he met with upon his return, and overawed
by his pretence, they gave way, for some time, to a tide of
favour too strong for them to oppose. Their enmity, however,
was too inveterate to remain long inactive. They resumed
their operations, and by the assistance of Foufeca, the minister
for Indian affairs, who was now promoted to the bishopric of
Badajos, they threw in so many obstacles to protract the pre-
parations for Columbus's expedition, that a year elapsed before
he . could procure two ships to carry over a part of the supplies
destined for the colony, and almost two years were spent before
the small squadron was equipped of which he himself was to
take the command .

1498. THIS squadron confited of fix ships only, of no great bur-

T'eof oY- den, and but indifferently provided for a long or dangerous
luinbus. navigation. The voyage which he now meditated was in a

course different from any he had undertaken. As he was fully
persuaded that the fertile regions of India lay to the south-west
of those countries which he had discovered, he proposed, as the
most certain method of finding out these, to fland directly
south from the Canary or Cape de Verd islands, until he came
under the equinottial line, and then to firetch to the weft be-
fore the favourable wind for such a course, which blows invari-
My 30. ably between the tropics. With this idea he let fail, and

"n P. Martyr, epift. 168. * Life of Columbus, c. 65.
o Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 9.

touched

touched first at the Canary, and then at the Cape de Verd nBOO K
islands. From the former he dispatched three of his ships with --
a supply of provisions for the colony in Hispaniola: with the july 9.
other three, he continued his voyage towards the south. No
remarkable occurrence happened until they arrived within five
degrees of the line. There they were becalmed, and at the fame July 19.
time the heat waxed so exceltive, that many of their wine casks
burst, the liquor in others toured, and their provisions cor-
ruptedP. The Spaniards, who had never ventured so far to
the south, were afraid that the ships would take fire, and be-
gan to apprehend the reality of what the ancients had taught
concerning the deftrudive qualities of that torrid region of the
globe. They were relieved, in some measure, from their fears
by a seasonable fall of rain. This, however, though so heavy
and unintermitting that the men could hardly keep the deck,
did not greatly mitigate the intenseness of the heat. The ad-
miral, who with his usual vigilance had directed every opera-
tion in person, from the beginning of the voyage, was so much
exhausted by fatigue and want of sleep, that it brought on a
violent fit of the gout, accompanied with a fever. All these
ircumftances constrained him to yield to the importunities of
his crew, and to alter his course to the north weft, in order to
reach some of the Carribee islands, where he might refit, and
be supplied with provisions.

O, the first of Aunuft, the man flationed in the round top Di-ocvcl; i,,

surprised them with the joyful cry of land. They flood to- czr;l', ":
wards it, and difcovcrcd a considerable island, which the ad-
miral called Trinidad, a name it fill retains. It lies on the

9 P. Martyr, dec. p. 70o
VoL. I. T coait

O(l) K coafi of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This,
v ~..j though a river only of the third or fourth magnitude in the

498. New World, far surpasses any of the fireams that water our

hemisphere. It rolls towards the ocean such a vail body
of water, and rushes into it with such impetuous force, that
when it meets the tide, which on that coafi rites to an uncom-
mon height, their collision occasions a swell and agitation of
the waves no less surprising than formidable. In this conflict,
the irrefiflible torrent of the river so far prevails, that it freshens
the ocean many leagues with its flood q. Columbus, before he
could perceive the danger, was entangled among those adverse
currents and tempefluous waves, and it was with the utmost
difficulty that he escaped through a narrow strait, which ap-
peared so tremendous, that he called it La Boca del Drago.
As soon as the consternation which this occasioned permitted
him to reflec upon the nature of an appearance so extraordi-
nary, he discerned in it a source of comfort and hope. He justly
concluded, that such a vafi body of water as this river contain-
ed, could not be supplied by any island, but must flow through
a country of immense extent, and of consequence, that he was
now arrived at that continent which it had long been the object
of his wishes to discover. Full of this idea, he flood to the
weft along the coast of those provinces which arc now known
by the names of Paria and Cumana. He landed in several
places, and had some intercourse with the people, who re-
fembled those of Hispaniola in their appearance and man-
ner of life. They wore, as ornaments, small plates of gold,
and pearls of considerable value, which they willingly ex-
changed for European toys. They fecmed to possess a better

J Gurnilla 1-i, tic I'Orcnoquc, toin. i. p. 14.

underflanding,

understanding, and greater courage, than the inhabitants of 00OK
the islands. The country produced four-footed animals of fe- -
veral kinds, as well as a great variety of fowls and fruits'. .4y8.
The admiral was so much delighted with its beauty and fertility,
that with the warm enthusiasm of a discoverer, he imagined it
to be the paradise described in Scripture, which the Almighty
chose for the residence of man, while he retained innocence
that rendered him worthy of such a habitation'. Thus Co-
lumbus had the glory not only of discovering to mankind the
existence of a New World, but made considerable progrcfs to-
wards a perfec knowledge of it and was the first man who
conducted the Spaniards to that vast continent which has been
the chief feat of their empire, and the source of their treafurcs
in this quarter of the globe. The shattered condition of his
ships, scarcity of provisions, his own infirmities, together with
the impatience of his crew, prevented him from pursuing his
discoveries any farther, and made it necessary to bear away for
Hispaniola. In his way thither he discovered the islands of
Cubagua and Margarita, which afterwards became remarkable
for their pearl-fiihery. When he arrived at Hispaniola, he was A,,,
wafted to an extreme degree with fatigue and sickness; but found
the affairs of the colony in such a situation, as afforded him no pro-
sped of enjoying that repose of which he flood so much in need.

MANY revolutions had happened in that country during his ,,.i or I .

abfencc. His brother, the Adelantado, in consequence of an l,,'lll
advice which the admiral gave before his departure, had re- t'I.
moved the colony from Isabella to a more commodious flation,
on the opposite fide of the island, and laid the foundation of

' I-lrcrar, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 9, lo, mv Life ofColuimbl s, c. 6(7--7.
' I-rrera, dcc. i. lib. iii. c. t. Goiiiara, c. 8.1. Sc NO';'I' X'. I

T 2 St.

BO OK St. Domingo ", which was long the most considerable European
i_-- v- town in the New World, and the feat of the supreme courts

1498. in the Spanish dominions there. As soon as the Spaniards

were established in this new settlement, the adelantado, that
they might neither languish in inactivity, nor have leisure to
form new cabals, marched into those parts of the island which
his brother had not yet visited or reduced to obedience. As the
people were unable to refill, they submitted every where to the
tribute which he imposed. But they soon found the burden to
be so intolerable, that, overawed as they were by the fu-
perior power of their oppressors, they took arms againit
them. Those infurredions, however, were not formidable. A
conflid with timid and naked Indians was neither dangerous
nor of doubtful issue.

Mutiny of BUT while the adelantado was employed againfi them in the
Roldan.

field, a mutiny, of an asped far more alarming, broke out among
the Spaniards. The ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom
Columbus had placed in a fiation which required him to be the
guardian of order and tranquillity in the colony. A turbulent
and inconsiderate ambition precipitated him into this desperate
measure, so unbecoming his rank. The arguments which he
employed to reduce his countrymen were frivolous and ill-
founded. He accused Columbus and his two brothers of arro-
gance and severity; he pretended that they aimed at establish-
ing an independent dominion in the country; he taxed them
with an intention of cutting off part of the Spaniards by hun-
ger and fatigue, that they might more easily reduce the re-
mainder to fubjetion ; he represented it as unworthy of Cafli-

" P. Martyr, dec, p. 56.

lians,

ilans, to remain the tame and passive slaves of three Genoese BO(K
adventurers. As men have always a propensity to impute the t-'-- -
hardships of which they feel the pressure, to the mifcondut of '
their rulers ; as every nation views with a jealous eye the power
and exaltation of foreigners, Roldan's insinuations made a deep
impreflion on his countrymen. His charaCter and rank added
weight to them. A considerable number of the Spaniards made
choice of him as their leader, and taking arms againit the ade-
lantado and his brother, seized the king's magazine of provi-
sions, and endeavoured to surprise the fort at St. Domingo.
This was preserved by the vigilance and courage of Don Diego
Columbus. The mutineers were obliged to retire to the pro-
vince of Xaragua, where they continued not only to disclaim
the adelantado's authority themselves, but excited the Indians
to throw off the yoke w.

SUCH was the diffraCed state of the colony when Columbu,

landed at St. Domingo. He was aflonifhed to find that the
three ships which he had dispatched from the Canaries were not
yet arrived. By the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots, and the vio-
lence of currents, they had been carried an hundred and sixty
miles to the weft of St. Domingo, and forced to take shelter
in a harbour of the province of Xaragua, where Roldan and
his seditious followers were cantoned. Roldan carefully con-
cealed from the commanders his infurretion against the ade-
lantado, and employing his utmost address to gain their confi-
dence, persuaded them to set on shore a considerable part of
the new settlers whom they brought over, that they might
proceed by land to St. Domingo. It required but few argu-

' Herrcra, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 5-8. Life of Columbus, c. 74--77. Goiara, c. 2zj
M'. Martyr, p. 78.

mclntq

BO OK rments to prevail with those men to espouse his cause. They

II.
k--v-^ ejwere the refute of the jails of Spain, to whom idleness, licen-

'498 tioufnefs, and deeds of violence were familiar; and they re-

turned eagerly to a course of life nearly resembling that to
which they had been accuflomed. The commanders of the
ships perceiving, when it was too late, their imprudence in dif-
embarking so many of their men, flood away for St. Domingo,
and got safe into the port a few days after the admiral; but
their flock of prcvifions was so wafted during a voyage of such
long continuance, that they brought little relief to the co-
lony x.

Composed BY this jundtion with a band of such bold and desperate
b nthe pru- associates, Roldan became extremely formidable, and no less
of Colunbus. extravagant in his demands. Columbus, though filled with

resentment at his ingratitude, and highly exasperated by the
insolence of his followers, made no haste to take the field. He
trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flames of a civil war,
in which, whatever party prevailed, the power and strength of
both must be so much wafted, as might encourage the common
enemy to unite and complete their deftrudion. At the fame
time, he observed, that the prejudices and passions which incited
the rebels to take arms, had so far infeced those who frill ad-
hered to him, that many of them were adverse, and all cold to
the service. From such sentiments, with refpea to the public
interest, as well as from this view of his own situation, he
chose to negociate rather than to fight. By a seasonable procla-
mation, offering free pardon to such as should merit it by re-
turning to their duty, he made impression upon fomc of the

H -lerrcr, dec. i, lib. iii. c. i2. Life of Columbus, c. 78, 79.

malcontents.

malcontents. By engaging to grant such as should desire it :;')
the liberty of returning to Spain, he allured all those unfor-
tunate adventurers, who, from sickness and disappointment,
were difgufied with the country. By promising to re-cftablifl,
Roldan in his former office, he soothed his pride; and by
complying with mofi of his demands in behalf of his followers,
he satisfied their avarice. Thus gradually and without blood-
shed, but after many tedious negociations, he dissolved this
dangerous combination which threatened the colony with ruin;
and restored the appearance of order, regular government, and
tranquillity Y.

IN consequence of this agreement with the mutineers, lands A new monde
were allotted them in different parts of the island, and the In- f, fcrtlncmdnt

effabliflied.

dians fettled in each diftria were appointed to cultivate a cer-
tain portion of ground for the use of those new matters. The 1499.
performance of this work was substituted in place of the tribute
formerly imposed, and how necessary soever such a regulation
might be in a feeble and sickly colony, it introduced among the
Spaniards the Repartinzientos, or distributions of Indians efta-
blifhed by them in all their settlements, which brought num-
berlefs calamities upon that unhappy people, and fubjeted
them to the most grievous oppression . This was not the only
bad effect of the infurreCEion in Hispaniola; it prevented Co-
lumbus from prosecuting his discoveries on the continent, as
felf-prefervation obliged him to keep near his person his bro-
ther the adelantado, and the tailors whom he intended to have
employed in that service. As soon as his affairs would per-
mit, he sent some of his ships to Spain with a journal of the

Y Hcrrcra, dec. 1. lib. iii. c. 13, 14. Life of Columbus, c. 80, &c.
X Herrera, dec. i, lib. iii. c. 14, &c.

vroyage

BOOKI) voyage which he had made, a description of the new countries
t.-v- which he had discovered, a chart of the coast along which he

1499. had failed, and specimens of the gold, the pearls, and other

curious or valuable produtions which he had acquired by traf-
sicking with the natives. At the fame time he transmitted an
account of the infurredion in Hispaniola; he accused the mu-
tineers not only of having thrown the colony into such violent
convulsions as threatened its dissolution, but of having ob-
itruded every attempt towards discovery and improvement, by
their unprovoked rebellion against their superiors, and pro-
posed several regulations for the better government of the
island, as well as the extinction of that mutinous spirit, which,
though suppressed at present, might soon burst out with addi-
tional rage. Roldan and his associates did not neglect to convey
to Spain by the fame ships, an apology for their own conduct,
together with their recriminations upon the admiral and his
brothers. Unfortunately for the honour of Spain, and the
happiness of Columbus, the latter gained most credit in the
court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and produced unexpected
effecs '.

The voyage BUT, previous to these, events had happened which merit at-
oflVACic tention, both on account of their own importance, and their
East Ilnics, connection with the history of the New World. While Co-
by the C.:pe
of Good lumbus was engaged in his successive voyages to the weft, the
Hop.:. spirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal, the kingdom

where it first acquired vigour, and became enterprising. Seif-
condemnation and regret were not the only sentiments to which
the success of Columbus, and reflecion upon their own impru-

a Herrera, dec, i. lib. iii. c. 14. Bcnzon. I-Iift. Nov. Orb. lib. i, c. z.

dence

dence in rejecting his proposals, gave rife among the Portuguese. B 00 K
They excited a generous emulation to surpass his performances,
and an ardent desire to make some reparation to their country '499
for their own error. With this view, Emmanuel, who in-
herited the enterprising genius of his predecessors, persisted in
their grand scheme of opening a passage to the East Indies by
the Cape of Good Hope; and soon after his accellion to the
throne, equipped a squadron for that important voyage. He
gave the command of it to Vasco de Gama, a man of noble
birth, poffeifed of virtue, prudence, and courage, equal to
the fiation. The squadron, like all those fitted out for dif-
covery in the infancy of navigation, was extremely feeble,
confifiing only of three vessels, of neither burden nor force ade-
quate to the service. As the Europeans were at that time al-
together unacquainted with the course of the trade-winds and
periodical monsoons, which render navigation in the Atlantic
ocean, as well as in the sea that separates Africa from India, at
some seasons easy, and at others not only dangerous, but almost
impracticable, the time chosen for Gama's departure was the
most improper during the whole year. He set fail from Lisbon
on the ninth of July, and fianding towards the south, had to 1497.
firuggle for four months with contrary winds, before he could
reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their violence began to Nov. 20.
abate; and during an interval of calm weather, Gama doubled
that formidable promontory, which had so long been the boun-
dary of navigation, and directed his course towards the north-
cast, along the African coast. He touched at several ports; and
after various adventures, which the Portuguese hiitorians re-
late with high but just encomiums upon his conduc and intre-
pidity, he came to anchor before the city of Mclinda. Through-
out all the vast countries which extcnd along the coast of Africa,

VOL. I. U from

BO K from the river Senegal to the confines of Zanguebar, the Por-

II.

_-v-..- tuguefe had found a race of men rude and uncultivated, ftran-
'499. gers to letters, to arts and commerce, and differing from the

inhabitants of Europe no less in their features and complexion,
than in their manners and institutions. As they advanced from
this, they observed, to their inexpressible joy, that the human
form gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic features began
to predominate, marks of civilization appeared, letters were
known, the Mahometan religion was established, and a com-
merce, far from being inconsiderable, was carried on. At that
time several vessels from India were in the port of Melinda.
Gama now pursued his voyage with almost absolute certainty
of success, and, under the conduct of a Mahometan pilot, ar-
rived at Calecut, upon the coast of Malabar, on the twenty-
second of May one thousand four hundred and ninety-eight.
What he beheld of the wealth, the populousness, the cultivation,
the industry and arts of this highly civilized country, far fur-
passed any idea that he had formed, from the imperfect ac-
counts which the Europeans had hitherto received of it. But
as he possessed neither sufficient force to attempt a settlement,
nor proper commodities with which he could carry on commerce
of any consequence, he hastened back to Portugal, with an ac-
count of his success in performing a voyage the longest, as well
as most difficult, that had ever been made since the first inven-
tion of navigation. He landed at Lisbon on the fourteenth
of September one thousand four hundred and ninety-nine, two
years, two months, and five days, from the time he left that port'.

THUS, during the course of the fifteenth century, mankind
made greater progress in exploring the tfate of the habitable

a Ramufio, vol. i. g19, D.

globe,

globe, than in all the ages which had elapsed previous to that B O K
period. The spirit of discovery, feeble at first and cautious,
moved within a very narrow sphere, and made its efforts with '499
hesitation and timidity. Encouraged by success, it became ad-
venturous, and boldy extended its operations. In the course
of its progreoion, it continued to acquire vigour, and advanced
at length with a rapidity and force which burst through all the
limits within which ignorance and fear had hitherto circum-
fcribed the acivity of the human race. Almost fifty years were
employed by the Portuuuefe in creeping along the coast of
Africa from Cape Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of which
lies only twelve degrees to the south of the former. In less than
thirty years, they ventured beyond the equinoctial line into
another hemisphere, and penetrated to the southern extremity
of Africa, at the difiance of forty-nine degrees from Cape de
Verd. During the last seven years, a New World was dif-
covered in the weft, not inferior in extent to all the parts of
the earth with which mankind were at that time acquainted.
In the east, unknown seas and countries were found out, and
a communication, long desired, but hitherto concealed, was
opened between Europe and the opulent regions of India. In
comparison with events so wonderful and unexpected, all that
had hitherto been deemed great or splendid, faded away and
disappeared. Vast objets now presented themselves. The
human mind, rouzed and interested by the profpedt, engaged
with ardour in pursuit of them, and exerted its adive powers
in a new direction.

THIS spirit of enterprise, though but newly awakened in Difcovris

camiid on in

Spain, began soon to operate extensively. All the attempts spai,'l, ii-
towards discovery made in that kingdom had hitherto been Va:"tl nll.,

U 2 carried

BOOK carried on by Columbus alone, and at the expence of the so-
v__ vereign. But now private adventurers, allured by the magni-
1499 ficent descriptions he gave of the regions which he had

visited, as well as by the specimens of their wealth which he
produced, offered to fit out squadrons at their own risk, and to
go in quefi of new countries. The Spanish court, whose scanty
revenues were exhausted by the charge of its expeditions to the
New World, which, though they opened vast prospects of fu-
ture benefit, yielded a very sparing return of present profit,
-was extremely willing to devolve the burden of discovery upon
its fubjeds. It seized with joy an opportunity of rendering the
avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of projectors, infirumental
in promoting designs of certain advantage to the public, though
Ojeda the of doubtful success with refpeat to themselves. One of the first

propositions of this kind was made by Alonfo de Ojeda, a gal-
lant and active officer, who had accompanied Columbus in his
second voyage. His rank and character procured him such
credit with the merchants of Seville, that they undertook to
equip four ships, provided he could obtain the royal license,
authorising the voyage. The powerful patronage of the bishop
of Badajos easily secured success in a suit so agreeable to the
court. Without consulting Columbus, or regarding the rights
and jurifdietion which he had acquired by the capitulation in
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two, Ojeda was per-
nittcd to set out forthe New World. In order to dire& his
course, the bishop communicated to him the admiral's journal
of his last voyage, and his charts of the countries which he had
May. di fcovered. Ojeda firuck out into no new path of navigation,

but adhering fcrvilcly to the route which Columbus had taken,
arrived on the coast of Paria. He traded with the natives, and
flanding to the wcft, proceeded as far as Cape de Vela, and

ranged

ranged along a considerable extent of coast beyond that on which B O O K
Columbus had touched. Having thus ascertained the opinion x -
of Columbus, that this country was a part'of the continent, r499'
Ojeda returned by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some OctLbcr
reputation as a discoverer, but with little benefit to those who
had raised the funds for the expedition ".

AMERIGO VESPUCCI, a Florentine gentleman, accompanied Is ccoipIi-

nied by

Ojeda in this voyage. In what flation he served, is uncertain; Amerijo
but as he was an experienced sailor, and eminently skilful in Vepucci
all the sciences subservient to navigation, he seems to have ac-
quired such authority among his companions, that they wil-
lingly allowed him to have a chief share in directing their ope-
rations during the voyage. Soon after his return, he tranf-
mitted an account of his adventures and discoveries to one of
his countrymen; and labouring with the vanity of a traveller
to magnify his own exploits, he had the address and confidence
to frame his narrative, so as to make it appear that he had the
glory of having firit discovered the continent in the New World.
Amerigo's account was drawn up not only with art, but with
tome elegance. It contained an amusing history of his voyage,
and judicious observations upon the natural productions, the
inhabitants, and the customs of the countries which he had
visited. As it was the firit description of any part of the New
World that was published, a performance so well calculated to
gratify the pafiion of mankind for what is new and marvellous,
it circulated rapidly, and was read with admiration. The coun- From whom

the namne of

try of which Amerigo was fippofed to be the discoverer, came A,,eri,,c i
gradually to be called by his name. The caprice of mankind, FivCn to thle
often as unaccountable as unjust, has perpetuated this error.

b lerrera, dec, i. lib. iv. c. 1, 2, 3.

By

BOOK By the universal content of nations, AMERICA is the name
L-_JvJ h bestowed on this new quarter of the globe. The bold preten-

'499. sions of a fortunate impoflor have robbed the discoverer of the

New World of a diflindtion which belonged to him. The name
of Amerigo has supplanted that of Columbus; and mankind
may regret an ad of injuflice, which, having received the
fandion of time, it is now too late to redress '.
Voyage of DURING the fame year, another voyage of discovery was

ono Nig- undertaken. Columbus not only introduced the spirit of naval

enterprise into Spain, but all the first adventurers who diflin-
guifhed themselves in this new career, were formed by his in-
firudions, and acquired in his voyages the skill and informa-
tion which qualified them to imitate his example. Alonfo
Nigno, who had served under the admiral in his last expedition,
fitted out, in conjundion with Chriflopher Guerra, a merchant
of Seville, a single ship, and failed to the coast of Paria. This
voyage seems to have been conduced with greater attention to
private emolument, than to any general or national object.
Nigno and Guerra made no discoveries of any importance; but
they brought home such a return of gold and pearls, as in-
flamed their countrymen with thedefire of engaging in similar
adventures d.

,0oo. SOON after, Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of the admiral's
inuiryn3. companions in his firfi voyage, failed from Palos with four

Yancz Pin- ships. He flood boldly towards the south, and was the first
Zon. Spaniard who ventured to cross the equinodial line; but he

seems to have landed on no part of the coast beyond the mouth

C Sec NOTE XXII.
d 1'. Martyr, dec. p. 87. Hcrrera, dec. z. lib. iv. c. 5.

of

of the Maragnon, or river of the Amazons. All these navi- B 0 K
gators adopted the erroneous theory of Columbus, and believed a _-
that the countries which they had discovered were part of the 'soo
vast continent of Indiac.

DURING this firit year of the sixteenth century, that fertile The 1'Prn,

g uefe- dit::o

district of America, on the confines of which Pinzon had ftopt ver

{Br:l

short, was more fully discovered. The successful voyage of
Gama to the East Indies, having encouraged the king of Por-
tugal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not only to carry on trade,
but to attempt conquest, he gave the command of it to Pedro
Alvarez Cabral. In order to avoid the coast of Africa, where
he was certain of meeting with variable breezes, or frequent
calms, to retard his voyage, Cabral flood out to sea, and kept
so far to the weft, that, to his surprise, he found himself upon
the shore of an unknown country, in the tenth degree beyond
the line. He imagined, at firit, that it was some island in the
Atlantic ocean hitherto unobserved; but, proceeding along its
coast for several days, he was led gradually to believe, that a
country so extensive formed a part of some great continent.
This latter opinion was well founded. The country with which
he fell in belongs to that province in South America now known
by the name of Brasil. He landed; and having formed a very
high idea of the fertility of the foil, and agreeableness of the
climate, he took possession of it for the crown of Portugal, and
dispatched a ship to Lisbon with an account of this event, which
appeared to be no less important than it was unexpected'
Columbus's discovery of the New World was the effort of an
anive genius, enlightened by science, guided by experience.

Herrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. 95.
' Herrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 7.

and

13 00 K and aEting upon a regular plan, executed with no less courage

TI.
--.v-·-s than perseverance. But from this adventure of the Portuguese,

1500. it appears that chance might have accomplished that great de-

sign, which it is now the pride of human reason to have formed
and perfected. If the sagacity of Columbus had not condutctd
mankind to America, Cabral, by a fortunate accident, might
have led them, a few years later, to the knowledge of that ex-
tensive continent .

Mlchinntions WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by those fucceflive
lun'ibut voyages, were daily acquiring more enlarged ideas of the extent

and opulence of that quarter of the globe which Columbus had
made known to them, he himself, far from enjoying the tran-
quillity and honours with which his services should have been
recompenfed, was struggling with every distress in which the
envy and malevolence of the people under his command, or the
ingratitude of the court which he served, could involve him.
Though the pacification with Roldan broke the union and
weakened the force of the mutineers, it did not extirpate the
feeds of discord out of the island. Several of the malcontents
continued in arms, refuting to submit to the admiral. He
and his brothers were obliged to take the field alternately, in
order to check their incursions, or to punish their crimes. The
perpetual occupation and disquiet which this created, prevented
him from giving due attention to the dangerous machinations
of his enemies in the court of Spain. A good number of those
who were most diflatisfied with his administration, had em-
braced the opportunity of returning to Europe with the ships
which lie dispatchcd from St. Domingo. The final disappoint-
mcnlt of all their hopes inflamed the rage of there unfortunate

Ilcrrcra, dec. . lib, vii. c. 5.

adventurers

adventurers against Columbus to the utmost pitch. Their po- BOO K
verty and distress, by exciting compassion, rendered their ac-
cufations credible, and their complaints interetfing. They '50o '
teazed Ferdinand and Isabella incessantly with memorials, con-
taining the detail of their own grievances, and the articles of
their charge against Columbus. Whenever either the king or
queen appeared in public, they surrounded them in a tumul-
tuary manner, infifling with importunate clamours for payment
of the arrears due to them, and demanding vengeance upon
the author of their sufferings. They insulted the admiral's
sons wherever they met them, reproaching them as the off-
spring of the projecor, whose fatal curiosity had discovered
those pernicious regions which drained Spain of its wealth, and
would prove the grave of its people. Those avowed endeavours
of the malcontents from America to ruin Columbus, were fe-
conded by the secret, but more dangerous insinuations of that
party among the courtiers, who had always thwarted his
schemes, and envied his success and credit h.

FERDINAND was disposed to liften, not only with a willing, Tl.ir;i-

but with a partial ear, to these accusations. Notwitlhianding i1,,'',iI',
the flattering accounts which Columbus had given of the and iiubclia,
riches of America, the remittances from it had hitherto been
so scanty, that they fell far short of defraying the expcnce of
the armaments fitted out. The glory of thc difcovcry, toge-
ther with the profpeEt of remote commercial advantages, was
all that Spain had yet received in return for the escorts which
lie had made. But time had already diminilhcd the first fen-.
fations of joy which the discovery of a New World occasioned,
and fame alone was not an objtct to satisfy the cold iltcrctrcd

h Life of Colunbus, c. 85.
VOL. I. X nmind

BOO K mind of Ferdinand. The nature of commerce was then so little
A_--. underflood, that, where immediate gain was not acquired, the
'500' hope of diltant benefit, or of flow and moderate returns, was

totally disregarded. Ferdinand confidered Spain, on this ac-
count, as a loser by the enterprise of Columbus, and imputed
it to his mifcondud and incapacity for government, that a
country abounding in gold had yielded nothing of value to its
conquerors. Even Isabella, who, from the favourable opinion
which she entertained of Columbus, had uniformly protected
him, was shaken at length by the number and boldness of his
accusers, and began to fufped that a difaffetion so general
muff have been occasioned by real grievances, which called for
redress. The bishop of Badajos, with his usual animosity
againit Columbus, encouraged these suspicions, and confirmed
them.

Fatal cffets As soon as the queen began to give way to the torrent of
of this calumny, a resolution fatal to Columbus was taken. Francis

de Bovadilla, a knight of Calatrava, was appointed to repair
to Hifpaniela, with full powers to inquire into the conduct of
Columbus, and, if he found the charge of mal-adminifiration
proved, to supersede him, and assume the government of the
island. It was impossible to escape condemnation, when this
preposterous commission made it the interest of the judge to find
the person whom he was sent to try, guilty. Though Colum-
bus had now composed all the dissentions in the island; though
he had brought both Spaniards and Indians to submit peaceably
to his government; though he had made such effetual provi-
sion for working the mines, and cultivating the -country, as
would have secured a considerable revenue to the king, as well
as large profits to individuals, Bovadilla, without deigning to

attend

attend to the nature or merit of those services, discovered, from B 00 K
the moment that he landed in Hispaniola, a determined pur- tv-
pose of treating him as a criminal. He took poffeflion of the '500.
admiral's house in St. Domingo, from which he happened at
that time to be absent, and seized his effeds, as if he had been
already convidted he rendered himself master of the fort and
of the king's stores by violence; he required all persons to ac-
knowledge him as supreme governor; he set at liberty the
prisoners confined by the admiral, and summoned him to ap-
pear before his tribunal, in order to answer for his conduct;
transmitting to him, together with the summons, a copy of the
royal mandate, by which Columbus was enjoined to yield
implicit obedience to his commands.

COLUMBUS, though deeply asseted with the ingratitude Columbus

and injustice of Ferdinandand Isabella, did not hesitate a mo- ito pain.
ment about his own condut. He submitted to the will of his
sovereigns with a refpefful silence, and repaired direcly to the
court of that violent and partial judge whom they had autho-
rifed to try him. Bovadilla, without admitting him into his
presence, ordered him instantly to be arrested, to be loaded with
chains, and hurried on board a Ihip. Even under this humi- Oaober.
liating reverse of fortune, the firmness of mind which diftin-
guifhes the charaCter of Columbus, did not forsake him. Con-
fcious of his own integrity, and solacing himself with reflet-
ing upon the great things which he had atchieved, he endured
this insult offered to his character, not only with composure,
but with dignity. Nor had he the consolation of sympathy to
mitigate his sufferings. Bovadilla had already rendered him-
self so extremely popular, by granting various immunities to
the colony, by liberal donations of Indians to all who applied

X 2 for

BOOK for thfem, and by relaxing the reins of discipline and govern-
-v-= ment, that the Spaniards, who were mofily adventurers, whom
5OO' ° their indigence or crimes had impelled to abandon their native

country, expressed the most indecent fatisfadion with the dif-
grace and imprisonment of Columbus. They flattered them-
selves, that now they should enjoy an uncontrouled liberty,
more suitable to their disposition and former habits of life.
Among persons thus prepared to censure the proceedings, and
to asperse the characer of Columbus, Bovadilla collected ma-
terials for a charge againit him. All accusations, the mofi
improbable as well as inconsistent, were received. No in-
former, however infamous, was rejected. The result of this
inqueit, no less indecent than partial, he transmitted to Spain.
At the fame time, he ordered Columbus, with his two brothers,
to be carried thither in fetters; and, adding cruelty to insult,
he confined them in different ihips, and excluded them from
the comfort of that friendly intercourse which might have
toothed their common distress. But while the Spaniards in
Hispaniola viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedings of
Bovadilla with a general approbation, which reflecs diflonour
upon their name and country, one man flill retained the mc-
mory of the great actions which Columbus had performed, and
was touched with the fentimcnts of veneration and pity due to
his rank, his age, and his merit. Alonfo de Vallejo, the cap-
tain of the vcifel on board which the admiral was confined, as
soon as he was clear of the island, approached his prisoner with
-;rcat rcfpe6t, and offered to release him from the fetters with
v,hich he was unjustly loaded. " No," replied Columbus, witl
a generous indignation, " I wear thiefe irons in confcqucnce of
an order from my fovercigns. They shall find me as obedient
to this as to their other injunCtions. By their command I

}la .'

have been confined, and their command alone shall set me at BO () K
liberty ." -J

1 500.

FORTUNATELY, the voyage to Spain was extremely short. Nov. 23.

As soon as Ferdinand and Ifabclla were informed that Colum- but dp'rivci
bus was brought home a prisoner, and i n chains, they perceived of ,all auio-
at once what universal astonishment this event mufi occasion,
and what an impreion to their disadvantage it must make.
All Europe, they foresaw, would be filled with indignation at
this ungenerous requital of a man who had performed actions
worthy of the highest recompence, and would exclaim against
the injustice of the nation, to which he had been such an emi-
nent benefactor, as well as against the ingratitude of the
princes whose reign he had rendered illustrious. Ashamed of
their own conduct and eager not only to make some reparation
for this injury, but to efface the slain which it might fix upon
their character, they instantly issued orders to set Columbus at Dec. 17.
liberty, invited him to court, and remitted money to enable
him to appear there in a rranner suitable to his rank. When
he entered the royal prcfence, Columbus threw himself at the
feet of his Sovereigns. He remained for some time silent; the
various passions which agitated his mind fupprcfing his power
of utterance. At length he recovered himfclf, and vindicated
his conduct in a long discourse, producing the mons falisfying
proofs of his own integrity as well as good intention, and evi-
dence, no lcfs clear, of the malevolence of his cnemics, who,
not satisfied with having ruined his fortune, labourcd to de-
prive him of what alone was now left, his honour and his fame'.
Ferdinand received him with decent civility, and Isabella witl

' life of Colturnus, c. 56. Ilerrcra, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 8.--11. Gom;r I l 1.
c. 23. Ovictdo, lb. iii. c. 6.

tcinlcrncfi;

B K tenderness and refpe&. They both expressed their sorrow for

II.
av__mm what had happened, disavowed their knowledge of it, and joined

'500. in promising him proteEtion and future favour. But though

they instantly degraded Bovadilla, in order to remove from
themselves any suspicion of having authorised his violent pro-
ceedings, they did not restore to Columbus his jurifdidion and
privileges as viceroy of those countries which he had discovered.
Though- willing to appear the avengers of Columbus's wrongs,
that illiberal jealousy which prompted them to invet Bovadilla
with such authority as put it in his power to treat the admiral
with indignity, flill subsisted. They were afraid to trust a man
to whom they were so highly indebted, and retaining him at
court under various pretexts, they appointed Nicholas de Ovan-
do, a knight of the military order of Alcantara, governor of
Hispaniola'.

COLUMBUS was deeply affected with this new injury, which

came from hands that seemed to be employed in making repa-
ration for his past sufferings. The sensibility with which great
minds feel every thing that implies any suspicion of their inte-
grity, or that wears the aspea of an affront, is exquisite. Co-
lumnbus had experienced both from the Spaniards; and their
ungenerous condut exasperated him to such a degree, that he
could no longer conceal the sentiments which it excited.
Wherever he went, he carried about with him, as a memorial
of their ingratitude, those fetters with which he had been
loaded. They were conflantly hung up in his chamber, and
he gave orders that when he died they should be buried in his
grave'.

k Herrcra, dec. i. lib. iv c. Io.-iz. Life of Columbus, c. 87.
I Life of Columbus, c. 86. p. 577.

MEANWHILE,

MEANWHILE, the spirit of discovery, notwithstanding the BOOK

severe check which it received by the ungenerous treatment of ---
the man, who first excited it in Spain, continued acive and vi- Pro'rSef;i of
gorous. Roderigo di Baitidas, a person of diftindion, fitted out discovery.
two ships in co-partnery with John de la Cosa, who having January
served under the admiral in two of his voyages, was deemed the
most skilful pilot in Spain. They fleered direcly towards the
continent, arrived on the coast of Paria, and proceeding to the
weft, discovered all the coast of the province now known by the
name of Terra Firma, from Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien.
Not long after Ojeda, with his former associate, Amerigo Ve-
fpucci, set out upon a second voyage, and being unacquainted
with the destination of Bafiidas, held the fame course, and
touched at the fame places. The voyage of Baftidas was pro-
fperous and lucrative, that of Ojeda unfortunate. But both
tended to increase the ardour of discovery; for in proportion
as the Spaniards acquired a more extensive knowledge of the
American continent, their idea of its opulence and fertility
increased m.

BEFORE these adventurers returned from their voyages, a Ovando ap-

fleet was equipped, at the public expence, for carrying over pointed go-
Ovando, the new governor, to Hispaniola. His pretence there Hispaniola.
was extremely requisite, in order to flop the inconsiderate ca-
reer of Bovadilla, whose imprudent administration threatened
the settlement with ruin. Conscious of the violence and ini-
quity of his proceedings against Columbus, he continued to
make it his sole objec to gain the favour and support of his
countrymen, by accommodating himself to their passions and

Hcrrera, dec. x. lib. iv. c. i .

prejudices.

BOOK prejudices. With this view, he established regulations, in
L.-v-_..i every point the reverse of those which Columbus deemed effen-

I50"1 tial to the prosperity of the colony. Inflead of the severe dif-

cipline, necessary in order to habituate the dissolute and cor-
rupted members of which the society was composed, to the
restraints of law and Subordination, he suffered them to enjoy
such uncontrouled license, as encouraged the wildest excesses.
Instead of protecting the Indians, he gave a legal fandion to
the oppreflion of that unhappy people. He took the exac
number of such as survived their past calamities, divided them
into diftint classes, difiributed them in property among his
adherents, and reduced the whole island to a slate of complete
servitude. As the avarice of the Spaniards was too rapacious
and impatient to try any method of acquiring wealth but that
of searching for gold, this servitude became as grievous as it
was unjust. The Indians were driven in crowds to the moun-
tains, and compelled to work in the mines by mailers who
imposed their talks without mercy or discretion. Labour, so
disproportioned to their strength and former habits of life,
wafted that feeble race of men, with such rapid consumption, as
must have soon terminated in the utter extinction of the ancient
inhabitants of the island I.

New rc-e;:l- THE neccflity of applying a speedy remedy to those difor-
bliihd.' ders, hastened Ovando's departure. He had the command of

the most refpedable armament hitherto fitted out for the New
World. It consisted of thirty-two ships, on board of which two
thousand five hundred persons embarked, with an intention of
fettling in the country. Upon the arrival of the new governor

n Hcrrern, dec. i. lib. iv. c. I1, &c. Oviedo, Hiif lib. iii. c. 6, p. 97. Bcnzon.
Flift. lib, i. c. I . p. 5 1.

with

with this powerful reinforcement to the colony, Bovadilla re- B o K
signed his-charge, and was commanded to return initantly to -
Spain, in order to answer for his conduct. Roldan, and the '5
other ringleaders of the mutineers who had been most active in
opposing Columbus, were required to leave the island at the
fame time. A proclamation was issued declaring the natives to
be free fubjeds of Spain, of whom no service was to be exacted
contrary to their own inclination, and without paying them an
adequate price for their labour. With refpea to the Spaniards
themselves, various regulations were made, tending to suppress
the licentious spirit which had been so fatal to the colony, and
to establish that reverence for law and order on which society
is founded, and to which it is indebted for its increase and
flability. In order to limit the exorbitant gain which private
persons were supposed to make by working the mines, an ordi-
nance was published, directing all the gold to be brought to a
public fmelting-houfe, and declaring one half of it to be the
property of the crown °.

WHILE these iteps were taking for securing the tranquillity The difa-

and welfare of the colony which Columbus had planted, he greeablef tu-
himself was engaged in the unpleasant employment of solicit- lumbus.
ing the favour of an ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding
all his merit and services, he solicited in vain. He de-
manded, in terms of the original capitulation in one thousand
four hundred and ninety-two, to be reinflated in his office of
viceroy over the countries which he had discovered. By a
strange fatality, the circumitance which he urged in support of
his claim, determined a jealous monarch to rejet it. The

o Solorzano Politica Indiana. lib. I. c. i1. Hcrrera, dec. x. lib, iv. c. 12.
VO.L. . Y grcatncfs

B 00 K grcatnefs of his discoveries, and the profped of their increasing

value, made Ferdinand confider the concessions in the capitula-
1502. tion as extravagant and impolitic. He was afraid of intruting

a fubjedt with the exercise of a jurfdidion that now appeared to
be so extremely extensive, and might grow to be no less formid-
able. He inspired Isabella with the fame suspicions; and under
various pretexts, equally frivolous and unjust, they eluded all
Columbus's requisitions to perform that which a solemn treaty
bound them to accomplish. After attending the court of Spain
for near two years, as an humble suitor, he found it impossible
to remove Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and per-
ceived, at length that he laboured in vain, when he urged
a claim of justice or merit with an interefled and unfeeling
prince.

He forms B T even this ungenerous return did not discourage him from
new schemes
of difcovcry. pursuing the great objec which first called forth his inventive

genius, and excited him to attempt discovery. To open a
new passage to the East Indies was his original and favourite
scheme. This fiill engrossed his thoughts; and either from his
own observations in his voyage to Paria, or from some obscure
hint of the natives, or from the accounts given by Baftidas and
de la Cosa, of their expedition, he conceived an opinion that,
beyond the continent of America, there was a sea which ex-
tended to the East Indies, and hoped to find some strait or nar-
row neck of land by which a communication might be opened
with it and the part of the ocean already known. By a very
fortunate conjecture, he supposed this strait or isthmus to be
situatcd near the gulph of Darien. Full of this idea, though
he was now of an advanced age, worn out with fatigue, and
broken with infirmities, he offered, with the alacrity of a

youthful

youthful adventurer, to undertake a voyage which would afcer- B 0 K
tain this important point, and perfedt the grand scheme which i
from the beginning he proposed to accomplish. Several cir- 1502.
cumfiances concurred in disposing Ferdinand and Isabella to
lend a favourable ear to this proposal. They were glad to
have the pretext of any honourable employment for removing
from court a man witl whose demands they deemed it impo-
litic to comply, and whose services it was indecent to neglect.
Though unwilling to reward Columbus, they were not insen-
fible of his merit, and from their experience of his skill and
conduct, had reason to give credit to his conjectures, and to
confide in his success. To these considerations, a third must
be added of flill more powerful influence. About this time
the Portuguese fleet, under Cabral, arrived from the Indies;
and, by the richness of its cargo, gave the people of Europe a
more perfec idea, than they had hitherto been able to form,
of the opulence and fertility of the east. The Portuguese had
been more fortunate in their discoveries than the Spaniards.
They had opened a communication with countries where in-
dufiry, arts, and elegance flourished; and where commerce had
been longer established, and carried to greater extent than in
any region of the earth. Their first voyages thither yielded
immediate, as well as vast returns of profit, in commodities
extremely precious and in great request. Lisbon became im-
mediately the feat of commerce and of wealth; while Spain
had only the c:xpctation of remote benefit, and of future gain,
from the weiern world. Nothing, then, could be more ac-
certal '

. the Spa.n 1 ds than Columbus's offer to conduEt them

to the cart, by L . ute which he expected to be shorter, as well
as left dancivus, than that which the Portuguese had taken.

Y 2 Ecnt

BOOK. Even Ferdinand was routed by such a profpet, and warmly

11.
t-..-. approved of the undertaking.

1502.

His fourth BUT, interesting as the object of this voyage was to the na-
voyage. tion, Columbus could procure only four small barks, the largest

of which did not exceed seventy tons in burden, for performing
it. Accuflomed to brave danger, and to engage in arduous
undertakings with inadequate force, he did not befitate to ac-
cept the command of this pitiful squadron. His brother Bar-
tholomew, and his second son Ferdinand, the historian of his
actions, accompanied him. He failed from Cadiz on the ninth
of May, and touched, as usual, at the Canary Islands; from
thence he purposed to have flood diretly for the continent;
but his largest vessel was so clumsy and unfit for service, as con-
firained him to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of exchang-
ing her for tome ship of the fleet that had carried over Ovando.
June 29. When he arrived off St. Domingo, he found eighteen of

these ihips ready loaded, and on the point of departing for
Spain. Columbus immediately acquainted the governor with
the destination of his voyage, and the accident which had
obliged him to alter his route. He requested permission to
enter the harbour, not only that he might negociate the ex-
change of his ship, but that he might take ihelter during a
violent hurricane, of which he discerned the approach from
various prognostics, which his experience and sagacity had
taught him to observe. On that account, he advised him like-
wife to put off for some days the departure of the fl .et bound
for Spain. But Ovando refused his request, and despised his
counsel. Under circumstances in which humanity would have
afforded refuge to a stranger, Columbus was denied admittance

into

into a country of which he had discovered the exifience, and Bno) i
acquired the poffeflion. His salutary warning, which might I
have been attended to without any inconveniency, was regarded '2'
as the dream of a visionary prophet, who arrogantly pretended
to predict an event beyond the reach of human foresight. The
fleet set fail for Spain. Next night the hurricane came on with
dreadful impetuosity. Columbus, aware of the danger, took

. ,precautions against it, and saved his little squadron. The fleet

·A deflined for Spain met with the fate which the rashness and
E'; obstinacy of its commanders merited. Of eighteen ships two

or three only escaped. In this general wreck perished Bova-
dilla, Roldan, and the greater part of those who had been the
most active in persecuting Columbus, and oppressing the In-
dians. Together with themselves, all the wealth which they
had acquired by their injustice and cruelty was swallowed up.
It exceeded in value two hundred thousand peso's; an immense
fum at that period, and sufficient not only to have screened them
from any revere scrutiny into their condut, but to have fe-
cured them a gracious reception in the Spanish court. Among
the ships that escaped, one had on board all the effects of Co-
lumbus which had been recovered from the wreck of his
fortune. Historians, firuck with the exaa discrimination of
charaters, as well as the just ditribution of rewards and
punishments, conspicuous in those events, universally attri-
bute them to an immediate interposition of divine Providence,
in order to avenge the wrongs of an injured man, and to punish
the oppressors of an innocent people. Upon the ignorant and
fuperfiitious race of men, who were witnesses of this occurrence,
it made a different imprcffion. From an opinion, which vulgar
admiration is apt to entertain with refpet to persons who have
distinguished themselves by their sagacity and inventions, they

believed

B o K believed Columbus to be possesed of supernatural powers, and
AmJ imagined that he had conjured up this dreadful florm by

'502. magical art, and incantations, in order to be revenged of his

enemies .

July 14. COLUM BUS soon left Hispaniola, where he had met with such

Searches in
vanforapaf- an inhospitable reception, and flood towards the continent.
sage to the After a tedious and dangerous voyage, he discovered Guanaia,.

an island not far ditfant from the coast of Honduras. There
he had an interview with some inhabitants of the continent,
who arrived in a large canoe. They appeared to be a people
more civilized, and who had made greater progress in the
knowledge of useful arts, than any whom he had hitherto dif-
covered. In return to the inquiries which the Spaniards made,
with their usual eagerness, concerning the places where they
got the gold which they wore by way of ornament, they di-
redted them to countries situated to the weft, in which, ac-
cording to their description, gold was found in such profusion,
that it was applied to the most common uses. Instead of fleer-
ing in quest of a country so inviting, which would have con-
duded them along the coast of Yucatan to the rich empire of
Mexico, Columbus was so bent upon his favourite scheme of
finding out that strait which communicated with the Indian
ocean, that he bore away to the east towards the gulf of Da-
rien. In this navigation he discovered all the coast of the con-
tinent, from Cape Gracias a Dios, to a harbour which, on
account of its beauty and security, he called Porto Bello. He
searched, in vain, for the imaginary strait, through which he
exped to make his way into an unknown sea ; and though
he went on flore fcveral times, and advanced into the country,

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 7, 9. Ilcrrera, dec. i. lib. v. c. i, z. Life of Columbus, c. 88.

he

he did not penetrate so far as to cross the narrow isthmus which n ) o K
separates the gulf of Mexico from the great southern ocean. -v
He was so much delighted, however, with the fertility of the 15 2.
country, and conceived such an idea of its wealth, from the
specimens of gold produced by the natives, that he rcfolved to
leave a small colony upon the river Belem, in the province of
Veragua, under the command of his brother, and to return
himself to Spain, in order to procure what was requisite for ,1oj.
rendering the establishment permanent. But the ungovernable
spirit of the people under his command, deprived Columbus of
the glory of planting the first colony on the continent of Ame-
rica. Their insolence and rapaciousness provoked the natives
to take arms, and as they were a more hardy and warlike race
of men than the inhabitants of the islands, they cut off part of
the Spaniards, and obliged the reft to abandon a fiation which
they were unable to maintain 1.

THIS repulse, the first that the Spaniards met with from any Shipwrecked
of the American nations, was not the only misfortune that on the coast

of Jamaica.

besel Columbus; it was followed by a succession of all the dif-
afters to which navigation is exposed. Furious hurricanes,
with violent forms of thunder and lightning, threatened his
leaky vessels with deftrution; while his discontented crew,
exhausted with fatigue, and destitute of provisions, was unwil-
ling or unable to execute his commands. One of his ships
perished; he was obliged to abandon another, as unfit for ser-
vice; and with the two which remained, he quitted that part of
the continent which in his anguish he named the Coast of
Vexation', and bore away for Hispaniola. New distresses

s Herrera, dec. x. lib. v. c. 5. &c. Life of Columbus, c. 89, &c. Ovicdo,
lib. iii. c. 9. ' La costa de los contraftcs.

awaited

B OOK awaited him in this voyage. He was driven back by a violent

II.
.-v_ tempet from the coafi of Cuba, his ships fell foul of one another,
1503. and were so much (hattered by the ihock, that with the utmost
June 24. difficulty they reached Jamaica, where he was obliged to run

them aground, to prevent them from finking. The measure
of his calamities seemed now to be full. He was cast ashore
upon an island at a considerable distance from the only fettle-
ment of the Spaniards in America. His ships were ruined
beyond the poilibility of being repaired. To convey an account
of his situation to Hispaniola, appeared impracticable; and
without this it was in vain to expea relief. His genius, fertile in
resources, and moit vigorous in those perilous extremities when
feeble minds abandon themselves to despair, discovered the only
expedient which afforded any profpea of deliverance. He had
recourse to the hospitable kindness of the natives, who confider-
ing the Spaniards as beings of a superior nature, were eager, on
every occasion, to minister to their wants. From them he ob-
tained two of their canoes, each formed out of the trunk of a
single tree, hollowed with fire, and so mis-shapen and aukward
as hardly to merit the name of boats. In these, which were fit
only for creeping along the coast, or crofing from one bay to
another, Mendez, a Spaniard, and Fiefchi, a Genoese, two
gentlemen particularly attached to Columbus, gallantly offered
to set out for Hispaniola, upon a voyage of above thirty
leagues '. This they accomplished in ten days, after surmount-
ing incredible dangers, and enduring such fatigue, that several
of the Indians who accompanied them funk under it, and died.
The attention paid to them by the governor of Hispaniola was
neither such as their courage merited, nor the distress of the
persons from whom they came, required. Ovando, from a

: Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 9.

mean

mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of allowing him to set B 0 K
his foot in the island under his government. This ungenerous
passion hardened his heart againfi every tender sentiment, which 503
reflection upon the services and misfortunes of that great man,
or compassion for his own fellow-citizens, involved in the fame
calamities, must have excited. Mendez and Fiefchi spent eight
months in soliciting relief for their commander and associates,
without any profpet of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various passions agitated the mind of H-ti;i:.-

Columbus, and his companions in adversity. At firit the ex- ,nlil,.';:'
pedation of speedy deliverance, from the success of Mcndez
and Fiefchi's voyage, cheered the spirits of the most desponding.
After some time the more timorous began to fufpeat that they
had miscarricd in their daring attempt. At length all con- 5.
eluded that they had perished. The ray of hope which had
broke in- upon them, made their condition appear now more
dismal. Despair, heightened by disappointment, fettled in
every breast. Their last resource had failed, and nothing re-
mained but to end their miserable days among naked favagcs,
far from their country and their friends. The seamen, in a
transport of rage, rose in open mutiny, threatened the life of
Columbus, whom they reproached as the author of all their
calamities, seized ten canoes, which he had purchased from the
hTdians, and despising his rcmonftrances and entrcatics, made
off with them to a difiant part of the island. At the fame tim',
the natives murmured at the long residence cf the Spaniards inl
their country. As their indufiry was not greater than that of
their neighbours in Hispaniola, like them, they found the bur-
den of supporting so many firangers to be altogether intolerWl ;i.
They began to bring in provisions with rcluctance, they fur -

VOL. I. Z ih.!

0l(o K nifhed them with a sparing hand, and threatened to withdraw
11
A.----- those supplies altogether. Such a resolution must quickly have

5s- b)een fatal to the Spaniards. Their safety depended upon the

good-will of the Indians; and unless they could revive the ad-
miration and reverence with which that simple people had at
first beheld them, destruction was unavoidable. Though the
licentious proceedings of the mutineers had, in a great measure,
effaced those impreflions which had been so favourable to the
Spaniards, the ingenuity of Columbus suggested a happy arti-
fice, that not only restored but heightened the high opinion
which the Indians had originally entertained of them. By his
skill in astronomy, he knew that there was shortly to be a total
eclipse of the moon. He assembled all the principal persons of
the diftrid around him on the day before it happened, and,
after reproaching them for their fickleness in withdrawing their
affection and assistance from men whom they had lately revered,
he told them that the Spaniards were servants of the Great
Spirit who dwells in heaven, who made and governs the
world; that he, offended at their refuting to support men who
were the objeCts of his peculiar favour, was preparing to punish
this crime with exemplary severity, and that very night the
moon ihould withhold her light, and appear of a bloody hue,
as a sign of the divine wrath, and an emblem of the vengeance
ready to fall upon them. To this marvellous prediction some
of them listened with the careless indifference peculiar to the
people of America; others with the credulous astonishment
natural to barbarians. But when the moon began gradually to
be darkened, and at length appeared of a red colour, all were
itruck with terror. They run with confiernation to their houses,
and returning instantly to Columbus loaded with provisions,
threw them at his feet, conjuring him to intercede with the

Great

Great Spirit to avert the deftrudion with which they were BOOK
threatened. Columbus, seeming to be moved by their en- -
treaties, promised to comply with their desire. The eclipse 1504'
went off, the moon recovered its splendour, and from that day
the Spaniards were not only furnished profusely with provisions,
but the natives, with fuperflitious attention, avoided every
thing that could give them offence'.

DURI ; G those tranfadtions, the mutineers had made repeated A cruel addi-

attempts to pass over to Hispaniola in the canoes which they had tion to thil"i.
seized. But, from their own mifconduat, or the violence of the
winds and currents, their efforts were all unsuccessful. Enraged
at this disappointment, they marched towards that part of the
island where Columbus remained, threatening him with new
danger and insults. While they were advancing, an event
happened, more cruel and affliting than any calamity which
he dreaded from them. The governor of Hispaniola, whose
mind was frill filled with some dark suspicions of Columbus,
sent a small bark to Jamaica, not to deliver his difireffed coun-
trymen, but to spy out their condition. Left the sympathy of
those whom he employed should afford them relief, contrary to
his intention, he gave the comman:d of this vessel to Efcobar,
an inveterate enemy of Columbus, who adhering to his inilruc-
tions with malignant accuracy, cast anchor at some distance
from the island, approached the shore in a finall boat, obfcrvcd
the wretched plight of the Spaniards, delivered a letter of empty
compliment to the admiral, received his answer, and departcd.
When the Spaniards first descried the veffcl flanding towards
the island, every heart exulted, as if the long-cxpcacd hour of

Life of Columbus, c. 103. I-erlera, dec. r. lib. vi. c. 5, 6. Bcn.' n, Ilifl. ili.
c. 14.

Z 2 1 'ir

0 0o K their deliverance had at length arrived; but when it disappeared

If.
--v-. j so suddenly, they funk into the deepest dejection, and all their

1504 hopes died away. Columbus alone, though he felt most fen-

sibly this wanton insult which Ovando added to his past neglect,
retained such composure of mind, as to be able to cheer his
followers. He assured them, that Mendez and Fiefchi had
reached Hispaniola in safety; that they would speedily procure
ships to carry them off; and as Efcobar's vefrel could not take
them all on board, that he had refused to go with her, because
he was determined never to abandon the faithful companions
of his difirefs. Soothed with the expectation of speedy de-
liverance, and delighted with his apparent generosity in at-
tending more to their preservation than to his own safety, their
spirits revived, and he regained their confidence ".

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have refifed the

mutineers, who were now at hand. All his endeavours to
reclaim those desperate men had no effect but to increase their
frenzy. Their demands became every day more extravagant,
and their intentions more violent and bloody. The common
safety rendered it necessary to oppose them with open force.
Columbus, who had been long afflicted with the gout, could
not take the field. His brother, the Adelantado, marched
May 20. against them. They quickly met. The mutineers rejecded

with scorn terms of accommodation, which he once more of-
sered them, and rushed on boldly to the attack. They fell not
upon an enemy unprepared to receive them. In the first shock,
fevcral of their most daring leaders were slain. The Adelan-
tado, whose strength was equal to his courage, closed with their

v Life of Columbus, c. 104. HeI- rra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 17.

captain,

captain, wounded, disarmed, and took him prisoner x. At fightl
of this, the reft fled with a dastardly fear, suitable to their for- t--'.-.-
mer insolence. Soon after, they submitted in a body to Co- '
lumbus, and bound themselves by the molt folcmn oaths to
obey all his commands. Hardly was tranquillity rc-eftablificd,
when the ships appeared, whose arrival Columbus had promiscd
with great address, though he could forcfec it with little cer-
tainty. With transports of joy, the Spaniards quitted an island
in which the unfeeling jealousy of Ovando had suffered them
to languish above a year, exposed to misery in all its various
forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the governor, with the Aug. i
mean artifice of a vulgar mind, that labours to atone for insolence His ddivel -

.lnncc, anl :ir

by servility, fawned on the man whom he envied, and had at- rival at Hit-
tempted to ruin. He received Columbus with the most fludied paniola
respeCt, lodged him in his own house, and distinguished him
with every mark of honour. But, amidst those over-ated
demonstrations of regard, he could not conceal the hatred and
malignity latent in his heart. He set at liberty the captain of
the mutineers, whom Columbus had brought over, in chains,
to be tried for his crimes, and threatened such as had adhered
to the admiral with proceeding to a judicial inquiry into their
condud. Columbus submitted in silence to what he could not
redress; but discovered an extreme impatience to quit a country
under the jurifdiation of a man who had treated him, on every
occasion, with inhumanity and injustice. His preparations
were soon finishcd, and he set fail for Spain with two flips. scl,t. .
Disasters similar to those which had accompanied him through

' Life of Columbus, c. 107 I-Icrrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. ii.

I,! i,

B oO K life continued to pursue him to the end of his career. One of

II.
--v_ his vessels being disabled, was soon forced back to St. Domingo;
'504. the other, ihattered by violent storms, failed seven hundred
December. leagues with jury-mafts, and reached with difficulty the port of

St. Lucar .
Death of THERE he received the account of an event the most fatal

Novl 9. that could have befallen him, and which completed his mif-

fortunes. This was the death of his patroness queen Isabella,
in whose justice, humanity, and favour, he confided as his last
rcfource. None now remained to redress his wrongs, or to
reward him for his services or sufferings, but Ferdinand, who
had so long opposed and so often injured him. To solicit a
prince thus prejudiced against him, was an occupation no less
irksome than hopeless. In this, however, was Columbus
doomed to employ the close of his days. As soon as his health
was in some degree re-ellablifhed, he repaired to court; and
though he was received there with civility barely decent, he
plied Ferdinand with petition after petition, demanding the
punishment of his oppressors, and the reflitution of all the pri-
vileges bheflowed upon him by the capitulation of one thousand
four hundred and ninety-two. Ferdinand amused him with
fair words and unmeaning promises. Instead of granting his
claims, he proposed expedients in order to elude them, and
spun out the affair with such apparent art, as plainly discoverel
his intention that it should never be terminated. The declining
health of Columbus flattered Ferdinand with the hopes of being
soon delivered from an importunate suitor, and encouraged him
to pcrfcvcre in this illiberal plan. Nor was he deceived in his

Y Life of Columbus, c. o10. Hlcrrcra, dec. i. lib. vi, c. 2.

expctations.

expecations. Disgusted with the ingratitude of a monarch BOOK
whom he had served with such fidelity and success, exhaufied with -
the fatigues and hardships which he had endured, and broken '504.
with the infirmities which these brought upon him, Columbus Death of Co-
ended his life at Valladolid on the twentieth of May one thou- luinbus.
sand five hundred and fix, in the fifty-ninth year of his age.
He died with a composure of mind suitable to the magnanimity
which distinguished his character, and with sentiments of piety
becoming that supreme refpedt for religion, which he mani-
felled in every occurrence of his life

Life of Columbus, c. Io8. Herrera, dec 1. lib. vi. c. 13, 14, 15.

S

# BOOK III.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

B O O K III.

V H I L E Columbus was employed in his lafi voyage, B OOK
several events worthy of notice happened in Hispaniola. L-
The colony there, the parent and nurse of all the fubfe- s taf4
quent eflablifhments of Spain in the New World, gradually colcny in
acquired the form of a regular and prosperous society. The Hifanio1:.
humane solicitude of Ifatella to protet the Indians from op-
pression, and particularly the proclamation, by which the Spa-
niards were prohibited to compel them to work, retarded, it is
true, for some time, the progress of improvement. The na-
tives, who confidered exemption from toil as supreme felicity,
scorned every allurement and reward by which they were in-
vited to labour. The Spaniards had not a sufficient number of
hands either to work the nirnes or to cultivate the foil. Several
of the first colonifis, who had been accustomed to the service of
the Indians, quitted the ifand, when deprived of thofc inflru-
mcnts without which they knew not how to carry on any opc-

VOL. . A a r:tion.

Bl0 K ration. Many of those who came over with Ovando, were

Ill a-_-.i seized with the distempers peculiar to the climate, and in a

'504. short space above a thousand of them died. At the fame time,

the demand of one half of the produt of the mines as the royal
share, was found to be an exaction so exorbitant, that no
adventurers would engage to work them upon such terms.
In order to save the colony from ruin, Ovando ventured to re-
,505. lax the rigour of the royal edics. He made a new diftribu-

tion ;bs the Indians among the Spaniards, compelling them to
labour, for a flated time, in digging the mines, or in cultivat-
ing the ground; but, in order to ikreen himself from the im-
putation of having fubjeded them again to servitude, he en-
joined their mafiers to pay them a certain fum, as the price of
their work. He reduced the royal share of the gold found in
the mines from the half to the third part, and soon after low-
ered it to a fifth, at which it long remained. Notwithstanding
Isabella's tender concern for the good treatment of the Indians,
and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve the royal revenue, Ovan-
do persuaded the court to approve of both these regulations '.

Wnrwith the BUT the Indians, after enjoying respite from oppression,
Indianl. though during a ihort interval, now felt the yoke of bondage

to be so galling, that they made several attempts to vindicate
their own liberty. This the Spaniards confidered as rebellion,
and took arms in order to reduce them to fubjedion. When
war is carried on between nations whose Ilate of improvement
is in any degree similar, the means of defence bear some pro-
portion to those employed in the attack; and in this equal
contcft such efforts must be made, such talents are displayed,

Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. v. c. 3.

and

and such passions roused, as exhibit mankind to view in a situ- BOO K
ation no less firiking than interesting. It is one of the noblcft .-v--
funtions ofhiftory, to observe and to delineate men at a june- so05
ture when their minds are most violently agitated, and all their
powers and passions are called forth. Hence the operations of
war, and the struggles between contending states, have been
deemed by historians, ancient ns well as modern, a capital and
important article in the annals of human actions. But in a
contest between naked savages, and one of the most warlike of
the European nations, where science, courage, and discipline on
one fide, were opposed by timidity, ignorance, and disorder on
the other, a particular detail of everns would be as unpleasant
as uninftrudive. If the fimpliciry and innocence of the in-
dians had inspired the Spaniards with humanity, had softened
the pride of superiority into compafion, and had induced them
to improve the inhabitants of the New World, instead of op-
pressing them, some sudden acts of violence, like the too rigo-
rous chastisements of impatient 'nftrutors, might have been
related without horror. But, unfortunately, this consciousness
of Superiority operated in a different manner. The Spaniards
were advanced so far beyond the natives of America in improve-
ment of every kind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be beings of an inferior na-
ture, who were not intitled to the rights and privileges of men.
In peace they fubjedted them to servitude. In war, they paid
no regard to those laws, which, by a tacit convention between
contending nations, regulate hostility, an- set some bounds to
its rage. They confidered them not as men fighting in defence
of their liberty, but as slaves, who had revolted against their
m:.ftcrs. Their caziques, when taken, were condemned, like
tbhc iadcrs of banditti, to the most cruel and ignominious pu-

A a 2 niflimcltca;

B OOTK punishments; and all their subjects, without regarding the di-

,-r-,j- ftination of ranks eflablifhed among them, were reduced to the
'505 fame state of abjed slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments

were hostilities carried on againfi the cazique of Higuey, a pro-
vince at the eastern extremity of the island. This ,war was
occasioned by the perfidy of the Spaniards, in violating a treaty
which they had made with the natives, and it was terminated
by hanging up the cazique, who defended his people with bra-
very so far superior to that of his countrymen, as intitled
him to a better fate b

The cruel THE conduct of Ovando, in another part of the island, was
and treache-
rolls conduat fill more treacherous and cruel. The province anciently nam-
of Ovando. ed Xaragua, which extends from the fertile plain where Leo-

gane is now situated, to the western extremity of the island,
was subjet to a female cazique, named Anacoana, highly re-
speded by the natives. She, from that partial fondness with
which the women of America were attached to the Europeans,
(the cause of which shall be afterwards explained) had always
courted the friendship of the Spaniards, and loaded them with
good offices. But some of the adherents of Roldan having
fettled in her country, were so much exasperated at her endea-
vouring to restrain their exceifes, that they accused her of hav-
ing formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and to exterminate
the Spaniards. Ovando, though he knew well how little cre-
dit was due to such proffligate men, marched, without further,
inquiry, towards Xaragua, with three hundred foot and seventy
horsemen. To prevent the Indians from taking alarm at this
hoflile appearance, he gave out that his sole intention was to

b I-Ierrera, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 9, 1o.

visit

visit Anacoana, to whom his countrymen had been so much B O K
indebted, in the most refpedful manner, and to regulate with _v-
her the mode of levying the tribute payable to the king of '5'
Spain. Anacoana, in order to receive this illustrious guefit with
due honour, assembled the principal men in her dominions, to
the number of three hundred, and advancing at the head of
there, accompanied by a vast croud of persons of inferior rank,
she welcomed Ovando with songs and dances, according to the
mode of the country, and condudted him to the place of her
residence. There he was feasted, for some days, with all the
kindness of simple hospitality, and amused with the games and
fpeEacles usual among the Americans upon occasions of mirth
and festivity. But, amidit the security which this inspired,
Ovando was meditating the defRrudion of his unfufpicious en-
tertainer and her fubjeds; and the mean perfidy with which
he executed this scheme, equalled his barbarity in forming it.
Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians the parade of an Eu-
ropean tournament, he advanced with his troops, in battle
array, towards the house in which Anacoana and the chiefs
who attended her were assembled. The infantry took posses-
sion of all the avenues which led to the village. The horsemen
encompassed the house. These movements were the object of
admiration without any mixture of fear, until, upon a signal
which had been concerted, the Spaniards suddenly drew their
swords, and rushed upon the Indians, defenceless, and aflo-
nifhed at an ad of treachery which exceeded the conception of
undesigning men. In a moment Anacoana was secured. All
her attendants were seized and bound. Fire was set to the
house; and, without examination or convidion, all these un-
happy persons, the most illustrious in their own country, were
consumed in the flames. Anacoana was reserved for a more

ignominious

3 O K ignominious fate. She was carried in chains to Saint Domingo,

and, after the formality of a trial before Spanish judges, ihe
1505. was condemned upon the evidence of those very men who had

betrayed her, to be publicly hanged'.

Reduaion of OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious treatment of
the Indies,
and its efflcts. their princes and nobles, who were objects of their highest re-

verence, the people in all the provinces of Hispaniola submit-
ted, without farther resistance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon
the death of Isabella, all the regulations tending to mitigate
the rigour of their servitude were forgotten. The small gra-
tuity paid to them as the price of their labour was withdrawn;
and at the fame time the talks imposed upon them were in-
c6. created. Ovando, without any restraint, distributed Indians

among his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to whom the
queen had left by will one half of the revenue arising from the
settlements in the New World, conferred grants of a similar
nature upon his courtiers, as the least expensive mode of re-
warding their services. They farmed out the Indians, of
whom they were rendered proprietors, to their countrymen
fettled in Hispaniola; and that wretched people, being com-
pelled to labour in order to satisfy the rapacity of both, the
exadions of their oppressors no longer knew any bounds. But,
barbarous as their policy was, and fatal to the inhabitants of
Hispaniola, it produced, for some time, very considerable es-
feEs. By calling forth the force of a whol] nation, and ex-
erting it in one direction, the working of tie mines was carried
on with amazing rapidity and fucccfs. During fcveral years,
the gold brought into the royal fmelting-hoLlies in Hispaniola

c Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. Iz. H-errra, dec: i. lib. vi. c. 4. Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. 12.
Rclacion de deflrutc. de las Indins, par Bart. de las Casas, p. d.

amounted

amounted annually to four hundred and sixty thousand pesos, B O K
above a hundred thousand pounds ftcrling which, if we at- A
tend to the great change in the value of money since the '15o.
beginning of the sixteenth century to the present times, must
appear an immense fum. Vast fortunes were created, of a fud-
den, by tome. Others dissipated in ofientatious profusion,
what they acquired with facility. Dazzled by both, new ad-
venturers crouded to America, with the most cager impatience,
to share in those treasures which had enriched their country-
men; and, notwithfianding the mortality occasioned by the
unhealthiness of the climate, the colony continued to increase d.

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wisdom and justice, Progress of

not inferior to the rigour with which he treated the Indians. the colony.
He established equal laws, and, by executing them with impar-
tiality, accustomed the people of the colony to reverence them.
He founded several new towns in different parts of the island,
and allured inhabitants to them, by the concession of various
immunities. He endeavoured to turn the attention of the Spa-
niards to some branch of industry more useful than that of
searching for gold in the mines. Some flips of the sugar-cane
having been brought from the Canary islands by way of expe-
riment, they were found to thrive with such increase in the
rich foil and warm climate to which they were transplanted,
that the cultivation of them soon became an,objed of commerce.
Extensive plantations were begun; fugar-works, which the
Spaniards called ingenio's, from the various machinery em-
ployed in them, were erected, and in a few years the manu-
fadure of this commodity was the great occupation of the

d Hcrrera, dec. .I lib. vi. c. 18, &c.

inhabitants

BOO K inh;iaitants of Hiifpaniola, and the most considerable source of

HIl. A.-_-r-J their wealth '.
506.

Political THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to promote the welfare
ol' ,rdinai, of the colony, were powerfully seconded by Ferdinand. The

large remittances which he received from the New World,
opened his eyes, at length, with refped to the importance of
those discoveries, which he had hitherto asseted to under-
value. Fortune, and his own address, having now extricated
him out of those difficulties in which he had been involved by
1 o7. the death of his queen, and by his disputes with his fon-in-law

about the government of her dominions , he had full leisure
to turn his attention to the affairs of America. To his provi-
dent sagacity, Spain is indebted for many of those regulations
which gradually formed that fyftcm of profound, but jealous
policy, by which she governs her dominions in the New World.
He ereted a court, distinguished by the title of the C(fa &e Con-
fratacion, or Board of Trade, cornpofed of persons eminent for
rank and abilities, to whom he committed the adminifiration of
American affairs. This board assembled regularly in Seville, and
was invested with a diftind and extensive jurifdiotion. He gave
a regular form to ecclesiastical government in America, by nomi-
nating archbishops, bishops, deans, together with clergymen of
subordinate ranks, to take charge 'of the Spaniards established
there, as well as of the natives, who should embrace the Chri-
flian faith. But, notwithstanding the obicquious devotion of
the Spanish court to the Papal See, fuich was Ferdinand's so-
licitude to prevent any foreign power from claiming jurifflic-
tion, or acquiring influence, in his new domniions, that he
' Ovicdo, lib. iv. c. 8. lHift. of the Reign of Charles V. vol. i ). p. 6, Ac.

rcfcrvcd

reserved to the crown of Spain the sole right of patronage to BOOJ K
the benefices in America, and stipulated that no papal bull <-
or mandate should be promulgated there, until it was pre- 6.
vioufly examined and approved of by his council. With the
fame spirit of jealousy, he prohibited any goods to be ex-
ported to America, or any person to fettle there, without a
special license from that council g

BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the police and wel- The number

of the Indians

fare of the colony, a calamity impended which threatened its dimininflhes
dissolution. The original inhabitants, on whose labour the salt.
Spaniards in Hispaniola depended for their prosperity, and even
their exiitence, wafted so fast, that the extinction of the whole
race seemed to be inevitable. When Columbus discovered His-
paniola, the number of its inhabitants was computed to be at
least a million h. They were now reduced to sixty thousand in
the space of fifteen years. This consumption of the human
species, no less amazing than rapid, was the effedt of fevcral
concurring causes. The natives of the American islands were
of a more feeble conflitution than the inhabitants of the other
hemisphere. They could neither perform the fame work, nor
endure the fame fatigue with men vwhoe organs were of a more
vigorous conformation. The inactive indolence in which they
delighted to pass their days, as it was the effedt of their debi-
lity, contributed likewise to increase it, and rendered them, from
habit as well as conflitution, incapable of hard labour. The
food on which they fubfifled, affL'ded little nourilhment,
an(t they were accuflomcd to take it in finall quantities, not
fiffifcient to invigorate a languid frame, and render it equal to

l-ercriia, dec. i. lib, vi. c. 19, 20. h Ibid. idec. 1, IIb. . c. 12.
VOL. I. B b hiC

B o0 K the efforts of indufiry. The Spaniards, without attending to
a _v-^ those peculiarities in the constitution of the Americans, im-
'506. posed talks upon them so disproportioned to their firength, that

many funk under the fatigue, and ended their wretched days.
Others, prompted by impatience and despair, cut short their
own lives with a violent hand. Famine, brought on by com-
pelling such numbers to abandon the culture of their lands, in
order to labour in the mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases
of various kinds, some occasioned by the hardships to which
they were exposed, and others by their intercourse with the
Europeans, completed the desolation of the island. Being
thus deprived of the instruments which they were accustomed
to employ, the Spaniards found it impossible to extend their
improvements, or even to carry on the works which they had
s508. already begun. In order to provide an immediate remedy for

an evil so alarming, Ovando proposed to transport the inha-
bitants of the Lucayo islands to Hispaniola, under pretence
that they might be civilized with more facility, and infitruded
to greater advantage in the Christian religion, if they were
united to the Spanish colony, and under the immediate infpec-
tion of the missionaries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived by
this artifice, or willing to connive at an ad of violence which
policy represented as necessary, gave his assent to the proposal.
Several velfels were fitted out for the Lucayos, the com-
manders of which informed the nati es, with whose language
they were now well acquainted, that they came from a delicious
country, in which their departed ance4tors resided, by vhom
they were sent to invite them to rerort thither, to partake of
the bliss which they enjoyed. That simple people lifiened
with wonder and credulity ; and, fond of visiting their rela-
lations and friends in that happy region, followed the Spaniards

with

with eagerness. By this artifice, above forty thousand were BOO K
decoyed into Hispaniola, to share in the sufferings which were
the lot of the inhabitants of that island, and to mingle their lsos.
groans and tears with those of that wretched race of men i.

THE Spaniards had, for some time, carried on their opera- New disco-

veries and

tions in the mines of Hispaniola with such ardour as well as settlements.
success, that they seemed to have engrossed their whole atten-
tion. The spirit of discovery languished; and, since the last
voyage of Columbus, no enterprise of any moment had been
undertaken. But as the decrease of the Indians rendered it
impossible to acquire wealth in that island with the fame rapi-
dity as formerly, this urged them to search for new countries,
where their avarice might be gratified with more facility.
Juan Ponce de Leon, who commanded under Ovando in the
eastern difirid of Hispaniola, passed over to the island of St.
John de Porto Rico, which Columbus had discovered in his
second voyage, and penetrated into the interior part of the
country. As he found the foil to be fertile, and expected,
from some symptoms, as well as from the information of the
inhabitants, to discover mines of gold in the mountains, Ovan-
do permitted him to attempt making a settlement in the
island. This was easily effected by an officer eminent for con-
dut no less than for courage. In a few years Porto Rico was
fubjeded to the Spanish government, the natives were reduced
to servitude; and, being treated with the fame inconsiderate
rigour as their neighbours in Hispaniola, the race of original
inhabitants, worn out with fatigue and sufferings, was soon
exterminated k.

I Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 3. Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. 6. Gomra Hillt. c. 41.
k Herrera, dec. I.. lib, vii. c. 1-4. Gonmara Hist. c. 44. Relation de B. de las
Casas,' p. 1o.

B b 2, ABOUT

BOO ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in conjunction
A. ---.j with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of Collmbus's original com-
1508. panions, made a voyage to the continent. They held the fame

course which Columbus had taken, as far as to the island of
Guanaios but, standing irc:n thence to the weft, they dif-
covered a new and extensive province, afterwards known by
the name of Yucatan, and proceeded a considerable way along
the coafi of that country '. Thou;,h nothing memorable oc-
curred in this voyage, it deserves notice, because it led to dif-
coveries of greater importance. For the fame reason, the
voyage of Sebastian de Ocampo must be mentioned. By the
command of Ovando, he failed round Cuba, and first dif-
covered, with certainty, that this country, which Columbus
once supposed to be a part of the continent, was a large
island m

Diego Co- THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the last occurrences
pointeudgo- under the administration of Ovando. Ever since the death of
vernor of Columbus, his son Don Diego had been employed in soliciting

Ferdinand to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, together with all the other immunities and
profits which descended to him by inheritance, in consequence
of the original capitulation with his father. But if there dig-
nities and revenues appeared so considerable to Ferdinand, that,
at the expence of being deemed unjust as well as ungrateful, he
had wrested them from Columbus, it is not surprising that he
should be unwilling to confer them on his son. Accordingly,
Don Diego wafted two years in incessant but fruitless impor-
tunity. Weary of this, he endeavoured at length to obtain by
a legal fcntencc, what he could not procure from the favour of

I Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 17. " Ibid. lib. vii. c. i.

an

an interested monarch. He commenced a f,.lt againfi Fcrdi- n oK
nand before the council that managed Indian fflairs, and that L---
court, with integrity which reflects honour lupon its proceed- i oS
ings, decided againfi the king, and sustained Don Diego's claim
of the vice-royalty, and all the other privileges stipulated in
the capitulation. Even after this decree, Ferdinand's repug-
nance to put a fubjeEt in possession of such extensive rights,
might have thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego had not
taken a flep which interested very powerful persons in the fuc-
cess of his claims. The sentence of the council of the Indies
gave him a title to a rank so elevated, and a fortune so opulent,
that he found no difficulty in concluding a marriage with
Donna Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand de Toledo, great
commendator of Leon, and brother of the duke of Alva, a
grandee of the first rank, and nearly related to the king. The
duke and his family espoused so warmly the cause of their new
ally, that Ferdinand could not resist their solicitations. He 1509
recalled Ovando, and appointed Don Diego his successor,
though, even in conferring this favour, he could not conceal
his jealousy; for he allowed him to assume only the title of go-
vernor, not that of viceroy, which had been adjudged to belong
to him ".

HE soon repaired to Hispaniola, attended by his brother, his He repairs to

uncles, his wife, whom the courtesy of the Spaniards honoured Hispaniola.
with the title of vice-queen, and a numerous retinue of persons
of both sexes, born of good families. He lived with a fplen-
dour and magnificence hitherto unknown in the New World;
and the family of Columbus fcemed now to enjoy the honours
and rewards due to his inventive genius, of which he himself
had been cruelly defrauded. The colony itself acquired new

" Hcrrcra, dec. i, lib. vii. c. 4, Cc.

lufsre

BOOK lustre by the acceflion of so many inhabitants, of a different

III.
ki_-v_% rank and character from most of those who had hitherto mi-

'509. grated to America, and many of the most illustrious families

in the Spanish settlements are descended from the persons who
at that time accompanied Don Diego Columbus °.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives from this change

of governors. Don Diego was not only authorised by a royal
edi6c to continue the repartimientor, or difiribution of Indians,
but the particular number which he might grant to every per-
son, according to his rank in the colony, was specified. He
availed himself of that permission; and soon after he landed at
St. Domingo, he divided such Indians as were still unappro-
priated, among his relations and attendants P.

Pearl fishery THE next care of the new governor was to comply with an
ofCubaga. inftrudion which he received from the king, about fettling a

colony in Cubagua, a fnall island which Columbus had dif-
covered in his third voyage. Though this barren spot hardly
yielded subsistence to its wretched inhabitants, such quantities
of those oysters which produce pearls were found on its coast,
that it did not long escape the inquisitive avarice of the Spa-
niards, and became a place of considerable resort. Large for-
tunes were acquired by the fishery of pearls, which was carried
on with extraordinary ardour. The Indians, especially those
from the Lucayo islands, were compelled to dive for them; and
this dangerous and unhealthy employment was an additional
calamity, which contributed not a little to the extinction of
that devoted race q.

* Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. i. P Rccopilacion de Leyes, lib. vi. tit. 8. 1. i, 2.

Hc rrcra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. io. 9 Herrera, dec. ,. lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara
Hist. c. 78.

ABOUT

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pinzon fct out, BOO K

in conjunCtion, upon a second voyage. They flood directly
south, towards the equinoctial line, which Pinzon had for- N7 509.
merly crossed, and advanced as far as the fortieth degree of
southern latitude. They were astonished to find that the con-
tinent of America firetched, on their right hand, through all
this vait extent of ocean. They landed in different places, to
take possession in name of their sovereign; but though the
country appeared to be extremely fertile and inviting, their
force was so small, having been fitted out rather for discovery
than making settlements, that they left no colony behind them.
Their voyage served, however, to give the Spaniards more
exalted and adequate ideas with respect to the dimensions of
this new quarter of the globe r.

THOUGH it was above ten years since Columbus had dif- A fettlemcrt.

on the conti-

covered the main land of America, the Spaniards had hitherto nent attcnlpt-
made no settlement in any part of it. What had been so long ed-
negledced was now seriously attempted, and with considerable
vigour, though the plan for this purpose was neither formed
by the crown, nor executed at the expence of the nation, but
carried on by the enterprising spirit of private adventurers.
This scheme took its rife from Alonfo de Ojeda, who had al-
ready made two voyages as a discoverer, by which he acquired
considerable reputation, but no wealth. But his character for
intrepidity and conduc easily procured him associates, who
advanced the money requifitc to defray the charges of the ex-
pedition. About the fame time, Diego de Nicueffa, who had
acquired a large fortune in Hispaniola, formed a fimilardefign.
Ferdinand encouraged both; and though he refused to advance

f Herrera, dec. . lib, vii. c, 9.

the

BOOK the smallest fum, was extremely liberal of titles and patents.

Ill.

k _
"i He ereded two governments on the continent, one extending

1 509. from Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the other from

that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The former was given to Ojeda,
the latter to Nicueffa. Ojeda fitted out a ship and two brigan-
tines, with three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix vessels, with
seven hundred and eighty men. They failed about the fame
time from St. Domingo for their refpedive governments. In
order to give their title to those countries some appearance of
validity, several of the most eminent divines and lawyers in
Spain were employed to prescribe the mode in which they
should take possession of them '. There is not in the history of
mankind any thing more singular or extravagant than the form
which they devised for this purpose. They infiruaed those
invaders, as soon as they landed on the continent, to declare
to the natives the principal articles of the Christian faith; to
acquaint them, in particular, with the supreme jurifdidion of
the Pope over all the kingdoms of the earth; to inform them
of the grant which this holy pontiff had made of their country
to the king of Spain; to require them to embrace the docrines
of that religion which they made known to them; and to sub-
mit to the Sovereign whose authority they proclaimed. If they
refused to comply with this requisition, the terms of which
must have been utterly incomprehensible to an uninftruEted
Indian, then Ojeda and Nicuefsa were authorised to attack them
with sword and fire ; to reduce them, their wives and children,
to a state of servitude; and to compel them by force to recognize
the jurifdilion of the church, and the authority of the mo-
narch, to which they would not voluntarily fubjce2 themselves '.

I-Irrcra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 15. ' See NOTE XXIII.

As

As the inhabitants of the continent could not at once yield I 30K

assent to doctrines too refined for their uncultivated underfland- v--
ings, and explained to them by interpreters imperfectly ac- Th d;'ll.c,,-
quainted with their language; as they did not conceive how a att'cn.:::;i
foreign priest, of whom they had never heard, could have any
right to dispose of their country, or how an unknown prince
should claim jurifdieion over them as his fubjelds; they fiercely
opposed the new invaders of their territories. Ojeda and Ni-
cueffa endeavoured to effec by force what they could not ac-
complifh by persuasion. The contemporary writers enter into
a very minute detail in relating their tranfadions; but as they
made no discovery of importance, nor eflablifhcd any permanent
Settlement, their adventures arc not intitled to any considerable
place in the general history of a period, where romantic va-
lour, struggling with incredible hardships, diftinguif every
effort of the Spanish arms. They found the natives in thofc
countries of which they went to assume the government, to
be of a charadter very different from that of their countrymen
in the islands. They were fierce and warlike. Their ar-
rows were dipped in a poison so noxious, that every wound
was followed with certain death. In one encounter they
cut off above seventy of Ojeda's followers, and the Spa-
niards, for the first time, were taught to dread the inha-
bitants of the New World. Nicueffa was opposed by people
equally resolute in defence of their poffefions. Nothing could
soften their fcrofity. Though the Spaniards employed every'
art to footl..: them, and to gain their confidence, they refused.
to hold any intercourse, or to exchange any friendly office, with
men wholf rciidence among them they confidered as fatal to
their liberty and independence. This implacable enmity of ,5,
the natives, though it rendered it extremely difficult as well as

VOL. I. C c dal]cl rols.

B °° K dangerous to cftablifh a settlement in their country, might have

been surmounted at length by the perseverance of the Spaniards,
1510' by the superiority of their arms, and their skill in the art of

war. But every disaster that can be accumulated upon the
unfortunate, combined to complete their ruin. The loss of
their ships by various accidents upon an unkown coast, the
diseases peculiar to a climate the moit noxious in all America,
the want ofprovifions, unavoidable in a country imperfectly
cultivated, disTention among themselves, and the incessant hofti-
lities of the natives, involved them in a fucceflion of calamities,
the bare recital of which firikes one with horror. Though they
received two considerable reinforcements from Hispaniola, the
greater part of those who had engaged in this unhappy expe-
dition, perished, in less than a year, in the most extreme misery.
A few who survived, fettled as a feeble colony at Santa Maria
el Antigua, on the gulf of Darien, under the command of
Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, who, in the most desperate exigencies,
displayed such courage and conduct, as first gained the confi-
dence of his countrymen, and marked him out as their leader
in more splendid and successful undertakings. Nor was he the
only adventurer in this expedition who will appear with lustre
in more important scenes. Francis Pizarro was one of Ojeda's
companions, and in this school of adversity acquired or im-
proved the talents which fitted him for the extraordinary actions
which he afterwards performed. Ferdinand Cortes, whose
name became fiill more famous, had engaged early in this en-
terprife, which rouzed all the active youth of Hispaniola to
arms; but the good fortune which accompanied him in his
subsequent adventures, interposed to save him from the disasters
to which his companions were exposed. He was taken ill at

St.

St. Domingo before the departure of the fleet, and detained B I K
there by that indisposition . z.-x

1 502.
NOTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate issue of this expedition, Conquest of

Cuba.

the Spaniards were not deterred from engaging in new schemes
of a similar nature. When wealth is acquired gradually by the
persevering hand of indufiry, or accumulated by the flow opera-
tions of regular commerce, the means employed are so propor-
tioned to the end attained, that there is nothing to strike the
imagination, and little to urge on the a&ive powers of the mind
to uncommon efforts. But when large fortunes were created
almost inflantaneoufly; when gold and pearls were procured
in exchange for baubles; when the countries which produced
there rich commodities, defended only by naked savages, might
be seized by the firfi bold invader; objeCs so singular and al-
luring rouzed a wonderful spirit of enterprise among the Spa-
niards, who rushed with ardour into this new path that was
opened to wealth and diflina'ion. While this spirit continued
warm and vigorous, every attempt either towards discovery or
conquest was applauded, and adventurers engaged in it with
emulation. The passion for new undertakings, which cha-
raderifes the age of discovery in the latter part of the fifteenth
and beginning of the sixteenth century, would alone have
been sufficient to prevent the Spaniards from flopping short
in their career. But circumstances peculiar to Hispaniola at
this juncture concurred with it in extending their naviga-
tion and conquefis. The rigorous treatment of the inha-
bitants of that island having almost extirpated the race, many
of the Spanish planters, as I have already observed, find-

. Herrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. i1, &c. Gomara Hist. c. 57, 58, 59. Benzon. I-Ii.
lib. i. c. 19--23. P. Martyr, decad. 122.

Cc2 ing

BOO K ing it impossible to carry on their works with the fame vigour
-- --i and profit, were obliged to look out for settlements in some
15'0. country whose people were not yet wafted by oppression.

Others, with the inconsiderate levity natural to men upon
whom wealth pours in with a sudden flow, had squandered, in
thoughtless prodigality, what they acquired with ease, and were
driven by necessity to embark in the most desperate schemes, in
51. order to retrieve their affairs. From all these causes, when Don

Diego Columbus proposed to conquer the island of Cuba, and
to establish a colony there, many persons of chief diftintion in
Hispaniola engaged with alacrity in the measure. He gave
the command of the troops destined for that service to Diego
Valafquez, one of his father's companions in his second voyage,
and who, having been long fettled in Hispaniola, had acquired
an ample fortune, with such reputation for probity and pru-
dence, that he seemed to be well qualified for conducting an
expedition of importance. Three hundred men were deemed
sufficient for the conquefi of an island above seven hundred
miles in length, and filled with inhabitants. But they were
of the fame unwarlike character with the people of Hifpa-
niola. They were not only intimidated by the appearance of
their new enemies, but unprepared to resist them. For though,
from the time that the Spaniards took possession of the adjacent
island, there was reason to expect a descent on their territories,
none of the small communities into which Cuba was divided,
had either made any provision for its own defence, or had
formed any concert for their common safety. The only ob-
ftrudlion the Spaniards met with was from Hatuey, a cazique,
who had fled from Hispaniola, and taken poffeifion of the
caflern extremity of Cuba. He flood upon the defensive at
fheir firit landing, and endeavoured to drive them back to their

ships.

flips. His feeble troops, however, were soon broken and 1300 1
dispersed; and he himfclf being taken prisoner, Velasquez, ac- L-v--
cording to the barbarous maxim of the Spaniards, confidered 'I''
him as a slave who had taken arms againit his master, and con-
demned him to the flames. When Hatuev was fastencd to the
flake, a Franciscan friar labouring to convert him, promised
him immediate admittance into the joys of heaven, if he would
embrace the Christian faith. " Are there any Spaniards," fays
he, after some pause, " in that region of bliss which you de-
scribe ?" " Yes," replied the monk, " but only such as arc
worthy and good." " The best of them," returned the indig-
nant cazique, " have neither worth nor goodness; I will not
go to a place where I may meet with one of that accursed race. '"
This dreadful example of vengeance struck the people of Cuba
with such terror, that they scarcely gave any opposition to the
progress of their invaders; and Velasquez, without the loss of
a man, annexed this extensive and fertile island to the Spanish
monarchy .

THE facility with which this important conquest was corn- Discovery of

pleted, served as an incitement to other undertakings. Juan Florida.
Ponce de Leon, having acquired both fame and wealth by the
reducion of Porto Rico, was impatient to engage in some new
enterprise. He fitted out three ships at his own expence, for 15.
a voyage of discovery, and his reputation soon drew together
a refpe6qable body of followers. He directed his course to-
wards the Lucayo islands; and after touching at several of
them, as well as of the Bahama isles, he flood to the south-west,
and discovered a country hitherto unknown to the Spaniards,

B. de las Casas, p. 40. Y Herrera, dec, m. lib. ix. c. 2, 3, &c. Ovicdo, li'h.
xvii . c. 3 p 1-9.

vlliclt

BOO K which he called Florida, either because he fell in with it on
(L~V-mi Palm Sunday, or on account of its gay and beautiful appear-

52 ance. He attempted to land in different places, but met with

such vigorous opposition from the natives, who were fierce and
warlike, as convinced him that an increase of force was requi-
site to effed a settlement. Satisfied with having opened a com-
munication with a new country, of whose value and importance
he conceived very sanguine hopes, he returned to Porto Rico,
through the channel now known by the name of the Gulf of
Florida.

IT was not merely the pafion of searching for new countries

that prompted Ponce de Leon to undertake this voyage, he was
influenced by one of those visionary ideas, which at that time
often mingled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered it
more enterprising. A tradition prevailed among the natives of
Porto Rico, that in the isle of Bimini, one of the Lucayos,
there was a fountain of such wonderful virtue as to renew the
youth, and recal the vigour of every person who bathed in its
salutary waters. In hopes of finding this grand restorative,
Ponce de Leon and his followers ranged through the islands,
searching, with fruitless solicitude and labour, for the fountain
which was the chief object of their expedition. That a tale so
fabulous ihould gain credit among simple uninftruted Indians
is not surprising. That it ihould make any impression upon
an enlightened people appears, in the present age, altogether
incredible. The faa, however, is certain; and the most au-
thentic Spanifih hiflorians mention this extravagant rally of their
credulous countrymen. The Spaniards, at that period, were en-
gaged in a career of ativity which gave a romantic turn to their
imagination, and daily presented to them strange and marvel-

lous

lous objects. A New World was opened to their view. They 130 OK
visited islands and continents ofwhofe exifgence mankind in for- ---,-
mer ages had no conception. In those dciightful countries nature '12
seemed to assume another form; every tree and plant and animal
was different from those of the ancient hemisphere. They seemed
to be transported to enchanted ground; and, after the wonders
which they had seen, in the warmth and novelty of their admi-
ration, nothing appeared to them so extraordinary as to be be-
yond belief. If the rapid succession of new and striking scenes
made such impression even upon the found understanding of
Columbus, that he boasted of having found the feat of Paradise,
it will not appear strange that Ponce de Leon should dream of
discovering the fountain of youth z.

SOON after the expedition to Florida, a discovery of much Progreis of

greater importance was made in another part of America. Bal- Balboa in
boa having been raised to the government of the small colony
at Santa Maria in Darien, by the voluntary suffrage of his affo-
ciates, was so extremely desirous to obtain from the crown a
confirmation of their election, that he dispatched one of his
officers to Spain, in order to solicit a royal commission, which
might invest him with a legal title to the supreme command.
Conscious, however, that he could not expect success from the
patronage of Ferdinand's ministers, with whom he was uncon-
neted, or from negociating in a court to the arts of which he
was a firanger, he endeavoured to merit the dignity to which he
aspired, and aimed at performing some signal service that
would secure him the preference to every competitor. Full of

z P. Martyr, decad. p. zoz. Lnfayo Chronol. para la Hill. de la Florida, por

D Gab. Cnrdenas, p. I. Oviedo, lib. xvi c. I1. Herrera, dec, a, lib. ix. c. 5.
Hit. de la Conq. de la Floida, par Garc de la Vega, lib, i. c. 3.

this

BOOK this idea, he made frequent inroads into the adjacent country,

Ill.
a -v-»j subdued fcveral of the caziques, and collected a considerable

5''2 . quantity of gold, which abounded more in that part of the

continent than in the islands. In one of those excursions, the
Spaniards contended with such eagerness about the division of
some gold, that they were at the point of proceeding to ats of
violence against one another. A young cazique, who was pre-
sent, aflonifhed at the high value which they set upon a thing
of which he did not discern the use, tumbled the gold out of
the balance with indignation; and, turning to the Spaniards,
" Why do you quarrel (fays he) about such a trifle ? If you
are so passionately fond of gold, as to abandon your own coun-
try, and to diflurb the tranquillity of distant nations for its
fake, I will conduct you to a region where the metal which
seems to be the chief objed of your admiration and desire, is so
common that the meanest utensils are formed of it." Tranf-
ported with what they heard, Balboa and his companions in-
quired eagerly where this happy country lay, and how they
might arrive at it. He informed them that at the difiance of
fix funs, that is of fix days journey towards the south, they
fliould discover another ocean, near to which this wealthy
kingdom was situated; but if they intended to attack that pow-
erful state, they must assemble forces far superior in number
and fircngth to those with which they now appeared'.

'h'le l' h-,-:c; TIIS was the firfi information which the Spaniards received
whi h hc
i) ,,,,l' concerning the great southern ocean, or the opulent and cxtcn-

five country known afterwards by the name of Peru. Balboa
had now before himl objcas suitcd to his boundlcfs ambition,

IIcrrcra, i(dc. . lib. ix. c. z. Gomara, c. . I'. Martyr, Dccad. p. 149.

and

and the enterprising ardour of his genius. He immediately BOOK
concluded the ocean which the Caziquc mentioned, to be that -v--
for which Columbus had searched without success in this part of 1 12.
America, in hopes of opening a more direc communication with
the East Indies; and he conjectured that the rich territory
which had been described to him, must be part of that vast and
opulent region of the earth. Elated with the idea of performing
what so great a man had attempted in vain; and eager to accom-
plifh a discovery which he knew would be no less acceptable to
the king than beneficial to his country, he was impatient until he
could set out upon this enterprize, in comparison of which all
his former exploits appeared inconsiderable. But previous ar-
rangement and preparation were requisite to enfurc success. He
began with courting and securing the friendship of the neigh-
bouring Caziques. He sent some of his officers to Hispaniola
with a large quantity of gold, as a proof of his past ficccfs,
and an earnest of his future hopes. By a proper difiribution
of this, they secured the favour of the governor, and allured
volunteers into the service. A considerable reinforcement from
that island joined him, and he thought himfclf in a condition
to attempt the discovery.

TaE ifihmus of Darien is not above sixty miles in Difficulty of

breath, but this neck of land, which binds together the con- C'XCLtLi"n it
tinents of North and South America, is ftrcngthened by a chain
of lofty mountains stretching through its whole extent, which
render it a barrier of solidity sufficient to rcffit the impulfc of
two opposite oceans. The mountains are covered with forcfls
almost inacccffible. The valleys in that moist climnate, where
it rains during two thirds of the year, are narfly, and so
frequently overflowed, that the inhabitants find it ncceffilry,

VOL. 1. D d in

B OO K in many places, to build their houses upon trees, in order to be

elevated at some diflance from the damp foil, and the odious
1512. reptiles ingendered in the putrid waters b. Large rivers rush

down with an impetuous current from the high grounds. In a
region thinly inhabited by wandering savages, the hand of in-
duftry had done nothing to mitigate or corret those natural
disadvantages. To march across this unexplored country, with
no other guides but Indians, whose fidelity could be little
trusted, was, on all these accounts, the boldefl enterprise on
which the Spaniards had hitherto ventured in the New World.
But the intrepidity of Balboa was such as diflinguifhcd him
among his countrymen, at a period when every adventurer was
1513. conspicuous for daring courage. Nor was bravery his only me-

rit; he was prudent in conduct, generous, affable, and possessed
of those popular talents which, in the moit desperate undertak-
ings, inspire confidence and secure attachment. Even after the
juntion of the volunteers from Hispaniola, he was able to
muster only an hundred and ninety men for his expedition.
But they were hardy veterans, innured to the climate of Ame-
rica, and ready to follow him through every danger. A thou-
sand Indians attended them to carry their provisions; and to
complete their warlike array, they took with them several of
those fierce dogs, which were no less formidable than deftruc-
tive to their naked enemies.

Dicovers the BALBOA set out upon this important expedition on the first
South Sea.

of September, about the time that the periodical rains began to
abate. Hc proceeded by fca, and without any difficulty, to
the territories of a cazique whose frienfhip he had gained;
but no sooner did he begin to advance into the interior part of

h P. Martyr, dccad.. p. 158.

the

the country, than he was retarded by every obstacle, which he B O1 K
had reason to apprehend, from the nature of the territory, or -
the disposition of its inhabitants. Some of the caziques, at his '51'-
approach, fled to the mountains with all their people, and car-
ried off or defiroyed whatever could afford subsistence to his
troops. Others collected their fubjcds, in order to oppofc his
progress and he quickly peceived what an arduous undertak-
ing it was to condu6t such a body of men through hostile na-
tions, across swamps and rivers, and woods, which had never
been passed but by straggling Indians. But by sharing in
every hardship with the meanest soldier, by appearing the
foremost to meet every danger, by promising confidently to
his troops the enjoyment of honour and riches superior to
the most successful of their countrymen, he inspired them
with such enthusiastic resolution, that they followed him
without murmuring. When they had penetrated a good
way into the mountains a powerful cazique appeared in
a narrow pass, with a numerous body of his fubjedts to
obftrud their progress. But men who had surmounted so
many obstacles, despised the opposition of such feeble ene-
mies. They attacked them with impetuosity, and having
dispersed them with much cafe and great slaughter, continued
their march. Though their guides had represented the breadth
of the ifihmus to be only a journey of fix days, they had
already spent twenty-five in forcing their way through the
woods and mountains. Many of them were ready to fink
under such uninterrupted fatigue in that sultry climate, fevcral
were fcizcd with the diseases peculiar to :he country, and all
became impatient to reach the period of their labours and tff--
fcrings. At length the Indians assurcd them, that from tih

D d 2 topi

B O° K top of the next mountain they should discover the ocean which
'--"-~-' was the objec of their wishes. When, with infinite toil, they

1513. had climbed up the greater part of that sleep ascent, Balboa

commanded his men to halt, and advanced alone to the fum-
mit, that he might be the first who should enjoy a fpeEtacle
which he had so long desired. As soon as he beheld the South
Sea stretching in endless profped below him, he fell on his
knees, and lifting up his hands to Heaven, returned thanks to
God, who had conducted him to a discovery so beneficial to his
country, and so honourable to himself. His followers obferv-
ing his transports of joy, rushed forward to join in his wonder,
exultation and gratitude. They held on their course to the
(hore with great alacrity, when Balboa advancing up to the
middle in the waves with his buckler and sword, took poffefiion
of that ocean in the name of the king his matter, and vowed to
defend it with there arms, against all his enemies c.

THAT part of the great Pacific or Southern ocean, which

Balboa first discovered, still retains the name of the Gulf of St.
Michael, which he gave to it, and is situated to the cast of Pa-
nama. From several of the petty princes, who governed in
the diftri6ts adjacent to that gulf, he extorted provisions and
gold by force of arms. Others sent them to him voluntarily.
To there acceptable presents, some of the caziques added a con-
fiderable quantity of pearls; and he learned from them, with
much fatisfadion, that pearl oysters abounded in the sea which
he had newly discovered.

s Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 1, &c. Gonmara, c. 62, &c. P. Martyr, decad.
p. 205, &c.

TOGETHER

TOGETHER with the acquisition of this wealth, which served BOO K
to soothe and encourage his followers, he received accounts -v_

1513.

which confirmed his sanguine hopes of future and more exten- He receives
five benefits from the expedition. All the people on the coast information

concerning a

of the South Sea, concurred in informing him that there was a more opulent
mighty and opulent kingdom situated at a considerable distance country.
towards the east, the inhabitants of which had tame animals to
carry their burdens. In order to give him an idea of these,
they drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas or sheep, as-
terwards found in Peru, which the Peruvians had taught to
perform such services as they described. As the Llama, in its
form, nearly resembles a camel, a beafi of burden deemed pecu-
liar to Asia, this circumstance, in conjunction with the disco-
very of the pearls, another noted production of that country,
tended to confirm the Spaniards in their mistaken theory with
refpe6t to the vicinity of the New World to the East Indies d.

BUT though the information which Balboa received from the Obliged to

people on the coafi, as well as his own conje&ures and hopes,
rendered him extremely impatient to visit this unknown coun-
try, his prudence restrained him from attempting to invade it
with an handful of men, exhausted by fatigue, and weakened
by diseases'. He determined to lead back his followers, at
present, to their settlement at Santa Maria in Darien, and to re-
turn next season with a force more adequate to such an arduous
enterprize. In order to acquire a more extensive knowledge of
the isthmus, he marched back by a different route, which he
found to be no less dangerous and difficult than that which he
had formerly taken. But to men elated with success, and ani-

'Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 2. c See NOTE XXIV.

mated

B 00 K mated with hope, nothing is unsurmountable. Balboa returned
a _Jr^ to Santa Maria, from which he had been absent four months,

with greater glory and more treasure than the Spaniards had
1514. acquired in any expedition in the New World. None of Bal-

boa's officers distinguished himself more in this service than
Francisco Pizarro, or affifled with greater courage and ardour
in opening a communication with those countries, in which he
afterwards acted such an illustrious parts.

Pedrarias np- BALBOA'S first care was to fend information to Spain of the
pn'tenrgo- important discovery which he had made; and to demand a rc-
Dalicn. inforcement of a thousand men, in order to attempt the con-

quest of that opulent country, concerning which he had received
such inviting intelligence. The first account of the discovery
of the New World hardly occasioned greater joy than the un-
expeted tidings, that a passage was at last found to the great
southern ocean. The communication with the East Indies, by
a course to the westward of the line of demarkation, drawn by
the Pope, seemed now to be certain. The vast wealth which
flowed into Portugal from its settlements and conquefis in that
country, excited the envy and called forth the emulation of
other flates. Ferdinand hoped now to come in for a fiare in
this lucrative commerce, and in his eagerness to obtain it, was
willing to make an effort beyond what Balboa required. But
even in this exertion, his jealous policy, as well as the fatal
antipathy of Foufeca, now biiflop of Burgos, to every man of
merit who diflinguifhed himself in the New World, were con-
fpicuous. Notwithflanding Balboa's recent ferviccs, which
marked him out as the molt proper pcrfon to finifli that great

- Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 3-6. Gonlara, c. 64. P. Martyr, dec. p. 229, &c.

undertaking

undertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand was so ungenerous B1 0 o K

lII.

as to overlook there, and to appoint Pedrarias Davila governor I_
of Darien. He gave him the command of fifteen flout vessels, 5'
and twelve hundred soldiers. These were fitted out at the pub-
lic cxpenfe, with a liberality which Ferdinand had never dif-
played in any former armament destined for the NewWorld; and
such was the ardour of the Spanish gentlemen to follow a leader
who was about to conduct them to a country, where, as fame
reported, they had only to throw their nets into the sea and
draw out gold e, that fifteen hundred embarked on board the
fleet, and, if they had not been restrained, a much greater
number would have engaged in the service "

PEDRARIAS reached the gulf of Darien without any remark-

able accident, and immediately sent tome of his principal offi-
cers ashore, to inform Balboa of his arrival, with the king'
commission, to be governor of the colony. To their astonish-
ment, they found Balboa, of whose great exploits they had
heard so much, and of whose opulence they had formed such
high ideas, clad in a canvas jacket, with shoes made of pack-
thread, employed, together with some Indians, in thatching
his own hut with reeds. Even in this simple garb, which cor-
responded so ill with the cxpeCtations and withes of his new
guests, Balboa received them with dignity. The fame of his
discoveries had drawn so many adventurers from the islands,
that he could now mufler four hundred and fifty men. At the
head of those daring veterans, he was more than a match for
the forces which Pedrarias brought with him. But though his
troops murmured loudly at the irjuflice of the king in super-

I-Ierrcra, (tcc. i. lib. x. c. 14. D Ibid. dcc. I. lib. x. c. 6, 7. P. MIr-
7yr, dLCC . 177. 256.

fc'ding

BOOK feding their commander, and complained that firangers would

a__- now reap the fruits of their toil and success, Balboa submitted
1514. with implicit obedience to the will of his sovereign, and re-

ceived Pedrarias with all the deference due to his character 1.

Dissention NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation of Balboa, to which
between him
2nd Balboa. Pedrarias owed the peaceable possession of his government, he

appointed a judicial inquiry to be made into his conduct, while
under the command of Nicueffa and Encifo, and imposed a
considerable fine upon him, on account of the irregularities of
which he had then been guilty. Balboa felt sensibly the mor-
tification of being fubjeded to trial and to punishment in a place
where he had so lately occupied the first flation. Pedrarias
could not conceal his jealousy of his superior merit; so that the
resentment of the one, and the envy of the other, gave rife to
dissentions extremely detrimental to the colony. It was threat-
ened with a calamity still more fataL Pedrarias had landed in
July. Darien at a most unlucky time of the year, about the middle

of the rainy season, in that part of the torrid zone where the
clouds pour down such torrents as are unknown in more tem-
perate climates k. The village of Santa Maria was feated in a
rich plain, environed with marshes and woods. The conftitu-
tion of Europeans was unable to withfiand the pestilential in-
fluence of such a situation, in a climate naturally so noxious,
and at a season so peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and de-
ftrudive malady carried off many of the soldiers who accom-
panied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity of provisions augmented
this difirefs, as it rendered it impossible to find proper refresh-

t Herrera, dec, i. lib. x. c. 13, 14.
1 Richard Hist. Naturelle de 'Air, tom. i. p. 204.

ment

ment for the sick, or the necessary sustenance for the healthy. B 100 K
In the space of a month, above fix hundred persons perished in ----
the utmoit misery. Dejetion and despair spread through the '
colony. Many principal persons solicited their difmiflion, and
were glad to relinquish all their hopes of wealth, in order to
escape from that pernicious region. Pedrarias endeavoured to
divert those who remained from brooding over their misfor-
tunes, by finding them employment. With this view, he sent
several detachments into the interior parts of the country, to
levy gold among the natives, and to search for the mines in
which it was produced. Those rapacious adventurers, more
attentive to present gain than to the means of facilitating their
future progress, plundered without diftinaion wherever they
marched. Regardless of the alliances which Balboa had made
with several of the caziques, they stripped them of every thing
valuable, and treated them, as well as their fubjeets, with the
utmost insolence and cruelty. By their tyranny and exactions,
which Pedrarias, either from want of authority or of inclina-
tion, did not restrain, all the country from the gulf of Darien
to the lake of Nicaragua was desolated, and the Spaniards were
inconsiderately deprived of the advantages which they might
have derived from the friendship of the natives, in extending
their conquests to the South Sea. Balboa, who saw with con-
cern that such ill-judged proceedings retarded the execution
of his favourite scheme, sent violent remonfirances' to Spain
against the imprudent government of Pedrarias, which had
ruined a happy and flourishing colony. Pedrarias, on the
other hand, accused him of having deceived the king, by mag-

I-Ieerrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 14. P. Martyr, dec. p. 272.
VOL. I. Ee nifying

BO 0 K nifying his own exploits, as well as by a false representation
'--~-.- of the opulence and value of the country m

1514.

Violent pro- FERDINAND became sensible at length of his imprudence in
et:eeilngs a-
gainrlt Balboa. superseding the most ative and experienced officer he had in

the New World, and, by way of compensation to Balboa, ap-
pointed him Adelantado, or Lieutenant-governor of the coun-
tries upon the South Sea, with very extensive privileges and
authority. At the fame time he enjoined Pedrarias to support
Balboa in all his enterprises, and to consult with him concerning
1515. every measure which he himself pursued. But to effect such a

sudden transition from inveterate enmity to perfect confidence,
exceeded Ferdinand's power. Pedrarias continued to treat his
rival with neglect; and Balboa's fortune being exhautfed by
the payment of his fine, and other exactions of Pedrarias, he
could not make suitable preparations for taking poTfeffion of
his new government. At length, by the interposition and ex-
hortations of the bishop of Darien, they were brought to a
reconciliation; and, in order to cement this union more firmly,
Pedrarias agreed to give his daughter in marriage to Balboa.
15i6. The firit effect of their concord was, that Balboa was permitted

to make several small incursions into the country. These he con-
ducted with such prudence, as added to the reputation which he
had already acquired. Many adventurers retorted to him, and,
with the countenance and support of Pedrarias, he began to pre-
pare for his expedition to the South Sea. In order to accomplish
this, it was necessary to build vessels capable of conveying his
troops to those provinces which he purposed to invade. After

"' Heirera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15. dec. 2. c. i, &c. Gomara, c. 66. P. Martyr,
dec. 3 c. 0o. Relacion de B. de las Casas, p. 12.

surmounting

surmounting many obstacles, and enduring a variety of those B 00 K
hardships which were the portion of the conquerors of America,
he at length finiflled four small brigantines. In these, with three '
hundred chosen men (a force superior to that with which Pi-
zarro afterwards undertook the fame expedition), he was ready
to fail towards Peru, when he received an unexpeced meffaqe
from Pedrarias". As his reconciliation with Balboa had never
been cordial, the progress which he made revived his ancient
enmity, and added to its rancour. He dreaded the profpcritv
and elevation of a man whom he had injured so deeply. He
fufpeted that success would encourage him to aim at inde-
pendence upon his jurifdidtion; and so violently did the pas-
sions of hatred, fear, and jealousy, operate upon his mind, that,
in order to gratify his vengeance, he scrupled not to defeat an
enterprise of the greatest moment to his country. Under pretexts
which were false, but plausible, he desired Balboa to postpone
his voyage for a short time, and to repair to Acla, in order that
he might have an interview with him. Balboa, with the un-
suspicious confidence of a man conscious of no crime, instantly
obeyed the summons; but as soon as he entered the place, he
was arrefied by order of Pedrarias, whose impatience to satiate
his revenge did not susser him to languish long in confinement.
Judges were immediately appointed to proceed to his trial. An
accusation of disloyalty to the king, and of an intention to re-
volt againfi the governor, was preferred againfi him. Sentence
of death was pronounced; and though the judges who pafled it,
secondcd by the whole colony, interceded warmly for his par-
don, Pcdrarias continued inexorable; and, to their astonish-
ment and sorrow, the Spaniards beheld the public execution

"Herrera, dec. 2. lib. i. c. 3. Lib ii . c. . 13. 21.

Ee 2 of

BOOK of a man whom they universally deemed more capable than

- alany who had borne command in America, of forming and ac-
1517. complifhing great designs°. Upon his death, the expedition

which he had planned was relinquished. Pedrarias, notwith-
standing the violence and injustice of his proceedings, was not
only screened from punishment by the powerful patronage of
the bishop of Burgos and other courtiers, but continued in
power. Soon after, he obtained permission to remove the co-
lony from its unhealthy station at Santa Maria to Panama, on
the opposite fide of the isthmus; and though it did not gain
much in point of healthfulness by the change, the commodious
situation of this new settlement contributed greatly to facilitate
the subsequent conquests of the Spaniards in the vast countries
situated upon the Southern Ocean P.

151,5 DURING these transaCtions in Darien, the history of which
ew ediico- it was proper to carry on in an uninterrupted tenour, several

important events occurred with refpea to the discovery, the
conquest, and government of other provinces in the New World.
Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a communication with
the Molucca or Spice Islands by the weft, that, in the year one
thousand five hundred and fifteen, he fitted out two ships at his
own expence, in order to attempt such a voyage, and gave the
command of them to Juan Diaz de Solis, who was deemed the
mofi skilful navigator in Spain. He flood along the coast of
South America, and on the first of January one thousand five
hundred and sixteen, entered a river, which he called Janeiro,
where an extensive commerce is now carried on. From thence
he proceeded to a spacious bay, which he supposed to be the
entrance into a firait that communicated with the Indian ocean;

· Hcrrcra, dec. z. lib. ii. c 21, 22. P Ibid. lib. iv. c. i.

bIt

but upon advancing farther, he found it to be the mouth of Rio °1° K
de Plata, one of the vast rivers by which the southern continent
of America is watered. In endeavouring to make a descent in
this country, De Solis and several of his crew were slain by the
natives, who, in fight of the ships, cut their bodies in pieces,
roasted and devoured them. Discouraged with the loss of their
commander, and terrified at this ihocking fpeEtacle, the fur-
viving Spaniards set fail for Europe, without aiming at any
farther difcoveryq. Though this attempt proved abortive, it
was not without benefit. It turned the attention of ingenious
men to this course of navigation, and prepared the way for a
more fortunate voyage, in which, a few years posterior to this
period, the great design that Ferdinand had in view was ac-
complifhed.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus a&ively employed in ex- State of the

tending their discoveries and settlements in America, they still Cpolo"ninHif-
confidered Hispaniola as their principal colony, and the feat of
government. Don Diego Columbus wanted neither inclination
nor abilities to have rendered the members of this colony, who
were most immediately under his jurifdidion, prosperous and
happy. But he was circumscribed in all his operations by the
suspicious policy of Ferdinand, who on every occasion, and
under pretexts the most frivolous, retrenched his privileges,
and encouraged the treasurer, the judges, and other fubordi-
nate officers, to counterac his measures, and to dispute his
authority. The most valuable prerogative which the governor
possessed, was that of distributing Indians among the Spaniards
fettled in the island. The rigorous servitude of those unhappy
men having been but little mitigated by all the regulations in

9 Herrera, dec. z. lib. i. c, 7. P. Martyr, decad, p. 317.

thci r

BO1OK their favour, the power of parcelling out such necessary inilru-

Ill.
v^J^ ments of labour at pleasure, secured to the governor great in-

1517. fluence in the colony. In order to firip him of this, Ferdinand

created a new office, with the power of difiributing the Indians,
and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albuquerque, a relation of Za-
pata, his confidential minister. Mortified with the injustice, as
well as indignity, of this invasion upon his rights, in a point
so essential, Don Diego could no longer remain in a place where
his power and consequence were almost annihilated. He re-
paired to Spain with the vain hopes of obtaining redress'. Al-
buquerque entered upon his office with all the rapacity of an
indignant adventurer, impatient to amass wealth. He began
with taking the exa6t number of Indians in the island, and
found, that from sixty thousand, who, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eight, survived after all their sufferings, they
were now reduced to fourteen thousand. These he threw into
separate divisions or lots, and bestowed them upon such as were
willing to purchase them at the highest price. By this arbi-
trary difiribution, several of the natives were removed from
their original habitations, many were taken from their ancient
mailers, and all of them fubjeded to heavier burdens, and to
more intolerable labour, in order to reimburse their new pro-
prietors. Those additional calamities completed the misery,
and hastened on the extinction of this wretched and inno-
cent race of men '.

Controeifyl Ti-i. violence of those proceedings, together with the fatal
tO ,ith tlrt- c(cnrlqucnccs which attended them, not only excited complaints

ilnt ofl ti;b among such as thought themselves aggrieved, but touched
Indianus.

Hlerrera, tdcc. i. lib, ix. c. 5. lib. x. c. 12. Ibid. dec, i. lib. x. c. 12.

the

the hearts of all who retained any sentiments of humanity. I'00 K

II.

From the time that Ecclefiaflics were sent into America to in- v_
ftrud and convert the natives, they perceived that the rigour 1517.
with which the Spaniards treated them, rendered their minifiry
altogether fruitless. The missionaries, in conformity to the
mild spirit of that religion which they were employed to pub-
lifh, early remonfirated against the maxims of their country-
men with refped to the Americans, and condemned the repar-
timientos, or diflributions, by which they were given up as
slaves to their conquerors, as no less contrary to natural justice
and the precepts of Christianity, than to found policy. The
Dominicans, to whom the inftrusEion of the Americans was
originally committed, were most vehement in testifying against
the repartimientos. In the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, Montefino, one of their most eminent preachers, in-
veighed against this practice in the great church at St. Domingo,
with all the impetuosity of popular eloquence. Don Diego
Columbus, the principal officers of the colony, and all the
laymen who had been his hearers, complained of the monk to
his superiors; but they, instead of condemning, applauded his
doEtrine, as equally pious and seasonable. The Franciscans,
influenced by the spirit of opposition and rivalfhip which sub-
sifts between the two orders, discovered some inclination to take
part with the laity, and to espouse the defence of the reparti-
nientos. But as they could not with decency give their avowed
approbation to a system of oppression, so repugnant to the fpi-
rit of religion, they endeavoured to palliate what they could
not justify, and alleged, in excuse for the conduct of their
countrymen, that it was impossible to carry on any improve-
ment in the colony, unless the Spaniards possessed such do-

minioll

BOOK minion over the natives, that they could compel them to
a__ labour'.

1517.

Contrary de- THE Dominicans, regardless of such political and interelted
ciflons con-
erinng this considerations, would not relax in any degree the rigour of

ii4. etheir sentiments, and even refused to absolve, or admit to the

sacraments, such of their countrymen as held the natives in
servitude". Both parties applied to the king for his decision in
a matter of such importance. Ferdinand empowered a com-
mittee of his privy-council, affifled by some of the most eminent
civilians and divines in Spain, to hear the deputies sent from
Hispaniola, in support of their refpedive opinions. After a
long discussion, the speculative point in controversy was deter-
mined in favour of the Dominicans, the Indians were declared
to be a free people, intitled to all the natural rights of men;
but, notwithstanding this decision, the repartimientos were con-
tinued upon their ancient footing". As this determination
admitted the principle upon which the Dominicans founded
their opinion, it was not calculated either to silence or to con-
vince them. At length, in order to quiet the colony, which
was alarmed by their remonfirances and censures, Ferdinand
issued a decree of his privy-council, declaring, that after ma-
ture consideration of the Apostolic Bull, and other titles by
1513. which the crown of Castile claimed a right to its possessions in

the New World, the servitude of the Indians was warranted
both by the laws of God and of man; that unless they were sub-
jedcd to the dominion of the Spaniards, and compelled to re-
lidc under their infpcd6ion, it would be impossible to reclaim

11(llc:I, ".(c I Ih ihl MI c 1ii ( cilo, libl. iii. c. 6. p. 97. "Oviedo, ihidl.

!" l , I, t !,'
111 . iithem. ix. c 5.

them

them from idolatry, or to inftrud them in the principles of the B OOK I
Christian faith ; that no farther scruple ought to be entertained .-l-
concerning the lawfulness of the repartirmientos, as the king t517'
and council were willing to take the charge of that upon their
own consciences; and that therefore the Dominicans, and monks
of other religious orders, should abfiain, for the future, from
those invectives, which, from an excess of charitable, but ill-in-
formed zeal, they had uttered against that practice y.

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree might be

fully underfiood, Ferdinand conferred new grants of Indians
upon several of his courtiers . But, in order that he might
not seem altogether inattentive to the rights of humanity, he
published an edic, in which he endeavoured to provide for the
mild treatment of the Indians under the yoke to which he sub-
jeded them; he regulated the nature of the work which they
should be required to perform, he prescribed the mode in
which they should be clothed and fed, and gave direclions
with refped to their inftrudioa in the principles of Chrifti-
anity "

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their experience of what Effeatof

was past, judged concerning the future, soon perceived the theie.
inefficacy of those provisions, and foretold, that as long as it
was the interest of individuals to treat the Indians with rigour,
no public regulations could render their servitude mild or
tolerable. They confidered it as vain to waste their own time
and iLrength in attempting to communicate the sublime truths
of religion to men, whose spirits were broken, and their facul-

Y Herrcra, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 14. * See NOTE XXV.
a Herrere, ibid.
VOL. . F f tics

B OOK ties impaired by oppression. Some of them in despair, re-

Ill.

A_ -' quefied the permission of their superiors to remove to the con-
15'7' tinent, and to pursue the object of their million, among such

of the natives as were not hitheto corrupted by the example
of the Spaniards, or alienated by their cruelty from the Chri-
flian faith. Such as remained in Hispaniola continued to re-
monftrate, with decent firmness, againfi the servitude of the
Indians.

Bartholemew THE violent operations of Albuquerque, the new distributor
de las Casas
appears i of Indians, revived the zeal of the Dominicans against the re-
defence of partimientos, and called forth an advocate for that oppressed
thie Indians.

people, who possessed all the courage, the talents, and activity
requisite in supporting such a desperate cause. This was Bar-
tholomew de las Casas, a native of Seville, and one of the
clergymen sent out with Columbus in his second voyage to
Hispaniola, in order to fettle in that island. He early adopted
the opinion prevalent among ecclesiastics, with refpet to the
unlawfulness of reducing the natives to servitude; and that he
might demonfirate the sincerity of his conviction, he relinquished
all the Indians which had fallen to his own share in the division of
the inhabitants among their conquerors, declaring that he should
ever bewail his own misfortune and guilt, in having exercised
for a moment this impious dominion over his fellow-creatures c.
From that time, he was the avowed patron of the Indians;
and by his bold interpositions in their behalf, as well as by the
refpet due to his abilities and character, he had often the me-
rit of setting some bounds to the excesses of his countrymen.

b Herrcra dec. m. lib. ix. c. 14. Touron. Hist. Gcner. de P'Amerique, tom. i.

p. 252. * Fr. Aug. Davila Padilla Hist. de la Fundacion de la Provincia de
6t. Jago de Mexico, p. 303, 304. Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 12.

He

He did not fail to remonfirate warmly against the proceedings BOOK
of Albuquerque, and, though he soon found that attention i_-.
to his own interest rendered him deaf to admonition, he did 1517.
not abandon the wretched people whose cause he had espoused.
He instantly set out for Spain, with the most sanguine hopes
of opening the eyes and softening the heart of Ferdinand, by
that striking picure of the oppression of his new subje&s, which
he would exhibit to his view .

HE easily obtained admittance to the king, whom he found ,516.
in a declining state of health. With much freedom, and no Soicirs th ir

cause in the

less eloquence, he represented to him all the fatal effects of the court of
reportimientos in the New World, boldly charging him with spain.
the guilt of having authorised this impious measure, which had
brought misery and deftruaion upon a numerous and innocent
race of men, whom Providence had placed under his protection.
Ferdinand, whose mind as well as body was much enfeebled.
by his difteper, was greatly alarmed at this charge of im-
piety, which at another junCture he would have despised. He
listened with deep compunction to the discourse of Las Casas,
and promised to take into attentive consideration the means
of redressing the evil of which he complained. But death
prevented him from executing his resolution. Charles of
Aufiria, to whom all his crowns devolved, resided at that
time in his paternal dominions in the Low Countries. Las
Casas, with his usual ardour, prepared immediately to set out
for Slanders, in order to occupy the ear of the young monarch,
when cardinal Ximenes, who, as regent assumed the reins of
government in Castile, commanded him to defit from the jour-
ney, and engaged to hear his complaints in person.
* Hcrrcra, dec. i, lib. x. c. 12. Dec. 2. lib. i. c. I. Davila Padilla Hilt. p. 304.

Fs HE

BOOK 'HE accordingly weighed the matter with attention equal

[11 ._v-...i to its importance; and as his impetuous mind delighted
The5e17l- in schemes bold and uncommon, he soon fixed upon a plan

regula

tions of car- which astonished the ministers, trained up under the formal and
dinal Xi-
ienl sXi. cautious administration of Ferdinand. Without regarding ei-

ther the rights of Don Diego Columbus, or the regulations
established by the late king, he resolved to fend three persons
to America as Superintendents of all the colonies there, with
authority, after examining all circumstances on the spot, to
decide finally with refped to the point in queflion. It was a
matter of deliberation and delicacy to chufe men qualified
for such an important station. As all the laymen fettled in
America, or who had been consulted in the administration of
that department, had given their opinion that the Spaniards
could not keep possession of their new settlements, unless they
were allowed to retain their dominion over the Indians, he saw
that he could not rely on their impartiality, and determined to
commit the trust to ecclefiaflics. As the Dominicans and Fran-
cifcans had already espoused opposite fides in the controversy,
he, from the fame principle, excluded both these fraternities
from the commission. He confined his choice to the monks of
St. Jerome, a small, but respectable order in Spain. With the
assistance of their general, and in concert with Las Casas, he
soon pitched upon three persons whom he deemed equal to the
charge. To them he joined Zuazo, a private lawyer of dif-
tinguifhed probity, with unbounded power to regulate all judi-
cial proceedings in the colonies. Las Casas was appointed to
accompany them with the title of Protecor of the Indians ¢.

* Hcrrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 3.

To

To vest such extraordinary powers, as might at once over- B K

ilh.

turn the fyflem of government established in the New World, i-v
in four persons, who, from their humble condition in life, The lnanner
were little intitled to possess this high authority, appeared to in which ,

were exe-

Zapata, and other ministers of the late king, a measure so wild cuted.
and dangerous, that they refused to issue the dispatches necef-
fary for carrying it into execution. But Ximenes was not of
a temper patiently to brook opposition to any of his schemes.
He sent for the refractory ministers, and addressed them in such
a tone, that in the utmost consternation they obeyed his or-
ders f. The superintendents, with their aflociate Zuazo, and
Las Casas, failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival, the
first aEt of their authority was to set at liberty all the Indians
who had been granted to the Spanish courtiers, or to any per-
son not residing in America. This, together with the infor-
mation which had been received from Spain concerning the
objec of the commission, spread a general alarm. The colonies
concluded that they were to be deprived at once of the hands
with which they carried on their labour, and that, of confe-
quence, ruin was unavoidable. But the fathers of St. Jerome
proceeded with such caution and prudence, as soon dissipated
all their fears. They discovered, in every flep of their con-
duO, a knowledge of the world, and of affairs, which is seldom
acquired in a cloister; and displayed a moderation and gentle-
ness still more rare among persons trained up in the solitude
and auflerity of monastic life. Their ears were open to infor-
mation from every quarter, they compared the different ac-
counts which they received, and, after a mature consideration
of the whole, they were fully satisfied that the state of the

f Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii, c. 6.

colony

BOOK colony rendered it impossible to adopt the plan proposed by
.,---.- Las Casas, and recommended by the cardinal. They plainly

'517. perceived that the Spaniards fettled in America were so few in

number, that they could neither work the mines which had
been opened, nor cultivate the country; that they depended
for both upon the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they must instantly relinquish their conquefis, or give up all the
advantages which they derived from them ; that no allurement
was so powerful as to surmount the natural aversion of the In-
dians to any laborious effort, and that nothing but the autho-
rity of a mailer could compel them to work; and if they were
not kept constantly under the eye and discipline of a superior,
so great was their natural lifleffnefs and indifference, that they
would neither attend to religious inftruation, nor observe those
rites of Christianity which they had been already taught.
Upon all those accounts, they found it necefary to tolerate the
r.epartinientos, and to susser the Indians to remain under sub-
jetion to their Spaniih masters. They used their utmost endea-
yours, however, to prevent the fatal effets of this eftabliifh-
ment, and to secure the Indians the consolation of the bell
treatment compatible with a slate of servitude. For this pur-
pose, they revived former regulations, they prescribed new
ones, they negl'eded no circumriance that tended to mitigate.
the rigour of the yoke; and by their authority, their example,
and their exhortations, they laboured to inspire their country-
men with, sentiments of equity and gentleness towards the un-
happy people upon whose indufiry they depended. Zuazo, in
his department, seconded the endeavours of the superintendents.
He reformed the courts of justice, in such a manner as to ren-
der their decisions equitable as well as expeditious, and intro-
duced various regulations which greatly improved the interior

police

police of the colony. The fatisfadion with his conduc, and BOOK
that of the superintendents, was now universal among the Spa- -
niards fettled in the New World, and all admired the boldness 's7'
of Ximenes, in having departed from the ordinary path of bu-
finess in forming his plan, as well as his sagacity in pitching
upon persons, whose wisdom, moderation, and disinterestedness,
rendered them worthy of this high trust E.

LAS CASAS alone was dissatisfied. The prudential confider- Las Casas

dissatisfied

ations which influenced the superintendents, made no impref- with them.
iion upon him. He regarded their idea of accommodating
their condudt to the state of the colony, as the maxim of an
unhallowed timid policy, which tolerated what was unjust, be-
cause it was beneficial. He contended, that the Indians were
by nature free, and, as their protector, he required the super-
intendents not to bereave them of the common privilege of
humanity. They received his mofi virulent remonstrances
without emotion, but adhered firmly to their own system. The
Spanish planters did not bear with him so patiently, and were
ready to tear him in pieces for insisting in a requisition so odi-
ous to them. Las Casas, in order to screen himself from their
rage, found it necessary to take shelter in a convent; and per-
ceiving that all his efforts in America were fruitless, he soon
set out for Europe, with a fixed resolution not to abandon the
protedion of a people whom he deemed to be cruelly op-
pressed h.

HAD Ximenes retained that vigour of mind with which he His negocx:,-
usually applied to business, Las Casas must have met with no intCrs oft

Charles V.

* Hcrrera, dec. A. lib. ii. c. 15. Remefal. Hist. Gener. lib. 2. c. 14, 15, i6.
h Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 16.

very

B00 K very gracious reception upon his return to Spain. But he

found the cardinal languishing under a mortal difiemper, and
5t 7. preparing to resign his authority to the young king, who was

daily expeaed from the Low Countries. Charles arrived, took
possession of the government, and, by the death of Ximenes,
loft a minifier, whose abilities and integrity intitled him to
direEt his affairs. Many of the Flemish nobility had accom-
panied their sovereign to Spain. From that warm predilection
to his countrymen, which was natural at his age, he consulted
them with refpet to all the tranfations in his new kingdom,
and they, with an indiscreet eagerness, intruded themselves
into every business, and seized almost every department of ad-
ministration h. The direction of American affairs was an ob-
jed too alluring to escape their attention. Las Casas observed
their growing influence, and though projectors are usually too
sanguine, to conduct their schemes with much dexterity, he
possessed a bustling indefatigable aftivity, which Sometimes
accomplishes its purposes with greater success, than the molt
cxquifite discernment and address. He courted the Flemish
minifers with assiduity. He represented to them the absurdity
of all the maxims hitherto adopted with refpeE to the govern-
ment of America, and particularly the defecs of that arrange-
ment which Ximenes had introduced. The memory of Ferdi-
nand was odious to the Flemings. The superior virtue and
abilities of Ximenes had long been the objec of their envy.
They fondly wished to have a plausible pretext for condemning
the measures, both of the monarch and of the minister, and of
refleAing some discredit on their political wisdom. The friends
of Don Diego Columbus, as well as the Spanish courtiers, who

i His. of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 43.

had

had been dissatisfied with the cardinal's adminifiration,joined Las B o 0 K
Casas in cenfuringthe scheme offending fuperintendants toAme- x_
rica. This union of so many interests and passions was irrefifi- '5'7.
ible; and, in consequence of it, the fathers of St. Jerome, and their
associate Zuazo, were recalled. Roderigo de Figueroa, a law-
yer of some eminence, was appointed chief judge of the island,
and received infirutions, in compliance with the request of Las
Casas, to examine once more, with the utmofl attention, the
point in controversy between him and the people of the colony,
with refpet to the treatment of the natives; and in the mean
time to do every thing in his power to alleviate their sufferings,
and prevent the extinction of the race .

THIS was all that the zeal of Las Casas could procure, at Scheme of
that juncture, in favour of the Indians. The impossibility of fupplyng the

colonie, with

carrying on any improvement in America, unless the Spanish negroes.
planters could command the labour of the natives, was an in-
superable objection to his plan of treating them as free sub-
jeds. In order to provide some remedy for this, without
which he found it was vain to mention his scheme, Las Casas
proposed to purchase a sufficient number of negroes from
the Portuguese settlements on the coast of Africa, and to
transport them to America, in order that they might be
employed as slaves in working the mines and cultivating the
ground. One of the firit advantages which the Portuguese
had derived from their discoveries in Africa, arose from the
trade in slaves. Various circumfiances concurred in reviving
this odious commerce, which had been long abolished in
Europe, and which is no less repugnant to the feelings of
humanity, than to the principles of religion. As early as the
year one thousand five hundred and three, a few negro slaves

I Herrcra, dec. z, lib. ii. c. 16. 19. zI. lib, iii. c. 7, 8.
VOL. I. G g had

BO1 K had been sent into the New World k. In the year one thousand

five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand permitted the importation
'5'57 of them in greater numbers', They were found to be a more

robust and hardy race than the natives of America. They were
more capable of enduring fatigue, more patient under fervi-
tude, and the labour of one negro was computed to be equal to
that of four Indians m. Cardinal Ximenes, however, when so-
licited to encourage this commerce, peremptorily rejected the
proposition, because he perceived the iniquity of reducing one
race of men to slavery, while he was consulting about the
means of restoring liberty to another . But Las Casas, from
the inconsistency natural to men who hurry with headlong im-
petuofity towards a favourite point, was incapable of making
this diftindion. While he contended earnestly for the liberty
of the people born in one quarter of the globe, he laboured to
enslave the inhabitants of another region; and in the warmth
of his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke, pronounced
it to be lawful and expedient to impose one still heavier upon
the Africans. Unfortunately for the latter, Las Cafas's plan
was adopted. Charles granted a patent to one of his Flemish
favourites, containing an exclusive right of importing four
thousand negroes into America. He fold his patent to some
Genoese merchants for twenty-five thousand ducats, and they
were the first who brought into a regular form that commerce
for slaves between Africa and America, which has since been
carried on to such an amazing extent o.

51s8. BUT the Genoese merchants, conducting their operations at
7a Cfs first, with the rapacity of monopolists, demanded such an high

fending la-
hourers to k Herrera, dec. r. lib. v. c. 12. 1 Ibid. lib. viii. c. 9. m Ibid. lib. ix.

)ipilaiola. c. 5. Ibid. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 8. o Ibid. lib. ii. c. 2o.

price

price for negroes, that the number imported into Hispaniola made n °0 K
no great change upon the state of the colony. Las Casas whose -v-
zeal was no less inventive than indefatigable, had recourse to 1517'
another expedient for the relief of the Indians. He obfcrved,
that most of the persons who had fettled hitherto in America,
were soldiers and tailors employed in the discovery or conquest
of the country; the younger sons of noble families, allured by
the profpeót of acquiring sudden wealth; or desperate adven-
turers, whom their indigence or crimes forced to abandon their
native land. Instead of such men, who were dissolute, rapa-
cious, and incapable of that fober persevering industry which
is requisite in forming new colonies, he proposed to supply
the new settlements in Hispaniola and the other islands with a
sufficient number of labourers and husbandmen, who should be
allured by suitable premiums to remove thither. These, as
they were accustomed to fatigue, would be able to perform the
work, to which the Indians, from the feebleness of their con-
ftitution, were unequal, and might soon become useful and
opulent citizens. But though Hispaniola flood much in need
of a recruit of inhabitants, having been visited at this time
with the small-pox, which swept off many of the natives, and
though Las Casas had the countenance of the Flemish ministers,
this scheme was defeated by the bishop of Burgos, who thwarted
all his projects'.

LAs CASAS now despaired of procuring any relief for the Sorns the

idea ofa niw

Indians in those places where the Spaniards were already fettled. colony,
The evil was become so inveterate there, as not to admit of a
cure. But such discoveries were daily making in the continent,
as gave an high idea both of its extent and populousness. In

r Hecrrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 21.

G g ll

B 00 K all those vast regions there was but one feeble colony planted;

and except a small spot on the isthmus of Darien, the natives
15'7. fiill occupied the whole country. This opened a new and more

ample field for the humanity and zeal of Las Casas, who flat-
tered himself that he might prevent a pernicious system from
being introduced there, though he had failed of success in his
attempts to overturn it, where it was already established. Full
of this idea, he applied for a grant of the unoccupied country,
firetching along the sea-coast from the gulf of P'aria to the
western frontier of that province now known by the name of
Santa Martha. He proposed to fettle there with a colony com-
posed of husbandmen, labourers, and ecclesiastics. He en-
gaged, in the space of two years, to civilize ten thousand of the
natives, and to infirud them so thoroughly in the arts of social
life, that, from the fruits of their industry, an annual revenue
of fifteen thousand ducats should arise to the king. In ten years,
he expeced that his improvements would be so far advanced,
as to yield annually sixty thousand ducats. He stipulated, that
no sailor or soldier should ever be permitted to fettle in this
difirid; and that no Spaniard Ihould enter it without his
permiflion. He even projected to clothe the people whom
he took along with him in some peculiar garment, which did
not resemble the Spanish dress, that they might appear to the
natives to be a different race of men from those who had brought
so many calamities upon their country q. From this scheme of
which I have traced only the great lines, it is manifest that Las
Casas had formed ideas concerning the method of treating the
Indians, similar to those by which the Jesuits afterwards carried
on their great operations in another part of the fame continent.
He supposed that the Europeans, by availing themselves of that

' Herrera, dec. a. lib. iv. c. 2.

ascendant

ascendant which they possessed in consequence of their superior B 00 K

Ill.

progress in science and improvement, might gradually form the -_-
minds of the Americans to relish those comforts of which they I'17'
were destitute, might train them to the arts of civil life, and
render them capable of its functions.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council of the Indies Favourably

received.

this project appeared not only chimerical, but dangerous in a
high degree. They deemed the faculties of the Americans to
be naturally so limited, and their indolence so excessive, that
any attempt to infirut or improve them would be fruitless.
They contended, that it would be extremely imprudent to give
the command of a country extending above a thousand miles
along the coast, to a fanciful, presumptuous enthusiast, a firan-
ger to the affairs of the world, and unacquainted with the arts
of government. Las Casas, far from being discouraged with a
repulse, which he had reason to expea, had recourse once more
to the Flemish favourites, who zealously patronized his scheme,
merely because it had been rejected by the Spanish ministers.
They prevailed with their mailer, who had lately been raised to 1519.
the Imperial dignity, to refer the consideration of this measure
to a feledt number of his privy-counfellors; and as Las Casas
excepted against the members of the council of the Indies, as
partial and interested, all of them were excluded. The de-
cifion of men chosen by recommendation of the Flemings, was
perfectly conformable to their sentiments. They warmly ap-
proved of Las Cafas's plan; and gave orders for carrying it into
execution, but refirited the territory allotted him to three hun-
dred miles along the coast of Cumana, allowing him, how-
ever, to extend it as far as he pleased towards the interior part
of the country r.

' GomaraHilt. Gener. c. 77. HIerrera, dec 2. lib, iv. c. 3. Ovicdo, lib. xix. c. 5.

TIts

BOOK TriIS determination did not pass uncenfured. Almost every

III. --.-.J person who had been in the Weft Indies exclaimed against it,

A 1517 de- and supported their opinion so confidently, and with fich plau-
liberation fible reasons, as made it advisable to pause and to review the
concerning
the mode of subjed more deliberately. Charles himself, though accuflomed,
dtians the at this early period of his life, to adopt the fentinents of his

miniflers, with such fubmilfion and deference as did not pro-
mise that decisive vigour of mind which diflinguifhed his riper
years, began tofufpedt that the eagerness with which the Fle-
mings took part in every affair relating to America, flowed
from some improper motive, aid discovered an inclination to
examine in person into the state of the question concerning the
characer of the Americans, and the proper manner of treating
lune 20. them. An opportunity of making this inquiry, with great

advantage, soon occurred. Quevedo, the bishop of Darien,
who had accompanied Pedrarias to the continent in the year
one thousand five hundred and thirteen, happened to land at
Barcelona, where the court then resided. It was :oon known,
that his sentiments concerning the talents and disposition of the
Indians differed from those of Las Casas; and Charles naturally
concluded, that by confronting two tefpedable persons, who,
during their long residence in America, had full leisure to ob-
serve the manners of the people whom they -pretended to de-
scribe, he might be able to discover which of them had formed
his opinion with the greatest discernment and accuracy.

A DAY for this solemn audience was appointed. The em-

peror appeared with extraordinary pomp, and took his feat on
: throne in the great hall of the palace. His principal cour-
tiers attended. Don Dicgo Columbus, admiral of the Indies,
was funmmoned to be prcfcnt. The bishop of Darien was called

upon

upon firfl to deliver his opinion. He, in a short difcourfc, BOOK
lamented the fatal desolation of America, by the extinction of
so many of its inhabitants; he acknowledged that this must be '5 7'
imputed, in some degree, to the excessive rigour and inconfi-
derate proceedings of the Spaniards; but declared, that all the
people of the New World, whom he had seen either in the
continent or in the islands, appeared to him to be a race of men
marked out, by the inferiority of their talents, for servitude,
and whom it would be impossible to inftrud or improve, unless
they were kept under the continual infpetion of a maiter. Las
Casas, at greater length, and with more fervour, defended his
own system. He rejeded with indignation the idea that any
race of men were born to servitude, as irreligious and inhumane.
He asserted, that the faculties of the Americans were not na-
turally despicable, but unimproved; that they were capable of
receiving inftrudion in the principles of religion, as well as of
acquiring the industry and arts which would qualify them for
the various offices of social life; that the mildness and timidity
of their nature rendered them so submissive and docile, that they
might be led and formed with a gentle hand. He profenfed,
that his intentions in proposing the scheme now under confi-
deration were pure and disinterested; and though, from the
accomplishment of his designs, inestimable benefits would re-
fult to the crown of Castile, he never had claimed, nor ever
would receive any recompence upon that account.

CHARLES, after hearing both, and consulting with his mi- The fclcine
nifters, did not think himself sufficiently informed to eftabliflh of Ls Cak;~;

approved o'.

any general arrangement with refped to the state of the In- 52-
dians; but as he had perfed confidence in the integrity of Las
Casas, and as even the bishop of Darien admitted his fchcme

to

B 0 1K to be of such importance, that a trial should be made of its es-

Ill.
<-- ~fecds, he issued a patent, granting him the difirid in Cumana
1517. formerly mentioned, with full power to eflablifh a colony there

according to his own plan'.

His prepara- LAS CASAS pushed on the preparations for his voyage with
tio for exe- his usual ardour. But, either from his own inexperience in
cuting it.

the conduct of affairs, or from the secret opposition of the Spa-
nifh nobility, who universally dreaded the success of an infti-
tution that might rob them of the industrious and useful hands
which cultivated their efiates, his progress in engaging hus-
bandmen and labourers was extremely flow, and he could pre-
vail on no more than two hundred to accompany him to Cu-

mana.

Departs for NOTHING, however, could damp his zeal. With this flen-
Anerica, and der train, hardly sufficient to take possession of such a vast ter-
meets with
formidable ritory, and altogether unequal to any attempt towards civilizing

its inhabitants, he set fail. The first place at which he touched
was the island of Porto-Rico. There he received an account
of a new obfiacle to the execution of his scheme, more infu-
pcrable than any he had hitherto encountered. When he left
America in the year one thousand five hundred and seventeen,
the Spaniards had little intercourse with any part of the con-
tinent, except the countries adjacent to the gulf of Darien.
But as every species of internal indufiry began to stagnate in
Hispaniola, when, by the rapid decrease of the natives, the
Spaniards were deprived of those hands with which they had
hitherto carried on their operations, this prompted them to try

H Terrera, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. 3, 4, 5. Argenfola Annales de Aragon, 74.97. Re-
niifrl llilt. Gencr. lib. ii. c. 19, 20o. va

various

various expedients for supplying that loss. Considerable num- B O° i
bers of negroes were imported; but, on account of their exor-
bitant price, many of the planters could not afford to purchase l5 7
them. In order to procure slaves at an easier rate, some of
these fitted out vessels to cruize along the coast of the continent.
In places where they found themselves inferior in strength, they
traded with the natives, and gave European toys in exchange
for the plates of gold which they wore as ornaments; but,
wherever they could surprise or overpower the Indians, they
carried them off by force, and fold them as slaves in Hifpa-
niola'. In those predatory excursions the most atrocious ads
of violence and cruelty were committed. The Spanish name
was held in detestation all over the continent. Whenever any
ships appeared, the inhabitants either fled to the woods, or
rushed down to the ihore in arms, to repel those hated disturbers
of their tranquillity. They forced some parties of the Spaniards
to retreat with precipitation; they cut off others; and in the
violence of their resentment againit the whole nation, they
murdered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal had prompted
them to fettle in the province of Cumanau. This outrage
against persons revered for their fandtity, excited such indigna-
tion among the people of Hispaniola, who, notwithstanding all
their licentious and cruel proceedings, were possessed with a
wonderful zeal for religion, and a superstitious refped for its
ministers, that they determined to inflit exemplary punish-
ment, not only upon the perpetrators of that crime, but upon
the whole nation. With this view, they gave the command of
five ships and three hundred men to Diego Ocampo, with or-
ders to lay wafe the country of Cumana with fire and sword,
and to transport all the inhabitants as slaves to Hispaniola.

' Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3. " Oviedo Hitl. lib. xix. c. 3
Vo L. I. H h This

B o K This armament Las Casas found at Porto-Rico, in its way to

<-- ~the continent and as Ocampo refused to defer his voyage, he
'5' . immediately perceived that it would be impossible to attempt the

execution of his pacific plan in a country which was the feat of
war and desolation.

2zth April. IN order to provide againit the effets of this unfortunate

Labours to
surmount incident, he set fail directly for St. Domingo, leaving his fol-
them. lowers cantoned out among the planters in Porto-Rico. From

many concurring causes, the reception which Las Casas met
with in Hispaniola was very unfavourable. In his negociations
for the relief of the Indians, he had censured the conduct of
his countrymen fettled there with such honest severity, as ren-
dered him universally odious to them. They confidered their
own ruin as the inevitable consequence of his success. They
were now elated with hope of receiving a large recruit of
slaves from Cumana, which must be relinquished if Las Casas
were assisted in fettling his projected colony there. Figueroa,
in consequence of the inftrutions he had received in Spain,
had made an experiment concerning the capacity of the Indians,
which was represented as decisive against the system of Las Casas.
He colleced in Hispaniola a good number of the natives, and
fettled them in two villages, leaving them at perfect liberty,
and with the uncontrouled direction of their own ations. But
that people, accustomed to a mode of life extremely different,
incapable of assuming new habits at once, and dejected too
with their own misfortunes as well as those of their country,
exerted so little industry in cultivating the ground, appeared so
devoid of solicitude or foresight in providing for their own
wants, and were such firangers to arrangement in conducting

' I-errera, dec. 2. lib. ix. c. 8, 9.

their

their affairs, that the Spaniards pronounced them incapable of BoOK
being formed to live like men in social life, and confidered
them as children, who should be kept under the perpetual tute- '
lage of persons superior to themselves in wisdom and sagacity .

NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumstances, which alie- Final mifcar-

l iage of his

nated the people to whom he applied from himself and from fci s.
his measures, Las Casa , by his activity and perseverance, by
some concessions, and nrany threats, obtained at length a small
body of troops to protec him and his colony at their first land-
ing. But upon his return to Porto-Rico, he found that the
diseases of the climate had been fatal to several of his people and
that others having got employment in that island, refused to
follow him. With the handful that remained, he set fail and
landed in Cumana. Ocampo lad executed his comniffion in that
province with such barbarous rage, having maifacred many of
the inhabitants, sent others in chains to Hispaniola, and forced
the refl to fly for shelter to the woods, that the people of a
small colony, which he had planted at a place which he named
Toledo, were ready to perish for want in a desolated country.
There, however, Las Casas was obliged to fix his residence,
though deserted both by the troops appointed to protect him,
and by those under the command of Ocampo, who foresaw and
dreaded the calamities to which he must be exposed in that
wretched fiation. He made the best provision in his power
for the safety and fubfificnce of his followers; but as his utmost
efforts availed little towards iccuring either the one or the other,
he returned to Hirfaniola, in order to solicit more effecual aid
for the preservation of men, who from confidence in him had

I-IHrrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5.

I-I h 2 ventured

B OO K ventured into a post of so much danger. Soon after his depar-

_- ~ture, the natives, having discovered the feeble and defenceless
'5'7' state of the Spaniards, assembled secretly, attacked them with

the fury natural to men exasperated by many injuries, cut off
a good number, and compelled the reft to fly in the utmost
confiernation to the island of Cubagua. The small colony
fettled there, on account of the pearl fishery, catching the pa-
nic with which they had been seized, abandoned the island,
and not a Spaniard remained in any part of the continent, or
adjacent islands, from the gulf of Paria to the borders of Da-
rien. Astonished at such a succession of disasters, Las Casas
was ashamed to shew his face after this fatal termination of all
his splendid schemes. He shut himself up in the convent of the
Dominicans at St. Domingo, and soon after assumed the habit
of that order'.

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony from Cumana hap-

pened in the year one thousand five hundred and twenty-one,
I have chosen to trace the progress of Las Casas negociations
from their first rife to their final issue without interruption.
His system was the object of long and attentive discussion; and
though his efforts in behalf of the oppressed Americans, partly
from his own rashness and imprudence, and partly from the
malevolent opposition of his adversaries, were not attended with
that success which he promised with too sanguine confidence,
they gave rife to various regulations which were of some benefit
to that unhappy people. I return now to the history of the
Spanish difcovcries, as they occur in the order of time '.

z Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5. Oviedo Hist. lib. 19.

c. 5. Gomara, c. 77. Davila Padilla, lib. i. c. 97. PRcncfal Hill. Gen. lib. iI. c. 22,
23. a Herrcra, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5. p. 329.

DIEGO

DIEGO VELASQUEZ, who conquered Cuba in the year one BOOK
thousand five hundred and eleven, still retained the government

517.

of that island, as the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though New dieco-
he seldom acknowledged his superior, and aimed at rendering veries towards
his own authority altogether independent". Under his pru-
dent adminifiration Cuba became one of the moit flourishing of
the Spanish settlements. The fame of this allured many per-
sons from the other colonies, in hopes of finding there either
some permanent establishment, or Come employment for their
adivity. As Cuba lay to the weft of all the islands occupied by
the Spaniards, and as the ocean, which firetches beyond it to-
wards that quarter, had not hitherto been explored, there cir-
cumftances naturally invited the inhabitants to attempt new dif-
coveries. An expedition for this purpose, in which activity
and resolution might conduct to sudden wealth, was more
suited to the genius of the age, than the patient industry requi-
site in clearing ground, and manufacturing sugar. Infligated
by this spirit, several officers, who had served under Pedrarias
in Darien, entered into an association to undertake a voyage of
discovery. They persuaded Francisco Hernandez Cordova,
an opulent planter in Cuba, and a man of distinguished
courage, to join with them in the adventure, and chose him
to be their commander. Velasquez not only approved of
the design, but aflifted in carrying it on. As the veterans
from Darien were extremely indigent, he and Cordova ad-
vanced money for purchasing three small vessels, and furnish-
ing them with every thing requisite either for traffic or for
war, a hundred and ten men embarked on board of them,
and failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of February one

b Herrera, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19.

thousand

BOO K thousand five hundred and seventeen. By the advice of their

V-..._ chief pilot, Antonio Alaminos, who had served under the firfi
1517. admiral Columbus, they flood directly weft, relying on the

opinion of that great navigator, who uniformly maintained
that a westerly course would lead to the most important disco-
veries.

ON the twenty-firfi day after their departure from St. Jago,

they saw land, which proved to be Cape Cotoche, the eaflern
point of that large peninsula projecting from the continent of
Yucatan. America, which fiill retains its original name of rucatan. As

they approached the shore, five canoes came off full of people
decently clad in cotton garments; an astonishing fpeeacle to
the Spaniards, who had found every other part of America
poiTeffed by naked savages. Cordova endeavoured by small
presents to gain the good-will of these people. They, though
amazed at the frange objeóds now presented for the first time to
their view, invited the Spaniards to visit their habitations, with
an appearance of cordiality. They landed accordingly, and as
they advanced into the country, they observed with new won-
der some large houses built with stone. But they soon found
that, if the people of Yucatan had made progress in improve-
ment beyond their countrymen, they were likewise more artful
and warlike. For though the Cazique received Cordova with
many tokens of friendflip, he had posted a considerable body of
his fubjeds in ambush behind a thicket, who upon a signal
given by him, ruffied out and attacked the Spaniards with
great boldness, and some degree of martial order. At the first
flight of their arrows, fifteen of the Spaniards were wounded;
but the Indians were firuck with such terror by the sudden ex-
plosion of the fire-arms, and so surpriscd at the execution done

by

by them, by the cross-bows, and by the other weapons of their B OO K
new enemies, that they fled precipitately, and Cordova quitted _--
a country where he had met with fucl a fierce reception, carry- '5'7.
ing off two prisoners, together with the ornaments of a small
temple, which he plundered in his retreat.

HE continued his course towards the weft without losing Campeachy.

fight of the coast, and on the sixteenth day arrived at Cam-
peachy. There the natives received them more hospitably;
but the Spaniards were much surprised that on all the extensive
coast along which they had failed, and which they imagined to
be a large island, they had not observed any river'. As their
water began to fail, they advanced, in hopes of finding a sup-
ply; and at length they discovered the mouth of a river at
Potonchan, some leagues beyond Campeachy.

CORDOVA landed all his troops in order to protect the sailors

while employed in filling the calks; but notwithfianding this
precaution, the natives rushed down upon them with such fury,
and in such numbers, that forty-feven of the Spaniards were
killed upon the spot, and one man only of the whole body
escaped unhurt. Their commander, though wounded in
twelve different places, directed the retreat with presence of
mind equal to the courage with which he had led them on in
the engagement, and with much difficulty they regained their
ships. After this fatal repulse, nothing remained but to haften
back to Cuba with their shattered forces. In their passage
thither they suffered the most exquisite difirefs for want of
water, that men wounded and sickly, shut up in small vessels,

Sec NOTE XXVI.

and

B 0° K and exposed to the heat of the torrid zone, can be supposed to

Ill. I.v-~ endure. Some of them, finking under these calamities, died by
'5'7' the way; Cordova, their commander, expired soon after they

landed in Cuba .

Voyage of NOTWITHSTANDING the disastrous conclusion of this expe-
G"ijlva'. dition, it contributed rather to animate than to damp a spirit of

enterprize among the Spaniards. They had discovered an ex-
tensive country, situated at no great distance from Cuba, fertile
in appearance, and pofleffed by a people far superior in im-
provement to any hitherto known in America. Though they
had carried on little commercial intercourse with the natives,
they had brought off some ornaments of gold, not considerable
in value, but of singular fabric. These circumfiances, re-
lated with the exaggeration natural to men desirous of height-
ening the merit of their own exploits, were more than sufficient
to excite romantic hopes and expectations. Great numbers
offered to engage in a new expedition. Velasquez, solicitous
to diflinguifh himself by some service so meritorious, as might
entitle him to claim the government of Cuba independent of
the admiral, not only encouraged their ardour, but at his own
expence fitted out four ships for the voyage. Two hundred
and forty volunteers among whom were several persons of
rank and fortune, embarked in this enterprise. The command
of it was given to Juan de Grijalva, a young man of known
merit and courage, with inftrucions to observe with attention
the nature of the countries which he should discover, to barter
for gold, and if circumstances were inviting, to fettle a colony

d Ilerrcra, dec 2. lib. ii. c. 17, 18 Hiftor. Verdadera de la Conquifla de Ia Nucva

Efpana por Bernml Diaz del C.flillo, cap. 1-7. Oviedo, lib. xvii. c. 3. Gomara, c. 52.
P. Martyr de infulis nuper inventis, p. 329.

in

in some proper fiation. He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on B o o K
the eighth of April one thousand five hundred and eighteen.
The pilot Alaminos held the fame course as in the former 15'18
voyage, but the violence of the currents carrying the ships to Nwyi
the south, the first land which they made was the island of
Cozumel, to the east of Yucatan. As all the inhabitants fled to May 3.
the woods and mountains at their approach, they made no long
flay there, and without any remarkable occurrence they reached
Potonchan on the opposite fide of the peninsula. The desire
of avenging their countrymen who had been slain there, con-
curred with their ideas of good policy, in prompting them
toland, that they might chaflife the Indians of that diftrid
with such exemplary rigour, as might strike terror into all
the people around them. But though they disembark-
ed all their troops, and carried ashore some field-pieces, the
Indians fought with such courage, that the Spaniards gained
the viEtory with difficulty, and were confirmed in their opi-
nion that the inhabitants of this country would prove more for-
midable enemies than any they had met with in other parts of
America. From Potonchan, they continued their voyage to-
wards the weft, keeping as near as possible to the shore, and
casting anchor every evening, from dread of the dangerous ac-
cidents to which they might be exposed in an unknown sea.
During the day, their eyes were turned continually towards
land, with a mixture of surprise and wonder at the beauty of
the country, and the novelty of the objeCts which they beheld.
Many villages were scattered along the coast, in which they
could distinguish houses of fione that appeared white and lofty
at a diflance. In the warmth of their admiration, they fan-
cied these to be cities adorned with towers and pinacles; and
one of the soldiers happening to remark that this country re-

VOL. I. I i fembled

B OOK fembled Spain in its appearance, Grijalva, with universal ap-

<»i- plause, called it New Spain, the name which still distinguishes
i5'8 this extensive and opulent province of the Spanish empire in
June 9. America. They landed in a river which the natives called
Tabasco. rabafco, and the fame of their viAory at Potonchan having

reached this place, the Cazique not only received them amica-
bly, but bellowed presents upon them of such value, as con-
firmed the high ideas which the Spaniards had formed with
refped to the wealth and fertility of the country. These ideas
were raised flill higher by what occurred at the place where
they next touched. This was considerably to the weft of Ta-
Guaxaca. bafco, in the province since known by the name of Guaxaca.

There they were received with the refped paid to superior be-
ings. The people perfumed them as they landed with incense
of gum copal, and presented to them as offerings the most
choice delicacies of their country. They were extremely fond
of trading with them, and in fix days the Spaniards obtained
ornaments of gold, of curious workmanship, to the value of
fifteen thousand pesos, in exchange for European toys of small
price. The two prisoners whom Cordova had brought from
Yucatan, had hitherto served as interpreters; but as they did
not undertand the language of this country, the Spaniards
learned from the natives by signs, that they were fubjeds of a
great monarch called Montezuma, whose dominion extended
over that and many other provinces. Leaving this place, with
which he had so much reason to be pleated, Grijalva continued
Jue 19. his course towards the weft. He landed on a small island,

which he named the island of sacrifices, because there the Spa-
niards beheld, for the first time, the horrid fpedacle of hu-
man victims, which the barbarous superstition of the natives

st John de offered to their gods. He touched at another frtall island,
lua. which

which

which he called St. John de Ulua. From this place he dif- Bo0 l
patched Pedro de Alvarado, one of his officers, to Velasquez,
with a full account of the important discoveries which he had 15L8.
made, and with all the treasure that he had acquired by traf-
sicking with the natives. After the departure of Alvarado, he
himself, with the remaining vessels, proceeded along the coast
as far as the river Panuco, the country fill appearing to be well
peopled, fertile, and opulent.

SEVERAL of Grijalva's officers contended, that it was not Reafonsfor

not leaving a

enough to have discovered those delightful regions, or to have colony tiere.
performed, at their different landing-places, the empty cere-
mony of taking pofreffion of them for the crown of Castile,
and that their glory was incomplete, unless they planted a co-
lony in some proper flation, which might not only secure the
Spanish nation a footing in the country, but, with the rein-
forcements which they were certain of receiving, might gra-
dually subjed the whole to the dominion of their sovereign.
But the squadron had now been above five months at sea; the
greatest part of their provisions was exhausted, and what re-
mained of their stores so much corrupted by the heat of the
climate, as to be almost unfit for use; they had loft some men
by death; others were sickly; the country was crowded with
people who seemed to be intelligent as well as brave; and they
were under the government of one powerful monarch, who
could bring them to aa againit their invaders with united
force. To plant a colony under so many circumstances of dif-
advantage, was to expose it to inevitable deftrudion. Gri-
jalva, though possessed both of ambition and courage, was de-
ftitute of the superior talents capable of forming or executing
such a great plan. He judged it more prudent to return to

I i 2 Cuba,

B OO K Cuba, having fulfilled the purpose of his voyage, and accom-

Il.
av-_3 plifhed all that the armament which he commanded enabled

'5'8 him to perform. He returned to St. Jago de Cuba, on the

twenty-fixth of October, from which he had taken his de-
parture about fix months before

Preparations THIS was the longest as well as the most successful voyage
for another
expedition. which the Spaniards had hitherto made in the New World.

They had discovered that Yucatan was not an island as they
had supposed, but part of the great continent of America. From
Potonchan they had pursued their cou rfe for many hundred
miles along a coast formerly unexplored, firetching at firfi to-
wards the weft, and then turing to the north; all the country
which they had discovered appeared to be no less valuable than
extensive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba, Valafquez,
transported with success so far beyond his most sanguine ex-
pedations, immediately dispatched a person of confidence to
carry this important intelligence to Spain, to exhibit the rich
productions of the countries which had been discovered by his
means and to solicit such an increase of authority as might en-
able and encourage him to attempt the conquest of them. With-
out waiting for the return of his messenger, or for the arrival
of Grijalva, of whom he was become so jealous or difiruftful,
that he resolved no longer to employ him, he began to prepare
such a powerful armament, as might prove equal to an en-
terprife of so much danger and importance.

BUT as the expedition upon which Valafquez was now in-
tent, terminated in conquests of greater moment than what the

" Hcrrera, dec. iv. lib. ii c. i, 2. 9, lo. BernalDiaz, c. 8- 17. Oviedo I-lift.
lib. xiii. c. 9. zo. Goiarla, c. 49.

Spaniards

Spaniards had hitherto atchieved, and led them to the know- BOOK
ledge of a people, who, if compared with such of the Ameri-
cans as were then known, may be confidered as highly civil- i518
ifed; it is proper to pause before we proceed to the history
of events extremely different from those which we have already
related, in order to take a view of the state of the New World
when firfi discovered, and to contemplate the policy and man-
ners of the rude uncultivated tribes, that occupied all the parts
of it, with which the Spaniards were at this time acquainted.

# BOOK IV.

THE
HISTORY

O F
A M E RI C A.

BOOK IV.
TWENTY-SIX years had now elapsed since Columbus BOOK

IV.

conducted the people of Europe to the New World. During Iv
that period the Spaniards had made great progress in exploring What parts of

America were

its various regions. They had visited all the islands scattered then known.
in different clusters through that part of the ocean which
flows in between North and South America. They had failed
along the eastern coast of the continent from the river De la
Plata to the bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found that
it stretched without interruption through this vast portion of
the globe. They had discovered the great Southern Ocean,
which opened new prospects in that quarter. They had ac-
quired some knowledge of the coast of Florida, which led them
to observe the continent as it extended in an opposite direction;
and though they pushed their discoveries no farther towards the

north,

BOOK north, other nations had visited those parts which they ne-

IV.
-4am, gleded. The English, in a voyage, the motives and success

of which ihall be related in another part of this History, had
failed along the coast of America from Labrador to the confines
of Florida; and the Portuguese, in quefi of a ihorterpaffage to
the East Indies, had ventured into the northern seas, and
viewed the fame regions '. Thus, at the period where I have
chosen to take a view of the fiate of the New World, its extent
was known almost from its northern extremity to thirty-five
degrees south of the equator. The countries which stretch
from thence to the southern boundary of America, the great
empire of Peru, and the extensive dominions subjea to the
Sovereigns of Mexico, were frill undiscovered.

The vas ex- WHEN we contemplate the New World, the first circum-
ltnt of the
New World. fiance that itrikes us is its immense extent. It was not a

small portion of the earth, so inconsiderable that it might
have escaped the observation or research of former ages, which
Columbus discovered. He made known a new hemisphere, of
greater extent than either Europe, or Asia, or Africa, the three
noted divisions of the ancient continent, and not much inferior
in dimensions to a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its magnitude, but for

its position. It stretches from the northern polar circle to a
high southern latitude, above fifteen hundred miles beyond the
farthest extremity of the old continent on that fide of the line.
A country of such extent passes through all the climates capable
of becoming the habitation of man, and fit for yielding the

a Herrera, dec. i. lib. vi c. i6.

various

various productions peculiar either to the temperate or to the B K
torrid regions of the earth. ---

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the grandeur of the Grand objeCs

it prefenis tu

objects which it presents to view is molt apt to firike the eye of viw.
an observer. Nature seems here to have carried on her opera-
tions with a bolder hand, and to have diflinguifhed the features
of this country by a peculiar magnificence. The mountains of Its mountains,
America are much superior in height to those in the other divi-
sions of the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which may be
confidered as the base of the Andes, is elevated farther above
the sea than the top of the Pyrenees. This Stupendous ridge
of the Andes, no less remarkable for extent than elevation,
rifes in different places more than one third above the Pike of
Teneriffe, the highest land in the ancient hemisphere. The
Andes may literally be said to hide their heads in the clouds
the storms often roll, and the thunder burfis below their fum-
mits, which, though exposed to the rays of the fun in the centre
of the torrid zone, are covered with everlasting snows b.

FROM those lofty mountains descend rivers proportionally rivers,

large, with which the itreams in the ancient continent are
not to be compared, either for length of course, or the vast
body of water which they roll towards the ocean. The Ma-
ragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata, in South America, the Miffi-
fippi and St. Laurence in North America, flow in such spacious
channels, that, long before they feel the influence of the tide,
they resemble arms of the sea rather than rivers of fresh
water '.

b See NOTE XXVII. ' Sec NOTE XXVIII.
VOL. 1. K k TlE

BOO K THE lakes of the New World are no less conspicuous for
-~-v-..J grandeur than its mountains and rivers. There; is nothing in
lakes. other parts of the globe which resembles the prodigious chain

of lakes in North America. They may properly be termed
inland seas of fresh water; and even those of the second or
third class in magnitude, are of larger circuit than the greatest
lake of the ancient continent.

Its form fa- THE New World is of a form extremely favourable to com-
vouratble to
commnlrce, mercial intercourse. When a continent, like Africa, is com-

posed of one vas solid mass, unbroken by arms of the sea pe-
netrating into its interior parts, with few large rivers, and
those at a considerable distance from each other, the greater part
of it seems destined to remain for ever uncivilized, and to be
debarred from any acive or enlarged communication with the
reft of mankind. When, like Europe, a continent is opened
by inlets of the ocean of vast extent, such as the Mediterranean
and Baltic; or when, like Asia, its coast is broken by deep
bays advancing far into the country, such as the Black Sea,
the gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, ofLBengal, of Siam, and of
Leotang; when the surrounding seas are filled with large and
fertile islands, and the continent itself watered with a variety
of navigable rivers, those regions may be said to possess what-
ever can facilitate the progress of their inhabitants in com-
merce and improvement. In all these refpeas America may bear
a comparison with the other quarters of the globe. The gulf
of Mexico, which flows in between North and South America,
may be confidered as a Mediterranean sea, which opens a ma-
ritime commerce with all the fertile countries by which it is
encircled. The islands scattered in it are inferior only to those

in

in the Indian Archipelago, in number, in magnitude, and in B OK
value. As we firetch along the northern division of the Ame- v_,
rican hemisphere, the Bay of Chefapeak presents a spacious
inlet, which conducts the navigator far into the interior parts
of provinces no less fertile than extensive; and if ever the pro-
grefs of culture and population shall mitigate the extreme
rigour of the climate in the more northern diftriOs of America,
Hudson's Bay may become as subservient to commercial inter-
course in that quarter of the globe, as the Baltic is in Europe.
The other great portion of the New World is encompassed on
every fide by the sea, except one narrow neck, which separates
the Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean; and though it be not
opened by spacious bays or arms of the sea, its interior parts
are rendered accessible by a number of large rivers, fed by so
many auxiliary streams, flowing in such various directions,
that, without any aid from the hand of indufiry and art, an
inland navigation may be carried on through all the provinces
from the river De la Plata to the gulf of Paria. Nor is this
bounty of nature confined to the southern division of America;
its northern continent abounds no less in rivers which are na-
vigable almost to their sources, and by its immense chain of
lakes provision is made for an inland communication, more
extensive and commodious than in any quarter of the globe.
The countries stretching from the gulf of Darien on one fide,
to that of California on the other, which form the chain that
binds the two parts of the American continent together, are
not dcftitutc of peculiar advantages. Their coast on one fide
is waihed by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by the Pacific.
Some of their rivers flow into the former, some into the latter,
and secure to them all the commercial benefits that may result
from a communication with both.

K k a BUT

BOOK BUT what most distinguishes America from other parts of
A m-v-,.- the earth, is the peculiar temperature of its climate, and the

TenTptlrtti're different laws to which it is subjet with refpet to the diftri-
of its cli-
nlat. bution of heat and cold. We cannot determine precisely the

portion of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely by mea-
iuring its difiance from the equator. The climate of a country
is affected, in tome degree, by its elevation above the sea, by
the extent of continent, by the nature of the foil, the height
of adjacent mountains, and many other circumfiances. The
influence of these, however, is, from various causes, less con-
fiderable in the greater part of the ancient continent; and from
knowing the polition of any country there, we can pronounce
with more certainty what will be the warmth of its climate,
and the nature of its productions.

Predoii- THE maxims which are founded upon observation of our
nance of cold. hemiphere will not apply to the other. There, cold predo-

minates. The rigour of the frigid zone extends over half of
that which should be temperate by its position. Countries
where the grape and the fig Ihould ripen, are buried under
snow one half of the year; and lands situated in the fame pa-
rallel with the most fertile and belt cultivated provinces in Eu-
rope, are chilled with perpetual frosts, which almost destroy
the power of vegetation'. As we advance to those parts of
America which lie in the fame parallel with provinces of Asia
and Africa, blessed with an uniform enjoyment of such genial
warmth as is most friendly to life and vegetation, the dominion
of cold continues to be felt, and winter, though during a short
period, often reigns with extreme severity. If we proceed
along the American continent into the torrid zone, we shall

" See NOTE XXIX.

find

find the cold prevalent in the New World extending itself also BOo K
to this region of the globe, and mitigating the excess of '-v
its fervour. While the negro on the coast of Africa is
scorched with unremitting heat, the inhabitants of Peru breathes
an air equally mild and temperate, and is perpetually
shaded under a canopy of grey clouds, which intercepts the
fierce beams of the fun, without obfiructing his friendly in-
fluence'. Along the eastern coafi of America, the climate,
though more similar to that of the torrid zone in other parts of
the earth, is nevertheless considerably milder than in those
countries of Asia and Africa which lie in the fame latitude.
If from the southern tropic we continue our progress to the
extremity of the American continent, we meet with frozen
seas, and countries horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable for
cold, sooner than in the north'.

VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the climate of Ame- Caufesof this.

rica so extremely different from that of the ancient continent.
Though the utmost extent of America towards the north be
not yet discovered, we know that it advances nearer to the
pole than either Europe or Asia. The latter have large seas to
the north, which are open during part of the year; and even
when covered with ice, the wind that blows over them is less
intensely cold than that which blows over land in the fame high
latitudes. But in America the land stretches from the river
St. Laurence towards the pole, and spreads out immensely to
the weft. A chain of enormous mountains, covered with snow

Voyage de Ulloa, torn. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage, p. 184.
f Anson's Voyage, p. 74 ; and Voyage de Quiros, chez Hist. Gen. dcs Voyages,
tom. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hist. Natur. de P'Air, ii. 305, &c.

and

B OOiK and ice runs through all this dreary region. The wind, in

IV.
I _-y ^ pafling over such an extent of high and frozen land, becomes

so impregnated with cold, that it acquires a piercing keenness,
which it retains in its progress through warmer climates, and
is not entirely mitigated until it reach the Gulf of Mexico.
Over all the continent of North America, a north-westerly wind
and excessive cold are synonymous terms. Even in the most
sultry weather, the moment that the wind veers to that quar-
ter, its penetrating influence is felt in a transition from heat to
cold, no less violent than sudden. To this powerful cause we
may ascribe the extraordinary dominion of cold, and its violent
inroads into the southern provinces in that part of the globe L.

OTHER causes no less remarkable, diminish the active power

of heat in those parts of the American continent which lie be-
tween the tropics. In all that portion of the globe, the wind
blows in an invariable direction from cast to weft. As this
wind holds its course across the ancient continent, it arrives at
the countries which firetch along the wetfern shore of Africa,
inflamed with all the fiery particles which it hath collected from
the sultry plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the African
defarts. The coast of Africa is, accordingly, the region of the
earth which feels the most fervent heat, and is exposed to the
unmitigated ardour of the torrid zone. But this fame wind
which brings such an accelion of warmth to the countries lying
between the river of Senegal and Cafraria, traverses the Atlan-
tic Occan before it reaches the American shore. It is cooled in
its passage over this vail body of water, and is felt as a refrflh-
ing gale along the coafls of Brasil h, and Guiana, rendering

c Chnrlevoix Ilift. dc Nov. Fr. iii. 165. Hill. gcnerale Voyages, tom, xv. 215, &c.
I SL'e NOTE' XXX.

theef

these countries, though among the warmest in America, tern- n 0o k
perate, when compared with those which lie opposite to them
in Africa i. As this wind advances in its course across America,
it meets with immense plains, covered with impenetrable so-
refts, or occupied by large rivers, marshes, and stagnating
waters, where it can recover no considerable degree of heat.
At length it arrives at the Andes, which run from north to
south through the whole continent. In passing over their ele-
vated and frozen summits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them hardly feel the ardour
to which they seem exposed by their situation k. In the other
provinces of America, from Tierra Firme westward to the Mex-
ican empire, the heat of the climate is tempered, in some
places, by the elevation of the land above the sea, in others,
by their extraordinary humidity, and in all, by the enormous
mountains scattered over this trad. The islands of America in
the Torrid Zone are either small or mountainous, and are
fanned alternately by refreshing sea and land breezes.

THE causes of the extraordinary cold towards the southern

limits of America, and in the seas beyond it, cannot be afcer-
tained in a manner equally satisfying. It was long supposed
that a vail continent, distinguished by the name of Terra
Auf ralis Incognita, lay between the southern extremity of
America and the Antartic pole. The fame principles which
account for the extraordinary degree of cold in the northern
regions of America, were employed in order to explain that
which is felt at Cape Horn and the adjacent countries. The
immense extent of the southern continent, and the large

See NOTE XXXI. k Acofta Hilt. Novi Oibis, lib. ii. c. iI. Buffon Hill.
Naturelle, &c. tom. ii. 512, &c. ix. 107, &c. Osborn's Collet. of Voyages, ii. p. 868.

rivers

B OOv rivers which it poured into the ocean, were mentioned and

<- - ~admitted by philosophers as causes sufficient to occasion the

unusual sensation of cold, and the still more uncommon ap-
pearances of frozen fcas in that region of the globe. But the
imaginary continent to which such influence was ascribed, hav-
ing been searched for in vain, and the space which it was sup-
posed to occupy having been found to be an open tea, new
conjeaures mutt be formed with refped to the causes of a tem-
perature of climate, so extremely different from that which we
experience in countries removed at the fame distance from the
opposite pole'.

Condition AFTER contemplating those permanent and charaEeriftic
when fir s i
diico'vred. qualities of the American continent, which arise from the pe-

culiarity of its iituation, and the disposition of its parts, the
next object that merits attention is its condition when firfi dif-
covered, as far as that depended upon the industry and opera-
tions of man. The effects of human ingenuity and labour
are more extensive and considerable, than even our own vanity
is apt at first to imagine. When we survey the face of the habi-
tablc globe, no finall part of that fertility and beauty, which
we afcribc to the hand of Nature, is the work of man. His
cfiorts, when continued through a succession of ages, change
tile appearance and improve the qualities of the earth. As a
great part of the ancient continent has long been occupied by
nations far advanced in arts and indufiry, our eye is accuflomed
to view the earth in that form which it affumcs when rendered
fit to bc the residence of a numerous race of men, and to supply
them witll nourifhmcnt.

i See NOTE XXXII.

Bu'

BUT in the New World, the flat of mankind was ruder, and O K

iv.

the aspeA of Nature extremely (liflfrent. Throughout all its t--
vast regions, there were only two monarchies remarkable for c'ltivatld.
extent of territory, or distinguished by any progress in im-
provement. The reft of this continent was poffeifed by fin:All
independent tribes, destitute of arts and induilry, and neithcr
capable to correct the defeds, nor dcfirous to meliorate tie con-
dition of that part of the earth allotted to therm for their habi-
tation. Countries, occupicd by such people, were alimofi in the
fame state as if they had been without inhabitants. linmcnfe
forests covered a great part of the uncultivated earth ; and as
the hand of induilry had not taught the rivers to run in a pro-
per channel, or drained off the stagnating -. ater, many of the
mors fertile plains were overflowed with inundations, or con-
verted into marihes. In the southern provinces, where the
warmth of the fun, the moisture of the climate, and the fertility
of the foil, combine in calling forth the moIt vigorous powers of
vegetation, the woods are so choked with its rank luxuriance,
as to be almost impervious, and the surface of the ground is
hid from the eye under a thick covering of ihrubs and herbs
and weeds. In this state of wild unaffiflcd nature, a great part.
of the large provinces in South Amcrica, which extend from
the bottom of the Andes to the sea, fiill remain. The Euro-
pean colonies have cleared and cultivated a few s)ots along the
coast, but the original inhabitants, as rude and indolent as ever,
have done nothing to open or improve a country, lioffcfiing al-
mofl every advantage of situation and climate. As we advance
towards the northern provinces (of Amcrica, Nature continues
to wear the fame uncultivated afpt, andl in proplortion as the
rigour of the climate increases, apecars more dcfolatc anid hor-
rid. There, the forefi,, though not encumbercd with tlhe Fami

Vto . I. T exuberalic

B OO K exuberance of vegetation, are of equal extent; prodigious

IV.
~<> marshes overspread the plains, and few marks appear of hu-

man activity in any attempt to cultivate or embellish the earth.
No wonder that the colonies sent from Europe were aflonifhed
at their firit entrance into the New World. It appeared to
them wafle, solitary, and uninviting. When the English be-
gan to fettle in America, they termed the countries of which
they took poleflion, The Wilderness. Nothing but their eager
expectation of finding mines of gold, could have induced the
Spaniards to penetrate through the woods and marshes of Ame-
rica, where, at every ftep, they observed the extreme difference
between the uncultivated face of Nature, and that which it
acquires under the forming hand of industry and art m.
Unwhole- THE labour and operations of man not only improve and

1"'" embellish the earth, but render it more wholesome, and friendly

to life. When any region lies neglected and destitute of cul-
tivation, the air flagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations
arise from the waters the surface of the earth, loaded with
rank vegetation, feels not the purifying influence of the fun;
the malignity of the diflempers natural to the climate increases,
and new maladies no less noxious are engendered. Accord-
ingly, all the provinces of America, when firfi discovered,
were found to be remarkably unhealthy. This the Spa-
niards experienced in every expedition into the New World,
whether destined for conquest or settlement. Though by
the natural constitution of their bodies, their habitual tem-
perance, and the persevering vigour of their minds, they
were as much formed as any people in Europe for aCtive

m Sec NOTE XXXIII.

service

service in a sultry climate, they felt severely the fatal and per- B OO K
nicious qualities of those uncultivated regions through which
they marched, or where they endeavoured to plant colonies.
Great numbers were cut off by the unknown and violent diseases
with which they were inseted. Such as survived the de-
firudive rage of those maladies, were not exempted from the
noxious effecs of the climate. They returned to Europe,
according to the description of the early Spanish hiflorians,
feeble, emaciated, with languid looks, and complexions of
such a sickly yellow colour, as indicated the unwholesome
temperature of the countries where they had resided "

THE uncultivated state of the New World affeded not only Its animars.

the temperature of the air, but the qualities of its producions.
The principle of life seems to have been less aftive and vi-
gorous there, than in the ancient continent. Notwithstanding
the vast extent of America, and the variety of its climates, the
different species of animals peculiar to it are much fewer in
proportion, than those of the other hemisphere. In the islands,
there were only four kinds of quadrupeds known, the largelf of
which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On the continent,
the variety was greater, and though the individuals of each
kind could not fail of multiplying exceedingly, when almost
unmolested by men, who were neither so numerous, nor so
united in society, as to be formidable enemies to the animal
creation, the number of diflinet species must still be confidered
as extremely small. Of two hundred different kinds of ani-
mals spread over the face of the earth, only about one third

"Gomara illt. c. 20. 22. Oviedo Hist. lib. ii. c. 13. lib, v. c, 1o, P. Martyr,

Eprlt. 5 Dec.

Dec .
p 76.

L I cxiitcd

B 0O K exitsed in America, at the time of its discovery o. Nature was
I _.-v--.. not only less prolific in the New World, but ihe appears likc-

wife to have been less vigorous in her produCtions. The ani-
mals originally belonging to this quarter of the globe appear to
be of an inferior race, neither so robust, nor so fierce, as those
of the other continent. America gives birth to no creature of
such bulk as to be compared with the elephant or rhinoceros,
or that equals the lion and tyger in strength and ferocity '.
The Tapyr of Brasil, the quadruped of the first magnitude in
the New World, is not larger than a calf of fix months old.
The Puma and Jaguar, its fiercest beasts of prey, which the
Europeans have inaccurately denominated lions and tygers,
possess neither the undaunted courage of the former, nor the
ravenous cruelty of the latter q. They are inactive and timid,
hardly formidable to man, and often turn their backs upon the
least appearance of resistance r. The fame qualities in the cli-
mate of America which flinted the growth, and enfeebled the
spirit, of its native animals, have proved pernicious to such as
have migrated into it voluntarily from the other continent, or
have been transported thither by the Europeans '. The bears,
the wolves, the deer of America, are not equal in size to those
of the Old World '. Most of the domestic animals, with which
the Europeans flored the provinces wherein they fettled, have
degenerated with respeCt either to bulk or quality, in a coun-

o Buffon Hilt. Niurelle, tom. ix. p. 86. P See NOTE XXXIV.
s Buffon Hilt. Natur. torn. ix. p. 87. Margravii Hifl. Nat. Brasil, p. 229.

uffon Hist. Natur. ix. 13. 203. Acofta Hist. lib. iv. c. 34. Pifonis Hifl. p. 6.

Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. i. lib. x. c. 13. ' Churchill, v. p. 691.
Ovalle Rclat. of Chili Church. iii. p. Io. Sommario de Oviedo, c. 14-22. Voyage
flu Des Marchais, iii. 299. ' Buffon I-ift. Natur. ix. 103. Kaln Travels, i. 02z.
i3ict Voy. te France Equinox. p. 339.

try

try whose temperature and foil seem to be less favourable to B O K
the firength and perfection of the animal creation . ----

THE fame causes which checked the growth and the vi- nfl an.

gour of the more noble animals, were friendly to thne piroprt-
gation and increase of reptiles and infeCts. Though this is not
peculiar to the New World, and those odious tribes, the off-
spring of heat, moiflure, and corruption, infest every part of
the torrid zone; they multiply faster, perhaps, in America, and
grow to a more monstrous bulk. As this country is, on the
whole, less cultivated, and less peopled, than the other quar-
ters of the earth, the aCtive principle of life wafles its force in
productions of this inferior form. The air is often darkened with
clouds of infeCts, and the ground covered with shocking and nox-
ious reptiles. The country around Porto-Bello swarms with toads
in such multitudes, as hide the surface of the earth. At Guya-
quil, snakes and vipers are hardly less numerous. Carthagena
is infested with numerous flocks of bats, which annoy not only
the cattle but inhabitants". In the islands, legions of ants
have, at different times, consumed every vegetable production Y,
and left the earth entirely bare, as if it had been burnt with
fire. The damp forests, and rank foil of the countries on the
banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem with almost every
offensive and poisonous creature, which the power of a sultry
fun can quicken into life z

u See NOTE XXXV. x \oyage de Ulloa, ton. i. p. S9.

i]d .

p. 147. Herrera, dec. i.'lib. iii. c. 3. 19. Y See NOTE XXXVI.
2 Voyage de Condamine, p. 167. Gumilla, iii. i2o, &c. Hist. gener. dcs Voyages,

xiv. 317. Dumont Memoircs fur la Louilianc, i. o18. Solnmiario de Ovicdo,
c,. 52-6z.

THE

B OOK THE birds of the New World are not distinguished by qua-

IV. _-v^ lities so conspicuous and charaderifiical, as those which we

. have observcd in its quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of

man, and less affedcd by the changes which his indufiry and
labour make upon the state of the earth. They have a greater
propcnfity to migrate from one country to another, and can
gratify this inftind of their nature without difficulty or danger.
Hence the number of birds common to both continents is much
greater than that of quadrupeds; and even such as are peculiar to
America nearly resemble those with which mankind were ac-
quainted in similar regions of the ancient hemisphere. The
American birds of the torrid zone, like those of the fame cli-
mate in Asia and Africa, are decked in plumage, which dazzles
the eye with the vivid beauty of its colours; but nature, satis-
sied with cloathing them in this gay dress, has denied most of
them that melody of found, and variety of notes, which catches
and delights the ear. The birds of the temperate climates
there, in the fame manner as in our continent, are less fplen-
did in their appearance, but, in compensation for that defe2,
have all the power and sweetness of music in their voice. In
some difirids of America, the unwholesome temperature of the
air seems to be unfavourable even to this part of the creation.
The number of birds is less than in other countries, and the
traveller is struck with the amazing solitude and silence of its
foreftsa. It is remarkable, however, that America, where the qua-
drupeds are so dwarfifh and dastardly, should produce the Condor,

a Bouguer Voy. nu Perou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a la Martinique, p. 96. Warren

Dcfcripi. Surinaml . Olborn's Collet. ii. 924. Lettrcs Edif. xxiv. p. 339. Charlev.
Hilt. de la Nouuv. France, iii. 155.

which

which is intitled to pre-emincence over all the flying tribe, in BOOK
bulk, in strength, and in courage.

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as America, muIf of Soi!

course be extremely various. In each of its provinces, we shall
find some distinguishing peculiarity, the description of which
belongs to those who write their particular hiflory. In gene-
ral, we may observe, that the moisture and cold, which pre-
dominate so remarkably in all parts of America, must have
great influence upon the nature of its foil; countries lying in
the fame parallel with those regions which never feel the ex-
treme rigour of winter in the ancient continent, arc frozen
over in America during a great part of the year. Chilled
by this intense cold, the ground never acquires warmth sus-
ficient to ripen the fruits, which are found in the correspond-
ing parts of the other continent. If we would rear in Ame-
rica the productions which abound in any particular diftrid
of the world, we must advance several degrees nearer to the
line than in the other hemisphere, as it requires such an in-
crease of heat to counterbalance the natural frigidity of the foil
and climate . At the Cape of Good Hope, several of the plants,
and fruits peculiar to the countries within the tropics, are culti-
vated with success ; whereas, at St. Augustine, in Florida, and
Charles-Town, in South-Carolina, though considerably nearer
the line, they cannot be brought to thrive with equal certainty .
But, if allowance be made for this diversity, the foil of America
is naturally as rich and fertile as in any part of the earth. As
the country was thinly inhabited, and by a people of little

b Voyage de Ulloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condanlinc, 175. Buffon Hilt. N;t.
xvi. 184. Voyage du Des Marchais, iii. 3zo.

c See NOTE XXXVI1. d See NOTE XXXVIII.

indufl ry,

BOOK indufiry, who had none of the dometic animals, which civil-

IV.
---- . ized nations rear in such vait numbers, the earth was not ex-

hautfed by their consumption. The vegetable productions, to
which its fertility gave birth, often remained untouched, and
being suffered to corrupt on its surface, returned with increase into
its bosom'. As trees and plants derive a great part of their
nourishment from air and water, if they were not destroyed by
man and other animals, they would render to the earth more,
perhaps, than they take from it, and feed rather than impoverish
it. Thus the unoccupied foil of America, might go on en-
riching for many ages. The vast number as well as enor-
mous size of the trees in America, indicate the extraordinary
vigour of the foil in its native itate. When the Europeans
firit began to cultivate the New World, they were aflonifhed
at the luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin mould; and
in fcveral places the ingenuity of the planter is fiill employed
in diminishing and wafling its superfluous fertility, in order
to bring it down to a Rate fit for useful culture '.
I o\. ^A- HAVING thus surveyed the itate of the New World at the

time of its discovery, and confidered the peculiar features and
qualities which distinguish and charadSerife it, the next inquiry
that merits attention is, How was America peopled ? By what
course did mankind migrate from the one continent to the
otlier ? and in what quarter is it most probable that a commu-
nic.atiion was opened between them?

C llflon, Hill. Niatur. i. 242. Kalin, i. i;i.

Ch:iilc\oix, -lilt. de Noiiv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage du Des Marchais. iii. 229.
Iery np DI Biy, part iii. p. ,. See NOTE XXXIX.

W I

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all the human race B o K

spring from the fame source, and that the descendants of one
man, under the protection as well as in obedience to the com- conc-r,'ni,;
mand of Heaven, multiplied and replenished the earth. But amon"g t.L-
neither the annals nor the traditions of nations reach back to
those remote ages, in which they took poiffefion of the different
countries where they are now fettled. We cannot trace the
branches of this firfi family, or point out with certainty the
time and manner in which they divided and spread over the
face of the globe. Even among the most enlightened people,
the period of authentic history is extremely short, and every
thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is not fur-
prifing, then, that the unlettered inhabitants of America, who
have no solicitude about futurity, and little curiosity concerning
what is palt, should be altogether unacquainted with their own
original. The Californians and Efkimaux, in particular, who
occupy those countries in America which approach ncareft to
the ancient continent, are so remarkably rude, that it is alto-
gether vain to search among them for such information as
might discover the place from whence they came, or the an-
ceftors of whom they are descended f. Whatever light has been
thrown on this subjed, is derived, not from the natives of
America, but from the inquisitive genius of their conquerors.

Wl EN the people of Europe unexpectedly discovered a New V;triotls tlic

World, removed at a vafi diflance from every part of the an- s.
cient continent which was then known, and filled with inha-
bitants whose appearance and manners differed remarkably from
the reft of the human fpecics, the queflion concerning their

i Vcnegas Hist, of California, i 60.
VOL. 1. Mm omi!,in,!

BOOK original became naturally an objet of curiosity and attention.
- v--' The theories and speculations of ingenious men with refpedt to

this fubjeat, would fill many volumes; but are often so wild
and chimerical, that I should offer an insult to the underfiand-
ing of my readers, if I attempted either to enumerate or to
refute them. Some have prefun!ptuoufly imagined, that the
people of America were not the offspring of the fame common
parent with the reft of mankind- but that they formed a fepa-
rate race of men diftinguifllable by peculiar features in the
constitution of their bodies, as well as in the charadteriftic qua-
lities of their minds. Others contend, that they are descended
from some remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of the earth,
who survived the deluge, which swept away the greatest part
of the human species in the days of Noah; and preposterously
suppose rude, uncivilized tribes, scattered over an uncultivated
continent, to be the molt ancient race of people on the earth.
There is hardly any nation from the north to the south pole, to
which some antiquary, in the extravagance of conjecture, has
not ascribed the honour of peopling America. The Jews, the
Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Carthaginians, the Greeks,
the Scythians, in ancient tir es are supposed to have fettled in
this western world. The Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwe-
gians, the Welsh, the Spaniards, are said to have sent colonies
thither in lati.r ages, at diiserent periods, and on various occa-
sions. Zealous advocates stand forth to rfpport the refpedive
claims of those people; and though they reit upon no better
Ibundation 'lian the casual refeinblance of some customs, or the
fuppnlfe .it'-inity between a few words in their different lan-
guag ,;ich erudition and more zeal have been employed, to
little purpote, in defence of the opposite fyftcms. Those re-
gions of conjcdurc and controvcrfy belong not to the historian.

His

His is a more limited province, confined to what is established 13 00 K
by certain or highly probable evidence. Beyond this I shall --
not venture, in offering a few observations, which may con-
tribute to throw Come light upon this curious and much agitated
queflion.

I. THERE are authors who have endeavoured by mere con- Ought not to

be founded

jedures to account for the peopling of America. Some have on ,er, con-
supposed that it was originally united to the ancient con- jedure,
tinent, and disjoined from it by the shock of an earthquake,
or the irruption of a deluge. Others have imagined, that some
vessel being forced from its conrfe by the violence of a weAerly
wind, might be driven by accident towards the American coast,
and have given a beginning to population in that desolate con-
tinent g. But with respect to all those fyfiems, it is vain either
to reason or inquire, because it is impossible to come to any
decision. Such events as they suppose are barely possible, and
may have happened. That they ever did happen, we have no
evidence, either from the clear testimony of history, or from
the obscure intimations of tradition.

2. NOTHING can be more frivolous or uncertain than the oronrefill-

blanice of

attempt. to discover the original of the Americans, merely by manners,,
tracing the resemblance between their manners and those of any
particular people in the ancient continent. If we suppose two
bodies of men, though in the most remote regions of the globe,
to be placed in a fiaLc of society finilar in its degree of im-

* Parsons Relmaini of faphet, p. 240. Anci-nt Univerf HiR. vol. xx. p 164. P.

Feyjoo Teatro Critico, tom. v. p. 304, &c. Acoft Hi. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. i.
c. 16. i9.

M m 2 provement,

BOOK provement, they must feel the fame wants, and exert the fame
-__ endeavours to supply them. The fame objecs will allure, the

fame palfions will animate them, and the fame ideas and fen-
timcnts will arise in their minds. The character and occupa-
tions of the hunter in America mutt be little different from
those of an Asiatic, who depends for fubfifience on the chace.
A tribe of savages on the banks of the Danube imuft nearly
resemble one upon the plains washed by the Miffifippi. Instead
then of presuming, from this similarity, that there is any affi-
nity between them, we should only conclude; that the difpo-
fition and manners of men are formed by their situation, and
arise from the state of society in which they live. The mo-
ment that begins to vary, the character of a people mull change.
In proportion as it advances in improvement, their manners
refine, their powers and talents are called forth. In every part
of the earth the progress of man hath been nearly the fame,
and we can trace him in his career from the rude simplicity of
savage life, until he attains the industry, the arts, and the ele-
gance of polished society. There is nothing wonderful then in
the Similitude between the Americans and the barbarous na-
tions of our continent. Had Lafitau, Garcia, and many other
authors, attended to this, they would not have perplexed a sub-
jedt which they pretend to illustrate, by their fruitless endeavours
to cflablifh an affinity between various races of people in the
old and new continents, upon no other evidence than fuclh d re-
feinblancc in their manners as necelrarily arises frem the fimila-
rity of their condition. There are, it is true, among cver) people
tome customs, which, .ts they do not flow from any natural want
or desire peculiat to their situation, may be denominated usages
of arbitrary institution. If between two nations fettled in remote

parts

parts of the earth, a perfecQ agreement with rcfped to any of Bo0 K
there fhouil be discovered, one might be led to suspect that -_-
they were connected by some affinity. If a nation were found
in America that consecrated the seventh day to religious reft, if
in another the firIt appearance of a new moon was celebrated
with festivity, we might justly suppose that the former had de-
rived its knowledge of this usage of arbitrary inflitution from
the Jews, while the latter might be confidered as nothin r more
than an expreiffon of joy natural to man on the return of the
planet which guides and cheers him in the night. The in-
stances of cufloms, merely arbitrary, common to the inhabitants
of both hemispheres, are, indeed, so few and so equivocal, that
no theory concerning the population of the New World ought
to be founded upon them.

3. THE theories which have been formed with refpec to or ofreligious

the original of the Americans, from observation of their re- riles'
ligious rites and practices, are no less fanciful, and destitute of
solid foundation. When the religious opinions of any people
are neither the result of rational inquiry, nor derived from the
instruCtions of revelation, they must needs be wild and extra-
vagant. Barbarous nations are incapable of the former, and
have not been blessed with the advantages arising from the
latter. Still, however, the human mind, even where its ope-
rations appear most wild and capricious, holds a course so re-
gular, that in every age and country the dominion of parti-
cular passions will be attended with similar effeCts. The fa-
vage of Europe or America, when filled with superstitious dread
of invisible beings, or with inquisitive solicitude to penetrate
into the events of futurity, trembles alike with fear, or
glows with impatience. He has recourse to rites and practices

of

B130 K of the fame kind, in order to avert the vengeance which he

V - _r, fippofes to be impending over him, or to divine the secret

which is the object of his curiosity. Accordingly, the ritual
of superstition, in one continent, seems, in many particulars,
to be a transcript of that established in the other, and both au-
thorife similar institutions, sometimes so frivolous as to excite
pity, sometimes so bloody and barbarous as to create horror.
But without supposing any consanguinity between such distant
nations, or imagining that their religious ceremonies were
conveyed by tradition from the one to the other, we may
ascribe this uniformity, which in many inflances seems very
amazing, to the natural operation of superstition and enthnfiafm
upon the weakness of the hyuman mind.

Not peopled 4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle in this in-
hiyhy civi'll quiry, that America was not peopled by any nation of the an-
izJc, cient continent, which had made considerable progress in civili-

zation. The inhabitants of the New World were in a fiate:
of society so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted with those
arts which are the' first essays of human. ingenuity in its ad-
vance towards improvement. Even the most cultivated nations
of America were strangers to many of those simple inventions,
which were almofl coeval with society in other parts of the world,
and were known in the earliest periods of civil life. From this it
is manifest, that the tribes which originally migrated to America,
came off from nations which muff have been no less barbarous
than their posterity, at the time when. they were firfi discovered
by the Europeans. For, although the elegant and refined arts
may decline or perifil, amidst the violent shocks of those revo-
lutions and difaflers to which nations are exposed, the neceiary
.rts of life, when once they have been introduced among any

people,,

people, are never lot. None of the vicirfitudcs in human 13 0
affairs affect these, and they continue to be pradtifed as long as s-v
the race of men exifis. If ever the use of iron had been known
to the savages of America, or to their progenitors, if ever they
had employed a plough, a loom, or a forge, the utility of these
inventions would have preserved them, and it is imloflible
that they should have been abandoned or forgotten. We may
conclude then, that the Americans sprung from some people,
who were themselves in such an early and unimproved flage of
society, as to be unacquainted with all the necessary arts which
remained unknown among their posterity.

5. IT appears no less evident, that America was not peopled nor trom the

iouthcrn re-

by any colony from the more southern nations of the ancient gions of our
continent. None of the rude tribes fettled in that part of our contintt.
hemisphere can be supposed to have visited a country so remote.
They possessed neither enterprise, nor ingenuity, nor power,
that could prompt them to undertake, or enable them to per-
form, such a diflant voyage. That the more civilized nations
in Asia or Africa are not the progenitors of the Americans is
manifest, not only from the observations which I have already
made concerning their ignorance of the moit simple and necef-
fary arts, but from an additional circumstance. Whenever any
people have experienced the advantages which men enjoy, by
their dominion over the inferior animals, they can neither sub-
sift without the nourilhment which they afford, nor carry on
their operations independent of their minifiry and labour. Ac-
cordingly, the first care of the Spaniards when they fettled in
America, was to flock it with all the domestic animals of Eu-
rope, and if prior to them, the Tyrians, the Carthaginians,
the Chinese, or any other polished people, had taken porffelioll

of

BOO K of that continent, we should have found there the animals pe-

IV.
L.uir~~. culiar to those regions of the globe where they were originally

feated. In all America, however, there is not one animal, tame
or wild, which properly belongs to the warm, or even the
more temperate countries of the ancient continent. The camel,
the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were as much unknown in
America, as the elephant or the lion. From which it is ob-
vious, that the people who firfi fettled in the western world did
not issue from the countries where those animals abound, and
where men, from having been long accustomed to their aid,
would naturally confider it, not only as beneficial, but as indif-
penfably necessary to the improvement, and even the preferva-
tion, of civil society.

The two con- 6. FROM confidering the animals with which America is
tinents feenm
to be milt stored, we may conclude that the nearest point of contad be-
contiguous tween the old and new continents is towards the northern ex-
towards the
north. tremity of both, and that there the communication was opened,

and the intercourse carried on between them. All the exten-
five countries in America which lie within the tropics, or ap-
proach near to them, are filled with indigenous animals of
various kinds, entirely different from those in the correspond-
ing regions of the ancient continent. But the northern pro-
vinces of the New World abound with many of the wild ani-
mals which are common in such parts of our hemisphere as lie
in a similar situation. The bear, the wolf, the fox, the hare,
the decr, the roebuck, the elk, and several other species fre-
qucnt the forefis of North America, no less than those in the
north of Europe and Asia '. It seems to be evident then, that

h Buffon Hilt. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

the

the two continents approach each other in this quarter, and are B 1O K

Iv.

either united, or so nearly adjacent, that these animals might
pass from the one to the other.

7. THE actual vicinity of the two continents is so clearly This afcer-
established by modern discoveries, as removes the chief difi- tfined by

discovery.

culty with refped to the peopling of America. While those
immense regions which firetched eastward from the river Oby
to the sea of Kamchatka were unknown, or imperfectly ex-
plored, the north east extremities of our hemisphere were sup-
posed to be so far distant from any part of the New World,
that it was not easy to conceive how any communication should
have been carried on between them. But the Ruffians, having
fubjedced the wefiern part of Siberia to their empire, gradually
extended their knowledge of that vast country, by advancing
towards the east into unknown provinces. These were disco-
vered by hunters in their excursions after game, or by soldiers
employed in levying the taxes, and the court of Moscow efti-
mated the importance of those countries only by the small addi-
tion which they made to its revenue. At length, Peter the Great
ascended the Ruffian throne. His enlightened, comprehensive
mind, intent upon every circumstance that could aggrandize his
empire, or render his reign illustrious, discerned consequences of
those discoveries, which had escaped the observation of his igno-
rant predecessors. He perceived, that in proportion as the re-
gions of Asia extended towards the east, they must approach
nearer to America; that the communication between the two
continents, which had long been searched for in vain, would
probably be found in this quarter, and that by opening this
intercourse, some part of the wealth and commerce of the
wefiern world might be made to flow into his dominions by :1

VOL. I. N n new

1300) K new channel. Such an objec suited a genius that delighted in

IV.
»-vi grand schemes. Peter drew up infiruEtions with his own hand

for prosecuting this design, and gave orders for carrying it into
execution'.

His fuccebfors adopted his ideas, and pursued his plan.

The officers whom the Ruffian court employed in this service,
had to firuggle with so many difficulties, that their progress
was extremely flow. Encouraged by some faint traditions
among the people of Siberia, concerning a successful voyage in
the year one thousand fix hundred and forty-eight, round the
north-east promontory of Asia, they attempted to follow the
fame course. Vessels were fitted out, with this view, at dif-
ferent times, from the rivers Lena and Kolyma; but in a frozen
ocean, which nature seems not to have deflined for navigation,
they were exposed to many disasters, without being able to
accompliih their purpose. No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian
court ever doubled this formidable Cape " we are indebted for
what is known of those extreme regions of Asia, to the disco-
veries made in excursions by land. In all those provinces, an
opinion prevails, that countries of great extent and fertility lie
at no considerable diflance from their own coasts. These the
Ruffians imagined to be part of America; and several circum-
fiances concurred not only in confirming them in this belief,
but in persuading them that some portion of that continent
could not be very remote. Trees of various kinds, unknown
in those naked regions of Asia, are driven upon the coast by
an easterly wind. By the fame wind, floating ice is brought
thither in a few days; flights of birds arrive annually from the

Muller Voyages ct Decouvcrtes par les Ruffes, tol. i. p. 4, 5. 141.
k Sec NOTE XL.

fame

fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among the inhabitants, of 13 0K

IV.

an intercourse formerly carried on with some countries situated -v--
to the east.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and comparing the

position of the countries in Afla which they had discovered,
with such parts in the north-west of America as were already
known, the Ruffian court formed a plan, which would have
hardly occurred to any nation less accustomed to engage in ardu-
ous undertakings, and to contend with great difficulties. Or-
ders were issued to build two vessels at Ochotz, in the sea of
Kamchatka, to fail on a voyage of discovery. Though that
dreary uncultivated region furnished nothing that could be of
use in conftruding them, but some larch trees; though not
only the iron, the cordage, the fails, and all the numerous
articles requisite for their equipment, but the provisions for
vidtualing them, were to be carried through the immense de-
farts of Siberia, along rivers of difficult navigation, and roads
almost impaflable, the mandate of the sovereign, and the per-
severance of the people, at last surmounted every obstacle. Two 1711.
vessels were finished, and, under the command of the captains Jln1 4.
Bchring and Tfchirikow, failed from Kamchatka in quest of
the New World, in a quarter where it had never been ap-
proached. They shaped their course towards the cart; and
though a florm soon separated the vessels, which never rejoined,
and many difafiers besel them, the cxpectations from the voy-
age were not altogether fruitrated. Each of the commanders
discovered 'and, which to them appeared to be part of the Ame-
rican contilent; and, according to their obfcrvations, it fccmn
to be situatcd within a few degrees of the north-west coafi of
California. Each set some of his people aflorce; but in one

N n 2place

B oOK place the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians approached; in
x--^- another, they carried offthofe who landed, and defiroyed their

boats. The violence of the weather, and the difirefs of their
crews, obliged both to quit this inhospitable coast. In their
return they touched at several islands, which stretch in a chain
from eafl to weft between the country which they had dif-
covered and the coast of Asia. They had some intercourse with
the natives, who seemed to them to resemble the North Ame-
ricans. They presented to the Ruffians the calurnet, or pipe of
peace, which is a symbol of friendship universal among the
people of North America, and an usage of arbitrary institution,
peculiar to them.

THE islands of this new Archipelago have been frequented

by the Ruffian hunters since that time; but the court seemed
to have relinquished its scheme of prosecuting discoveries in
this quarter. It was unexpectedly resumed in the year one
thousand seven hundred and fixty-eight, and captain Krenitzin
had the command of two small vessels fitted out for that pur-
pose. In his voyage outward he held nearly the fame course
with the former navigators, he touched at the fame islands,
observed their situation and productions more carefully, and
discovered several new islands, with which they had not fallen
in. Though he did not proceed so far to the eafi as to revisit
the country which Behring and Tfchirikow supposed to be part
of the American continent, ycl, by returning in a course con-
fiderably to the north of theirs, he corrected tome capital mif-
takes into which they had fallen, and has contributed to faci-
litate the progress of future navigators in those seas'

' Sec NOTE XLI.

THUS

THus the poffibilityof a communication between thecontinents 1 P K

in this quarter refts no longer upon mere conjecture, but is efta- I--
bliflled by undoubted evidence '". Some tribe, or some families
of wandering Tartars, from the refilcfs spirit peculiar to their
race, might migrate to the nearest islands, and, rude as their
knowledge of navigation was, might, by palsing from one to
the other, reach at length the coast of America, and give a
beginning to population in that continent. The diflance be-
tween the Marian or Ladrone islands and the nearest land in
Asia, is greater than that between the part of America which
the Ruffians discovered, and the coast of Kamchatka; and yet
the inhabitants of those islands are manifestly of Asiatic extrat.
If, notwithstanding their remote situation, we admit that the
Marian islands were peopled from our continent, distance alone
is no reason why we should hesitate about admitting that
the original of the Americans may be from the fame source.
It is probable that future navigators in those seas, by fleer-
ing farther to the north, may find that the continent of Ame-
rica approaches still nearer to Asia. According to the in-
formation of the barbarous people, who inhabit the country
about the north-east promontory of Asia, there lies, off the
coast, a small island, to which they fail in less than a day. From
that, they can descry a large continent, which, according to
their description, is covered with forests, and poffefied by people
whole language they do not underfland n. By them they are
supplied with the skins of martens, an animal unknown in the
northern parts of Siberia, and which is never found but in
countries abounding with trees. If we could rely on this ac-
count, we might conclude, that the American continent is fe-

m Muller's Voyages, tom. i. 248, &c. 267. 276.

Muller's Voy. et Decouv. i. 166.

parated

BOOK parated from ours only by a narrow firait, and all the difficulties
LcvLY_ with respect to the communication between them would vanish.

Perhaps the merit of ascertaining this is reserved for the fove-
reign now feated on the throne of Peter the Great, who, by
pcrfecting his plan, may add this splendid event to those which
already distinguish her reign.

Another cor- IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries, that an inter-
anunication
by thllr norlh- course between our continent and America might be carried on
welt. with no less facility from the north-west extremities of Europe.
A. D. 830. As early as the ninth century, the Norwegians discovered

Greenland, and planted colonies there. The communication
with that country, after a long interruption, was renewed in
the last century. Some Lutheran and Moravian missionaries,
prompted by zeal for propagating the Christian faith, have
ventured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated region .
To them we are indebted for much curious information with
refpeEt to its nature and inhabitants. We learn, that the north-
weft coast of Greenland is separated from America by a very
narrow strait; that, at the bottom of the bay into which this
firait conducts, it is highly probable that they are united P; that
the inhabitants of the two countries have some intercourse with
one another; that the Efquimaux of America perfectly refem-
ble the Greenlanders in their aspet, dress, and mode of living;
that some sailors, who had acquired the knowledge of a few
words in the Greenlandifh language, reported that these were
A. D. 1 underflood by the Efquimaux; that, at length, a Moravian

milfionary, tell acquainted with the language of Greenland,
having visited the country of the Efquimaux, found, to his

* Crantz llil. of GRcenl. i. 4 242 .

24. 'rcvot Hifl. Gcn. dcs Voyages, tonl. xv.
152, 1not. (96) P lggcdc, p. 2, 3.

afloniihment,

astonishment, that they spoke the fame language with the POO K
Greenlanders, and were in every refped the fame people, and v
he was accordingly received and entertained by them as a friend
and a brother q.

BY these decisive fads, not only the consanguinity of the

Efquimaux and Greenlanders is established, but the pofibility
of peopling America from the north of Europe is demonstrated.
If the Norwegians, in a barbarous age, when science had not
begun to dawn in the north of Europe, possessed such naval
skill as to open a communication with Greenland, their ancef-
tors, as much addicted to roving by sea, as the Tartars are to
wandering by land, might at some more remote period, ac-
complifll the fame voyage, and fettle a colony there, whose de-
fcendents might, in progress of time, migrate into America.
But if, instead of venturing to fail diredly from their own
coast to Greenland, we suppose that the Norwegians held a
more cautious course, and advanced from Shetland to the Feroe
Islands, and from them to Iceland, in all which they had
planted colonies, their progress may have been so gradual, that
this navigation cannot be confidered as either longer or more
hazardous, than those voyages which that hardy and enter-
prifing race of men is known to have performed in every age.

8. THOUGH it be potfible that America may have received Probably

its firit inhabitants from our continent, either by the north-west tle lotlfi-e^r
of Europe or the north-eait of Asia, there fcelis to be good
reason for supposing that the progenitors of all the American
nations, from Cape Horn to the southern confines of Labrador,

e Crantz Hiti(. of Greenl. p. 261, 262.

migrated

Bv) OK migrated from the latter rather than the former. The Efqui-

v_ nzmaux are the only people in America, who, in their asped or

character, bear any resemblance to the northern Europeans.
They are manifestly a separate species of men, diftina from
all the nations of that continent, in language, in disposition,
and in habits of life. Their original, then, may warrantably
be traced up to that source which I have pointed out. But,
among all the other inhabitants of America, there is such a
flriking similitude in the form of their bodies, and the qualities
of their minds, that, notwithstanding the diversities occasioned
by the influence of climate, or unequal progress in improve-
ment, we must pronounce them to be descended from one
source. There may be a variety in the shades, but we can
every where trace the fame original colour. Each tribe has
something peculiar which distinguishes it, but in all of them
we discern certain features common to the whole race. It is
remarkable, that in every peculiarity, whether in their persons
or dispositions, which charaderife the Americans, they have some
resemblance to the rude tribes scattered over the north-east of
Asia, but almost none to the nations fettled in the northern ex-
tremities of Europe. We may, therefore, refer them to the for-
mer origin, and conclude that their Asiatic progenitors, having
fettled in those parts of America, where the Ruffians have disco-
vercd the proximity of the two continents, spread gradually over
its various regions. This account of the progress of population
in America, coincides with the traditions of the Mexicans con-
cerning their own origin, which, imperfct as they are, were
preserved with more accuracy, and merit greater credit, than
those of any people in the New World. According to them,
their ancestors came from a remote country, situated to the
north-calf of Mexico. They point out their various stations

as

as they advanced from this, into the interior provinces, and it E( 0OK

IV.

is precisely the fame route which they muff have held, if they 4----
had been emigrants from Asia. The Mexicans, in describing
the appearance of their progenitors, their manners, and habits
of life at that period, exadly delineate those of the rude Tar-
tars, from whom I suppose them to have sprung'.

THus have I finished a disquisition which has been deemed

of so much importance, that it would have been improper to
omit it in writing the hiflory of America. I have ventured to
inquire, but without presuming to decide. Satisfied with offer-
ing conjectures, I pretend not to establish any system. When
an investigation is, from its nature, so intricate and obscure,
that it is impossible to arrive at conclusions which are certain,
there may be some merit in pointing out such as are pro-
bable'.

THE condition and charadcer of the American nations, at the Condition

time when they became known to the Europeans, deserve more ofnd halri.
attentive consideration, than the inquiry concerning their ori- cans.
ginal. The latter is merely an object of curiosity, the former
is one of the most important as well as inftrudive researches,
which can occupy the philosopher or hiflorian. In order to
complete the hiflory of the human mind, and attain to a perfeCt
knowledge of its nature and operations, we must contemplate
man in all those various situations wherein he has been placed.
We must follow him in his progress through the diffirent flagcs

' Acotla Hilt. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. 2, &c. Garcia Origen de Ins Tnlios, ilh. v
.. 3. Torqucinada Monar. Ind. lib. i. c. 2, &c. Boturini Blenaduci Idea de una I-lil.
'.Ic Ia Anier. Scptentr. § xvii. p. 127.

* Memoires fur la Louifianc, par Dumont, toni. i. p. 119,
VOL. I. Oo oef

1BO3 K of focicty, as he gradually advances from the infant state of

_.
----- civil life towards its maturity and decline. We mufi ob-

fcrve at each period, how the faculties of his understanding
unfold, we muit attend to the efforts of his active powers,
watch the motions of affection as they rife in his breast, and
mark whither they tend, and with what ardour they are ex-
erted. The philosophers and hiflorians of ancient Greece and
Rome, our guides in this as well as every other disquisition,
had only a limited view of this subjed, as they had hardly any
opportunity of surveying man in his rudest and mofR early fiate.
In all those regions of the earth with which they were ac-
quainted, civil society had made considerable advances, and na-
tions had finished a good part of their career before they began
to observe them. The Scythians and Germans, the rudest
people of whom any ancient author has transmitted to us an
authentic account, poiTeffed flocks and herds, had acquired pro-
perty of various kinds, and, when compared with mankind in
their primitive tfate, may be reckoned to have attained to a
great degree of civilization.

reft ;irprioved BUT the discovery of the New World enlarged the sphere
than in any
p-lt of the of contemplation, and presented nations to our view, in ilages
C';.tii. of their progress, much less advanced than those wherein they

have been observed in our continent. In America man appears
under the rudest form in which we can conceive him to subsist.
We behold communities just beginning to unite, and may ex-
amine the sentiments and alcions of human beings in the in-
lancy of social life, while they feel but imperfectly the force
of its ties, and have scarcely relinquished their native liberty.
ThIat state of primaeval simplicity, which was known in our
continent only by the fanciful description of poets, really cx-

iftcd

ified in the other. The greater part of its inhabitants were B OO K
strangers to industry and labour, ignorant of arts, and al-
moit unacquainted with property, enjoying in common the
blessings which flowed spontaneously from the bounty of na-
ture. There were only two nations in this vast continent which
had emerged from this rude state, and had made any confider-
able progress in acquiring the ideas, and adopting the infli-
tutions, which belonged to polished societies. Their govern-
ment and manners will fall naturally under our review in
relating the discovery and conquest of the Mexican and Peru-
vian empires; and we shall have there an opportunity of con-
templating the Americans in the fRate of highest improvement
to which they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches shall be turned to This inquiry

the small independent tribes which occupied every other part of confrnedc
America. Among there, though with some diversity in their tribes.
character, their manners and institutions, the state of society
was nearly similar, and so extremely rude, that the denomina-
tion of Savage may be applied to them all. In a general
hifory of America, it would be highly improper to describe the
condition of each petty community, or to invertigate every
minute circumfiance which contributes to form the characcr
of its members. Such an inquiry would lead to details of
iiinicafurable and tiresome extent. The qualities belonging
to the people of all the different tribes have such a near rcfcm-
blancc, that they may be painted with the fame features. Where
;iny circumflances seem to conflitute a divcrfity in their cla-
r;accr and manners worthy of attention, it will be fufficicnt to
point there out as they occur, and to inquire into the caufcs
of such peculiaritics.

0 o, I

BOOK IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying and authentic

IV. -v__ information concerning nations while they remain uncivil-

Ditficuity ot ized. To discover their true character under this rude form,
o 1 Inlirg in-
,tu;1i:tioi, and to collect the features by which they are distinguish-

ed, requires an observer poffened of no less impartiality than
discernment. For, in every flage of society, the faculties, the
sentiments, and desires of men are so accommodated to their
own slate, that they become flandards of excellence to them-
selves, they affix the idea of perfection and happiness to those
attainments which resemble their own, and wherever the ob-
jeds and enjoyments to which they have been accustomed are
wanting, confidently pronounce a people barbarous and miser-
able. Hence the mutual contempt with which the members
of communities, unequal in their degrees of improvement, re-
gard each other. Polished nations, conscious of the advan-
tages which they derive from their knowledge and arts, are
apt to view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and, in the pride
of superiority, will hardly allow either their occupations, their
feelings, or their pleasures, to be worthy of men. It has fel-
dom been the lot of communities, in their early and unpolifhed
slate, to fall under the observation of persons, endowed with
force of mind superior to vulgar prejudices, and capable of
contemplating man, under whatever asped he appears, with
a candid and discerning eye.

irml the in- TI-lE Spaniards, who first visited America, and who had an
th^eirift ob- opportunity of beholding its various tribes, while entire and
fi:rrvci, unfubdued, were far from possessing the qualities requisite for

obfcrving the firiking fpetacle presented to their view. Nei-
ther the age in which they lived, nor the nation to which
they belonged, had made such progress in true science, as in-

fpircs

spires enlarged and liberal fentimcnts. The conquerors of B O K
the New World were mofily illiterate adventurers, destitute -v
of all the ideas which should have diredted them in contem-
plating objects, so extremely different from those with which
they were acquainted. Surrounded continually with danger,
or firuggling with hardships, they had little leisure, and less
capacity for any speculative inquiry. Eager to take poffeifion
of a country of such vail extent and opulence, and happy in
finding it occupied by inhabitants so incapable to defend it,
they hastily pronounced them to be a wretched order of men,
formed merely for servitude; and were more employed in com-
puting the profits of their labour, than in inquiring into the
operations of their minds, or the reasons of their customs and
inltitutions. The persons who penetrated at subsequent pe-
riods into the interior provinces, to which the knowledge and
devafiations of the first conquerors did not reach, were gene-
rally of a similar character; brave and enterprising in an high
degree, but so uninformed as to be little qualified either for
observing or describing what they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of the Spa- and their pre-

niards, render their accounts of the people of America ex- judices;
tremely defective. Soon after they planted colonies in their
new conquefis, a difference in opinion arose with refpedt to the
treatment of the natives. One party, solicitous to render their
servitude perpetual, represented them as a brutish, obifinate race,
incapable either of acquiring religious knowledge, or of being
trained to the functions of social life. The other, full of pious
concern for their conversion, contended that, though rude and
ignorant, they were gentle, affectionate, docile, and by pro-
per instruCtions and regulations might be formed gradually

into

BOO K into good Chrifians and useful citizens. This controversy, as

-- I have already related, was carried on with all the warmth

which is natural, when attention to interest on the one hand,
and religious zeal on the other, animate the disputants. Most
of the laity espoused the former opinion; all the ecclesiastics
were advocates for the latter; and we shall uniformly find that,
accordingly as an author belonged to either of there parties,
he is apt to magnify the virtues or aggravate the defets of the
Americans beyond measure. Those repugnant accounts increase
the difficulty of attaining a perfed knowledge of their character,
and render it necessary to peruse all the descriptions of them by
Spanish writers with difirufit, and to receive their information
with some allowance.

and from the ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the discovery of Ame-
fvpms ofer rica, before the manners of its inhabitants attracted, in any

considerable degree, the attention of philosophers. At length,
they discovered that the knowledge of their condition and cha-
racier might enable them to fill up a considerable charm in the
history of the human species, and lead to speculations no less
curious than important. They entered upon this new field
of fludy with great ardour; but, instead of throwing light upon
the fubjedt, they have contributed, in some degree, to involve
it in additional obscurity. Too impatient to inquire, they
hastened to decide; and began to ereEt systems, when they
flould have been searching for fads on which to eflablifh their
foundations. Struck with the appearance of degeneracy in the
human fpecics throughout the New World, and aflonifhed at
beholding a vast continent occupied by a naked, feeble, and
ignorant race of men, some authors of great name have main-
tailned, that this part of the globe had but lately emerged from

the

the sea, and become fit for the residence of man; that every BO1 K

IV.

thing in it bore marks of a recent original; and that its in- Lv-r
habitants, lately called into exiftencc, and frill at the begin-
ning of their career, were unworthy to be compared with the
people of a more ancient and improved continent '. Others
have imagined, that, under the influence of an unkindly cli-
mate, which checks and enervates the principle of life, man
never attained in America the perfection which belongs to his
nature, but remained an animal of an inferior order, defctive
in the vigour of his bodily frame, and destitute of sensibility,
as well as of force, in the operations of his mind u. In oppofi-
tion to both these, other philosophers have supposed that man ar-
rives at his highest dignity and excellence long before he reaches
a fiate of refinement; and, in the rude simplicity of savage life,
displays an elevation of sentiment, an independence of mind,
and a warmth of attachment, for which it is vain to search
among the members of polished societies ". They seem to con-
fider that as the mofi perfect slate of man which is the least
civilized. They describe the manners of the rude Americans
with such rapture, as if they proposed them for models to the
reft of the species. These contradictory theories have been
proposed with equal confidence, and uncommon powers of
genius and eloquence have been exerted in order to clothe
them with an appearance of truth.

As all those circumfiances concur in rendering an inquiry

into the slate of the rude nations in America intricate and ob-
fcure, it is necessary to carry it on with caution. When guided
in our researches by the intelligent observations of the few phi-

t M. de Buffon Hilt. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. 103. 114.
u M. de P. Kecherches Philof. fur les Americ. paflim. I M. Roufcau.

lofophers

BOO K lofophers who have visited this part of the globe, we may ven-
,--- ture to decide. When obliged to have recourse to the super-

ficial remarks of vulgar travellers, of sailors, traders, bucca-
neers, and mifflonaries, we must often pause, and comparing
detached fadts, endeavour to discover what they wanted saga-
city to observe. Without indulging conjecture, or betraying
a propensity to either system, we must study with equal care
to avoid the extremes of extravagant admiration, or of super-
cilious contempt for those manners which we describe.

Method ob- IN order to conduc this inquiry with greater accuracy, it
served in the
inquiry. should be rendered as simple as poifible. Man exified as an

individual before he became the member of a community; and
the qualities which belong to him under his former capacity
should be known, before we proceed to examine those which
arise from the latter relation. This is peculiarly necessary in
invefligating the manners of rude nations. Their political
union is so incomplete, their civil institutions and regulations
so few, so simple, and of such small authority, that they ought
to be viewed rather as independent agents, than as members
of a regular society. The character of a savage results almost
entirely from his sentiments or feelings as an individual, and
is but little influenced by his imperfect fubjetion to govern-
ment and order. I shall condut my researches concerning the
manners of the Americans in this natural order, proceeding
gradually from what is simple to what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily confiitution of the Ameri-

cans in those regions now under review. II. The qualities of
their minds. III. Their domeitic state. IV. Their political
slate and inflitutions. V. Their system of war, and public

security.

security. VI. The arts with which they were acquainted. , o

c

VII. Their religious ideas and institutions. VIII. Such singular
detached customs as are not reducible to any of the former
heads. IX. I shall conclude with a general review and efii-
mate of their virtues and defels.

I. THE bodily constitution of the Americans-The humian rl}, cvi.,-

body is less affeEted by climate than that of any other animal.,,(' l:
Some animals are confined to a particular region of the globe,
and cannot exiil beyond it; others thou h they may be brought
to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to them, ccafe to multi-
ply when carricd out of tlat difirict, which Nature deflincd to
be their mansion. Even ucli as feemcapableof being naturalized
in various climates, lfcl thecffcCt of every remove from their
proper flation, and gradually dwindle and dcgenerate from the
vigour and perfection peculiar to their species. Man iL thc
only living creature whose frame is at once so hardy and so
flexible, that he can spread over thi whole earth, become the
inhabitant of every region, and thrive and multiply unidcr
every climate. Subjjcd, however, to the general law of Na-
ture, the human body is not entirely exempt from the opra-
tion of climate, and whenl cxpofcd to the extrecme. cithler of
hcat or cold, its size or vigour diminifhcs.

Tn firfi appc:lrance of the inhlabitants of tlh NYcE : 9';l'.1,

filled the difcovercrs with i'lch aflollilfmcnt. that they Ewc:'-
p]t to ilmagine them a race of men cdirercnt from those of the
other hemifp-ierc. Their complexion is of a reddish brown,
nearly reftembling the colour of copper' Tlh h:eir of thel.i

Y Ovi(c'o Sinadlio, p1 4' , ' D .: c o Ccn; iur, : . 2:
VOL. 1. P p lcad,.

1, oo 1 lic ads is always black, long, coarse, and lank. They have no

-v-- beard, and every part of their body is pcrfedtly smooth. Their

persons are of a full size, extremely straight, and well propor-
tioncd . Their features are regular, though often distorted by
absurd endeavours to improve the beauty of their natural
form, or to render their aspet more drcadful to their enemies.
Aire f(e Ic. In the ifinds, where four-footed animals were both few and

finall, and the earth yielded her produEtionsa!mofl fpontane-
oufly, the constitution of the natives, neither braced by the ac-
tive exercises of the chacc, nor invigorated by the labour of
cultivation, was extremely feeble and languid. On the conti-
nent, where the forefis abound \v ith game of various kinds, and
the chief occupation of many tribes was to pursue it, their
frame acquired greater firmness. Still, however, the Ameri-
cans were more remiarkable for agility than firength. They
resemblcd beasts of prey, rather than animals formed for laboura.
They were not only averse to toil, but incapable of it ; and
when rouz:d by force from their native indolence, and com-
pelled to work, they funk under tasks which the people of the
other continent would have performed witheafe . This feeble-
ness of constitution \was universal among the i;habitants of
tlofe regions in America which we are surveying, and may be
confidered as charadcriftic of the species thele'.

Ti-iE bcardless countenance and smooth skin of the Ame-

rican seems to indicate a defed of vigour, occasioned by some
vice in his frame. He is destitute of one sign of manhood and

/ SJe NOTEI XI .11. See NOTE` XLIII.
b C)vicdo Soml. p. il, C. Voy. te l ornal, ii. I 1S. \ ilcil'E DTcciiplioi, p. 131.

13. L .n; C'aih:, i, cv. Reltic . p . ' Tolrqueci. Monal. . . ;,.

? Ovicdu Suinatio, p. ;..
'il 1b. .ii. c. 6, l-lcrrcra, dcc. 1. lib. ix.c.5. c. 5. S lon ),p. 4 .

of

offlrength. This peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of tlic ;
New World are diflinguifhed from the people of all other na- ...
tions, cannot be attributed, as some travellers have supposed, to
their mode of fubfiflence". For though the food of iany
Americans be so extremely insipid, that they are alto;,thlcr
unacquainted with the use of salt, rude tribes in other parts of
the earth h:.ve subsisted on aliments equally finple wsithout this
mark of degradation, or any apparent fynmptom of a diminu-
tion in their vigour.

As the external form of the Americans leads us to fii- l: l;

pcd that there is some natural debility in their frame, thc t
finallnefs of their appetite for food has been mentioned by
many authors as a confirmation of this fu)ficion. The quan-
tity of food which men consume varies according to the
temperature of the climate in which they live, the, dcgree ci
adivity which they exert, and the natural vigour of their
confiitutions. Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone,
and when men pass their days in indolence and cafe, they
rcquire less nourishment than the atqivc inhabitants of tem-
perate or cold countries. But neither the warmth of tlicir
climate, nor their extreme laziness, will account f.)r the un-
com1mon (lefect of appetite among the Americans. 'TIe Spi-
niards were adtoniihcd with obfcrving this, not oinl. in the
islands, but in fevcral parts of the continent. The conilit;-
tional tcmperl:llac of thle natives far exceeded, il tl;cir 'li!i]on,
tlhe abftinencc of the imoit mortified hermits'; wlli!c, on the
otlher land, the alppetite of tlie Spaniards appeared to tlhe Arne-
ficaas insatiably voracious; and they ailtrmcdi, tlhat one Sp:a-

' C I.

1 lcv . I Iill. ie N uLa I F .

F iii . .' '

,

i
3., .\. Simon Co(nqul:it, &c. p. ;). laku li, iii. 465. 5.::j

I. p 2, iilr,

r o, r niard d 'voured more food in a day than was fuficicnt for ten

Americans.

i.s-

. AR JRoo F of some feeblencfs in their frame still more striking,
i - - is tlh infcnfibility of the Americans to the charms of beauty,

anti the power of love. That pallion vwhich was c(lefincd to
prpl tta;te life, to be the bond of social union, and the iource
of tendcr!!cs and joy, is the most ardent in the human breast;
m;nd thoulh tl c perils and hardilpips of the savage state,
iilouhli cxcccVe fatiguc, on some occasions, and the dif- -
Eculty at a'l times of procuring subsistence, may seem to be
advcrfe to this pafioon, and to have a tendency to abate its vi-
-gour, yet the rudefl nations in every other part of the globe
1:cin to feel its influence more powerfully than the irhallitants
of the N. s World. The negro glo\%s with all the warmth of
deiire natural to his climate; and the motr uncultivated .Afi:tics
dilcover that sensibility, which, from their situation, \ e should
exped them to have felt. But the Americans arc in an amazing
degree, firangers to the force of this firi: inftin.t of nature.
In every part of the New World the natives treat thcir iomen
with coldness and indifference. They are neither the ohjces
of that tender attachment which takes place in civilized society,
ntr of that ardent cifire conipicuous among rude nations.
Even in climates wjere thi, paifon ufu: lly acquires its greatest
vi,,our, the savage of America views his female x, ith disdain,
as an animal of a less noble fpccies. i-e is at.no p-iins to win
ier favour by tle alfiduity of courtfliip. and ftilllefs felicitous
lo plrefcrve it b, indulgence and gentleness . Milfionarics

1.:: :ri,.'.c i. ib. ii. c. i6. , ,-inncpin M icur; de Sauvna s, ;z,

;vci . (',!L;'.) ii l

}I (i , Ifc:; Antillcs, p. 461. \ ,))iag( tCI Cto cal . ii 1.14. Illi!llli'i,

:ii. 9

. ( I 7.1 .i Uczi dcl (;ran C'ln c), 71. I'.ll;k cii' I)ccl. ( l'aTJo nr. P 12-
1 ,:'t , l .' ( ;,ii,-..- app. Muratori 1 3. (llillian. Fclicc, i. 305.

thcmfclves,

ihemfelvcs, notwitlhflnding the austerity of monaflic idclas, '
cannot refrain from expressing their aftonifincnt at tlc difpaf- ----._
fionate coldness of the American young men in their intcrcoursi
with the other sex'. Nor is this reserve to be aferibed to any
opinion which they entertain with refped to the merit of fe-
male Lhaftity. That is an idea too refined for a favagc, and
suggested by a delicacy of lentimcnt and affetion to which he is
a stranger.

BUT in inquiries conccrning either the bodily or mental K:;1..'

qualities of particular races of men, there is not a more com- ', 1.:^;
mon or more seducing error, than that of ascribing to a single
c:iufe, tlioie charaderillic peculiarities, which are thle cffie of
the co nbin d o:)eration of many causes. The climate and foil
of America differ, in so meany refpedts, from those of the other
hemnilphere, and this difference is so obvious and striking, that
1hilofophers of great eminence have laid hold on this as fusE-
cient to acc:mxiit for .what is pcculiar in the conflitution of it-;
inhabitants. They reft on physical caucfs alone, and confider
the feeble frame and languid ldeire of the Americans, as con-
sequences of the temperament of that po.tion of the globe
which they inhlbit. Buit the influences of plitical ,and mo-
ral caulcs oullt not to hlave been overlooked Tlhee operatei
with no lcfs cflfcd than that on Iwhich they lefit s a full .x-
planation of the singular appearallccs vwlich lhave been men-
tioned. Wi'lrcver thec flaic of focicty is fucli as to create ma-
ny wants and desires, wliclh c:inot be satisficd without regu-
lar exertions ot inclufiry, the body accufloincd to labour be-

1 Chlinvalon. p. i . Ictti. Edit. ton0 . xxiv. 31ib. 't ' it c, ii. ;;. \' l i. ';

liba. 11. lt1. d
L I. . i i iit ill p. I1.

comies
3.

i 0o o K comes robufi and patient of fatigue. In a more finiple slate,

] ;v "Xhcre the demands of men are so few and so moderate, that

they may be gratified, almost without any effort, by the rpon-
tancous productions of nature, the powers of the body are not
called forth, nor can they attain their proper firength. The
n:ttivcs of Chili and of North-America, the two temperate re-
,ions in the New World, who live by hunting, may be deemed
an acivc and vigorous race, when compared with the inha-
bitants of the isles, or of those parts of the continent where
hardly any labour is requisite to procure subsistence. The
exertions of a hunter are not, however, so regular, or so con-
tinued, as those of persons employed in the culture of the earth,
or in the various arts of civilized life, and though his agility
may be greater than theirs, his flrength is on the whole in-
ferior. If another direCtion were given to the active powers of
man in the New World, and his force augmented by cxercife,
he might acquire a degree of vigour which he does not in his
present state possess. The truth of this is confirmed by expe-
rience. Wherever the Americans have been gradually accuf-
tomed to hard labour, theirconftitutions become robust, and
they have been found capable of performing such talks, as
seemed not only to exceed the powers of such a feeble frame as
has been deemed peculiar to their country, but to equal any es-
rort of the natives, either of Africa or of Europe '.

'Fi-lr- fame reasoning will apply to what has been ohferved

,.u)cerning their slender demand for food. As a proof that this
ihould he aferilhcd, as much to their extreme ildolence, and
-frlen rIntal wn nt of occupation, as to any thing peculiar in the

Sc NOTE XLIV.

physical

physical firuiture of their bodies, it has been obfcrvcd, th:Lt in 1 o 0 1
those diflridts, where the people of America are obliged to cx- .-.-
crt any unu ual effort of acivity, in order to procure fubfiftcnce,
or wherever they are employed in fcvere labour, their appetite
is not inferior to that of other men, and, in some p!aces, it has
flruck observers as rcmarkably voracious -.

THE operation of political and moral causes is fill more

conspicuous, in modifying the degree of attachment between
the sexes In a itate of high civilization, this ptffion inflamned
by restraint, refined by dclicacy, and cherilhed by faflion, oc-
cupies and engroifes the heart. It is no longer a simple infiins
of nature; fentimcnt heightens the ardour of dcfire, anl the
most tender emotions of which our frame is susceptible, soothe
and agitate the foul. This description, ho-.ever, applies only
to those, who, by thcir situation, are exempted from the cares
and labours of life. Among persons of inferior order, who
are doomed by their condition to inceffalnt toil, the dominion
of this pafTion is less violent, and their solicitude to procure
subsistence, and to provide for the firfi demand of nlture, lea\-c;
little leisure for attending to its feconid call. But if the natnr-
of the intercourse between the sexes varies so much ;n cel'i;ms
of dififrent rank in polished societies, the condition of '::ill,
while lie remains uncivilized, must occasion a variationl fill
more apparent. c/We may wvell suppose, that amidfl tile haro-
fliips, the dang;crs, and the simplicity of savage life. \l hcrce fihft-
ence is alw;lys preccarious, and often scanty, whlcre men arc al-
mo co:itinulally cngagcd in the pursuit of their cnemies, or in
guarding againtl their attacks, and wvhcre neither dress nor
rcfcrvc arc employed as arts of female allurmcent, thalt the at-

' Ulu:n.; lla, ii. 7Z. 7 3. I.afiau, i. i 5.

'Ovallc Churclh. iii. Si.
,M¥urat);, i;i. z);.

tcnl tion

i; o o iz tcntion of the Americans to their women would be extremely

iv.
it l, feeble, without imputing this solely to any physical defeEt or

degradation in their frame.

Ir is accordingly observed, that in those countries of Ame-

rica, hcere, from the fertility of the foil, the mildness of the
climate, or some flrther advances .. hich the natives have made
in improvement, tlie means of subsistence are more abundant,
.nd the hardfiips of fav;ige life, are less severely felt, the ani-
m:l pafTion of the sexes becomes more ardent. Striking ex-
amples of this occur among tome tribes feated on the banks of
great livers well flored with food, among others vwho arc ma-
iters of hunting-grounds abounding so much with gdme, that
they have a regular and plentiful supply of nourilhmcnt with
little labour. The fupcrior degree of security and affluence
which they enjoy, is followed by their natural cffecs. The
pailions implanted in the human frame by the hand of nature
acquire additional force; new taftes and desires arc formed;
the woman, as they are more valued and admired, become more
attentive to (lrefs and ornament; the men,beginning to feel how
much of their ow-n happiness depends upon tllem, no longer dif-
dain the arts of winning their favour and afficion. ' hle inter-
course of the sexes becomes very different from that \which takes
place among their ruder countrymen ; and as hardly any refiraint
is imposed on the gratification of dcfire, cither by religion, or
laws, or decency, the diflolution of their ma.nners is exceflive'.

Non of No'rw'llsT': N DING the feeble mnal: of the Ancericans,
hci.JdICefir- almoIt none of them arc deformed, or mutilated, or defec-

tive in any of tlhir senses. All travcllcrs have been struck

12i , 3,)9. C':;n!cv. iii.423. Du:nilt i Mellm. fur L,ouibianc, i, iq.

with

with this circumstance, and have celebrated the uniform 13 0 K1
symmetry and perfection of their external figure. Some -
authors search for the cause of this appearance in their phy-
fical condition. As the parents are not exhaufled or over-
fatigued with hard labour, they suppose that their children
are born vigorous and found. They imagine, that in the
liberty of savage life, the human body, naked and unconfined
from its earliefr age, preserves its natural form ; and that all
its limbs and members acquire a juster proportion, than when
fettered with artificial restraints, which flint its growth,
and diflort its shape "'. Something, without doubt, may be
ascribed to the operation of these causes; but the true reasons
of this apparent advantage, which is common to all savage
nations, lie deeper, and are closely interwoven with the nature
and genius of that slate. The infancy of man is so long and
so helpless, that it is extremely difficult to rear children among
rude nations. Their means of subsistence are not only scanty,
but precarious. Such as live by hunting must range over ex-
crnfive countries, and shift often from place to place. The
care of children, as well as every other laborious talk, is de-
volved upon the women. The diftrefies and hardships of the
savage life, which are often such as can hardly be supportcd by
persons in full vigour, must be fatal to those of more tender
age. Afraid of undertaking a task so laborious, and of fucli
long duration, the women in some parts of America, cxtin-
guifh the firfi sparks of that life which they arc unable to
cheriflh, and by the use of certain herbs procure frequent
abortions . Sensible that only flout and well-formed children
have force of confiitution to struggle through such an hard

rn Pi ).

p. 6. I Ellis's Voyage to l-ludfon'3 Bay, 193. Hcrrcra, d:: , -.li). i:;. c..
VOL. I. ° ' infitncy,

1: () o K infancy, other nations abandon or destroy such of their pro-
-~ geny as appear feeble or defectivc, as unworthy of attention o.

Even when they endeavour to rear all their children without
distinction, so great a proportion of the whole number pe-
rifles under the rigorous treatment which mutf be theirlot
in the savage flatc, that few of those who laboured under
any original frailty attain the age of manhood r. Thus, in
polishcd societies, where the means of fulbiflence are secured
with certainty, and acquired with cafe; where the talents of
the mind are often of more importance than the powers of the
body; children are preserved notwithfianding their defects or
deformity, and grow up to be useful citizens. In rude nations,
such persons are either cut off as soon as they are born, or becom-
ing a burden to themselves and to the community, cannot long
protraCt their lives. But in those provinces of the New World
-where, by the establishment of the Europeans, more regular
provision has been made for the fubfifience of its inhabitants,
and they are refirained from laying violent hands on their chil-
dren, the Americans are so far from being eminent for any fu-
perior perfection in their form, that one should rather fufpet
orme peculiar imbecillity in the race, from the extraordinary
number of individuals who are deformed, dwarfifh, mutilated,
blind, or deafq.

u, iioi of HOWEVER feeble the constitution of the Americans may be,
~Lnc:'l)';p i- it is remarkable, that there is less variety in the human form

throughout the New World, than in the ancient continent.
When Columbus and the other discoverers first visitcd the dif-

Gu MniilaT - i, ii. 234. Tcclho' 1-lit, oflP.nguay, &c. Clhulclill's CollCt. vi. !oS.
I Crcuxii I-lin. Canad. p. q7. '1 Voyage tie Ulloa, i. 232.

ferent

lerent countries of America which lic within the torrid zone, , o c K
they naturally exe0ced to find people of the flme complexion - ~
with those in the correponding rcid.- s of the o'ther hemifphcre.
To their amazement, howevcr, the,' difcovcred that Amcrica
contained no negroes'; and the cause of this singular appear-
ance became as much the object of curiosity, as the fatd itsef
was of wonder. In what part or membrane cf the lodyc ;'.!t
hu mour rcfides which tinges the complexion of the nc.tro v. i i. :a
deep black, it is the business of anatomists to inquire ;a:i dc-
scribe. The powerful operation of heat appears manilfcfll to
be the caufc which produces this striking variety in the human
fpecics. All Europe, almost the whole of Asia, and the tem--
pcrate parts of Africa, are occupied by men of a fair com-
plexion. All the torrid zone in Africa, some of the warmer
regions adiacent to it, and a few countries in Asia, arc filled
with people of a deep black colour. If we trace the nations of
our continent, making our progress from cold and temcprate
countries towards those parts which arc expof-d to the inficnicc
of vehement and unremittingheat, we fliall find, that the extrcmc
\\ litencfs of their skin soon begins to diminifi ; that its colour
(icepens gradually as we advance; and after pasing through all
the fucceiive gradations of flladc terminates in an unifornm
unvarying black. But in Amrerica, lwhere the agency of heat
is checked and abated by various ciufe3, which I ha:-c aiready
explained, the climate seems to be defiitutc cf that force which
produces such wonderful ceflcs on the lhuan fiame. 1The
colour of the natives of the torrid zone, in Amcric.. , can hardly
be said to be of a deeper hue than that of t:he people in thec more
temperate parts of their continent. Accurate olbfCcvcrs, wh11(
had an opportunity of viewing the Americans in very dif-fircrn

' . ,Martyr. dec. p. -,

q :', q.ii;!::tc'; .

i: o o K climates, and in countries far removed from each other, have

1V. been struck with the amazing similarity of their figure and

aspect .

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so little from

one itandard in fashioning the human form in America, the
creation of fancy hath been various and extravagant. The
fame fables that were current in the ancient continent, have
been revived with refpec to the New World, and America too
has been peopled with human beings of monstrous and fantastic
appearance. The inhabitants of certain provinces xwere de-
fcribed to be pigmies of three feet high; those of others to be
giants of an enormous size. Some travellers published accounts
of people with only one eye, others pretended to have discovered
men without heads, whose eyes and mouths were planted in
their breals. The variety of Nature in her productions is,
indeed, so great, that it is presumptuous to set bounds to her ser-
tility, and to rejeEt indiscriminately every relation that is not per-
fedly consonant to our own limited observation and experience.
But the other extreme, of yielding an hafiy assent, on the
slightest evidence, to whatever has the appearance of being
strange and marvellous, isno less unbecoming a philosophical
inquirer, as, in every period, men are more apt to be betrayed
into error, by their weakness in believing too much, than by
their arrogance in believing too little. In proportion as science
extends, and nature is examined with a discerning eye, the
wonders that amused ages of ignorance difappcar. The talcs
of credulous travellers concerning America arc forgotten ; the
monftcrs which they dcfcribe have been searched for in vain;

See NOTE XLV.

and

and those provinces where they pretend to have found inhabit- s o K
ants of singular forms, are now known to be possessed by peo-
ple no wife different from the other Americans:.

THOUGH these relations may, without discussion, be rejeCaed

as fabulous, there are other accounts offuch varieties in the
human species in some parts of the New World, which reft
upon better evidence, and merit more attentive examination.
This variety has been particularly observed in three different
diftrids. The first of these is situated in the isthmus of Da-
rien, near the centre of America. Lionel Wafer, a traveller
possessed of more curiosity and intelligence than we fiould have
expected to find in an associate of Buccaneers, discovercd there
a fmiall, but singular race of men. They are of low fiature,
according to his dcfcription, of a feeble make, incapable of en-
during fatigue. Their colour is a dead milk white; not refem-
bling that of fair people among Europeans, but without any
tincture of a blush or sanguine complexion. Their flin is
covered with a fine hairy down of a chalky white, the hair of
their heads, their eye-brows, and eye-laflcs, are of the fame
hue. Their eyes are of a singular form, and so weak, that
they can hardly bear the light of the fun ; but they fee clearly
by moon-light, and arc most aCdive and gay in the night".
No race similar to this has been discovered in any other part of
America. Cortes, indeed, found tome pcrfons cxadly refem-
bling the white people of Darien, among the rare and mon-
firous animals which Montczuma had collected '. But as the
power of the Mexican empire extended to the provinces border-
ing on the ifihmus of Daricn, they were probably brought

t Sec NOTE XLVI. u Wafer Defctipt. of Ih. ap. Dan. . i ic', i:. i. p....
" Cortes ap. Raamul. iii. p. 241. C.

fio'0 11

B o o i from thence. Singular as the appearance of those people may

'_.,---_ be, they cannot be confidered as conitituting a diftinat species.

Among the negroes of Africa, as well as the natives of the Indian
islands, nature sometimes produces a small number of individuals,
with all the charaateriftic features and qualities of the white peo-
plc of Darien. The former are called Albinos by the Portuguese,
the latter KackerlZker by the Dutch. In Darien the parents of
those klzh'tes are of the fame colour with the other natives of the
country; and this observation applies equally to the anomalous
progeny of the negroes and Indians. The fame mother who
produces some children of a colour that does not belong to the
race, brings forth the reft of the complexion peculiar to her
country Y. One conclusion may then be formed with respeCt
to the people described by Wafer, the Albinos and the Kacker-
aekcj; they are a degenerated breed, not a separate class of men;
and from rome disease or defet of their parents, the peculiar
colour and debility which mark their degradation is transmittcd
to them. As a decisive proof of this, it has been observed, that
neither the white people of Darien, nor the Albinos of Africa,
propagate their race : their children are of the colour and tem-
perament peculiar to the natives of their refpetive countries '.

THE second district that is occupied by inhabitants differing

in appearance from the other people of America, is situated in
a high northern latitude, extending from the coast of Labrador
towards the polc, as far as the country is habitable. The peo-
ple scattered over those dreary regions, are known to the Euro-
peans by the name of Ej'Jqtuimauztx. They themselves, with that
idea of their own fupcriority, which consoles the rudeit and

,1aigrav. i i . Hi.Rcr. Nat. Iraf. lib. viii. c. 4. ! \Waler, p. 348. D3mannc.
ilil. (' I'.\fiii , ii. 2 ;.1. Rcchcrch. Philo[ ftur Ics AIncr ii. i. &c.

moit

most wretched nations, assume the name of IKeralit or M1en. i: o o K
They are of a middle size and robust, with heads of a difpro- ~ ,
portioned bulk, and feet as remarkably frall. Their com-
plexion, though swarthy, by being continually exposed to the
rigour of a cold climate, inclines to the European white, ra-
ther than to the copper colour of America, and the men have
beards which arc sometimes bushy and long . From thcfe
marks of diftincion, as well as from one still less equivocal,
the affinity of their language to that of the Grecnlanders, which
I have already mentioned, we may conclude, with some degree
of confidence, that the Efqcuimaux are a race different from the
reft of the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty concerning the

inhabitants of the third difiric, situated at the southern ex-
tremity of America. These are the famous Patagoniansx, who,
during two centuries and a half, have afforded a fubjedt
of controversy to the learned, and an object of wonder to
the vulgar. They are supposed to be one of the wandering
tribes, which occupy that va3, but le]af known region of Ame-
rica, which extends from the river De la Plata to the Straits
of Magellan. Their proper fiation is in that part of the in-
terior country, which lies on the banks of the river Negro;
but in the hunting season they often roam as far as the straits
which separate Terra del Fuego from the main-land. The first
accounts of this people were brought to Europe by the compa-
nions of Magellan a, who defcribcdi them as a gigantic race,
above eight feet high, and offtrength in proportion to their

z lEiis Vi y. to H',-l . B iy, p. 131. 139. De la Potheric, tou).. rI . . Wales
jouin. us tVo'y. to Chuircl.ill River. Phil. . vol. v IO. Io. . o(

a Falknlxcr'sDcfciptiool o i'[',L ii,>oli;', p. 10o.o

enormous

H oo K enormous size. Among several tribes of Animals, a disparity

**^J in bulk, as considerable, may be observed. Some large breeds

of horses and dogs exceed the more diminutive races in fiature
and strength, as far as the Patagonian is supposed to rife above
the usual standard of the human body. But animals attain the
highest perfection of their species, only in mild climates, or
where they find the most nutritive food in greatest abundance.
It is not then in the uncultivated waste of the Magellanic re-
gions, and among a tribe of unprnvident savages, that we
should expect to find man, possessing the highest honours of his
race, and distinguished by a superiority of size and vigour, far
beyond what he has reached in any other part of the earth.
The mot explicit and unexceptionable evidence is requisite,
in order to eflablifl a fad, repugnant to those general principles
and laws, which seem to effedt the human frame in every
other inflance, and to decide with refped to its nature and qua-
lities. Such evidence has not hitherto been produced. Though
several persons, to whose teflimony great rcfped is due, have
visited this part of America, since the time of Magellan, and
have had interviews with the natives ; though some have as-
firmed, that such as they saw were of gigantic ftaturc, and
others have formed the fame conclusion from measuring their
footsteps, or the skeletons of their dead; yet their accounts
vary from each other in so many essential points, and are min-
gled with so many circumstances manifeflly false or fabulous,
as detraCt much from their credit. On the other hand, some
navigators, and those among the most eminent of their order
for discernment and accuracy, have afierted that the natives of
Patagonia, with whom they had intercourfc, though flout

') Sec NOTE XLVII.

and

and well made, are not of such extraordinary size as to be (i o K
distinguished from the reft of the human species. The exist- .
ence of this gigantic race of men, seems, then, to be one of
those points in natural hiflory, with refpeE to which a cautious
inquirer will hesitate, and will chute to suspend his assent until
more complete evidence shall decide, whether he ought to ad-
mit a fad, seemingly inconfiftcnt with what reason and expe-
rience have discovered concerning the firudure and condition
of man, in all the various situations in which he has been ob-
served.

IN order to form a complete idea with refped to the confti- The:r f:ate o:

h Lalth.

tution of the inhabitants of this and the other hcmifphcre, we
should attend not only to the make and vigour of their bodies,
but confider what degree of health they enjoy, and to what period
of longevity they usually arrive. In the simplicity of the savage
itate, when man is not oppressed with labour, or enervated by
luxury, or disquieted with care, we are apt to imagine that his
life will flow on almost untroubled by disease or fuffcring, until
his days be terminated, in extreme old age, by the gradual de-
cays of nature. We find, accordingly, among the Americans,
aswell as among other rude people, persons, whose decrepit
and shrivellcd form seems to indicate an extraordinary length of
life. But as most of them are unacquainted with the a:rt of
numbering, and all of them as forgetful of what is past, as
they are improvident for what is to come, it is impossible to
ascertain their age with any degree of prccifion 1). It is evident,
that the period of their longevity must vary considerably, ac-
cording to the diversity of climates, and their different modes of

h Uil.a Notic. AnmIezic. 32z. Bancroft Nat. Ilil. of Gui.tn;, 3; 1.
VOL. 1. R r fubliflcncc.

1; o0 K fubfiflcncc. They seem, however, to be every where exempt

IV from many of the diflempers which aflliEt polished nations.

None of the maladies, which are the immediate offspring of
luxury or sloth, ever visited them; and they have no names in
their languages by which to diftinguith this numerous train of
adventitious evils.
|),|l.' BuB , hllatevcr be the situation in which man is placed, he

is born to susser ; and his diseases, in the savage state, though
fewer in number, are, like those of the animals whom he
nearly rcfemblcs in his mode of life, more violent, and more
fatal. If luxury engenders and nourishes distempers of one
fpccies, the rigour and distresses of savage life bring on
those of another. As men, in this slate, are wonderfully
improvident, and their means of subsistence precarious, they
often pass fiom extreme want to exuberant plenty, according
to the vicissitudes of fortune in the chace, or to the variety in
the productions of the seasons. Their inconsiderate gluttony
in the one situation, and their revere abfiinence in the other,
are equally pernicious. For, though the human constitution
may be accustomed by habit, like that of animals of prey, to
tolerate long famine, and then to gorge voraciously, it is not
a little affeced by such sudden and violent transitions. The
frcngtlh and vigour of favagcs are, at some seasons, impaired
by what they susser from scarcity of food : at others, they are
affliied with disorders arising from indigestion and superfluity
of gross aliment. Thefc lafi are so common, that they may
he confidercd as the unavoidable confequcnce of their mode
of fubfifling, and cut off conlidcrable numbers in the prime
of life. They arc lilcwifc extremely subicd to consumptions,

to

to pleuretic, aflhmatic, and paralytic difordersc, brought on by 13 Co K
the immoderate hardships and fatigue which they endure in v
hunting and in war; or owing to the inclemency of the sea-
sons to which they are continually exposed. In the savage
state, hardships and fatigue violently assault the constitution.
In polished societies, intemperance undermines it. It is not
easy to determine which of them operates with mofi fatal
effect, or tends most to abridge human life. The influence of
the former is certainly most extensive. The pernicious con-
fcquences of luxury reach only a few members in any commu-
nity, the distresses of savage life are felt by all. As far as I can
judge, after very minute inquiry, the general period of human
life is shorter among savages, than in well-regulated and in-
dufirious Societies.

ON E dreadful malady, the severest scourge, with which, in this

life, offended Heaven chastens the indulgence of criminal dcfirc,
fcems to have been peculiar to the Americans. By commu-
nicating it to their conquerors, they have not only amply
avenged their own wrongs, but by adding this calamity to
those which formcrly embittered human life, they have, per-
haps, more than counterbalanced all the benefits which Europe
has derived from the discovery of the New World. This dif-
temper, from the country in which it first raged, or from the
people by whom it was supposed to have been spread over
Europe, has been fomctimes called the Neapolitan, and some-
timcs the French difcafe. At its first appearance, the infcLcion

Chiarlev. N. Fr. ii 36. ; . Lafltaui, i:. 3'. li. '. i,
1;. -.

R r 2 was

B OO K was so malignant, its symptoms so violent, its operation so

;-^ rapid and fatal, as to baffle all the efforts of medical skill.

Afionifhment and terror accompanied this unknown affliEtion
in its progress, and men began to dread the extinction of the
human race by such a cruel visitation. Experience, and the
ingenuity of physicians gradually discovered remedies of such
virtue as to cure or mitigate the evil. During the course of
two centuries and a half, its virulence seems to have abated con-
liderably. At length, in the fame manner with the leprosy,
which raged in Europe for some centuries, it may wafle its force
and disappear; and in some happier age, this western infetion,
like that from the Eafi, may be known only by defcrip-
tion c

PT.\.c ::.,J 11. AFTER confidering what appears to be peculiar in the
.iir,'i,: bodily conflitution of the Americans, our attention is naturally

turned towards the powers and qualities of their minds. As
the individual advances from the ignorance and imbecillity of
the infant fiate, to vigour and maturity of underflanding, some-
thing similar to this may be observed in the-progrefs of the fpe-
cies. With refped to it, too, there is a period of infancy, dur-
ing which several powers of the mind are not unfolded, and all
are feeble and defecive in their operation. In the early ages
of society, while the condition of man is timple and rude, his
reason is but little exercised, and his desires move within a
very narrow sphere. Hence arise two remarkable characteriflics
of the human mind, in this fiate. Its intellectual powers are
extremely limited; its emotions and efforts are few and lan-

t See NOTE XLVIII.

guid.

guid. Both there diftindions are conspicuous among the rudest n o o K
and most unimproved of the American tribes, and constitute a -
firiking part in their description.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called speculative rea- liltellicu-

faculties very

toning or research, is altogether unknown in the rude Rfate of liie,:.tj
society, and never becomes the occupation or amusement of
the human faculties, until man be so far improved as to have
secured, with certainty, the meals of subsistence, as well as the
pofleffion of leisure and tranquillity. The thoughts and at-
tention of a savage are confined within the small circle of ob-
jeas, immediately conducive to his preservation or enjoyment.
Every thing beyond that, escapes his observation, or is perfelly
indifferent to him. Like a mere animal, what is before his eyes
interests and assets him; what is out of fight, or at a difiance,
makes no impression . There are several people in America
whose limited understandings seem not to be capable of form-
ing an arrangement for futurity; neither their solicitude nor
their foresight extend so far. They follow blindly the im-
puife of the appetite which they feel, but are entirely regardless
of distant confcquences, and even of those removed in the leafi
degree from immediate apprelinfion. While they highly prize
such things as fcrve prcfcnt ufc, or minister to prefcnt enjoy-
ment, they fct no value upon those which are not the object of
some immcdiiate want '. When, on the alpproal- of the
evening, a Caribbcc fccls hlimfclfdifpofecd to .o to rcfi, no con-
fideration will tempt him to fell his hLmmto2z. tut, in the
morning, when he is sallying out to the buln-:c or p-iltime of

r UlIln Nmticins Anlcric. 2 .. ..L..

:1 i '.
Church Coll. v. t; . ,I t I le Cr. dI: C! , . it ..

! ["i

: o) o l. the day, he will part with it for the slightest toy that catches
..- . his fancy . At the close of winter, while the impression of

what he has suffered from the rigour of the climate is fresh in
the mind of the North American, he sets himself with vigour
to prepare materials for ereding a comfortable hut to proted
him against the inclemency of the succeeding season; but as
soon as the weather becomes mild, he forgets what is palt, aban-
dons his work, and never thinks of it more, until the return of
cold compels him, when too late, to resume it ".

IF in concerns the most interesting, and seemingly the moit

simple, the reason of man, while rude and deflitude of culture,
differs so little from the thoughtless levity of children, or the
improvident inflind of animals, its exertions in other direc-
tions cannot be very considerable. The objets towards which
icafon turns, and the disquisitions in which it engages, mufi
depend upon the slate in which man is placed, and are fug-
gefied by his necessities and desires. Disquisitions, which ap-
pear the most necessary and important to men in one state of
society, never occur to those in another. Among civilized na-
tions, arithmetic, or the art of numbering, is deemed an eifen-
tial and elementary science, and in our continent, the invention
and use of it reaches back to a period so remote as is beyond
the knowledge of history. But among savages, who have no
property to estimate, no hoarded treasures to count, no variety
of objeds or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arithmetic is
a fupcrfluous and useless art. Accordingly, among some tribes
in America it fecms to be quite unknown. There arc many

t Labat \' yig es, ,

ii .
1'14 1 I'. tre, ii. 385. Adair Hilt. of Aier.

l.;c!i~:l), - ~11.w ho

who

who cannot reckon farther than three ; and have no denomi- o

.

nation to distinguish any number above it '. Several can pro- -
ceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When they would con-
vey an idea of any number beyond these, they point to the hair
of their head, intimating that it is equal to them, or with won-
der declare it to be so great that it cannot be reckoned '. Not
only the Americans, but all nations, while extremely rude, seem
to be unacquainted with the art ofcomputation7z. As soon, how-
ever, as they acquire such acquaintance or connetion with a
variety of objects, that there is frequent occasion to combine or
divide them, their knowledge of numbers increases, so that the
state of this art among any people may be confidered as one
flandard, by which to estimate the degree of their improve-
ment. The Iroquois, in North America, as they are much
more civilized than the rude inhabitants of Brasil, Paraguay,
or Guiana, have likewise made greater advances in this reflpct;
though even their arithmetic does not extend beyond a thou-
sand, as in their petty tranfadions they have no occasion for
any higher number :1. The Cherokee, a less considerable nation
on the fame continent, can reckon only as ftr as a hundred,
and to that extent have names for the fevernl numbers ; the
smaller tribes inlthcir neighbourhood can rife no higher than
ten b

IN other refpeds, the exercise of the underf;lliindiii amon .!1..

rude nations is fiil! more limited. The firrl ideas of every

x CoInIdari, p. ó'7,, c'.nl;Us' u".p dc BUry, ix. I 'S Lc;y. ildii. 2,1e . lict. 3)2.

I.etr. Idif. 2;,. 314. ) Dum; nt l.oui:" i. tS7. -Lrrcr i, dec. 1. iib. ii. .
c. 3. Biet, 3......A. ioeTh . ' t; he licalc w ilt l tIl(l, cnL.tn!z.,
C1liz/.. i. 22-. n d wii .Iitdc.hit'<adal:s,

w1. l'Al.cChlappe, i.;. 17. 1

C-'.17

Iv. Nouv. 'iantcc, iii. .A;. ' A !air 1 1'' of. A

. ir. la;li:; s, 77. b.:
NOTE Xl1. X1\.

"~ ~ ~ ~~ua

i; o o i human being nuft be such as he receives by the senses. But,

... j in the mind of man, while in the savage state, there seem to

be hardly any ideas but what enter by this avenue. The ob-
jecs around him are presented to his eye. Such as may be
subservient to his use, or can gratify any of his appetites, at-
trad his notice; he views the reft without curiosity or atten-
tion. Satisfied with confidering them under that simple mode,
in which they appear to him, as separate and detached, he
neither combines them so as to form general classes, nor con-
templates their qualities apart, nor befiows a thought upon
the operations of his own mind concerning them. Thus, he
is unacquainted with all the ideas which have been denominated
inivcrfal, or abfirac, or of refl.eion. The range of his un-
derfianding must, of course, be very confined, and his reason-
ing powers be employed merely on what is sensible. This is
so remarkably the cafe with the ruder nations of America, that
their languages, (as we shall afterwards find) have not a word
to express any thing but what is material or corporeal. Time,
space, fubJfance, and a thousand other terms which represent
abftrad and universal ideas, are altogether unknown to them c
A naked savage, cowering near the fire in his miserable cab-
bin, or firetched under a few branches which afford him a tem-
porary shelter, has as little inclination as capacity for useless
Speculation. His thoughts extend not beyond what relates to
animal life; and when they are not directed towards some of
its concerns, his mind is totally inactive. In situations where
lo extraordinary effort, either of ingenuity or labour is requi-
site, in order to satisfy the simple demands of nature, the
powers of the mind are so seldom routed to any exertion, that

Condam. p. 54.

tl h

the rational facultics cortinue almonf dormant and uncxcrcifc l.
The numerous tribes scattered over the rich plains of South-
America, the inhabitants of some of the ifiands, and of fcvcral
fertile plains on the continent, come under this dcfcription.
Their vacant countenance, their flaring uncxprclfve eve, their
lifeless inattention, and total ignorance of fubjeds, which si em
to be the firr which should occupy the thougilts of rational
beings, made such impreflion upon the Spaniards, when they
first beheld those rude people, that they confidered them as ani-
mals of an inferior order, and could not believe that they be-
longed to the human fpccies '. It required the authority of a
papal bull to counteract this opinion, and to convince them that
the Americans were capable of the funCtions, and intitled to
the privileges of humanity e. Since that time, persons more
enlightened and impartial than the discoverers or conquerors of
America, have had an opportunity of contemplating the moii
savage of its inhabitants, and they have been aflonifhed and
humbled, with observing how nearly man, in this condition,
approaches to the brute creation. But in fevercr climates,
where subsistence cannot be procured with the fame ease, where
men muff unite more closely, and aCt with greater concert,
neccflity calls forth their talents, and iharpens their invention,
to that the intelligent powers are more exercised and im-
proved. The North-Americans and natives of Chili, who inh:i-
bit the temperate regions in the two great diftriEts of America,
are people of cultivated and enlarged underftandi:gs, when
viewed in comparison with some of those feated in the islands, or
on the banks of the Maragnon and Orinoco. Their occupations
are more various, their system of policy, as well as of war, more

d I-lclera, dcc. z. 2 b. Iib . i. c T orqil iii. Mlci, Ild. ii; ,I,/;.
VoL. I. S f llI

R3 0 K complex, their arts more numerous. But, even among them,

..-v-- the intellectual powers are extremely limited in their operations,

and unless when turned direcly to those objeEts which interest
a savage, are held in no estimation. Both the North-Ameri-
cans and Chilefe, when not engaged in some of the functions be-
longing to a warrior or hunter, loiter away their time in
thoughtless indolence, unacquainted with any other subjed wor-
thyof their attention, or capable of occupying their minds f.
If even among them, reason is so much circumscribed in its ex-
ertions, and never arrives, in its highest attainments, at the
knowledge of those general principles and maxims, which serve
as the foundaticn offcience, we may conclude, that the intel-
ledual powers of man in the savage slate are destitute of their
proper objedt, and cannot acquire any considerable degree of vi-
gour and enlargement.

:i;,e .:rits FIROM the fame causes, the adtive efforts of the mind are
. t }he m::.d
cu .,1 ;..- few, and, on most occasions, languid. If we examine into the
lu'td. motives which rouze men to adivity in civilized life, and

'prompt them to perfevcre in fatiguing exertions of their inge-
nuity or strength, we fllall find that they arise chiefly from
acquired wants and appetites. These are numerous and im-
portunate, they keep the mind in perpetual agitation, and, in
order to gratify them, invention must be always on the firetch,
and industry mutf be inceflantly employed. But thedefires of
simple nature are few, and where a favourable climate yields
almofi spontaneously what fufliccs them, they fcarccly stir the
foul, or excite any violent emotion. Hence the people of fe-
vcral tribes in America waste their life in a lifilefs indolence.

i LafCtau, ii. 2

To

To be free from occupation, seems to be all the enjoyment to- , ) c,
wards which they aspire. They will continue whole days ftrctch-
ed out in their hammocs, or feated on the earth, in perfec idle-
ness, without changing their posture, or raising their eyes from
the ground, or uttering a single word g.

SucH is their aversion to labour, that neither the hope of 1,';'-;

future good, nor the apprehension of future evil, can surmount
it. They appear equally indifferent to both, discovering little
solicitude, and taking no precautions to avoid the one, or to
secure the other. The cravings of hunger may rouse them;
but as they devour, with little diflintion, whatever will ap-
pease its inflinctive demands, the exertions which these occa-
lion are of short duration. Destitute of ardour, as well as
variety of desire, they feel not the force of those powerful
springs which give vigour to the movements of the mind, and
urge the patient hand of industry to persevere in its efforts.
Man, in some parts of America, appears in a form so rude,
that we can discover no effeCts of his activity, and the prin-
ciple of understanding which should direct it, seems hardly
to be unfolded. Like the other animals, he has no fixed rcfi-
dence; he has erected no habitation to shelter him from the
inclemency of the weather; he has taken no measures for
securing a certain subsistence ; he neither sows nor reaps; but
roams about as led in search of the plants and fruits which
the earth brings forth in fuccefion; and in quest of the game
which he kills in the forests, or of the fish which he catches in
the rivers.

THIS description, however, applies only to some tribes. s .;, \.,
Man cannot continue long in this slate of feeble and unin- ''i',lhl,'.'.t

g Bouguer Voy. au Pcrou, oz. B3orde, ;5.

S f o formed

n o o0 K formed infancy. He was made for induflry and action, and
.- .,---. the powers of his nature, as well as the necessity of his condi-

lion, urge him to fulfil his defliny. Accordingly, among most
oftlhe American nations, especially those feated in rigorous cli-
mates, some efforts are employed, and some previous precau-
tions are taken, for fccuring subsistence. The career of re-
gular induflry is begun, and ihe laborious arm has made the
firfi essays of its power. Still, however, the improvident
a;nd slothful genius of the savage tfate predominates. Even
among those more improved tribes, labour is deemed ig-
nominious and degrading. It is only to work of a certain
kind that a man will deign to put his hand. The greater part
is devolved entirely upon the women. One half of the com-
Inunity remains inactive, while the other is oppressed with the
multitude and variety of its occupations. Thus their industry
is partial, an, the foresight which regulates it, is no less li-
mited. A remarkable instance of this occurs in the chief ar-
rangmenrt with refpeQ to their manner of living. They depend
for their subsistence, during one part of the year, on fiffling;
during another, on hunting; during a third, on the produce
of their agriculture. Though experience has taught them to
foresee the return of those various seasons, and to make some
provision for their respective exigencies, they either want saga-
city to proportion this provision to their consumption, or are To
incapable of any command over their appetites, that, from their
inconsiderate waite, they often feel the calamities of famine as
icvcrcly as the rudest of the savage tribes. What they susser
one year does not augment their indufRry, or render them more
provident to prevent similar diflrcffcs !. This inconsiderate
Ihoughtlcifnefs about futurity, the effcct of ignorance and the

': Clalclc v. . 'r. ii;. 338. l.cttr. Edlif. 23. 23. D iDc Iipt. of N France, Ofbion's

* .'.!-. l ;. i .P
S.: I) Dc a l'othciic, ii. 63.

caufc

caue of sloth, accompanies andcharaderizes man in every fRage 1i oC o 1
of savage life i; and by a capricious singularity in his opera- ----
tions, he is then least solicitous about supplying his wants, when
the means of satisfying them are most precarious, and procured
with the greatest difficulty k.

1II. AFTER viewing the bodily confitution of the Ameri- T.;i, fr..

cans, and contemplating the po"wers of their minds, we are led, ,t
in the natural order of inquiry, to confider them as united to-
gether in society. Hitherto our researches have been confined
to the operations of underflanding refpeding themselves, as
individuals, now they will extend to the degree of their fenfi-
bility and affedsion towards their species.

THE domestic fiate is tile first and mofl simple form of hu- DI:;.i':

man association. The union of the sexes, among different
animals, is of longer or shorter duration in proportion to the
cafe or difficulty of rearing their offspring. Among those
tribes where the season of infancy is short, and the voung soon
acquire vigour or agility, no permanent union is formed.
Nature commits the care of training up the offspring to the
mother alone, and her tenderncfs, without any other a,;iiftncc,
is equal to the talk. But where the fiate of infa cy is lo): and
helpless, and the joint assiduity of both parents is rcqluifitc in
tending their feeble brood, there a mnore intimate coinnct-ion
takes place, and continues until the purpose of nature be ac-
complifhed, and the new race grow up to fnll maturity. As
the infancy of man is more feeble and hclp'ecs than that of n.,
other animal, and he is dependent, during a much longer p)e-
riod, on the care and foresight of his parents, the union bci. : (Li'

I ;I':ul'utts .N . HIi. of (lGuan.i, 326. 3, 3. S~c NO'I'. L.

I' n. '

B o o K husband and wife came early to be confidered, not only as a

^ -j_ solemn, but as a permanent contract. A general fateof pro-

mifcuous intercourse between the sexes never existed but in the
imagination of poets. In the infancy of society, when men,
defiitute of arts and indufiry, lead a hard precarious life, the
rearing of their progeny demands the attention and efforts of
both parents; and if their union had not been formed and con-
tinued with this view, the race could not have been preserved.
Accordingly, in America, even among the rudest tribes, a re-
gular union between husband and wife was universal, and the
rights of marriage were underflood and recognized. In those
difirids where subsistence was scanty, and the difficulty of main-
taining a family was great, the man confined himfelftoone wife.
In warmer or more fertile provinces, the facility of procuring
food concurred with the influence of climate, in inducing the
inhabitants to increase the number of their wives '. In some
countries the marriage union subsisted during life; in others,
the impatience of the Americans under refiraint of any species,
together with their natural levity and caprice, prompted them
to dissolve it on very flight pretexts, and often without assigning
any cause "%.
C:onditiol of BUT whether they confidered the obliation of this contrad

as perpetual, or only temporary, the condition of women was
equally humiliating and miserable. Whether man has been
improved by the progress of arts and civilization in society, is
a question, which, in the wantonness of disputation, has been
agitated among philosophers. That women are indebted to

Lcttr. Edif. 23. 318. Lafitau Mocurs, i. 554. Lery 3p de Bry, iii. 234. Jour-

nal de Grillet et Bechamel, p. 88. m Lafitau. i. 580. Joutel Journ. Hiftor.
345. Lozano Defcr. del Gran Chaco, 70. Hcnnepin Mocurs des Sauvagcs, p. 30 33.

the

the refinements of polished manners for a happy change in their B 0 0 K
slate, is a point which can admit of no doubt. To despise and -_--> -
to degrade the female sex, is the charaderiftic of the savage
state in every part of the globe. Man, proud of excelling in
strength and in courage, the chief marks of pre-eminence among
rude people, treats woman, as an inferior, with disdain. The
Americans, perhaps from that coldness and insensibility which
has been confidered as peculiar to their conflitution, add neglec
and harshness to contempt. The moil intelligent travellers
have been firuck with this inattention of the Americans to their
women. It is not, as I have already observed, by a fiudied dif-
play of tenderness and attachment, that the American endea-
vours to gain the heart of the woman whom he wishes to marry.
Marriage itself, instead of being an union of affeQion, and in-
terest between equals, becomes, among them, the unnatural
conjunction of a master with his slave. It is the observation of
an author, whose opinions are deservedly of great weight,
that wherever wives are purchased, their condition is extremely
depressed i. They become the property and the slaves of thofc
who buy them. In whatever part of the globe this cuflom
prevails, the observation holds. In countries where refinement
has made some progress, women, excluded from society, and
shut up in fcqueftered apartments, are kept under the vigi-
lant guard of their nafters. In ruder nations, they are dc-
graded to the imeaneft functions. Among many pzople of
America the inarriage-contradt is propeilyv a purclnfic. T e(
man buys his wife of her parents. Though unacq1uainted with
the use of money, or with such comercrcial tranflactions aq take
place in more improved focicty, he knows how to give an
equivalent for any object which hc desires to poffeis. In fomn

n Sketches of I-ifl. of r an, ;. ,..

places

i o0o 0 pulaces the fitor devotes his service for a certain time to the

,>': parents of the maid whom he courts; in others, he hunts for

them occfionally, or aflifis in cultivating their fields, and form-
ing their canoes; in others, he osiers presents of such things
as are deemed most valuable on account of their usefulness or
rarity . In return for these, he receives his wife; and this
circumfiance, added to the low eflimation of women among
savages, leads him to confider her as a female servant whom he
has acquired, and whom he has a title to treat as an inferior.
In all unpoliihed nations, it is true, the funaions in domestic
-cconomy, which fall naturally to the share of vwomen, are so
many, that they are fubjeded to hard labour, and mufi bear
more than their full portion of the common burden. But
in America their condition is so peculiarly grievous, and their
deprciTion so complete, that servitude is a name too mild to de-
scribe their wretched state. A wife, among most tribes, is no
better than a beail of burden, deflined to every office of labour
and fatigue. While the men loiter out the day in sloth, or
spend it in amufemenit, the women are condemned to: incelfant
toil. Talks are imposed upon them without pity, and services
are received without complacence or gratitude., Every cir-
cumfance reminds women of this mortifying inferiority. They
murf approach their lords with reverence ; they nmuf regard
them as more exalted beings, and are not permtitted to eat in
their presence 1. There are diflrics in America where thlis do-
minion is so grievous, and so sensibly felt that folne women,
in a wild emotion of maternal tenderncfs, lhave dcflroyed their

l.flitau Mocurs, &c. i. 56o, &c. Charlev. iii. 285, &c. Hcericl, Idcc. 4 b. il.

c. 7. Duiont, ii. 16. P Tcrtre, ii. 3,z. Bnodc Rlclat. des Incura
dis Caiibes, p. 21. 13ie, 357. Condiaminc, p. li1. Fernin. i. 79.

I Guinilln, i. 153. B[arrre,, 164. Labat. Vov. ii 7. Clha unltlon, 51. Tcitrei
i. 3o00.

female

female children in their infancy, in order to deliver thcm f.om L O

,

that intolerable bondage to which they knew they were doomiedL'. ,-
Thus the first inflitution of social life is perverted. That fate
of domeitic union towards which nature leads the human fpe-
cies, in order to soften tile heart to gentleness and humanity,
is rendered so unequal, as to establish a cruel diftinlion be-
tween the fexcs, which forms the one to be harsh and unfeel-
ing, and humbles the other to servility and fubjc2iion.

IT is owing, perhaps, in some measure, to this ftatc of de- ' i.e, ..

pression, that women in rude nations are far from bci:g pro- ",' ":'
lific . The vigour of their conflitution is exhlauled by excer-
live fatigue, and the wants and difirefies of savage life are so
numerous, as to force them to take various precautions in order
to prevent too rapid an increase of their progeny. Amon,
wandering tribes, or such as depend chiefly upon hunting for
fubfifience, the mother cannot attempt to rear a second clild,
until the firit lhas attained such a degree of vigour as to be in
some measure independent of her care. From this motive, it
is the univerfll practice of the American women to nurse tllir
children during fcveral ycars:; and as they seldom marry
early, the period of their fertility is over, before they can finifi
the long but neceitary attendance upon two or three fuccefTive
children '. Among some of thelcaft polished tribes, whos; in-
dufiry and foresight does not extend so far as to ia'e.c any re-
gular provision for their own fubliflcnce, it is a maxim not to
burden themselves with rearing more than two cli!ldrn '; and

r CGuIila, ii. 2 3. 2 38. I-[el4lc , d 1c 7. ll!. i c. 4. ] , i.

C;1]Bllvoix, iii. o t ikI[ , (!C U( lib i.c. ..

C. t'l., \.

iii. 503. I' nit [vie,-,. fu I.,7,il.riC, . 2 .

2 DI i.S; 'll; . N .aur (1'\

\, ;c', :, <9

ii 3G;. C(.'1,h: . I 1,|. | Ie ja',U . ii. 42z. : "' 'Z I tr ', 'c .

A- , ,: l' I . ;.,, ,

.c^, (:'u: cli. (, cc; vi. i
C. . L]ct. . I.ldi. 2.1. 1:o ] j'.';:; !.'-: ',..

VOL. I. T t no

i; 0o 1 no fuich numerous families, as are frequent in civilized societies,
.,.-~ arc to be found among men in this slate '. When twins are

born, one of them commonly is abandoned, because the mother
is not equal to the talk of educating both '. When a mother
ries -while ihe is nursing a child, all hope of prefcrving its life
fills, and it is buried together with her in the fame grave n. As
tilc parents are frequently expoied to want by their own
improvident indolence, the difficulty of sustaining their chil-
dren becomes so great, that it is not uncommon to abandon or
dcef-oy tlhem :. Thus their experience of the difficulty of
trainin up an infant to maturity, amidfl the hardships offavage
iife, often fifes the voice of nature among the Americans,
and fui)prec!es the itrong emotions of parental tenderncfs.

K1":',:,.- BU'T, though necessity compels the inhabitants of America
, !.. thus to set bounds to the increase of their families, they arc

not deficient in af:edion and attachment to their offpring.
They feel the power of this inftind in its full force, and as
long as their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no people
exced them in tcndernefs and care '. But in rude nations,
the dependence of children upon their parents is of fhortcr
continuance than in polished societies. When men mufi be
trained to the various funtions of civil life by previous difci-
ciplinc and education, when the knowledge of abfirufc sciences
mufl be taught, and dexterity in intricate arts munf be acquir-
ed, before a young man is prepared to begin his career of

*' ' '

c Lcu:;'o .I

ur::,l, Lett.

7 e f. x. 200. See N O T I l..

i(

(Xi.al h vPi ii.

iiiic.

L tt. . x. 200. ' . l-lcina z Mcmno. d Ch(c-
· , 'u; C, !'.;et;, C',vic£. O ig. I'.;i i. ' \:unegas l-lifl. of' Callilorn. i. c82.

' (3'u1 ; :', i. 2l 1 Lit. jt(./ .

adsion,

adion, the attentive feelings of a parent are not confined to the i, o o
years of infancy, but extend to the establishment of his child in V
the world. Even then, his solicitude does not terminate. His
protection may still be requisite, and his wisdom and experience
fiill prove useful guides. Thus a permanent connection is form-
ed; parental tenderness is exercised, and filial refpeEt rcturned,
throughout the whole courfc of life. But in the simplicity of
the savage fiate, the arTfctio! of parents, like the inftinc.i-vc
fondness of animals, ceases almofi entirely as Toon as their off-
spring attain maturity. Little inftruCdion fits them for thlt
mode of life to which they are destined. The parents, as if
their duty were accomplished, when they have conduued their
children through the helplcfs years of infancy, leave them as-
terwards at entire liberty. They seldom advise or admonish,
they never chide or chaflife them. They susser them to be
absolute manlers of their own actions '. In an American hut,
a father, a mother, and their pofierity, live together like per-
sons assembled by accident, without seeming to feel the obliga-
on of the duties mutually arising from this connecion . As
filial love is not cherished by the continuance of attention or
good offices, the recollection of benefits received in early infan-
cy is too faint to excite it. Conscious of their own liberty, and
impatient of restraint, the youth of America are accufomncd
to ad as if they wcre totally independent. Their parents are
not objeCts of greater regard than other persons. They treat
them always with neglect, and often with fuc;' har!fhncs and
insolence, as to fill those who have been witnesses of their con-

b Chakl v iii.

iii. 272. Iict. 3 . Gunllla, i, 212 La;iu:u, i. 6o. (C cuixii, 1l;l .
Canal. p. 71. Fcrnandlcz, Rclac. Hill. de los Chcquit. 33. c Chlullv. lil.

F'
. ir. iii. 27t.

T t 2 tdut

lJ O O I; duc with horror"'. Thus the ideas which seem to be natural
* _v,-^ tto man in his savage slate, as they rcfult from his circumftan-

ccs and condition in that period of his progress, assea the two
capital relations in domestic life. They render the union be-
tveen i;uflband and wife unequal. They shorten the duration,
and wcalcn the force, of the connection between parents and
children.

iV. FRaoI the domestic fiate of the Americans, the tranfi-

tion is natural to the consideration of their civil government
and political inflitutions. In every inquiry concerning the
opcrations of men when united together in focicty, the first
ol!jcc of attention should be their mode of subsistence. A c-
cordingly as that varies, their laws and policy must be different.
The inftitlitions suited to the ideas and exigenciesof tribes,
which subsist chiefly by fishing or hunting, and which have
hardly formed a conception of any fpecics of property, will be
much more simple than those which rmurft take place when
the earth is cultivated with regular indufiry, and a right of
property, not only in its productions, but in the foil itself, is
completely ascertained.
O '- ALL the people of America, now under review, belong to

the former class. But though they may all be comprehended
under the general denomination of savage, the advances which
they had made in the art of procuring to themselves a certain
and plentiful subsistence, were very unequal. On the vast

1 G ulii', i. 212.

Z Tel l:e , ii. C3 . Cl haIlcv. I lin. id N. Fiance, ii. 309 Chnill v.

I-Till ie 'a.ang. i. 1i5 L. zno, DuIlkrip. dcl Giran Chaci , p. 68. ioo, iol. Felialld.
Rc'ac, Hlilur. de los Chiqulit. , 26.

plains

plains of South-America, man appears in one of the rudest l1 c o o.
flates in which he has been ever observed, or, perhaps, can c--- . -
exilt. Scveral tribes depend entirely upon the bounty of na-
ture for fubfificnce. They discover no folicitudc, they employ
little foresight, they scarcely exert any induflry, to fccure
what is necessary for their support. The Topayerrj- of Brasil,
the Gziaxeror of Tierra-Firme, the CaitGwas, the ilfoxon, ani
several other people of Paraguay, are unacquainited with every
fpccies of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant. ETven
the culture of the manioc, of which cafitda bread is In;d.,, is a1n
art too intricate for their ingenuity, or too sati uing to t}:hir
indolence. The roots which the earth produ:cs fpontaneoufl/,
the fruits, the berries, and feeds, which they gather in the
woods together with lizards and other reptiles, which the lc:It
engenders in a fat foil, moistened by frequent rains, fuilply
them with food during fomc part of the year A. At other ': :.;:
times they subsist by fi'hing; and nature fcc-.ns to have in-
dulgcd the laziness of the people, by the lib.ra.it. vi,, which
file mlinifiers, in this way, to their wants. The v:ir rivers of
South-America abound with an infnite v:riiecy of'te imofl (ec-
licate fish. The lakes and lmanr'!ls, f,'rmcd by the annual over-
flowing'of the waters, are filled witll all the different ,fpcicjs,
where they remain fliut up, as inl n.tur-l reflrvoir;, fIr the
use of the inhabitants. They fwariu in fucli shoals, tlht it
some places they are catched ' oithout

:lt Ior ill :ltPrv . r[:

otihers, the n:itives have difcovcrcdl a mi:lod (of infc'tilln tlhe
w:atcr with the juice of ccrtain plants, by which the fill are so

Nr ':u
I ufr. 1.!. *f, lalii . Churchl C(ol. ii. 1i . ,4 '

, C ;;i ;; , .ra i'.

P. li' 'lecl ,, ,\ccol:; ; , 1'.:.;,,. S, &'c. C(.1.,,'h \i. -S. 1.,(t .. l': . '

.,

,;, ,y.i ,, l, i'/,,;; , l)w lcii[. (.1. (i;::m (:h:v';.. p ,t. RSe'.,.',

hli;} ,. .': !'.,o

:.i ,,,t[.

:

1 L. :

p 7. I' Sc.
NO'.'!2 LAlt.

u o o I intoxicated, that they float on the surface, and are taken

i : with the hand 9. Some tribes have ingenuity enough to pre-

fervc them without salt, by drying or smoking them upon hur-
dles over a flow fire 1. The prolific quality of the rivers in
South-America induces many of the natives to retort to their
banks, and to depend almost entirely for nourishment on what
their waters supply with filch profusion i. In this part of the
globe, hunting seems not to have been the first employment of
men, or the first effort of their invention and labour to obtain
food. The; were fih:ers before they became hunters ; and as
the occupations of the former do not call for equal exertions of
at2ivity, or talents, with those of the latter, people in that
fiate appear to possess neither the fame degree of ent erprife, nor
of ingenuity. The petty nations, adjacent to the Maragnon
and Orinoco, are manifefily the most inacive and least intelli-
gent of all the Americans.
I);, hunih'g NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can fuflain them-

selves in this manner. The greater part of the American na-
tions, dispersed over the forefis with which their country is
covered, do not procure subsistence with the fame facility.
For although there forests, especially in the southern continent
of America, are stored plentifully with game k, considerable
efforts of activity and ingenuity are requisite in pursuit of it.
Neccffity incited them to the one, and taught them the other.
Hunting became their principal occupation; and as it called
forth strenuous exertions of courage, of force, and of inven-

t Sec NO'TC LIII. II Condam. 159. Guinilln, ii. 37. Lettr. Edif.
14. 199. 23. 3A. Acugna, Relat. de la Riv.des Ainaz. 138.

i B3irrelit, Rclat. deFr. Equin. p. 1 . k- P. Martyr. Dccad. p. 324.
(Gu;illa, ii. .4, &c. Acugna, i. 156.

tion,

tion, it was dcemed a funCtion no less honourable than nccei.:- i; ,
ry. This was peculiar to the men. They were trained toit

- -..

from their earliest youth. A bold and dextrous hunter ranked
next in fame to the diltinguified warrior, and an alliance with
the tormer is often courted in preference to one with the !-:ttcr '
Hardly any device, which the ingenuity of man has difcov:rec
for ensnaring or deflroying wild animals, was unknown to the
Am, ricains. While engaged in this favourite cxcrcif', ltcy
shake off the indolence peculiar to theirnatute, the l;tcnt pow-
ers and vigour of their minds are routed, and tlhey become ac-
tive, perfevcring, and indefatigable. Their sagacity in fndin;
their prey, and their address in killing it, are eucal. Their rca-
son and their icnfes, being conflant!y directed towards this one
objeCt, the former diiplays such fertility of invention, and the
latter acquile fucl a degree of acutencfs, as appeLar a-mos- in-
credible. They discern the footiclps of a -wild healr, which
escape everyother eye, and can follow thein with certainty
through the pathless forefl. If they attac- their ame openly.,
their arrow seldom errs from the mark ;; if they endeavour to
circumvent it by art, it is almofl imtpofible to avoid their toils.
Among several tribes, their young men were not permitt(d to
marry, until thcy had given fucli proofs of heir skill iin hunt-
ing as put it beyond doubt that they were capt.bjc of provid'ingl
for a family. Their ingcnuity always oi tllc iCretch, and lharp-
ened by cnulation, as well as nccelity, ]has :Iruck out many ii.-
ventions, which greatly facilitate fucclef in the clihcf. The
most singular of tlefc is the difcovcry of a ,,poison in which they
dip the arrows employed in hunting. 'lhe flightcR wouncl

I Chlialcv. I silloire ! - la !\'. TIi{.;cc, iii. l lq. ''" !;i' ',

,r, . .

!' l'

\ c,.

: .qui;n. ;',; . D,,x i('.'L )ii'uv. ,i lhe I'iv,.i m , \

;; ,').x P lch
ri l.al .,. l .. ,:- '

'-; i ti

c) o ; vithl those envenomed shafts is mortal. If they only pierce the

fl:in, the blood fixes and congeals in a moment, and the firong-
eft animal falls motionless to the ground. Nor does this poison,
notwithstanding its violence and subtlety, infe< the flesh of the
animal whlich it kills. That may be eaten wihl perteci safety,
and retain its native rclifl and qualities. All the nations along
the :lMaragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with this compo-
fition, the chief ingredient in which is the juice extracQed from
the root of the curare, a fpccies of withe . In other parts of
America, they employ the juice of the manchenille for the fame
purpose', and it operatcs with a no lecs fatal activity. To peo-
pIl po{Ic:cd of those fccrets, the bow is a more deftruQive wea-
pon than tlhe musket, and, in their skilful hands, does great
execution among the birds and bcafis which abound in the so-
res of America.

., u i. the life of a hunter gradually leads man to a slate more
advanced. The chafe, even where prey is abundant, and the
dexterity of the hunter much improved, affords but an uncer-
tain maintenance, and at some seasons it muff be suspended al-
together. If a savage trusts to his bow alone for food, he and
his family will often be reduced to extreme distress °. Hardly
any region of the earth furnishes man spontaneously with what
his wants require, in the mildest climates, and mofi fertile foils,
his own indufiry and foresight must be exerted, in some degree,
to fecurc a regular supply of food. Their experience of this
surmounts the abhorrence of labour natural to savage nations,
and compels them to have rccourfe to culture, as subsidiary to
lunting. In particular situations, some small tribes may flubift

; ';:P. , ii. ,, ',"c. CuimI.un-. 2.8S. Rlcclecrcl PlIilf i. 239. JIaicioft N:,..

I:;!. u :
(,,; , i:;, z &l, &c. " Scc ;OTI;' I.V.

by

by fifl-ing, independent of any produltion of the earth, raifd i ()
by their own in-uflry. But throughout all America, we ficaccly ,
meet wi.h any nation of hunters, vwhich does not pracSifc fucme
fpccies of cultivation.

THEIR agriculture, however, is neitherextenfive nor labo- :...

rious. As ,ame and fifli are their prin.'ipal food, all they aim '
at by cultivation, is to supply any occafion:ll dcfzcd of thlle. In
the southern continent of America, the natives confined their
indufiry to rearing a few plants, which, in a rich foil and warm
climate, w-ere easily trained to maturity. The chief of these is
la2:zec, well known in Europe by the name of Turky or Indian
whc.:t, a grain extremely prolific, of fiiple cultur:, agreeable
to the tafre, and affording a strong hearty nourifhmcnt. Tlic
second is the nmazioc, which grows to the size of a large shrub,
or fnall tree, and produces roots fomelwhat resembling parsnips.
After carefully squeezing out the juice, these roots are grated
dcown to a fine powder, and formed into thin cakes, cailed
Canj7da bread, which, though insipid to the tafic, proves no
contemptible food '. As the juice of the manioc is a dcadly
poison, fomc autlhors have celebratcd the ingenuity of the Ame-
ricans, in converting a noxious plant into wholeomne n )Lu-
rifhment. But it filould rather be confidered as one of te;
defcprate expedients for procuring fubfiflcncc, to whic'i
ncce!lity reduces rude nations; or, p;rhaps, men wcrc led
.o the ui;( of it by a progress, in wliich tlicre is nothing
marvellous. One fpe'cics of manioc is altogcthcr free of ;anlv
poisonous qilility, and may be caten without any prcplrlition
but llat of ro.tifing it in the embers. This it is probal)lc, was

,' jlo;in, -l

i.' . 1 |. t tl . l L

;.at. i . . . '\I1 l'1l.

[Ir! d ;;i ;
:.:u !i] 'I i\' c. t-. 1'.lo.t, i.(,z' . A u\ l ubict \' i'i r. lur Ic 'l.il'ioc. I l'it ,' I , , i, J1

.: p ' 5, & .
VOL. I. U 11 i i)!

firt ifc d by tle Americans as food; and nccc lity ]IvingT gra-
ll;ijly taugllt thlc the art of frparating its pcrnici:us juice
if r;:i the oticr if)ccice, they have by experience found it to be
Lilc moit prolific :s wcll as the m(oli nIlurifiling plant of the
tw\o . Thi tliird is tlhe phl1clinl, which til.tl',h it ;ifcs to the
lii h t of a trcc, is of fuchl quick growth, that in Icfs than ;

lv,i;r it rc'ard.s the i]ndufiry of tlic cultivator with its fruit.

T'lis, when rolfled, ful))plies the place of bread, and is both

l):d;atlllc and notrifhing . The fourt}l is the pj)ottfo, whlore
culture and qualities are too well known to nccdi any defcrip-
.ion. 'Fl fifth i s plinCto, a small tree, yielding a fironi. aro-
nmatic fpicc. The Americans, who, like othcr inlabitants of
warmn climates, delight in whatever is liot and of poignant fla-
vonur, dccm this fcafoning a necessary of life, and mingle it co-
piously with evellr kind of food they take

Sutcii ;nre tllc various producQions, which were the clii f ol-

ic6t of culture aniong the hunting tribes on the continent of
Amncrica, and with a moderate exertion of ative and provident
industry, thefc might have yielded a fill fiupply to the wants of
a numerous people. But men accuflomcd to the free and va-
grant life of hlunters, arc incapable of regular application to la-
bour; and confider agriculture as a fecondarv and inf,:rior oc-
cupation. Accordingly tle provision for fiufifience, arising
from cultivation, was fu limited and scanty amoin: the Amcri-
cIlns, that, upon any accidental failure of their usual fuicces in
Inunting, tlicy were often reduced to cxtreme dilircEs.

' 'l.t. ,] c:(. 3 ,I l i t. i. Il. ( ll., . .ai-iL ua il;c Jiiditn,
1 i.. .S.,: NO()'''. "1. C NOJ' l I..\ 1.

' G ui[:ii:t, ii'. I';; I. AcJfl , lib. iv c. 20.

INT

IN the ili nds, thc r:ocle of fiufii- in was (co!; ji,, -rsl: .' L;

fcrcnt. iNone of thelarrc animals \ llic aboulrnd o i t c c.on-
tinent were k nown there. Only fou.r f)ccies of (iautrlid;
bcfidcs aI kinda (f frnall dumb dog, exittcd in tlie illninis, tie
hig.-eft of which cli not exceeccd li lZo ofa rabbit To hnillt
frch dliminutixc prcy, was an occu)ption wlh'( rmrli.tWCl no
cfrort cither of acivitv or cour.age. The chief ephoymc! (of
t hlunter in the isl,: s ,,':ts to kill birds, v. hich on the contin..'-'
are deemed ignotlc game, and left chlicfl t toile purfilit of
hoys i. This want of aniimals, as well as thicir l)cculia-lr itu-
ation, led the ifllmldcrs to depend principally upon filnini fr
their fufltcnc . Teirivers, and the fct with i liic i tl. v
.:rc surrounded, frupplicd til'nll wvith this flpcics o(f s)od. At
some p:irticul:lr f'cifon,;, turtle, crabs; and other flcll-l'K!,
.aboutldd in fiich numbers, that they could fupl)port tlic:nelvc
with a facility in which their indolence delijlt.l(d . \t otl;cr
times, thecy ate lizards, and various reptiles of odious for'ia .i
To fifling, the inhabitants of the i!lands actdfd fiiie (derece of
agriculture. Maize 1;, manioc, and other Ilanlts, v ccr2 c-Iti-
v;ted in thle f:llrm ma nner as on tlhe continent. lit ;;II the si i .i :
of tlicir ilidufiry, togetw! r witl wh;it their fbil nnd eliie:1 Imat' ro-
(inccd fjoniltn.mculmy, aflorlcd theCi but a fe;lnty Iny.ir:i icII '.'
'Il'huiih tli:ir demands for food were very fparinl,, tilcv ) ihriy
r; i Il rwhat 't,:wa ftiiecicnt for their own confilnl)t i),. if: !L';
S;) lini";rds fettled in any diflriid, fuich a Enall additinn, o,^ f.l) r-
iin::' r: ry moullths fool cxlhauftcd tlecir fcanlty ;.ores, an:d
brou.;1:t on a sarmi ic.

.T l ':

pJ ic- . PII

,I1 :
J 'I!. ]delo: t7tlluln~,h1.

. 2!.

1l I'.' - , li. ',;, , j,; " . '' O) 'i Sl , ll, xiii. C. . ( ,. I 1: . , 11 '

t ,?.',. ' (;').:l.t,; t I ; .l .

( . l l Cl . I

, ll), a!, ii. j 1, ,; .r . ( '. , .

t",. x.i. c, .
-j, ',' ",, l' ) I'l". 1 V1 1.

U 11 2 rTwol

-( c) .. '?'\o ircumfiances, common to all the savage nations of
> _j_,._ Amcerica, concurred with those which I ha:ve already menti-

oncd, not only in rendering their agriculture imperfec, but in
1,: Lcircumfcribing their power in all their operations. They had

i:o tame animals; and they were unacquainted with the use of
. etils.
s!, , '.,t I.s other parts of the globe, man, in his rudcfl state appears

:is lord of the creation, giving law to various tribes of animals,
which he has tamed and reduced to fubjet1ion. The Tartar
f!iowxos his prey on the horse which he has reared; or tends his
numcirous herds, Iwhich furnish hirm toth with food and cloth-
in1g; the Arab has rendered the camel docile, and avails himself
of its perfevcring firength; the Laplander has formed the rein-
,leer to be futfcrvient to his will; and even the people of Karnm-
chatka have trained their dogs to labour. This command ovci
the inferior creatures is one of the noblest prerogativcs of man,
And ainoln the grealtef efforts of his wisdom arin power.
Without this, his dominion is incomplcte. He is a monarch,
who has no fubjedis; a maiter, without servants, and muif
uerform every operation by the flrength of his ow n arm. Such
\ as the conliti(..n of all the rude nations in America. 'heir
reason was to little improved, or their union so incomplctc,
that they fccm not to have been conscious of the superiority of
tleir n:.ture, and fiiffcrcd all tle animal creation to retain it-
liblert, without cfiablifliing their own authority over any one
ttpccics. VMol of the animals, indeed, which have been ren-
dcrcd donmflic in our continent, do not exifl in the new W)or!dc,
but tliofc peculiar to it arc neither to fierce, nor so foi midable,
is to have exempted them from fcrvitudc. There are fomc ani-
:nals of the fiame fpiccics in both continents. But the rcin-dcer,

,}' lir!

which has been tamed and broiken to the yoke in tlhe one he- n (),
iiifplcrce, ralns wild in the other. The bi6io of America is mia-
nifeily of the fame ipecies with the llorned c tttlc of the other
hlcinilphcre '. These, even among the rudest nations- il our
continent, have been rendered do.neiiic ; and in conicquc.cc
of hlis dominion over them, man can accompliih w"orks of laboar
with greater facility, and has made a vast addition to his means
of fubfificnce. The inhabitants of many regions in the New
World, wliere the bilon abounds, might have derived the fime
advantages from it. It is not of a nature so indocile, but that
it might have ben trained to be as subservient to man as our
cattle l. But a favagc, in that uncultivated fialc wherein th
Allcricans were dicov. rcd, is the enemy of the other ani:n'ls,
not their fupcrior. He waftes and dcfirojs, but knowvs not
ho.w to multiply or to govern them ('

THIS, perhaps, is the mots notable diftincion betj-ccn th(:

irnhabitants of the Ancient and New V/or'ds, and a hi'il p-c-
eminence of civilized men above such as c ontinu rudc. The
grc:etcit operations of man in ichangiln and illpro\ving the face
ofi nlttuc, as \\ell as his n ofi coniidci able cfoirts in cultiv.;tinr,
L.i calrtl!, are acconjJ)lilhed by means of the aid which he re-
ceives from tlle atnl mnals whom he has tii-med ,and e:.pioys in la-
bouir. It is by their ftrcngh that lie subdues tie lin!bborn foil,
and converts the defcrt or niarlli into a fLruitfLl sic'ld. Eut mi:lln,
in his civiliz'd iLate, is b accuftoc;led to thfe ferice of the lCo;cef'-
tic animals, tlht lic feCh'om rlcliC s upon the vati bencfits whiclh
he dcrivcs i oln it. !f xxe were to fuppofc him, cvcIn whe

* 1'.ion, A.. rtic. J:,!n. ": U\iuv Dccouvo: le par I 1':',,!! '
': ', p. ; ,

*a:

:
O o 1; . n,'os i';.pr-,vcd, to be deprived of thcir useful minifiry, llis cm-

." ' !'il' OC
o lvr n::tr1 mruf in some measure ccafe, and he would rc-

ni-iin a i.c!ble animal, at a los how to subsist, and incap'ible of
a;it!c;m;tin:g uch arduous undertakings as their assistance cn-
a'.'cs him to execute with cafe.
.l:. 1;i: is a doubtfil point, whether the dominion of man

' ':' - ovecr the animal creation, or his acquiring thec infL of metals,

1hai conti ibuted m_-os to extend his power. The aera of tills im-
port:) nt discovery is unknown, and in our hemisphere very
]c'notc. It is only by tradition, or by di;ing up some rude
infirumnents of our forcfathers, that we Ikcrn that marlknd
vwerc originally unacquainted with the ife of metals, and endca-
vo-ircd to fijpply the want of them by employin5 flints,

1* '

se'!'!·., ,oi)Cs', 7n.1* ctler lhard fallbsacces, for the fime purlpofes
wxviic metals f;:rve among polishcd nat ions. Nature comnplctcs
tlie formation of fomc metals. Gold, filv1r, and copper, are
fo;nd in tlheir perfet slate, in the clefts of rocks, in the fides
ofl.ount:ins, or the channels of rivers. These were accord-
ingly the mctiis firfi knowii, and first applied to ufc. But
iron, the n;ofl ferviccable of all, and to which man is mofl in-
riclbtcd, is never discovered in its perfect form ; its grots and
'ilbborn ore must feel twice the force of fire, and go through
t'.'o laborious ;IocTffes, before it becomes fit for ufc. Man was
(on; aclquainteld with thc other metals, before he acquired the
art of fabricating irol, or attained such ingenuity as to perfc. i an
invention, to x hlic!i he is indebted for those infirumenis where-
witlh 1!e frid(ucs the earth, and commands all its inhabitants.
Eut in tills, as well a' in nmany other rcfpcds, the infe!riity

ls the Aimicins wss ws onpicuouls. All the savage tribes, fe;it-
.crcd lover the continent and iflanids, 'erc totally unacquaintcd

wit h

with iljce metals :vitch: t!he foil, prodiuesc in 2girit 'iim lce, i

'" '

ve .:.._ .e,t o'Jc tri-!ii, (u::ntit of

. 0 1, w-i th

. picked ---

in ::ic to)rrnt s that dclcended from their mnor;;tains, and
for; .cd iinto ornlnicrlts. T'hcir devices, to ful¥); ly this want of
the fervicalble n;mt;:s, wcre extr iiiely ruid, and :tull ,l.::t.
Tle rnoi finlle opcrat;on w\\-: to thicnr an u:ndclt:.ija:;r r;
iimmenf'. ( ;czultv and labour. To fell a trce \ ixl. r,1 ,-he-cr
inirum-i;-is t!ilan lhatchets of flonc, \was cinolvy.n!cnt fur !.
,llmonthli To so m a canoe into iiapc, and tolJliow it, co;i-
filmc!d y.r.; ;ind it frequently began to rot Icforc ty viw:-c
able to fni il it g. 'TIicir operations in a-rici"i5Lire vere el:'l y
flow and de.f;cive. In a country covcrc(d x-itll wo ndcs of t!h
har(dclt tiib er, the clcariIlv of a finall field dcfiincd for cui-
ture rcouired the unitcdl efiorts of a tribe, and was ax wor of
muchl ti:l;e and ri-cit toil. Thils was the bitfinlsL of th- imen,
and thelir im!olcncc was fatis;fed with plrformni:; . it in a v'Cy

Vh (tltl) iiiirncLr. The labour of cul;v,ttiot jl )i was cit t ..'

'oI;;cn1, l ho, afLer lig;,gingn, or railier firri , t'ie si.:ld, v,"i'i
,xooden inattocks, and latkcs linrdclncd ii ti e illc, Ci)C(l or
pl;lltcd it; but were more iliJcbtc(l l;,i l l, ilicrearc to tihe
fertility of tlic foil, than to t!heir owll rudl inliufirv.

A2G'I IC UL'I'URF, CVen when thio firenr:

: i of

: i,:l: isfcc.ndcd

l)y that cf the aniniils wilis ei l( lh'ls fl,;),_ed t ot t lie' ,}.Lc, and
lis po.,'err
: ,augmen'te by ti'Ic uie of tl e v ,ri :, ii.: nc iats \-itli

l'litCh tile difi overy of inet;l, l:::, t-tt,'i;!:r .iaM, is fitill a work

of -rc:et ,l.bour ; and it is ,.itli thle ;v., *:t o, li s browv tlit lie
renldlcr tc c.iarth fertile. It is not woni;tcl(ul,l tlic tlhit pcoij,'

i; . . ,

. t . : IorGu .

...

. 1
.1, A. ..

3: bor e RJ ~~~~~~~t. LI'.s rl'

I; o iK dcflitute of both thcfe advantages fllould have made so little

progress in cultivation, that they muift be confidered as depend-
inl for filflftence on fifling and hunting, rather than on the
fruits of tlicir ow'n labour.

,,C~F; :" FROl\ thisdcfcril)tion of the mode of fil'bfifting among the

11i ut. .. .a-

ri'; ,f)., rude American tribes, the form and genius of their political
'11. slai. inflitutions may be deduced, and we are enlabled to trace various

circumfianccs of difiinction between them and more civilized
nations.

i. J)i;i d I. THEY w-cre divided into fmiall independent communities.
cOuiiiuiiiic.. While hunting is the chief source of fuhfifience, a vafl ext.:nt

of territory is rcqcuifie for supporting a fmnall number of peo-
ple. In propo:tion as men multiply and unite, th. wild ani-
.mals, on wh-lich tihey prey, diminish, or fly at a grca:ter cliftancc
from the haunts of their enemy. The incrc.;fc of a society in
this slate is limitcd by its own nature, and the members of it
must either difj)erfe, like the game wlhich they pursue, or fall
upon some better method of procuring food, than by hunting.
Beafis of prey arc by nature solitary and unlocial, they go not
forth to the chafe in herds, but delight inll thol. r, cfics of the
:orefl where they can roam and deftrov undifhlurled. A nation
of hulnters referrbles theml, both in occupatlion and in ,lgeniuls.
Tlhey cannot form into large commulnitics, htcaufo it would
be impoflible to find fubfiflence, and tlhcy mnl! drive to a
diflance every rival who may encroach on those domains, which}
they confidcr as their own. This was the fate of all the A5 me-
rican tribecs, llt numbers in each were final], thouglli freattered
over vafi countries; they wcrc far removed from one another,

and

and engaged in perpetual hostilities or rivalnfip . In Ame- o
rica, the word nation is not of the fame implort as in other _-
parts of the globe. It is applied to small societies, not exceed-
ing, perhaps, two or three hundred pcrfons, but occupying
provinces larger than some kingdoms in Europe. The country
of Guiana, though of larger extent than the kingdom of France,
and divided among a great number of nations, did not con-
tain above twenty-five thousand inhabitants :. In the provinces
which border on the Orinoco, one may travel several hundred
miles in different direcdions, without finding a single hut, or
observing the footsteps of a human creature . In North-Ame-
rica, where the climate is more rigorous, and the foil less ser-
tile, the desolation is fiill greater. There, vast journeys of tome
hundred leagues have been made through uninhabited plains
and forests . As long as hunting continues to be the chief em-
ployment of man to which he trusts for fubfiflence, he canr
hardly be said to have occupied the earth n.

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are firangers to tU-:cquantej

the idea of property. As the animals on which the hunter oi prupr!y
feeds are not bred under his infpedion, nor nourished by his
care, he can claim no right to them, while they run wild in
the forest. Where game is so plentiful that it may be catched
with little trouble, men never dream of appropriating what is
of fnall value, or of easy acquisition. Where it is so rare, that
the labour or danger of the chafe requires the united efforts

Lozano, Defcrip. del Gran Chaco,' 9.62. Fcrnnndez, Rclac, Hilt. de los Chiquit. 162
k Voyages de Marchais, iv 3'3. 1 Gunilla, ii. tol.
m iM. Fahry, quoted by Ruffon, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 179, Boflu, Travels through
l.ouiflana, i. 1ll. Sce NOTE LVIII. n See NOTE LIX.

VOL.. I. Xx of

*

B o o K of a tribe, or village, what is killed is a common flock, be-

_._ .. longing equally to all, who, by their skill or their courage,

have contributed to the success of the excursion. The forest,
or hunting-grounds, are deemed the property of the tribe,
fiom which it has a title to exclude every rival nation. But no
individual arrogates a right to any difliidc of these, in prese-
rence to his fellow-citizens. They belong alike to all; and
thither, as to a general and undivided flore, all repair in quest
of fufenance. The fame principles, by which they regulate
their chief occupation, extend to that which is Subordinate.
Even agriculture has not introduced among them a complete idea
of property. As the men hunt, the women labour together, and
after they have shared the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy
the harvest in common °. Among some tribes, the increase of
their cultivated lands is deposited in a public granary, and di-
vided among them, at stated times, according to their wants P.
Among others, though they lay up separate flores, they do
not acquire such an exclusive right of property, that they can
enjoy superfluity, while those around them susser want q. Thus
the diftinaions arising from the inequality of pofleffions are un-
known. The terms rich or poor enter not into their language,
and being firangers to property, they are unacquainted with
that, which is the great objcst of laws and policy, as well as the
chief motive which induced mankind to eflabliflh the various
arrangements of regular government r.

tuligy and
e of PEOPLE in this slate retain a high sense of equality and

Lqualily and

independ- independence. Wherever the idea of property is not established
cnce.

o Dr. Ferguson's Efray, 12z. P Gunilla, i. 26. BIrickell, Hil. of N. Carol.
127. See NOTI. LX. q Denys, Hill. Natur. ii. 392, 393.

r P. Marlyr, DecnCd. p. 4;. Vcneg. Hist. of Califoin. i. 66. Lery, Navig. in
Bnifil, c. 17.

there

tiere can be no diftintion among men, but what arifcs from ;
personal qualities. These can be conspicuous only on such ..
occasions as call them forth into exertion. In times of dan-
ger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wisdom and experience of
age are consulted, and prescribe the measures which ought to
be pursued. When they take the field against the enemies c(f
their country, the warrior of most approved courage Icacs t!h
youth to the combat s. If they go forth in a body to the chafe
the most expert and adventurous hunter is foremofi, and
directs their motions. But during seasons of tranquillity and
inadion, when there is no occasion to display those talents,
all pre-eminence ceases. Every circumstance indicates, that
all the members of the community are on a level. They are
clothed in the fame simple garb. They feed on the fame plain
fare. Their houses and furniture are exacly similar. No di-
ftincion can arise from the inequality of pofTeffions. What-
ever forms dependence on one part, or constitutes superiority
on the other, is unknown. All are freemen, all feel themfelvcs
to be such, and assert with firmness the rights which belong to
that condition r, This sentiment of independence is imprinted
fodeeply in their nature, that no change of condition can era-
dicate it and bend their minds to servitude. Accustomed to be
absolute masters of their own conduc, they disdain to execute
the orders of another, and, having never known control, will
not submit to correction U. Many of the Americans, when they
found that they were treated as slaves by Spaniards, died of
grief; many destroyed themselves in despair x.

' Acofla, -ill. lib. vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hilt. Brasil, lib. ii. c. i3. De lry. iii. p. 1o.
Biet, 36G. t Labat. vi. 124. Brickell. Hifl. of Carol. 310.

u See NOTE LXI. x Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquif.
de la Florida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat. ii. 138. Benzo Hill. Nov. Orb. lib. iv. c. 2g.

X x 2 4. AMONG

; o o K 4. AMON cG people in this slate, government can assume little

authority, and the sense of civil subordination muff remain

,,,;iutui,- very imperfect. While the idea of property is unknown, or
, ..;,-..i, incompletely conceived, and the spontaneous producdions of the

earth, as well as the fruits of industry, are confidered as be-
longing to the public flock, there can hardly be any such sub-
jeEt of difference or discussion among the members of the fame
community, as will require the hand of authority to interpose
in order to adjufi it. Where the right of separate and exclu-
five possession is not introduced, the great object of law
and jurisdiction does not exist. When called into the field,
either in their own defence, or to invade the territories of
their enemies, when engaged in the toil and dangers of the
chafe, the members of a tribe perceive that they are part ot
a political body. They are conscious of their own connedion
with the companions in conjunction with whom they a ; and
they follow and reverence such as excel in conduct and valour.
But, during the intervals between such common efforts, they
are fcarccly conscious of the ties of political union x. No vi-
fible form of government is established. The names of ma-
gifrate and fzlbjcl7 are not in use. Every one seems to enjoy
his natural independence almost entire. If a scheme of public
utility be proposed, the members of the community are left at
liberty to chute whether they will alfifi or not in carrying it
into execution. No flatute imposes any service as a duty, no
compulsory laws oblige them to perform it. All their refolu-
tions are voluntary, and flow from the impulse of their own
minds v. The firrt siep towards establishing a public jurifdic-

x Lozano, Dclcr. del Gian Chaco, 93. MIclenlcz Tefoios Veldadcros, i. 23. Sec
NQO'Fi LX11. Y Charecv. I-V i. Nov. France, iii. 266. 268.

tion

tion has not been taken in those rude societies. The right of n o o
revenge is left in private hands 7Z If violence is committed, or
blood is shed, the community does not assume the power either
of inflicting or of moderating the puniflment. It belongs to the
family and friends of the person injured or slain to revenge the
wrong, or to accept of the reparation offered by the aggrcfior.
If the elders interpose, it is to advise, not to decide, and it is
seldom their councils are liflened to; for as it is deemed pufil-
lanimous to susser an offender to escape with impunity, resent-
ment is implacable and everlasting a. The object of govern-
ment among savages is rather foreign than domestic. They do
not aim at maintaining interior order and police by public re-
gulations, or the exertions of any permanent authority, but la-
bour to preserve such union among the members of their tribe,
that they may watch the motions of their enemies, and atd
against them with concert and vigour.

SUCH was the form of political order eftablifled among the To'..rIit pro-

. iH. K(e-

greater part of the American nations. In this fate were most Icr:ptioi;, ap-
of the tribes, spread over the vast provinces extending caftward p
of the Mifliffippi, from the mouth of the St. Laurence to the
confines of Florida. In a similar condition were the people
of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili, and several tribes in Pa-
raguay and Guiana, and in the countries which firctch from
the mouth of the Orinoco to the peninsula of Yucatan. Among
such an infinite number of petty associations, there may be pe-
culiarities which constitute a diftiniion, and mark the various

Z l-cerrea, cc. 8. lib. iv. c. 8. a Charlev. I iil. N. France, iii. .71,

z72. La, fit.. 4
. . Canflni Hilt. de Nucvo Rcyni de Gianiada, z2i.

degrces

B o o I degrees of their civilization and improvement. But an attempt

.- -. to trace and enumerate these would be vain, as they have not

been observed by persons, capable of discerning the minute and
delicate circumstances, which serve to discriminate nations re-
fembling one another in their general characer and features.
The description which I have given will apply, with little va-
riation, to the policy of every people in America, w.hich to
fishing and hunting had added some degree of agriculture.

RUDE and imperfect as those infiitutions may appear,

several tribes were not so far advanced in their political pro-
grefs. Among all those petty nations which trusted for subsist-
ence entirely to fifling and hunting without any species of cul-
tivation, the union was so incomplete, and their sense of
mutual dependence so feeble, that hardly any appearance of
government or order can be discerned in their proceedings. Their
wants are few, their objects of pursuit simple, they form into
separate tribes, and ad together, from inftind, habit, or con-
veniency, rather than from any formal concert and association.
To this class belong the Californians, several of the small na-
tions in the extensive country of Paraguay, some of the people
on the banks of the Orinoco, and on the river St. Magdalene,
in the new kingdom of Granada b.

Some irregu- BUT though among these laft-mentioned tribes there was
lar appear-
a:nces. hardly any shadow of regular government, and even among

those which I first described, its authority is flendcr and con-
fined within narrow bounds, there were some places in Ame-

b Venegas. i. 68. Lcttr. Edif. ii. 176. Techo. Hist. of Parag. Churchill, vi. 78.
.i(. Gen. des Voyages, xiv. 74.

rica

rica where it was carried far beyond the degree which seems v o . .
natural to rude nations. In surveying the political operations ,__;
of man, either in his savage or civilized state, we discover fin-
gular and excentric institutions, which start as it were from
their flation, and fly off so wide that we labour in vain to bring
them within the general laws of any system, or to account
for them by those principles which influence other communi-
ties in a similar situation. Some instances of this occur a-
mong those people of America, whom I have included under
the common denomination of savage. These are so curious
and important that I shall describe them, and attempt to explain
their origin.

IN the New World, as well as in other parts of the globe, Particula-:;

cold or temperate countries appear to be the favourite feat of ia2ollerol' t
freeorn and independence. There the mind, like the body, is gio.
firm and vigorous. Conscious of their own dignity, and capa-
ble of the greatest efforts in afterting it, men aspire to indepen-
dence, and their stubborn spirits sloop with reluCance to the
yoke of servitude. In warmer climates, by whose influence
the whole frame is so much enervated, that present pleasure is
the supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment, men ac-
quiefce, almost without a firuggle, in the dominion of a fupe-
rior. Accordingly,. if we proceed from north to south along the
continent of America, we shall find the power of those veiled
with authority gradually increasing, and the spirit of the peo-
ple becoming more tame and paffivc. In Florida, the autho-
rity of the sachems, caziques, or chiefs, was not only perma-
nent, but hereditary. They were liftinguifhed by peculiar
ornaments, they enjoyed prerogatives of various kinds, and
were treated by their subjects with that reverence, which people

accuflomi c (

;: o o K accufromcd to fubjetion, pay to a master c. Among the na-

tion of thc Natchez, situated on the banks of the Mississippi, a

A!,1,w ti difl'rence of rank took place, with which the northern tribes
N\ 1. li /.

were altogether unacquainted. Some families were reputed no-
blc, and cnjoyed hereditary dignity. The body of the people
was confidcrcd as vile, and formed only for fubjeclion. This dif-
tindion was marked by appellations which intimated the high
elevation of the one slate, and the ignominious depression of
the other. The former were called Rfpe6ltable; the latter, the
Stinkardx. The great Chief, in whom the supreme authority
was veiled, is reputed to be a being of superior nature, the
brother of the Sun, the sole object of their worship. They ap-
proach him with religious veneration, and honour him as the
representative of their deity. His will is a law, to which all
submit with implicit obedience. The lives of his f !jeEts are so
absolutely at his disposal, that if any one has incurred his dif-
pleasure, he comes with profound humility and offers him his
head. Nor does their dominion end with their lives; their prin-
cipal officers, their favourite wives, together with many domes-
tics of inferior rank, are sacrificed at their tombs, that they
may be attended in the next world by the fame persons who
fcrved them in this; and such is the reverence in which they are
held, that those vidi ms welcome death with exultation, deeming
it a rccompcnce of their fidelity and a mark of difindion, to be
fcledcd to accompany their deccafed maiter '. Thus a perfe't
dcfpotifmn, with its full train of fuperflition, arrogance, and
cruelty, is cfiablifhcd among the Natchez, and by a singular

c Cardenins y Cano r.nfuyo Chrinol. :i la lift. de I'iori(d, p. 46. Ie Moyne de Mor-
gues JcoIcs Florida:. Ap. de iBry. p. i. 4. &c. Chal lev. Hiss. N. France, iii. 467, 4()8.

d D)uinont lMemnoil Hll. fur LOuifiranc, i. 171. Chiarlcv. Hill. N. France. iii. 41).
&c. Lctr. Edif. zoi . o06, i .

fatality,

fatality, that people has tafted of the worst calamities incide nt ( o K
to poliflled nations, thou gh they tlhemfelves arc not far icdvanced .,-~-
beyond the tribes around them in civility arnd im!i,,Iovemnct.
In Hispaniola, Cuba, and the larger islands, tlcir ciziqlues or ll:.' in;l..
chiefs possessed extensive power. The dignity was traninitticd
by hcrcditiry right from father to son. Its honours and prero-
g;ttives were considerable. Their subjects paid great respect to
the caziqucs, and executed their orders without hesitation or
reserve . They were diflinguifhcd by peculiar orn;mcnts,
and in order to prcferve or augment the veneration of the peo-
ple, they had the address to call in the aid of fuperflition to up-
hold their authority. They delivered tlieir mand:itcs as the
oracles of heaven, and pretended to poflcfs the power of regu-
lating the seasons, and of dispensing rain or sunshine, accord-
ing as their fubjeSts flood in need of them.

IN some parts of the continent, the power of the cazirlqus 1, : ,

seems to have been as extensive as in the isles. In Eogot;t,
which is now a province of the New I:intlom of Granada,
there was fcttled a niat!oil, more collfidcerab'l i number and
more improv(e. in the various alrts ,) lifc, tlin any people in
America exce-nt tlhe i''elxicas al'(! c'ruvianns. Thely f bfifcd
chiefly )' , ruitntre. 'T'hi idlca ,

f propelrty was in'rocluced

ami,)lg them, and its rigits fc,'trrt r by laws, II tl(l(ed down by
tradition, and oblfirved wvith ,gri:t :.:l. They lived in large
towns. They were clot.l i iln a decent man;iner, andl their
liou!'s may be termed colmmodiolti, \vwicll compared with thllf

V

!I '.,,,, ,Ic. .

1 . ii. ic. I6( 11 'i. c. ; I Lo 'l' i b. .

3C 2.

' i'. I:;,L ;.\ .1 lilt. eI lC s (cI N :,, I ,

C;G .

pi. .>
VOL. I. Yy of

: 0 0o K of the people around them. The effecs of this uncommon ci-

vilization were conspicuous. Government had assumed a re-
gular form. Ajurifdidion was established, which took cogni-
zance of different crimes, and puniihed them with rigour. A
diflindion of ranks was known; their chief, to whom the
Spaniards gave the title of monarch, and who merited that
name on account of his fp!cndoras well as power, reigned with
absolute authority. I-le was attended by officers of various con-
ditions; he never appeared in public without a numerous reti-
nuc; he was carried in a fort of palanquin with much pomp,
and harbingers went before him to sweep the road and fircw it
with flowers. This uncommon pomp was supported by presents
or taxes received from his fubjecs, to whom their prince was
such an objct of veneration, that none of them pr fT.red to
look him diretly in the face, or ever approached him Ltui w:ith
an averted countenance g. There were other tribes on the fame
continent, among which, though far less advanced than the
people of Bogota in their progrcfs towards refinement, the free-
dom and independence, naturil to man in his savage slate, wais
much abridged, and their caziques had afiumed extensive au-
thority.

Calllcs 1., IT is not easy to point out the circumfftnces, or to d fcover
, ,P': ,,U- the causes which contributed to introduce and cftabli.th amre'i

;C. each of those people a form of government so different si n

that of the tribes around them, and so repugnant to the gell :s
of rude nations. If the persons who had an opportunity of ,)-
serving them, in their original flatc, had been more attentive

H-lerrera, dec. 6. lil,. i. c. 2. lib. v. c. 56. Piediahiia, c. 5. p. , &c. Go-
.:u . I-iif.. c, 72.

and

and more discerning, we might have received inforrnlation fiom ;i, o()
them sufficient to auide us in tins inquiry. If the tranlfakionls
ot people, unacquainted with the use of letters, ,were not in-
volved in impene, rable obscurity, we might have derived some
information from that iforce. But as nothing f.,tisfaclory can
be gathered, either from the accounts of the Sp',niards, or
from their own traditions, we must have rccourfe to conjec-
tures, in order to explain the irregular appearances in the po-
litical state of tie people whom I have mentioned. As all
those tribes which had loft their native liberty and indepen-
dence were feated in the Torrid Zone, or in countries approach-
ing to it, the climate may be fl ppofed to have had some influence
in forming their minds to that servitude, which seems to be
the defiiny of man in those regions of the globe. But though
the influence of climate, more powerful than that of any other
natural cause, is not to be overlooked; that alone cannot be
admitted as a solution of the point in question. The opera-
tions of mcn are so complex, that we imua not attribute the
form which they assume, to the force of a finlle principle or
cacif. Alt::ough de(lptifin be confin'ed in America to the
Torrid Z'nc, and to the warm regions bordering upon it, I
have al-c.ady observed that these countries contain various tribes,
iome of which pofhtfs an high dei.,-lc of freedom, and others
are altogc.t.icr unacqu:iintcd with l e -c lraints of 'overnmelt.
The indolcn,.e and timidity ptcuitr to the inhabitlnts of the
islands, rendered them so inc.lp.ilct of thc sentiments or efforts
neccfitrv for maintaining indcpndcicnc;, that there is no occa-
sion to search for any other caufc of tlheir tame filbnimTion to
the will of a superior. The filbjecion of the Natchez, and of
the people of Bogota, fecms to have been the confequcllil-e of a

Y y 2 differcnce

I oo I ; (difiercnce in their fiate from that of the other Americans. They

v--- were ifettlcd nations, residing conflantly in o!!e place. Hunt-

inl was not the chief occupation of the former, and the latter
icem hardly to have trufled to it for any part of their subsist-
ence. Eotl had made such progress in agriculture and arts,
that the idea of property was introduced in some degree in the
one communit , and fully eflablifhed in the other. Among
people in this Ibite, avarice and ambition have acquired ob-
iecds, and have begun to exert their power; views of interest
allure the fclfilh; the desire of pre-eminence exc;tes the cnter-
prifing; dominion is courted by both; and passions unknown
to man in his fivage slate prompt the intercflcd and ambitious
to encroach on the rii:hts of their fillow-citizcns. Motives,
with which rude nations are equally una:cquainted, induce the
people to Ilbmit ta!ncly to the usurped authority of their fupe-
riors. But evcn amocng natiol,s in lllis flatc, the spirit of fubjecls
could not have been rendered io obfcquious, or the power of
rulcrs so unbolunded, without the intervention of fuperflition.
By its fatal influence, the human mind, in every stage of its
progress, is depresscd, and its native vigour and in(dependence
lubducd. Whoever can acquire the dirction of this formidable
engine, is fccure of dominion over his species. Unfortunately
for the people whose inflitutions arc the subject of inquiry,
this power was in the hands of their chiefs. The caziques of
tlhe ilcs could put what responses they pleased into the mouths
of their Ccmis or gods ; and it was by their interposition, and
in their name, that they imposed any tribute or burden on their
people'. The great chief of the Natchcz was the principal
miniiicr as well as the representative of the Sun, their deity.

h Ilrreil, dec. ,. lib. iii. c. 3-

The

The rcfped wh.ich the people of Bogota paid to their monarchs, , ( o K
was inspired by religion, and the heir app:lrc:;t of the kingdom
was educ ,ted in the innermost recess of tlieir principal temple,
under :u

, austere discipline, arid with such peculiar ri}h:ts, as

tend, d ;. :ill his subjes with high sentiments c6nccrnin, the
fanctir. .f his charaer.r, and tl; di-rnity of his flation . Thus
supel: ition, '.,!:,ch, in thc rudcsi period ol fociet.', is either al-
tc,.t'hcr un n no .: i w afies its f;)rce in childifl unmeaning
p:.-:clcc, had ac-l:i.;r.d iuch an afC. ndant over those pcop!c of
Armricac:, who had n;ade s6one little progress towards refine-
ment, tli,, it became the chief inftlument of bending their
minds to an ulltiiely fervitudc, and fubjeded them, in the
beginning of tli:.'l' political career, to a despotism hardly lets
ri ;orous, than thliit which awaits nations in the last ifage of their
corruption and decline.

V. AFTER examining the political inflitutions of the rude 'licir .;r-

nations in America, the next object of attention is their art
of war, or their provision for public security and defence. 'The
small tribes disperscd over America are not only ilndepenent
and unconnedccd, but engaged in perpetual hostilities with one
anothr '. Though 1lirangers to the idea of cparate property
vested in any individual, the rudefl of the American nations are
well acquainted with he rights of each community to its own
domains. This ri. hi they hold to beperfeEt and exclutive, en-
titling the poieffTor tn oppose the encroachment of nci]hbour-
ing tribes. As it is of the utmost consequence co prcevnt them
from deflroying or ditiurbing the game in t! hir hianting grounds,
they guard this natitoLal property with a jealous attenltion. En':

i Picdalhian, p. ,T. 1k RBbas Ilill. de los tiiumlp. p. c.

.;1

i: o i: as their tcriitories are extensive, and the boundaries of them
,._--.-, not exac!v i.fcertained, innumerable fubjeds of dirpute arise,

which fcl(com terminate without hloodflcd. Even in this fim-
ple and primitive l'ate of society, inteieit is a source of discord,
ain l often prompts savage tribes to take arms, in order to repel
or putjniil such as encroach on the forests or plains, to which
they trufR for fubfiflence.

'The-ir ,1o- BUT interest is not either the most frequent or the most pow-
;; ,;, ....i erful motive of the incessant hostilitics among rude nations.

:as' These must be imputed to the pailion of revenge, which rales

with fiuch violence in the breast of avages, that eagerness to
gratify it may be confidered as the diftinuifhing charaderitlic
of men in their uncivilized state. Circumfiances of powerful
influence, both in the interior government of rude tribes,
and in their external operations against foreign enemies, con-
cur in cherishing and adding strength to a passion fatal to the
general tranquillity. When the right of redrefling his own
wrongs is left in the hands of every individual, injuries are
felt with exquisite sensibility, and vengeance exercised with un-
relenting rancour. No time can obliterate the memory of an
offence, and it is seldom that it can be expiated but by the

riio!n the rpi- blood of the offender. In carrying on their public wars, savage
'T ,vC'"- nations are influenced by the fame ideas, and animated with

the fame spirit, as in prosecuting private vengeance. In fmrall
communities, every man is touched with the injury or affront
offered to the body of which he is a member, as if it were a per-
fonal attack upon his own honour or safety. The desire of re-
venge is communicated from breafl to breast, and soon kindles
into rage. As fceble societies can take the field only in finall
parties, each warrior is conscious of the importance of his own

arm,

arm, and f els that to it is committed aconfiderable portion of r, o K
the public vengeance. War, which between extensive king- _ ....
doms is carried on with little animoiity, is prosecutcd by filnall
tribes with all the rancour of a private quarrel. The resent-
ment of nations is as implacable as that of individuals. It may ci1cc

i h ;-

be dissembled or fupprcffed, but is never cxtinguiflced; and ' c
often, when lerfl expc, d or dreaded, it burfis out with re-
doubled fury . When polifled n'.tionsllave obtained the glory
of vicsory, or have acquired an addition of territory, they may
terminate a wa;- 'with honour. But favaces are not satisfied
until they extirpate the community, which is the obje(r of their
rage. 'heiy fight not to conquer, but to defiroy. If they en-
gage in hotlliiies, it is with the resolution never to fee the face
of thi: enemy in peace, but to prosecute the quarrel with im-
mortal enmity -. The desire of vengeance is the firfi, and al-
most the only principle, which a savage inflils into the minds
ofllis children n. This grows up with hlim as he advances in
life ; and as his attention is direted to few objeds, it acquires
a degree of force unknown among men whose paflions are dif-
fipated and weakened by the variety of their occupations and
pursuits. The defirc of vengeance, which takes poffeflion of
the heart of savages, rcfembles the initincLive rage of an ani-
mal, rather than the paflion of a man. It turns, with un-
discerning fury, even against inanimate objccs. If hurt acci-
dentally by a stone, they often fcize it in a transport of anger,
and endeavour to wreak their vengeance upon it '. If flruck

i3ouclic l'lilt. Nat. ide N. France, p. 9;. Cnarlev. I-iill. tie N. Fianc , iii. 21.

2z5 I.cly ap :).* ily, iii. zo4. Cliux. Ilill. Canu.l. p. 72. LoZ. :io DclC,. td l G;:al
Cha.co, 9.; llillep. olo turs !es Sauv. 40. m Cl.n .

il I: .
ll '. N . i. ii. -^S

C.olid., 1. I(a , i. 126. 13trrcre, p. 170, 1i73. " C lhailcv. .

N 1 . iii. lz, .
Lry', 36. o e g.

',x itlt

i o o J with an arrow in battle, they will tear it from the wound,
- ,_----. break and bite it with their teeth, and dash it on tle ground P.

With recllfcd to their enemies, the rage of vengeance knows
no bounds. When under the dominion of this paiTion, man
becomes th'e nmoll cruel of all animals. Hce ciiher pities, nor
forgives, nor fparcs.

THE force of this passion is so well underflood by the Ame-

ricans thenifclves, that they always apply to it, in order to
excite their people to take arms. If the elders of any tribe at-
tempt to rouzc their youth from sloth, if a chief wifics to al-
lure a band of warriors to follow him in invading an encmy's
country, the most persuasive topics of their martial eloquence
are drawn from revenge. "The bones of our countrvymen,"
fay they, " lie uncovered; their bloody bed bas not beetn wai-
ed clean. Their spirits cry against us; they mulf be appeared.
Let us go and devour the people by whom they were slain. Sit
no longer inactive upon your mats ; lift the hatclet, console tile
spirits of the dead, and tell thlCi) tlh3t they shall be avenged q."

p-,,,!
,. 1- ANIMATED with such exhortations, the youth snatch their

arms in a transport of fury, raifc the long of war, and burn
with impatience to cmbrue their hand.( in the blood of their
enemies. Private chiefs often afeinbec finill ' arties, and in-
vade a hoflilc triibc, without consulting the rulers of the comi'vu-
nity. A fnglc warrior, prompted by caprice or revenge, will
take the field al)c(c, and march fcveral hundred miles, to fir-
pricf and cut ofl a flraggling enemy '. The exploits ofa noted

1 I' .el :, l: iv I' . 2.i. ;. h

I lei ra, LI c c. I. I l, ., .

q' ..hl ; .

v ,;i. !N. N.S. ii. 2i6, 2,7. L.iy apl)c li'y, iii. 204.
Sce NflI' ; LX111I.

warrior,

v.arrior, in filch f vliitav cxcurfions, often form thie cli;ciart o' '!
'e

i \

iiic hiiiory of an n :-ia n campaign ; and thlcir cliers c- ,.- .
nivc at fich Irrcntl ir (:'lies, as thve tend to cilcrhib a inlrti:i'
spirit, an ll aceilcctli tl eir people to cn!'crprirf and c(' ilr'.
But lwln t \var is ntition 1, and undertalken by p:i'ic iaii:'.'-
iitv, t!hc (!-lii crati;)ris aIrc formi:[ and l\ow. T'li cl,'!rs :: ',I ' -

leC, l. v (i ,Jivr t!h ir o'), i).!s in folcIn frecc'!cc. ,

, i,.,..

w\it, 1n'it.tri}c t :ile

11 ..'_ (I1 c cnlcrprit, landi ,ii:'.'. it;

:,.-

lncI''.i:'l ' (liaLldva ll: i 'm) , co)nrctlcl Cl 'Ccs v.'ith no irp . ')ii.icria-
biIe lor'ion of political dilcrnmclt and fir; :

i1i. T' 11- ;'

I l';

a.id foot'fily cs arc con rticdl , and fointlctiil' t i',' ai'1< tIlc

:1d-

vice eveCn of tlicir \.oIln ' IF. t ! K

lI L' il t:tion ': l;r war,

tleT sr,'rarc for it. with muchi cc'rclnoil'. A '::d;l:- oflecrs to
c(,Ill.l It. tlic ex c:lition, aIId i;

icC .

c l, But no 1n.in is -o;i-

lr,. ild to fiol!o-;v !:i;i; ti' rcfolution of the co,,omi tl.itv to
c-':-1;'.c'CC ,,ofilitiCs im'i:fis no ob'i'r";.iO[1 1U'M ''I a[l' ut, alCi I
to takc J::L- in the wvar. Lacl inldividual is flill 1n'.ir of hi j
ownil c''. id, and his engagcmcnt in the Icrvicc is p. i-. :'
volnitar '.

Ti. mlaxinms by which tlhey rcl-'t tc their inilit - op..'r: - "

th.n ), 1Iuni 1 cxltrc.'; cly di'i c'nt1L li'oni thoolc .-hic}l tqn.:(. lplacc
among 11n,1c civili.:,-d aridl )opulo:i; Lations, arc v. !l IMilit . to
thcir o'. A; pol itical fiate, and thec nature of Gi: ,coInI!ry il '.vi,.ic h
they ad:. Ti:ny nc\er tal<c i !( it 1 T , !'.) h ;, as it
\otsll rcc1 lir e a :,ct atcr cflort (, -li'i ' ; ,il. anrdl ili ; U, i Lsl is"
rlfual a;: ,;":', l:v;:i ,

c t!») inr, viL,' I .r ,: i fii l,)l.} ,'(:', l::'c, it'9 a

marclh C01 ionc luilldrc(d ilies tlolu:ith drc:,ry io '. ·;, r dtirin.

;.... ,... '. . -

, :. ' r. 1. . ; tJu, : ',. :' (..!, ,! v. 1!
.... . 1i

VOL. i. }. z/ a h>'l:. :

I, o

*) ' a long vo-.agc upon their lakes and rivers. Their armies arc
._J--.-~_v not cncu;wblercd with baggage or niilitary frores. Eaich war-

rior, Iceidis his arms, carries a mat and a finall lba of pounded
nmaiZe, and vwith thellc is comp-letcly ecquipped for any fcrvice.
While at a diflance from the enemils frontier, they dirfprfe
tlroulgh the woods and fuipport tlicmfelvs \xith the game
which tlihe kill, or the fifhl whiich they catch. As tlhey ap-
preach nearer to tlie territories of the nation, which they intend
to attack, they collcd their troops, and advance w. ith greater
caution. Even then they proceed wholly by ftratagcmn and am-
Lufcadc. They place not their glory in attacking their rncmies
with open force. To fuirpliife and ceftroy is the gre;iteft merit
of a commnander, and the hilghet pride of his follo7wers. War
and lthnting are their only occupations, and they conduc- both
with tlhe fame spirit and the fame arts. They fillow tle track
of their enemies through the forft. They cndelivour to dif-
cover their haunts, thqy lurk in lome thicket near to these, and
vwith the patience of a fportfinan lying in wait for game, will
continue in their station day after day, until they can rush upon
their prey when moit secure, and lca-f able to rcfiti them. If
they meet no flraggling party of the enemy, they advance to-
wards their villages, but with filch folicitnde to conceal their
approach, tlat they often creep on their hands and fct th rough
tlhe woodl;, and paint their ifins of tle fame colour with the
wxithered leav,.s, in order to avoid detection '. If ,o fortluinate
as to remain unobfcrvcd, they set on fire their huts in tl(: clcda
of night, and mafracre tlh inlLabitants, as they fly inaklc(l and
(lereneklcfs froml the flames. If they hope to e:flecl a retreat
w\itliout bein pl)lrfurild, tlcy carry off foime prilolners, lwhomn

*

(-li ,' t;i . t,; I'. iii. z\,
:3;. IIif ; ;.,' . :,, . .,:. 1t. -, hj

''. '.

they reserve for a more dreadful fate. But if, nrtcvithlan(dinu '; )
all their addrcfs and precautions, tlicy finld that tleni- in)tionl-; --
arc diScovcred, that the cnemy llha; taken the alarm, and is ,rc-
pared to oppose tlhem, they usually deem it mo rt rudent to re-
tire. They recard it as extreme folly to meet an (enI1nv \x;'io
is on his guard, upon ceual terms, or to give ba;tle in a1i op,: l
field. The moo} diflinguifhed fucccfs is a lifir:ae t, a leader.
if purclafcd with any confidlcrablc lots to his foi! )\ ; ,ijn
they ncvcr Lboaft of a victory if slained witl the blood Iof tlicir
own countrymen '. To fall in battle, inrtead of hlci r rcc';-
oi;cdl anll olourable dcath, is a misfortune lwhich fuillicts the
memory

ll of a war-'ior to the inmlutattion of rallhnel or i n)rll--
(lCe 1 ',

'Tilii fyfcii- of war was univcrf.l in Amncrici, and the finall >: il 'in ,.

unciviiic.d tribes, difiecrfctd through all its dliP!rent rc:ionus ,
and cliina!cs, display more craft thani boldncef in c.urr.ing; oil
their lioflilities. Struck with this conduct, so opposite to t e(
idcas and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend tllt
it flows from a feeble and cliftardly fiirit p)cculiar th t!c me--
ricans, whiiclh is incapable of any generous or manly ecertion '.
But whcn vwe rcflect that miany of tlhefl tribes, on occafillns
which call for cxtraordinary efforts, not only dcl-end tlicmlfelv.es
,.;itll ol)flinatc resolution, but attack tli ir cincii.'s witih tlie
inofi daring courage, and that they 1)Oficf; forlituide (of mdild
ful)crior to tile fcnfe of danger or the fear of lde !th, Cwe inl1
:afribc tlleir habitual caution to fomc otheir cafllr thita colflti-
tutio!iul timidity !. The number of mcin in cach tribe is f)

r;,c; NO)'i:'."I;*..

io ,I . .* CI2la. i ti l N.

Iil ili. '. 7 l1',"

:; i. 1: ;,:' ',l :,;'.,-', * . 1' i.'ilu . ii. 2 ( . t, Ch uli clu\. iii. :'-' . S j '>' ;
.X\'I. I'.cclhccics 1'h;u1. futr Ics .\W e:iti. i, it, \ . "'": ',.I:t'|. i\.

.,i l. L. : .t!.-

.' l

t

..:.

* 1 '

.
v ii..'i ;, .' ). C' .1. :,' .. 1'1. 1, ; ;.

Z ,, .-:. .'l{,

- * : :.: fntal, he difficulty of rearing newr members, amidfl thce!ard-

i- .... s and (dangers of savage life, o great, that the life of a citi-
;zeni i. extremely precious, and the prcfervation of it becomes a
capital objtct in their policy. Had the point of honour been
tlie fitile aimo5n the feeble American tribes, as among the pov-
crt ui nati-lons of Europe, had they been taunlt, in contempt of
d:.::;"gr and death, to court fame or vic-orv!, they muAt Ihve
been ruined by maxims, so ill adapted to their condition. But
\wherver their communities are more populous, si that they
can acl wxith confiderab!e force, and can fuft:;in the lois of feve-
ral of their membcrs, without being fcnfi bly weakcncd, the
military oper:itions of the Americans more ncarly Trefcmble thorfc
of other nations. The Brafilians, as well as the tr;bes situ.ated
uJpon tili banks of the river De la Plata, often take the si-ld in
,cll numerous bodies, as defcrve the name of armies '. They
defy their enemies to the combat, engage in regular battles,
and maintain the conflit with that desperate fcrocity, vwhich is
natural to men, lwho have no idea of war but that of extermi-
nating their enemies, and who never give or take quarter ; In
the powcrful empires of Mexico an:d Peru, great armies were
afrcLubled, friequent battles were fooght, and thetleory ati well
as praaice of war were different foLom what took llace in tholC
Ip;tty societies which affiume the name of nations.
'-* (:' Bv r thou l:h vigilance and attention are the qualities clhicly

.. rclquifite, whecre the objl.d of w.ar is to deceive and to ifur rifc;
iind tlloutli tlic .Anmecicans, welln adcing finly, vdi!l,:y an
a;n a;ziung de rece of address in conceal'in: tlhir own it)lonls,
land d.icovcrin' those of an enelmy, yet yet it is rCllmarable

i' I..
iX ,:l i Iilr.ip ;,.i.,ap !c ':-', xi p. :.. , Lc. N', t; ]' I:t,

th.-nt,

that, when they take the field in parties, they can feiMorn hc o ;
brought to ohbcrve the precautions rnmoi cfinti.il t:. their o-.vl . _ _.
iccurity. Such is the difficulty of accuno.:niin fiv.:':cs L'o itb-
ordination, or to acd in concert ; fuc' is !:ci i:,r :*.,iC:',c. un-
der rcftraint, and such tlcir caprice and prIi'Si1,, : *, . t: .:i is
rarely tlcy can be brought to conform tl i:.'.. .' ,

to t:c co:,n-

fels alld diresionls of thic:r Iei(!lrs. T lcv nvcr iation cc ;:ii-
nels around the place x hlcre tlhev re-c at night, and after mnir.}-
ing ionim hun(dred miilcs to si ,p; i,' an enemy, are often fir-
prifcd tl]cmrli ves, and cu:t (.'i:, xv-h l'inc iikl in :is i'-,::ounlu leeC',
a:: if thlv wcre not v, itll;ri reach o0 danger -.

IF notwitiflanding this neli;,nc nand lci it'., \;'1i' of-eC

fruflatc their moit artful fchumcs, they catch, the Cn.:!-V i!!i-
prepared, they rush upon them withl the .tinoj ferocity, a:.-
tearing off the scalps cfall tliof: wIhofli vidiillS to thilir r 'c
they carry home thiofe frange trophiics in trillph. lThcf2
thlev preserve as monuments, not only of their ow\vi lro:'. ,
but of the vengeance which their arm n his inhidecd utp:nl the
people who v.erc ohj 'c(s of pub: i rcli'ntmcnt T. v a"C fLi
more foicitotis to flizc priloncrs. Dsi in] their rctvc:it, if t y
hope to affcr it unimole.lcd, tlIcfc are conmmon!' ex. .::n1. iro:n
any i!nf:!t, and treated with some de:,rec of lhu:t :it;t-, tllo:nl
:luardcd . ;ith th'c noift ftl'id attention.

B'r .'iT a'er tllis tcmporarv filfxiif.i.m, thltirr: :- r.l.ti,_.s :.

n,.' '\ ,

C A:'. ,' s)oon as thiey approacli thtir own f!t'i ties, fle
ol tC'1 ir n:''l ,'el are (difp te.hed to itormin t',cir Ca'utrymnei

ithl ' :. c,

to t i! c .f'ce fs of tlc :.
c cdi)lion. Tl:en th', )if u ..

. ,',1 ,,. l,~)

, I ~ ~ ~ C-
'.<.

,: . o0 i: -',in to f;:el the wvrctchednefs of their condition. 'hlc women

_-~. (of the vil!n:a c, toether with the youth who have not attained

to the aec :cf lcarill: arms, afflmble, and forminig the-mselves
into tw-o lines, throtl ,ll which the prifoncrs mufi pass, beat and
tr::ig them w\illi sicks or flones in a cruel manner . After
i;is fitl:: iratific::tion of tliir rage against their enemies, follow
:iIrmcntitiolls for tlic loss of such of their own countrymen as
i:avc fl!lcn in the r'rvicc, accompanied with words and actions
\-. li;h fl ccm t' express tche utmost anguish of grief. But in a mo-
initt, ,upon! a signal givcn, their tears cease, they pass, withl a
1 .;!n alnd un:a.ccou.!tabllc transition, fiom the depths of for-
'.;o, t tranilOrts of joy, and begin to celebrate their vitiory
,with all the wild exultation of a barbarous triumph 1. The fatc
Of' t! prifoc l rS remains fiill undecided. The old men delibc-
rate: concernln!; it. Some are dcflined to be tortured to death,
i;! order to fitiatc the revenge of the conquerors; some to re-
place the micimnlc rs which the community has loll in that or
former wars. They who arc reservcd for this milder fatc, are
lcd to the ]Ints of those whose friends have been killed. The
women meet tlcem at the door, and if they receive them, their
i'ferirings are at an end. They arc adopted into the family, and,
according to their phrafc, are feated upon the mat of the dc-
ceased. They affumic his name, they hold the fame rank, arc
treated thcnceforward with all the tenderncfs due to a father, a
brother, a hufa:lild, or a friend. But if, cithcl from caprice,
or an unrelenting dcfirc of revenge, the women of any nfamily
rcfufe to accept of tle prisoner who is offered to them, his doom
is fixed. No power can then save him from torture and death.

i,'[ ,i, li.'- WIIILI. their lot is in filufcnf, tlhe prisoners thcmfclves a)-
i''1. .i pear altogether unconcerned about vwlat may befal them. They
i.:1 . ,

].;liontl!n, i. i . Ch.itv, ltv lill. N. 'r. ii. i. Laluitau M\ca urs, ii. 26,4.

talk,

talk, they eat, they Ilcep, as if they were perf(ctly at ease, anld ' '
no danger impcnding. Wllen the fatal sentence is intimatcd to ---
them, they receive it with an unaltered countenance, raise their
deatli-fiong, and prepare to susser like men. 'Ihcir coii;ucrorsl- ", '

-·' U ,... . I ', '. . '

aflcmblc as to a solemn fcftival, rcfolvcd to put their coura!e
to the utmost proof. A fcenc cnfucs, the l:brc delcripti,,.t.
of which is cnoutg to chill the heart witl horror, nwhereve:r
men have been accuflomcd, by mildcr inflitutions, to rcfijci,
their fpccics, and to mclt into tcndcrnefs at the si o

lit of lnhan

fuft3crings. The prifoncrs aic ticd naked to a flake, but so as
to be at liberty to move around it. iAll who arc prcfent, men,
women, and children, rinfh upon them like furics. Every
fpecics of torture is applied th;at the rancour of revencie can in-
vent. Some burn telir limbs wvith red-hot irons, fomi man!-
g!c their bodies with knives, others tear their fl'lh fromn tIheli
bones, pluck out their nails b., the loots, and rend and twist
their sinews. They vie with one anotier in refinenimnts of tor-
ture. Nothing fcts bounds to tlieir rae, but the ldr'ad of
abridging the duration of their vengca;n.c 1-y lharc:il;i tilC
dcath of the fiuffcrcrs : and stich is tlChir cruel in;.znuiiv in tor-
menting, that by avoiding induflrioulyv to lihrt any vital part,
tlihe oftcn prolong this feene of annuilmi for flcvcrl d.iy-. In
fpitc of all that they fufier, tllc viCaims continuell to cllant their
dcat!l-foln with a firm voice, they boafl of thlir o.' n e:loits,
tlicy i,fuilt their tormentors for thcir wan;t ofilill iil ivenrij n.
their friends and relations, thr'v wavirn tlic n of tie vcn';cancc
wvliichl aw;,its tlc;m, on ;ccoutt of tlicir dcatil, and excite tllcir
fi.rocity by tile mofi provoking rclp-o. clis and tllrcats. T') dif-
Ilay lini d.intccd fortitude in fil!e. d(rcadfnlI iitu::tion; is tl: no:-
bleicI t ulilil los a warrior. To avoid tlc trisl by

:l vxolln, '.
decath), or t, ,ir;rinlcumler it, is d'cncl infanioitt . a;in c .,-'';,',. w .

I'

' ° 1 If any one betray symptoms of timidity, they often difpatcl
_-.-. him at once ux ith contempt, as unworthy of being treated like

a manl :'. nimrAted w:ith those ideas, they endure, without a
groan, what it seems almost impofil1lc that human nature
Ihould sustain. They appear to be not only iifcnfible of pain,
but to court it. " Forbear, said an aged chief of the Iroquois,
\vahcn his infilts had provoked one cf his tormcentor. to wound
him witlh : knSife, forbear these fiabs of your knife, and rather
let me dclc by firc, that those dogs, your allies, from beyond
1th sea, may learn by my example to fuffcr like men :." This
mar:aolimity, of which tire ar e frequelnt inf-alices among lil
Amilrican warriors, inifead of excitin, adm:nration, or calling
forth fymapathly, cxafperates the fierce fplirits of their torturers
iofrefC afl of cruelty ". Weary at length of contending with
men, whose conflancy of mind they c:nnot vanquiflh, some

1iicf in a rage ,puts a Icriod to their -fi:'hrings, by dilfpathi.;
ihem x ith lis da-,acr or club 1.

s,!n r',:oC THis barbarous scene is often fuccecdcd by one no !cis
C i : ';-, *il1 1 , i-

h.;ocking. As it is i:poflible to appease the fell spirit of re-
venge w.hich racs in the heart of a fivage, this frelquently
prompts the Americans to devour those unhappy persons, who
have been the viclTims of their cruelty. In the ancient world,
tradition has pr cfrvcdl the memory of barbarous nations of
cannibals, lwho fed on human flei. Eut in every part of tle
Nevw Wor'd, there were pcolle to whom this cuflom was ia-

!:L 1: ' j1i; r'. , i. 37. 3 ii. S. " Coldcn. Iliil. of Five N atrtij;, i. ; ,.

" . * ',,a:, .: .'.; , i. --3 . 1' Chlrlcv. 1ill. N. F,. iii. 243, &c. 38,.

1]:.:i'.ill, ,'d(,'. , ::. . 2'.;,. L'!i: ;ij, Ilisi. Ctt t l . |). 73. l'llcnnep , ~. s

,',: ., :'..., :

1 ',3t, &c. 1. V';:, :'. 2i (',
7 ':, . ':' CliCe , ii. . 1,)c. Ij la l'h Iici,:, ii. 22, &C.

-lill Nm iliar.

miliar. It prevailed in the southern continent ', in fevcral of 0 !:
the illands r, and in various districts of North-America . Even _--
in those parts, where circumstances, with which wc are un-
acquainted, had in a great neafure abolished this practice, it
seems to h.Ave been so well known, that it is incorporat-
ed into the idiom of their language. Among the Iroquois,
the phrase by which thcy express their resolution of m:wl;iin war
a:,ainft an enemy is, " Let us go and eat that nation." If they
solicit the aid of a neichllbouring tribe, they invite it to " celt
broth made of the flcih of their enemies ." Nor, was the prac-
tice peculiar to rude unpoliihed tribes, the principle fiom which
it took rife, is so deeply rooted in the minds of the Armcricans,
that it fubfificd in Mlexico, one of the civilized empires in the
New World, and iclics of it ma.- be difcovcred amonrg the more
mild inhab)itants of Peru. It was not iearcity of food, as f.)n-:
authors irnmgine, and the importunate cravin',s of hunler, ti.h.i
forced the Americans to those horrid repairs on their fellow-
creatures. Human fleill was never used as common food in
any country, and the various relations concerninill popcl, whl
reckoned it among the flated nmeans offubii!tcincc, flo', f;-oi
thecredulity ald miliikes of travellers. The rainco-,ur of re-
venge firit piomlpted men to this barbarous adclln . T-l
fiercell tribes dcLvoured none tbut prisoners taklen ll w\Ar, or
such as tliev regarded ;s cnemies ':. Wonlen alnd eiiili,:clil \v,,

' S'::.'iius anpd j, L

v, .ii . SII,.

L_. 'c, i:'.i. 2l,. lict, 3S.4. L".. I .: !.i

!'i.,o, ; : i

i :,,dm S4 iv K i),::, 1. i1 .
I:., . 1i ''iu: ph. 47.0

' i. ' *' .l' 'r.':. q:.) \.'l . t.l) c. p .i . 'I'.ltrt , i;. .; ,.

',iKC ,

,ll.)i, .1. t3 .

1,?... ii.. .' 1,

i 2. ;.

it . I . i 2 4 ii . .'.

l;3' .' , i'i jD . t ¥ ,ji

.1:". I I '' I', ii. i 2 8i , ',,;. i ti'T . '

.

. z-- I.). '.: ' h.,,i>c, Ft . 5, q ...c

N '

I''L _.>X.X. L

° i;', i, j.-, ;. i, .,, , i _

C , c 'i ,, ! i1' i ltu, ;'. z'. ilanctor t, '..~. '.!iei. ' ' .

,' 2!i.;a, ..:. n

Oc. rX l i 1..X '
.

Voz.,. I. 3 '

B O o I: were not the objecs of enmity, if not cut off in the fury of

... .. c.their firfi inroad into an hostile country, seldom suffered by the

cllicerate cffcfts of their revenge '.

THE pcople of South-America gratify their revenge in a

manner somewhat different, but with no lcfs unrelenting ran-
cour. Their prisoners, after meeting at their firlt entrance
with the fame rough reception as among the North-Ameri-
cans ', are not only exempt from injury, but treated with the
grcatcfl kindness. They are feasted and caressld, and Come beau-
tiful young women are appointed to attend and solace them. It
is not easy to account for this part of their conduct, unless we
impute it to a refinement in cruelty. For, while they seem fludi-
ous to attach their prisoners to life, by supplying them with
every enjoyment that can render it agreeable, their doom is ir-
revocably fixed. On a day appointed, the victorious tribe as-
femblcs, the captive is brought forth with great solemnity, he
views the preparations for the sacrifice with as much indiffe-
rence, as if he himfelfwere not the vidim, and meeting his
fate with undaunted firmness, is dispatched with a single blow.
The moment he falls, the women seize the body, and dress it
for the feast. They besmear their children with the blood, in
order to kindle in their bofonms a hatred of their enemies, which
is never extinguished, and all join in feeding upon the flesh
with amazing greediness and exultation :'. To devour the body
of a slaughtered enemy, they deem the most complete and ex-
quifite gratification ofrevenge. Wherever this pradice prevails,

Y 1;ct, 3;2. Inliltlini, Vita di Ainerico, 84. T'ertre, . . Fucnl n, Dcfciip. d'.

S wi..

i1. 3

S .
z Siadius ap (. I1 b , i ii, . 4. 12j.

v SLdliu.npdc Pry, iii. 12 e, &c. Lcry, ibid. 210.

captives

captives never escape death, but they are not tortured w.itl ti.c . o \
fame cruelty as among the tribes which are lcss accufio:ncd to

.
such horrid feasts 1'

As the constancy of every American warrior may be put to

such severe proof, the great object of education and difcip!ilie
in the New World is toform the mind to fufaiin it. When na-
tions carry on war with open force, defy their encinic.; to the
combat, and vanquish them by the superiority of their skill or
courage, foldicrs are trained to be active, vigorous, and enter-
prifing. But in America, where the genius and maximns of war
are extremely differe- t, pafl've fortitude is tle quality in higllcft
eitim..tion. Accordingly, it is early the fludy of the Armericns
to acquire a talent, which will enable them to belave like men,
when their resolution shall be put to the proof. As the youth
of other nations exercise themfclves in feats of aitivity ;ind
force, tliofe of America vie with one another in exhibitiols of
their patience under sufferings. They harden their nerves lby
those voluntary trials, and gradually accustom thenmflves to
endure the iharpeft pain, without complaining. .' boy and girl
will bind their naked arms together, and place a burning coal
between them, in order to try whlo first discovers such impt-
tience as to shake it off'. All the trials, cuftoln;ar in Aine-
rica, when a youth is admitted into the claIs of warriors, or
when a warrior is promotcd to the dignity of captain or chief,
are accommodated to this idea of maniincfs. They arc not dif-
plays of valour, but of patience; they are not exhibitions of
their ability to offend, but of their capacity to susser. A-
mong the tribes on the banks of the Orinoco, if a warrior

b, S'c N 0 T E IL XXI. C ailv. . . i . i; 3 -.

3 A 2 :fqirc.

is f '* c-: - :o!- . 'ii}. rank of captain, his probation bcrinr \j-it, a Incr .,
._. , 1,-i; r
!' ('. r.i;' thlan anty cver observed b), lhe molt abfi.m: o;

rir:;'it. ,t th

L clFs: of t]is, the c!hicfs aiemni-e, cacli c ivc.I

.;::. I: :

-. .^:..:s ^t; . r wllip, jplrc{ £o VigoO. o fl, th3t

his io.lv is; ';i5Lo.' liyed, and if lie bctriy. the ]cIst fyniptom

;f i,,! tc:'c o cve fcnfibility, he is cli. raccd for ever, and
rci.::.:,.;. ::s ! u:.lorthy of the honour. After fo:mc interlv.l., the
collJilrcy of the candidate is proved by a more c'crnci:iting
trijl. ilc is laid in a ham:noc wit]h his hands bound fast, an
iinumerall¢e multitude of venomous ants, whose bite occ sions
c:-iquil ce pain, ,cnd produces a violent inflammation, are thrown
l]u)(n him. The judgesof his nmerit fland around the hammoc,
lid, whilc thiefe cruel infeOs fasten upon the most sensible parts
of his body, a sigh, a groan, an involuntary motion exprelive
of lwhat he fuffcrs, vwould exclude him from the dignity which
ihe is ambitiou s to obtain. Even after this evidence of hiis for-
titude, it is not deemed to be completely afeertaincd, but mufr
fland another test more dreadful than any he has hitherto un-
dergone. He is again suspended in his hammoc, and covered
with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of stinking herbs is kin-
dled underneath, so as he may feel its heat, and be involved
in finokc. Though scorched and almost fufl:ocated, he must
continue to endure with the fame patient insensibility. Many
perish in this rude cffay of their firmncfs and courage, but
fuclh as go through it with applause, receive the ensigns of their
new dignity with much solemnity, and arc ever after regarded
as leaders of approved resolution, whose behaviour, in the most
trying situations, will do honour to their country !. In North-

d Guinlila, ii. 286, &c. Bict, 376, &c.

America,

America, the previous trial of a warrior is neither so formai, , o
nor so fcvcrc. Though even there, before a youth is permitted _
to bear arms, his pntiencc and fortitude are proved by blows,
by fire, and by i!fil Its, more intolcrab!c to a haughty spirit
than both .

TItE amazin fireadinefs with vwhich the Americans cndtrc

the mofl cxquifitc torments, has enduced some authors to flip-
pofc tlat, from the ecculiar fceblenefs of tlhir frame, their fen-
fibility is not so accutc as that of other people ; as women, and
persons of a relaxed habit, are obfcrved to be lcfs affected with
pain than robust men, whose nerves arc more firmly braced.
But the conflitution of the Americans is not so different, in it:;
texture, from that of the reft of the human fpccies, as to ac-
count for this divcrfity in their behaviour. It flows from a
principle of honour, instillcd early and cultivated with fucll
care, as to inspire man in his rudest slate with an heroic magna-
nimity, to which philosophy hath cndeavoured, in vain, to
form him, when more highly improved and poliflcd. This
invincible constancy he has been taught to confider as t!he chief
diftindtion of man, and the highest attainment of a warrior.
The ideas which influence his condut1, and the paIons whicll
take poffRclon of his heart, are few. They operate of courfc
with more decisive effet, tlan when the mind is crowded with
a multiplicity of objects, or diftraated by the varicty of its pur-
suits; and when every motive that operates with force on the
mind of a favagc, prompts them to fufler with dignity, they
will bear what might seem to be impoifiblc for human patience

Charlcv. I-liiR. N. Fr, iii. 21 .

to

B 0 0 K to fuitain. But wherever the fortitude of the Americans is not

IV routed to exertion by their ideas of honour, their feelings of

pain arc the fame with those of the reft of mankind Nor is
that patience under sufferings for which the Americans have
been so juilly celebrated an universal attainment. The con-
ftancy of many of the victims is overcome by the agonies of
torture. Their weakness and lamentations complete the tri-
umph of their enemies, and reflect disgrace upon their COun-
try ..

\.V l.d 1i. THE perpetual hoflilitics carried on among the American
.i:j >Ilv' tribes are produtive of very fatal cffects. As their imperfect

indufiry does not supply them with any fliperfluous fiore of
provisions, even in seasons of tranquillity, when the irruption
of an enemy dcfolates their cultivated lands, or diflurbs them
in their hunting excursions, such a calamity reduces a commu-
nity, naturally unprovident and destitute of resources, to ex-
treme want. All the people of the difiricd that is invaded,
are frequently forced to take refuge in woods or mountains,
which can afford them no fubfiftencc, and where many of them
perish. Notwithfianding their exczffive caution in conducting
tlheir military operations, and the solicitude of every leader to
preserve the lives of his followers, as they seldom enjoy any in-
tervals of peace, the loss of men among the Americans is confi-
derable in proportion to the degree of population. Thus famine
and the fwvord combine in thinning their numbers. All their
tribes are feeble, and many which were once powerful have
gradually wafted away and at last difappcarcd. Nothing now

r S.e NO T E .XXII.
; Clharlev, H-l N. F
,. i:ir.248. 385. Dc la Potileric, iii. 48.

remains

remains of several nations, which were once considerable, but ; 0 o Ki
the name. '-;

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there are tribes which en- c it ticir

-lui~ li'; rs: I)'.

deavour to recruit their national force when exhaul.ed, by t.l:opi], !.i-
adopting prisoners taken in war, and by this expedient prevent t''' .
their total extintion. The practice, however, is not univcr-
sally received. Rcfentment operates more powerfully among
savages, than considerations of policy. Far the greater part of
their captives was antiently fcrificed to their vengeance, and
it is only since their numbers began to decline fast, tlat they
have adopted milder maxims. But such as they do naturalize,
renounce for ever their native tribe, and assume the manners
as well as paflions of the people by whom they are adopted :, so
entirely, that they often join them in their expeditions against
their own countrymen. Such a sudden transition, and so repug-
nant to one of the most powerful infcincs implanted by nature,
would appear firange among any people; but, among the mem-
bers offinall communities, where national enmity is violc n t and
deep-rooted, it is more unaccountable. It fcems hlowever, to
result naturally fiom the principles upon wl hicli war is carried
on in America. When nations aim at exterminating their ene-
mies, no exchange of prifoncrs can ever take place. From rhe
moment one is made a prisoner, his country and his fri:nds
confider him as dead . I-Ie has incurred indelible difgracc by
filffcring himself to be surprised or to be taken by an enemy;
and were he to return home, after such a slain upon his ho-

Ciaóile'v. Ilitl. N. F, iii. i 2r3, .

27. 129y. CGum lla, ii. 2.7. &C.

; C aii. Hi llv N.

ilt .
N :i. 2.1 5, &c. 1litL. ii. cj , I' See NOTE LXXIll.

nou r,

i, o o K nour, his nearelr relations would not receive or even acknow-

. )-- ledge that they knew him . Some tribes were flill more rigid,

and if a prisoner returned, the infamy which he had brought
on his country was expiated, by putting him instantly to death ".
As the unfortunate captive is thus an ontcaft from his own
country, and the tics which bound him to it are irreparably
broken, he feels less reluctance in forming a new conneclion
with people, who, as an evidence of their friendly fentimcnts,
not only deliver him from a cruel death, but offer to admit him
to all the rights ofa fellow-citizen. The perseOd fimi'arity of
manners amoilg savage nations facilitates and completes the
union, and induces a c;ptive to transfer nut only his al.egiance,
but his airction, to the community into the bosom of which
he is received.

TIei. il-. ,:-

p :)l. '
;0 BUT though war be the chief occupation of men in their

*;. .rude slate, and to excel in it, their highell diftincdion and pride,

their inferiority is always manifcft when they cngage in com-
petition with polifled nations. Dcflitutc of that foresight
rwhich difccrns and provides for remote events, firdngers to the
union and mutual confidence requisite in forming any extensive
plan of operations, and incapable of the subordination no less
requisite in carrying into execution fich planis, savage nations
may afloniflh a disciplined enemy by their valour, but seldom
prove formidable to him by their condlud, and whenever the
contest is of long continuance, must yield to superior art '. The
empires of Peru and Mexico, thonghj their progress in civili-
fation, when mcafurcd by the European or Asiatic fltindards,

I L:ilcnt ii. 185, s6. nm li-cricra, dec. 3. 11. i, .

i 1. 1 . 173.
II Src N 'i't"L. L\)l"'

.... Xzx~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~*"'

wasinconfiderable, acquired such an ascendency over the rude B ° 0 K
tribes around them, that they fubjeded most of them with
great facility to their power. When the people of Europe
over-ran the various provinces of America, this superiority
was still more conspicuous. Neither the courage nor number
of the natives could repel a handful of invaders. The alien-
ation and enmity, prevalent among barbarians, prevented
them from uniting in any common scheme of defence, and
while each tribe fought separately, all were subdued.

VI. TIHE arts of rude nations unacquainted with the use of Their art.

metals, hardly merit any attention on their own account, but
are worthy of some notice, as far as they serve to display the
genius and manners of a people. The first difirefs a savage Dress and or-

narnents.

must feel, will arise from the manner in which his body is as-
fecctd, by the heat, or cold, or moiflure of the climate under
which he lives; and his first care will be, to provide some
covering for his own defence. In the warmer and more mild
climates of America, none of the rude tribes were clothed. To
most of them Nature had not even suggested any idea of im-
propriety in being altogether uncovered d. As under a mild
climate there was little need of any defence from the injuries
of the air, and their extreme indolence shunned every fpe-
cics of labour to which it was not urged by absolute necef-
fity, all the inhabitants of the isles, and a considerable part
of the people on the continent, remained in this ftatc of naked
simplicity. Others were satisficd with some flight covering,
such as decency required. But though naked, they were not
unadorned. They drcffcd their hair in many diffcrcnt forms.

'I I.cry Navig.itr p. Dc llry, iii. p. 16[. Lire of Colunibus, c. 24. \'cncgas I-Ii..
of C .;il hmn. p. 7o.

VOL. I.
. B They

B °0v K They fafiened bits of gold, orfhells, or hining flones, in their

.-wvr, ears, their notes, and cheeks'. They lained their skins with

a great variety of figures; and they spent much time, and sub-
mitted to great pain, in ornamenting their persons in this fan-
taftic manner. Vanity, however, which finds endless occupa-
tion for its ingenuity and invention, in nations where dress
has become a complex and intricate art, is circumscribed within
so narrow bounds, and confined to so few articles among na-
ked savages, that they are not satisfied with those simple deco-
rations, and have a wonderful propensity to alter the natural
form of their bodies. This pradtice was universal among the
rudefi of the American tribes. Their operations for that pur-
pose begin as soon as an infant is born. By comprefling the
bones of the skull, while fiill soft and flexible, some flatten the
crown of their heads; foine squeeze them into the shape of a
cone; others mould them as much as possible into a square
figure '; and they often endanger the lives of their posterity by
their violent and absurd efforts to derange the plan of Nature,
or to improve upon her designs. But in all their attempts
either to adorn or to new-model their persons, it seems to have
been less the object of the Americans to please, or to appear
beautiful, than to give an air of dignity and terror to their
asped. Their attention to drcfs had more reference to war
than to gallantry. The difference in rank and estimation be-
tween the two sexes was so great, as extinguished, in some
measure, their solicitude to appear mutually amiable. The
man deemed it beneath him to adorn his person, for the fake
of one on whom he was accuflomed to look down as a slave.

e Lcry up. De Bry, iii. 165. Lettr. Edificintcs, 20. 2z3.
f Oviedo lii. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage de Labat. ii. 72. CLarlcvoix, iii.

323. CGuniilla, i. 197, &c. Acugna Relat. de la Riv. des Amaz. ii. 83. Lawson's Voy.
to Carolina, p. 33.

It

It was when the warrior had in view to enter the council of r 0 i K
his nation, or take the field against its enemies, that he assumed
his choicest ornaments, and decked his person with the nicest
care l. The decorations of the women were few and simple;
whatever was precious or splendid was reserved for the men.
In several tribes the women were obliged to spend a conrider-
able part of their time every day in adorning and painting their
husbands, and could bestow little attention upon ornamenting
themselves. Among a race of men so haughty as to dcfpife,
or so cold as to neglect them, the women naturally became
careless and slovenly, and the love of finery and (how, which
has been deemed their favourite passion, was confined chiefly
to the other sex h. To deck his person was the diftincqion of
a warrior, as well as one of his most serious occupations'.
In one part of their dress, which, at first fight, appears the
most singular and capricious, the Americans have discovered
considerable sagacity in providing againit the chief inconve-
niencies of their climate, which is often sultry and moist to ex-
cess. All the different tribes, which remain unclothed, are ac-
customed to anoint and rub their bodies with the grease of
animals, with viscous gums, and with oils of different kinds.
By this they check that profuse perfpiration,which,in the torrid
zone, waftes the vigour of the frame, and abridges the period
of human life. By this zoo they provide a defence against the ex-
treme moisture during the rainy feafonk. They likewise, at cer-
tain seasons, temper paint of different colours with those unc-
tuous substances, and bedaub themselves plentifully with that
composition. Sheathed with this impenetrable varnish, their

g Wafcr'sVoyage, p. 14z. Leryap.dc Bry,iii. 167. Charlev. Hit. N. Fran. iii. 26. 222.
h Charlev. I-i d. de la Nouv. France, iii. 278. 327. Lafitau, ii. 53. Kalm's Voyage,

iii. 273. Lery ap. De Bry, iii. 169, 17o. Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hill. de los
tliuilih. &c. 472. i Sec NO T E LXXV. k Sec NOTE LXXVI.

3 B flnins

I3 0 0 K skins are not only protected from the penetrating heat of the

1V.
<»_ - fun, but, as all the innumerable tribes of infedts have an anti-

pathy to the smell or taste of that mixture, they are delivered
from their teazing persecution, which, amidfl forests and
marshes, especially in the warmer regions, muff have been al-
together intolerable in their state of nakedness'.
Habitations. TNIE next object to dress that will engage the attention of a

savage, is to prepare some habitation that may afford him flelter
by day, and a retreat at night. Whatever is connected with his
ideas of personal dignity, whatever bears any reference to his
military character,thefavage warrior deems an objec of impor-
tance. Whatever relates only to peaceable and inactive life, he
views with perseet indifference. Hence, though finically atten-
tive to dress, he is little solicitous about the elegance or difpo-
fition of his habitation. Savage nations, far from that state of
improvement, in which the mode of living is confidered as a
mark ofdiftindion, and unacquainted with those wants, which
require a variety of accommodation, regulate the confiruaion
of their houses according to their limited ideas of necessity.
Some of the American tribes were so extremely rude, and had
advanced so little beyond the primeval simplicity of nature,
that they had no houses at all. During the day, they take shelter
from the scorching rays of the fun under thick trees; at night
they form a shed with their branches and leaves ". In the rainy
season they retire intocovers, formed by the hand of nature,or
hollowed out by their own induflry ". Others, who have no
fixed abode, and roam through the soress in quest of game, so-

I Labat, ii. 73. Guinilla, i. . 0 .

202. Bancroft Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 81, 28o.

m See N OTE LXXVII. n Lettrcs Edif. v. 273. Venegas Hiss. of Califor. i. 76.

Lozann Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 55. Lettrcs Edif. ii. 176. Gumilla, i. 383. Ban-
croft Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 277.

journ

journ in temporary huts, which they ere w itl little labour, B 0 ) K
and abandon without any concern. The inhabitants of those
vail plains, which are deluged by the overflowing of tie rivers
during the heavy rains that fall periodically between the tropics,
raise houses upon piles fastened in the ground, or place them
among the boughs of trees, and are thus safe amidst that wide
extended inundation which surrounds them ". Such were the
firfl cifays oftlie rudest Americans towards providing them-
selves with habitations. But even among tribes which were
more improved, and whose residence was become altogether
fixed, the firudure of their houses was extremely mean and
iimple. They were wretched huts, Sometimes of an oblong
and Sometimes of a circular form, intended merely for shelter,
with no view to elegance, and little attention to conveniency.
The doors were so low, that it was necessary to bend or to creep
on the hands and feet in order to enter them. They were
without windows, and had a large hole in the middle of the
roof, to convey out the smoke. To follow travellers in other
minute circumfiances of their description, is not only beneath
the dignity of history, but would be foreign to the objeat of
my researches. One circumstance merits attention, as it is fin-
gular, and illufirates the characer of the people. Some of their
houses were so large as to contain accommodation for fourscore
or a hundred persons. These were built for the reception of
different families, which dwelt together under the fame roof i,
and often around a common fire, without separate apartments,
or any kind of screen or partition between the spaces which
they rcfpcQively occupied. As soon as men have acquired dif-
tind ideas of property; or when they are so much attached to
their females, as to watch them with care and jcaloufy ; fami-

,, Gumilla, i. 225. -IcrrliC . b. ix c. 6. OviWuC Soiin;ar, p. 3, C,
P Sec NOTE LXXVIII.

lies

B 0OO K lies of course divide and fettle in separate houses, where they

Iv.
a-_v_-' can secure and guard whatever they wish to preserve. This

singular mode of habitation may therefore be confidered not
only as the effect of that community of goods which fubfifled
among the several people in America, but as a proof of inat-
tention and indifference towards their women. If they had
not been accuflomed to perfel equality, such an arrangement
could not have taken place. If their sensibility had been apt to
have taken alarm, they would not have trufled the virtue of
their women amidit the temptations and opportunities of such a
promiscuous intercourse At the fame time, the perpetual
concord, which reigns in habitations where so many families
arc crowded together, is surprising, and affords a firiking evi-
dence that they mufl be people of either a very gentle, or of
a very phlegmatic temper, who, in such a situation, are un-
acquainted with animosity, brawling, and discord .
Their arms. AFT E R making some provision for his dress and habitation, a

savage will perceive the necessity of preparing proper arms
with which to aflault or repel an enemy. This, accordingly has
early exercised the ingenuityand invention of all rude nations.
The first offensive weapons were doubtless such as chance pre-
sented, and the first efforts of art to improve upon there, were
extremely aukward and simple. Clubs made of rome heavy
wood,flakes hardened in thefire, lances whose heads were arm-
ed with flint or the bones of Come animal, are weapons known
to the rudest nations. All these, however, were ofufe only in

1 Journ dc Grillet & Becha mel dans la Goyanc, p. 65. Lafitau Mcaurs, ii. 4. Tor-

cluenl Monarq. r. 247. Journal Iliti. (de Joutcl, z 7. Lery -ift. Brasil, ap. de Bry, iii.
238. Lozano. Dcfcr. del Gran Chnco. 67.

clote

close encounter. But men wished to annoy their enemies while B 0 0 K
at a distance, and the bow and arrow is the most early inven- L-rv-
tion for this purpose. This weapon is in the hands of people,
whose advances in improvement are extremely inconsiderable,
and is familiar to the inhabitants of every quarter of the globe.
It is remarkable, however, that some tribes in America were so
deflitute of art and ingenuity, that they had not attained to the
discovery of this simple inventions, and seem to have been
unacquainted with the use of any missive weapon. The fling,
though in its confirudion not more complex than the bow, and
among many nations of equal antiquity, was little known to
the people of North America P or the islands, but appears to
have been used by a few tribes in the southern continent q.
The people in some provinces of Chili,and those of Patagonia,
towards the southern extremity of America, use a weapon pe-
culiar to themselves. They fallen flones about the size of a
fill to each end of a leather thong of eight feet in length, and
swinging these round their heads, throw them with such dex-
terity that they seldom miss the object at which they aim r.

AMONG people who had hardly any occupation but war or Their docf-

hunting, the chief exertions of their inventions, as well as in- tic utenil
dufiry, were naturally direded towards these objects. With
refpedt to every thing else, their wants and desires were so li-
mited, that their invention was not upon the firetch. As their
food and habitations were perfcdtly simple, their domestic uten-
fils were few and rude. Some of the southern tribes had dif-
covered the art of forming veflels of earthen ware, and baking

O Picdrahita (Cnq. dcl Nucvo ceyno, 9. 2, p Naufr. de Alv. Nun Cabeca
de vaca, c. x. p. 12. Picdrah, p. i6. See NOTIE LXXIX.

r Ovall s Relation of Chili. Church. Collc. iii. 82. Falknci's Dcfcrip. of Patagon.
p. 130. L, cc NOTE LXXX.

them

B o0 K them in the fun, so as they could endure the fire. In North

Iv.
' ^v-» America, they hollowed a piece of hard wood into the form of

DI)reffing their
food. akettle,and filling itwith water, brought it to boil by throwing

red-hot siones into it'. These vessels they used in preparing
part of their provisions; and this may be confidered as a ftep
towards refinement and luxury, for men in their rudest state
were not acquainted with any method ofdreffing their victuals,
but by roasting them on the fire; and among several tribes in

Conflruaionor America, this is the only species of cookery yet known u. But
tlei- cus. the master piece of art, among the savages of America, is the

conftruaion of their canoes. An Eikimaux, shut up in his boat
of whale-bone, covered with the skins of feals, can brave that
flormy ocean, on which the barrenness of his country compels
him to depend for the chief part of his subsistence ". The peo-
ple ofCanada venture upon their rivers and lakesin boats made
of the bark of trees, and so light that two men can carry them,
wherever shallows or cataracts obflruEt the navigation Y. In
these frail vessels they undertake and accomplish long voya-
gesz. The inhabitants of the isles and of the southern continent
form their canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large tree, with
infinite labour, and though in appearance extremely aukward
and unwieldy, they paddle and fleer them with such dexterity,
that Europeans, well acquainted with all the improvements in
the science of navigation,have been astonishcd at the rapidity
of their motion, and the quickness of their evolutions. Their
piroguzs, or war-boats, are so large as to carry forty or fifty
men; their canoes emploecd in fishing and in short voyages

I Chtlaicv. "ill. ol 7. Fr. iii. 3.32. Sec NOTL I.XXXI.

> 'l.; Vov. I . See NO)T'L LXXX.I 1.

/ 1.!lfitclu MtI urs , &c i.
ii .2 3.

arc

are less capacious'. The form as well as materials of all there B 0 0 K
various species of vessels is well adapted to the service for --
which they are destined; and the more minutely they are ex-
amined, the mechanism of their flruSIure, as well as neatness
of their fabric, will appear the more admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards induflry among the Ame- l.iil:.r,,-f

ricans, one firiking quality in their character is conspicuous. they :!,py to
They apply to work without ardour, carry it on with little l;boutr.
activity, and, like children, are eaily diverted from it. Even
in operations which seem the most interesting, and where the
most powerful motives urge them to vigorous exertions, they
labour with a languid liflleffnefs. Their work advances under
their hand with such slowness, that an eye-witness compares it
to the imperceptible progress of vegetation'. They will spend
so many years in forming a canoe, that it often begins to rot
with age before they finish it. They will susser one part of a
roof to decay and perish, before they complete the otherl.
The slightest manual operation consumes a vast length of
time, and what in polished nations would hardly be an effort
of industry, is among ravages an arduous undertaking. This
slowness of the Americans in executing works of every kind
may be imputed to various cau.cs. Aron.,l favawges, who ilo
not depend lor fubfiflencc upon the ifforts of regular indus-
try. time is of so little importince, that tiey let no valuc u on
it; and provided they can finich a design, they never regard
how long they arc employ.-d about it. The tools which they
employ are so aukward and defective, that every work in
which they engage muff neceffirily be tedious. The hand of

1I L.:tiat Voyrges, ii y i, &c. 131. c Gumnilla, ii. 297.
d lorde t cl tt. Cic s Car:ibcs, p. 22.
VO L. . 3 C the

_13 0 0 K the moif indufirious and ikilful artist, were it furnished with

IV.
k^ ---. no better instrument than a flone hatchet, a shell, or the bone

of tome animal, could hardly perfect the moll simple work.
It is by length of labour, that he must endeavour to supply
his defeEt of power. But, above all, the cold phlegmatic tem-
per peculiar to the Americans renders their operations lan-
guid. It is almofi impoflible to rouze them from that habitual
indolence in which they are funk; and unless when engaged
in war or hunting, they seem incapable of exerting any vi-
gorous effort. Their ardour of application is not so great as
to call forth that inventive spirit which fuggefis expedients
for facilitating and abridging labour They will return to a
task day after day, but all their methods of executing it are
tedious and operose c. Even since the Europeans have commu-
nicated to them the knowledge of their instruments, and
taught them to imitate their arts, the peculiar genius of the
Americans is conspicuous in all their attempts. They may be
patient and assiduous in labour, they can copy with a servile
and minute accuracy, but discover little invention, and no ta-
lents for dispatch. In spite ofinftrudion and example, the fpi-
rit of the race predominates, their motions are naturally tardy,
and it is vain to urge them to quicken their pace. Among
the Spaniards in America, the work of an Indian is a phrase by
which they describe any thing, in the execution of which an
immense time has been employed, and much labour wafted'.
Jcir religion. VII. No circumstance respeCting rude nations has been the

object of greater curiosity than their religious tenets and rites;
and none, perhaps, has been so imperfectly underflood, or rc-

c See N OTE LXXXJII. 1 Voyage de Ulloa, i. 335. Lcttr. Edifl &c.
'5. 348.

)prcfcnted

presented with so little fidelity. Priefis and mifllonaries are the B 0 ° K
persons who have had the bcfl opportunities of carrying on -v--.

Peculi:!r t!i'-

this inquiry, among the molt uncivilized of the American ,-l ii
tribes. Their minds engrossed by the dotrines of their own th"i lsr.iu,;
religion, and habituated to its inflitutions, are apt to discover
something that resemble those objeds of their veneration, in
the opinions and rites of every people. Whatever they con-
template, they view through one medium, and draw and ac-
commodate it to their own fyftcm. They fludy to recon-
cile the inflitutions, which fall under their obfcrvation, to
their own creed, not to explain them according to the rude
notions of the people themfelvcs. They ascribe to them ideas
which they are incapable of forming, and fuplpo~ie them to be
acquainted with principles and facds, which it is impofliblc
that they should know. Hence, even among the mos barbarous
nations in America, some mifiionaries have been induced to
believe, that they had discovered traces, no leTs diftind than
amazing, of their acquaintance with the sublime myfleries
and peculiar institutions of Christianity. From their own in-
terpretation of certain expressions and ceremonies, they con-
cluded that tlhee people hati fomc knowledge of the dodtrinc
of the Trinity, of the inicarnation of thc Son of God, of his
expiatory fdcrificc, of the virtue of the cross, and of the effi-
cacy of t! c sacraments". In such unintelligent and credulous
guides as these, we can place little confidence,

BuT, even when we make our choice of condu(cors with

the great en cire. we mull not tollow them with implicit faith.
An inquiry into the religious noiions of rude nations is in-

L; Vci l.gni, i.. 8 3- 9 ' Toutluci:Gida, ii, 4 45. Garcia Oricn, . lzz,. HI rrrn, dcc. .4.
lil). ix c, 7. (ICc. 5. lib. iv. c. 7.

3 C volvcd

B 0 0 K volved in peculiar intricacies, and we must often pause in or-

iV.
<v-^ der to separate the fads which our informers relate, from the

reasonings with which they are accompanied, or the theories
which they build upon them. Several pious writers, more
attentive to the importance of the subjed than to the condi-
tion of the people whose sentiments they were endeavouring
to discover, have bellowed much unprofitable labour in re-
searches of this nature h.
Confined to THERE are two fundamental doctrines, upon which the

whole fyfiem of religion, as far as it can be discovered by the
light of nature, is eflablifhed. The one refpets the being of
a God, the other the immortality of the foul. To discover the
ideas of the uncultivated nations under our review with re-
gard to these important points, is not only an objec ofcurio-
fity, but may afford inftrudtion. To there two articles I ihall
confine my researches, leaving subordinate opinions, and the

The being of detail of local superstitions, to more minute inquirers. Who-
God. ever has had any opportunity of examining into the religious

opinions of persons in the inferior ranks of life, even in the
most enlightened and civilized nations, will find that their
system of belief is derived from inftrudion, not discovered by
inquiry. That numerous part of the human species whose lot
is labour, whose principal and almost sole occupation is to fe-
cure subsistence, views the arrangement and operations of
nature with little reflecion, and has neither leisure nor ca-
pacity for entering into that path of refined and intricate
speculation which conducts to the knowledge of the princi-
ples of natural religion. In the early and most rude periods
of savage life, such disquisitions are altogether unknown.
When the intclledtual powers arc just beginning to unfold,
and their first feeble exertions are dircdted towards a few ob-

1 Sce NOTE LXXXIV.

jets

jeacs of primary necessity and use; when the faculties of the B O 0 K
mind are so limited, as not to have formed abfirad or general -v-
ideas; when language is so barren, as to be destitute of names
to distinguish any thing that is not perceived by some of the
senses; it is prepoflerous to expeC that man should be capa-
ble of tracing with accuracy the relation between cause and
effect; or to suppose that he should rife from the contemplation
of the one to the knowledge of the other, and f rm just con-
ceptions of a Deity, as the Creator and Governor of the uni-
verse. The idea of creation is so familiar, wherever the mind
is enlarged by science, and illuminated with revelation, that
we seldom refledc how profound and abftrure this idea is, or
confider what progress man must have made in observation
and research, before he could arrive at any knowledge of this
elementary principle in religion. Accordingly, several tribes
have been discovered in America, which have no idea whate-
ver of a Supreme Being, and no rites of religious worship. In-
attentive to that magnificent fpedtacle of beauty and order
presented to their view, unaccustomed to reflect either upon
what they themselves are, or to inquire who is the author of
their exifgence, men, in their savage slate, pass their days, like
the animals around them, without knowledge or veneration
of any superior power. They have not in their languages any
name for the Deity, nor have the most accurate observers been
able to discover any practice or intfitution which seemed to
imply that they recognized his authority, or were solicitous
to obtain his favour'. It is only among men in the most uncul-

i Biet, 539. Lry ap DeBry, iii. 22z. NicuhoE. Church. Coll. ii. 132. Lcttr. Edif.

3. 177. Id. 12, 13. Venegas, i. 87. Lozano Dcfcript. del Gran Chaco, 59. Ser-
nand. Miflion. de Chiquit. 39. Gumilla, ii. 156. Rochclbrt Hit. des Antilles, p. 468.
Margrave Hist. in Append. de Chilicnfibus, 286. Ulloa Notic. Arncic. 335, &c. 13ar-
rcre, 2 8, 219. Harcourt Voy. to Guiana. Purch. I'lgr. iv. p. 1273. Account of
Brasil, by a Portuguefc. Ibid. p. 1289. Jones's Journal, p. 59. Sec NOTE LXXXV.

tivated

B 0 0 K tivated slate of nature, and while their intellectual faculties

IV. -.--..J are so feeble and limited as hardly to elevate them above the

irrational creation, that we may discover this total infenfibi-
lity to the impressions of any invisible power. But the human
mind, formed for religion, soon opens to the reception of
ideas, which are destined, when correced and refined, to be
the great source ofconfolation amidst the calamities of life.
Among some of the American tribes, fiill in the infancy of
improvement, we discern apprehensions of some invisible and
powerful beings. These apprehensions are originally indif-
tinc1 and perplexed, and seem to be fuggefied rather by the
dread of impending evils, than to flow from gratitude for
bleflings received. While Nature holds on her course with
uniform and undiflurbed regularity, men enjoy the benefits
rcfulting from it, without inquiring concerning its cause. But
every deviation from this regular course rouzes and aflonifhes
them. When they behold events to which they are not ac-
cuflomed, they fcarch for the reasons of them with eager cu-
riofity. Their underfianding is unable to penetrate into there;
but imagination, a more forward, and ardent faculty of the
mind, decides without hesitation. It ascribes the extraordinary
occurrences in nature to the influence of invisible beings, and
fuppoCes that the thunder, the hurricane, and the earthquake,
arc cffc'as of their interposition. Some such confured notion
of spiritual or invisible power, superintending over those na-
tural calamities which frequently desolate the earth, and
terrify its inhabitants, may be traced among many rude na-
tions k. But beiides tlis, the difaficrs and dangers of savage
life are so many, and men often find themfcelves in situations
so formi'lallc, th.at the mind, sensible of its own weakness,
las no rcfuurcc but in the guidance and protection ofwifdom

. S.c NOTE LXXXVI.

and

and power superior to what is human. Dejedted with calami- : <)") K
ties which oppress him, and expof.d to dangcrs wvhich he Z---
cannot repel, the fa\snjc no longer relics upon limfclf; lie
feels his own impotence, and fees no profpeEtof being extri-
cated, but by the intery ofition of fomc invisible arm. Hence,
in all unenlightened nations, the first rites or practices which
bear any refcmblance to acIs of religion, have it for their ob-
jeS't to avert evils which men fuffcr or dread. Tile 3f7mitous or
Ok'i's of the North Americans were amulets or charms, which
they imagined to be of such virtue, as to prcferve the persons
who rcpofe confidence in them from every difaflerous event,
or they were confidered as tutelary spirits, whose aid they
might implore in circumfiances of distress i. The Ccmis of
the iflandcrs were reputed by them the authors of every ca-
lamity that afflicts the human race; they were represented
under the most frightful forms, and religious homage was paid
to them with no other view than to appease these furious dei-
ties m. Even among those tribes whose religious fyflem was
more enlarged, and who had formed some conception of be-
nevolent beings, delighted with conferring benefits, as well
as of malicious powers prone to inflict evil; superstition frill
appears as the offspring of fear, and all its efforts were em-
ployed to avert calamities. 1 hey were persuaded that their
good deities, prompted by the beneficence of their nature,
would beflow every blessing in their power, without folicita-
tion or acknowledgment; and their only anxiety was to
soothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers whom they re-
garded as the enemies of mankind .

I Charlev. N. Fr. ii. 343, &c. Crcuxii I-lif. Ci:nad. p. 82, &c. I1 Ovicdo,

lib. iii. c. i. p. i l . P. ivlartyi, dccad. p. 102 &c. Tertre, ii. 365. IIltde,
p. 14. Stale of Virginia, by a Nativc, book iii. p. 32, 33. Dunoiil, i. i65. l;icicofr
Nat. Hill. of Guiana, 309.

(S .c..l

B 0 0 K SUCH were the imperfect conceptions of the greater part of

IV. c-v-- the Americans with refped to the interpositions of invisible

agents, and such, allnoft universally, was the mean and illi-
beral object of their superstitions. Were we to trace back the
ideas of other nations to that rude slate in which hiflory firfi
presents them to our view, we should discover a surprising re-
semblance in their tenets and practices; and ihould be con-
vinced, that, in similar circumfiances, the faculties of the hu-
man mind hold nearly die fame course in their progress, and
arrive at almost the fame conclusions. The impressions of fear
are conspicuous in all the fyfiems offuperfiition formed in this
Situation. And the mofi exalted notions of men rife no higher
than to a perplexed apprehension of certain beings, whose
power, though supernatural, is limited as well as partial.

Remarkable BUT, among other tribes, which have been longer united,
teir religious or have made greater progress in improvement, we discern
notions. some feeble pointing towards morejufi and adequate concep-

tions of the power that presides in nature. They seem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to whom all
things are indebted for their being. If we may judge by some
of their expreffions,they appear to acknowledge a divine power
as the maker of the world, and the disposer of all events. They
denominate him the Great Spirit °. But these ideas are faint
arid confused, and when they attempt to explain them, it is
manifest, that among them the wordfpirit has a meaning very
different fr m that in which we employ it, and that they have
no conception of any deity but what is co poreal. They be-
lieve their gods to be of the human form, though of a nature
more excellent than man, and retail such wild incoherent

o Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays des Hurons, 226.

fables

fables concerning their functions and operations, as are alto- B 0 0 K
gether unworthy of a place in hiflory. Even among these -
tribes, there is no eflablifhed form of public worship; there
are no temples erecded in honour of their deities; and no mi-
nifters peculiarly consecrated to their service. They have the
knowledge, however, of several superstitious ceremonies and
practices handed down to them by tradition, and to these
they have recourse with a childish credulity, when rouzed by
any emergence from their usual insensibility, and excited to
acknowledge the power, and to implore the protection of fu-
perior beings".

THE, tribe of the Natchez, and the people of Bogota had ad System of the

vanced beyond the other uncultivated nations of America in Natchez.
their ideas of religion, as well as in their political inflitutions;
and it is no less difficlt to explain the cause of this diftinc-
tion than of that which we have already confidered. The
Sun was the chief objec of religious worship among the Nat-
chez. In their temples which were c ;nfiruded with some
magnificence, and decorated with various ornaments, accord-
ing to their mode of architecture, they prefcrved a perpetaal
fire, as the pureit emblem of their divinity. Miniflers were
appointed to watch and feed this sacred flame. The firil func-
tion of the great chief of the nation, every morning, was an
ac of obeyfance to the fun; and feftiv;ils returned at flated
seasons which were celebrated by the whole community with
solemn but unbloody rites:'. This is the moil refined species

p Chailev. N. Fr. iii. 345. Coldcn, i. 17. q Dumont, i. 158, &c
Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 417, &c. 429. Lahrau, i. 167.

VOL. I. 3 D of

B o0 K of fuperrtition known in America, and, perhaps, one of the

IV.
_-v--_ most natural as well as most reducing. The fun is the apparent

source of the joy, fertility, and life, diffused through nature,
and while the human mind, in its early essays towards inquiry,
contemplates and admires his universal and animating energy,
its admiration is apt to flop short at what is visible, without
reaching to the unseen cause; and pays that adoration to the
most glorious and beneficial work of God, which is due only
to him who formed it. As fire is the purest and most adcive
of the elements, and in some of its qualities and effects re-
fembles the fun, it was, not improperly, chosen to be the
emblem of his powerful operation. The ancient Persians, a
people far superior, in every refpeE, to that rude tribe whose
rites I am describing, founded their religious fyflem on similar
principles, and established a form of public worship, less gross
and exceptionable than that of any people destitute of guidance
from revelation. This surprising co-incidence in sentiment
between two nations, in such different flates of improve-
ment, is one of the many singular and unaccountable cir-
cumflances which occur in the hiflory of human affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the fun and moon were like-
wife,the chiefobjecAs of veneration.Their system of religionwas
more regular and complete, though less pure than that of the
Natchez. They had temples, altars, priefis, sacrifices, and that
long train of ceremonies,which fuperflition introduces where-
ever she has fully cftablifhed her dominion over the minds of
men. But the rites of their worship were cruel and bloody.
They offered human vicqims to their deities, and many of their
practices nearly rcfembled the barbarous inflitutions of the

Mexicans,

Mexicans, the genius of which we ihall have an opportunity B 0 0 K
of confidering more attentively in its proper place r. -

WITI refpct to the other great do-.rine of religion, cnn- Thrril, is

cerning the immortality of the foul, the sentiments of the A- thU ii,,,ii,-
mericans were more united: the human mind, even when 'eafl "' -y the

fuul,

improved and invigorated by culture,ffrinks from the t!Louhts
of diflolution, and looks forward with hope and expecdalion
to a slate of future exifience. This sentiment, resulting from a
secret coifcioufnefs of its own dignity, from an initindive
longing after immortality, is univcrfal, and may be deemed
natural. Upon this, are founded the most exalted hopes of
man in his highest Rate of improvement; nor has nature with-
held from him this foothingconfolation, in the molt early and
rude period of his progress. We can trace this opinion from
one extremity of America to the other. In some regions more
faint and obscure, in others more perfectly developed, but no
where unknown. The mofi uncivilized of its savage tribes do
not apprehend death as the extinStion of being. All hope for
a future and more happy ftate,wherc they (hall be for everex-
empt from the calamities which embittcr human life in its
present condition. This they figure as a d-lightful country,
blessed witl perpetual spring, wholeforefls abound with game,
whose rivers swarm with fish, where famine is never felt,
and uninterrupted plenty lhall be enjoycd wuithout labour or
toll But as men, in forming their firll impcrfced ideas con-
cerning the invisible world, filuppofe that there they shall con-
tinuc to feel the fame desires, and to be cng;igcd in the fame
occupations; they niturally aCcribc cminince and ditinQion,

r Pri ralila, Conq cl. Nl . RN. I lno, p , .
- ,ic., I'Cc. 6. lib. v. c. 6.

3 D 2

B °0 K in that slate, to the fame qualities and talents which are here

IV.
_ _--v3 the objeCt of their esteem. The Americans, accordingly, allot-

ted the highest place, in their country of spirits, to the skilful
hunter, to the adventurous and successful warrior, to such as
had surprised and slain the greatefi number of enemies, who
had tortured many of their captives, and devoured their flesh -.

inducethem These notions were so prevalent, that they gave rife to an uni-
tobury arms, verfalcuftom, which is, at once, the strongest evidence that the
&c. with the
dead. Americans believe in a future slate, and the best illustration of

what they expect there. As they imagine, that the dead be-
gin their career anew in the world whither they are gone,
that they may not enter upon it defenceless and unprovided,
they bury with them their bow, their arrows, and other wea-
pons used in hunting or war; they depofite in their tombs
the skins or fluffs of which they make garments, Indian corn,
manioc, venison, domestic utensils, and whatever is reckoned
among the necessaries in their simple mode of life '. In some
provinces, upon thedeceafe of a cazique or chief, a certain
number of his wives, of his favourites, and of his slaves, were
put to death, and interred together with him, that he might
appear with the fame dignity in his future flation, and be
waited upon by the fame attendants ". This persuasion is so
deep-rooted, that many of their retainers offer themselves as
voluntary vicims, and court the privilege of accompanying

s Lery ap De Biy, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 351, &c. De la Potherie,

11. 45, &c. iii. 5. t Chronica de Cicca de Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288.
Creux. Hilt. Canad. p. 91. Rochefort, Hi:. des Antilles, 568. Biet, 391. De la Potherie,
ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco, Convcrf. de Piritu, p. 35.

u Dumont, Louifiane, i. zo8, &c. Ovicdo, lib. v. c. 3. Goinara, His. Gcn. c. 28.

P. Mart. decad. 304. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 421. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. P Mcl-
chior Hernandez, Menmor. de Chiriqui. Coll. Orig. Papers, i. Chron. de Cicca de
Leon, c. 33.

their

their departed master, as an high diflindion. It has been R O K
found difficult, on some occasions, to fct bounds to this en- --~
thufiafin of affectionate duty, and to reduce the train of a
favourite leader to such a number as the tribe could afford
to spare x.

AMONG the Americans, as well as other uncivilized nati- Superf.iiocn

Cjlrlne. t:d

ons, many of the rights and obfervanccs which bear fume re- 11h,-i,
fcmnblance to ads of religion, have no connection with devo- tiun-
tion, but proceed from a fond dcfire of prying into futurity.
The human mind is most apt to feel, and to discover this vain
curiosity, when its own powers are most feeble and uninform-
ed. Astonished with occurrences, of which it is unable to
comprehend the cause, it naturally fancies that there is fomc-
thing mysterious and wonderful in their origin. Alarmed at
events, of which it cannot discern the issue or the confe-
quences, it has recourse to other means of discovering them,
than the exercise of its own sagacity. Wherever superstition
is so established as to form a regular system, this desire of pe-
netrating into the secrets of futurity is conneted with it.
Divination becomes a religious at. Priefis, as the ministers of
Heaven, pretend to deliver its oracles to men. They are the
only soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who poisess the sacred
and important art of disclosing what is hid from other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, who pay no veneration to any Thi depart-
superintending power, and who have no eflablifhed rites or ment el'ong

to their phy-

minitfers of religion, their curiosity to discover what is future ficians.
and unknown is cherished by a different principle, and derives

x See NOTE LXXXVII.

firength
* V~~

B \0 K firength from another alliance. As the diseases of men, in the

A.-y--J flavage slate, are like those of the animal creation, few but ex-

trenely violent, their impatience under what they susser, and
solicitude for the recovery of health, soon inspired them with
extraordinary reverence for such as pretended to underhand
the nature of their maladies, or to preserve them from their
sudden and fatal effeCs. These ignorant pretenders, however,
were such utter firangers to the flrudure of the human frame,
as to be equally unacquainted with the caufcs of its di orders,
and the manner in which they will terminate. Enthusiasm,
mingled frequently with some portion of craft, supplied what
they wanted in science. They imputed the origin of difeafcs
to fupcrnatural influence, and prescribed or performed a va-
riety ofmyfierious rites, which they gave out to be of power
sufficient to remove them. The credulity and love of the mar-
vellous, natural to uninformed men, favoured the deception,
and prepared them to be the dupes of their imposture. Among
savages, their first physicians are a kind of conjurers or wizards,
who boafi that they know what is past and can foretell what
is to come. Incantations, sorcery, and mummeries of diverse
kinds, no less firange than frivolous, are the means which
they employ to expel the imaginary caufcs of malignity ;
and, relying upon the efficacy of these, they predi& with con-
fidence what will be the fate of their deluded patients. Thus
fuperflition in its earliest form flowed from the solicitude of
man to be delivered from present diflrefs, not from his dread
of evils awaiiting him in a future life, and was originally in-
grafted on medicine, not on religion. One of the firfi, and
m .f intelligent hiflorians of America was struck with this al-

y P. IM lch I lcrnandlc/ , AMemorial dc Chcriqui. Collca. Oli;. Pal. i.

liance

liance between thc arts of divination and that of physic, among BO o K
the people of Hispaniola ". But this was not peculiar to them. A
The Alexis, tle Piayas, the /utmoins, or whatever was the
difiinguifhing name of their diviners and charmers in otler
parts of America, were all the physicians of their refpeidtive
tribes, in the fame manner as the Buhitos of Hispaniola. As
their funClion led them to apply to the human mind when
enfeebled by ficknces, and as they found it, in that season of
dejecion, prone to be alarmed with imaginary fears, or amuf-
ed with vain hopes, they easily induced it to rely with impli-
cit confidence on the virtue of their spells, and the certainty
of their preditionsa.

WHEN EEVER men acknowledge the reality of supernatural Gradually
power and discernment in one infiance, they have a propen- extc'IS.
fity to admit it in others. The Americans did not long suppose
the efficacy of conjuration to be confined to one subjet. They
had recourse to it in every situation of danger or distress.
When the events of war were peculiarly difafterous, when
they met with unforeseen disappointments in hunting, when
inundation or drought threatened their crops with deftrudion,
they called upon their conjurers to begin their incantations, in
order to difcovcr the caufcs of those calamities, or to foretell
what would be their iffuc i'. Their confidence in this delusive
art gradually increased, and manifcficd itself in all the occur-
rences of life. When involved in any difficulty, or about to

A Ovicdo, lib v c. i. a IIcrrcra, tdc. i. lib. iii. c. 4. Ofbornc,

Coll. ii. S6o. Duii(,tit, i. i69, &c. Chailev. N. F. iii 36,1. 364, &c. I aw\ bn, N.
Carol 214. Iiibais, ' liulipli. 1). 17. Ilkt, 3'6. D la P'ohl rici, ii. '
, &c.

b Cha lcv. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dui1nt it, i 173. lIcrnaud. Icklac. lac los Chiitiuit. p. 1.
Lozano, 84. Mnigiavc, z79.

C n tel

B o K enter upon any tranfation of moment, every individual regu-
.- ,-v-« larly consulted the forcerer, depended upon his inflrudions to

extricate him from the former, and to direct his conduct in
the latter. Even among the rudest tribes in America, super-
flition appears in this form, and divination is an art in high
efieem. Long before man had acquired such knowledge of a
deity as inspires reverence and leads to adoration, we observe
him firetching out a presumptuous hand to draw aside that
veil with which providence kindly conceals its purposes from
human knowledge; and we find him labouring, with fruitless
anxiety, to penetrate intj the myfieries of the divine admi-
niftration. To discern, and to worship a superintending
power, is an evidence of the enlargement and maturity of the
human underfianding; a vain desire of prying into futurity, is
the errur of its infancy, and a proof of its weakness.

FROM this weakness proceeded, likewise, the faith of the

Americans in dreams, their observation of omens, their at-
tention to the chirping of birds and the cries of animals, all
which they suppose to be indications of future events, and if
any one of these prognostics is deemed unfavourable, they
instantly abandon the pursuit of those measures on which they
are most eagerly bent'-.
Detachcd VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea of the un-

cusos. cultivated nations of America, we must not pass unobserved

forne singular cufloms, which, though universal and charac-
tcriftic, could not be reduced, with propriety, to any of the

c Charl'v. N Fr. iii. 26z 353. Stadius, np dc Bry, iii. 2o. Crcuxii, I-llt. Canad.
84. 'fcclo, Hist. of P.irag. Church. Coil. vi. 37. De la Potherie, iii. 6.

articles

articles into which I have divided my inquiry concerning their f
manners. - . --

AMroNG favacs, in every part of the globe, the love of I,';' <.

dancing is a favourite paifion. As a great part of their time
languifles away in listless indolence, without any occupa!i-
on to rouze or interest them, they delight universally in a l;'--
time which calls forth the active powers of their nature into
cxercife. The Spaniards, when they first visited America.
were astonished at the fondness of the natives for dancing,
and beheld with wonder a people, cold and unanimated in moll
of their other pursuits, kindle into life, and exert themfelvci
with ardour, as often as this favourite amusement recurred.
Among them, indeed, dancing ought not to be denominated
an amusement. It is a serious and important occupation, which
mingles in every occurrence of public or private life. If any
intercourse be necessary between two American tribes, the
ambassadors of the one approach in a solemn dance, and pre-
sent the calumet or emblem of peace; the sachems of the other
receive it with the fame ceremony'. If war is denounced
against an enemy, it is by a dance, expreffivc of the resent-
ment which they feel, and of the vengeance which they medi-
tate '. If the wr~.th of their gods is to be appeascd, or their
beneficence to be celebrated; if they rejoice at the birth of a
child, or mourn the death of a friend , they have dances ap-
propriated to each of these situations, and fiuited to the differ-
ent sentiments with which they are then animated. If a person

n Dc la Porhcric Hil. ii. i,

1 &c. Charlev. N Fr. iii. 2 1. 297. La Ilontann . ioo. 1. I .

-Ilenncpin. Decou. 149, &c. 1, LC'h rlv. N. Fr. iii. 2,8. l.a'ta , i. .

c Joutel, 343. Goniara, Ifilt. Gen. c. 196.
VOL. I. 3 E is

E ov K is indisposed, a dance is prescribed as the most cffeqEual means
L----- of restoring him to health; and if he himself cannot endure

the fatigue of such an excrcife, the physician or conjurer per-
forms it in his name, as if the virtue of his activity could be
transferred to his patient'.

ALL their dances are imitations of some action; and though

the music by which they are regulated, is extremely fimnpl
and tiresome to the ear by its dull monotony, some of their
dances appear wonderfully exprcffive and animated. The war-
dance is, perhaps, the moit firiking. It is the representation
of a complete American campaign. The departure of the war-
riors from their village, their march into the enemy's country,
tlhe caution witll which they encamp, the address with which
they flation tome of their party in ambush, tle manner of
surprising the enemy, the noise and ferocity of the: combat,
the scalping of those who are slain, the seizing of prisoners, the
triumphant return of the conquerors, and the torture of the
victims, are successively exhibited. The performers enter with
such enthufiafic ardour into their several parts, their gef-
turcs, their countenance, tleir voice are so wild and so well
adapted to their various situations, that Europeans can hard-
ly believe it to be a mimic scene, or view it without emo-
tions of fear and horror"

Bu r however expreTive so:-ne of the American dances may
bc, there is one circumnltance in them remarkable, and con-
nclcd with the characcr of the race. The songs, the dances,
thc amtufcJiicnts of other nations, expreflivc of the sentiments

,i l),'ny:; 11}i,. N . i, ). IH ick; .!1, 1-. 1) . I', la'o ,urie, ii. 3(,.

c: D l.t l'lil:-.ic, ii. j l(,. tliilv, \.. I ir. 297.
] .alita, I, i. 523.

wlh icl

xhdich animate tlceir hearts, are often adapted to display or B °o K
excite that fcrfibility which mutually attaches the foxes. ---
Among some people, such is the ardour of this paffon, that
love is almost the sole oljeCt of feflivity and joy; and as rude
nations are firangers to delicacy, and unaccu2fomed to dif-
guifc any emotion of tleir minds, their dances are often cx-
trcmcly wanilton and indeccnt. Such is tlhe Ci/cnda, o which
the nativcs of Africa are so passionately fond'; and such the
feats of the dancing girls, which the Aliatics contemplate
with so much avidity of dceirc. But, among the Americans,
more cold and indifferent to their females, from causes which
1 have already explained, this pafilon mingles but little with
their fcftivals and pastimes. Their songs and dances arc
mostly solemn and martial, they are connected with fomne of
tle serious and important affairs of life', and having no rela-
tion to love or gallantry, are seldom common to the two sexes,
but executed by the men and women apart . If, on some oc-
cafions, the women are permitted to join in the festival, the
charaler of the entertainment is frill the fame, and no move-
ment or geflure is expressive of attachment, or encourages fa-
miliarity

AN immoderate love of play, cfpecially at ganms of ha- i:

zard, which fccms to be natural to all people unaccuflo:ned '
to the occupations of regular indufiry, is likewise univcrial

, :A\ . n1ubn, \Vov. to Scn ngal, p. iii. 25 87. L.:ii, o ,

oyge ' iv. 463. S'.nc, Hll.
N.I!. (il'J |a . InlroCI. p. 1 5) . Fcriir,, l)cu iipt. de Surin. i. p. 1 )

el;-ciplt. of N. Francc. ()Olornc, Coil. ii. SS Clhailcv.. Fr. iii. !".i.

1. \\':li;l':i Account of' Illliius, &c. 1 )9. I,

a ti c i.ly, iii. 177. I.o'/:io, 1 11.

c l'i . i . rea, d .

I. lirr. Zi. c. S. d c.-1. lib. x. c. -4. ic. e N ( IL'
l.XXXVIII. h Iarrcrc, Fr. l'iin p. i1 .

3 2.E a ncln

B o0 K among the Americans. The fame causes, which so often

IV. b
a-_v-- prompt persons at their ease in civilized life to have recourle

to this paflime, render it the delight of the ravage. The ior-
mer are independent of labour, the latter do not feel the ne-
ceility of it, and as both are unemployed, they run with tran-
sport to whatever is of power to flir and agitate their minds.
Hence the Americans, who at other times are so indifferent,
so phlegmatic, so silent, and so disinterested, as soon as they
engage in play become rapacious, impatient, noisy, and al-
motl frantic with eagerness. Their furs, their domeflic uten-
fils, their clothes, their arms, are flaked at the gaming-table,
and when all is loft, high as their sense of independence is, in
a wild emotion of defp-,ir or of hope, they will often risk their
perfonalliberty, upon a single cast'. Among several tribes,
such gaming parties frequently recur, and become their most
acceptable entertainment at every great festival. Superstition,
which is apt to take hold of those passions which are most vi-
gorous, frequently lends its aid to confirm and strengthen this
favourite inclination. Their conjurers are accuflomed to pre-
scribe a solemn match at play, as one of the most efficacious
methods of appearing their gods, or of restoring the sick to
health k.

and for drink- FROM causes similar to those which render them fond of play,
ng'. the Americans are extremely addiced to drunkenness. It seems

to have been one of the first exertions of human ingenuity to
discover some composition of an intoxicating quality; and
there is hardly any nation so rude, or so deflitute of invention,

i Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318. Lafitau, ii. 338, &c. Ribas,Triunmf. 13. Brickell, 335.
I Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 262.

as

as not to have succeeded in this fatal research. The most bar- B o o K
barous of the American tribes have been so unfortunate as to _--
attain this art; and even those who are so deficient in know-
ledge, as to be unacquainted with the method of giving an
inebriating firength to liquors by fermention, can accomplish
the fame end by other means.The people of the islands ofNorth
America, and of California, used, for ti is purpose, the smoke
of tobacco,drawn up with a certain infiruinent into the nofirils,
the fumes of which arcending to the brain, they felt all the
transports and frenzy of intoxication m. In almost every other
part of the New World, the natives possessed the art of ex-
tradting an intoxicating liquor from maize or the manioc root,
the fame fubf.ances which they convert into bread. The ope-
ration by which they effect this, nearly resembles the common
one of brewing, but with this difference, that in place ofyeff,
they use a nauseous infusion of a certain quantity of maize
or manioc chewed by their women. The saliva excites a vi-
gorous fermentation, and in asew days the liquor becomes fit
for drinking. It is not disagreeable to the tafle, and when
swallowed in large quantities, is of an intoxicating qualityn.
This is the general beverage of the Americans, which they
diflinguifh by various names, and for which they feel such a
violent and insatiable desire, as it is not easy either to con-
ceive or describe. Among polished nations, where a fuccef-
fi;:n of various functions and amusements keep the mind in
continual occupation, the desire for firong drink is regulated,
in a great measure, by the climate, and increases or diminishes
according to the variations of its temperature. In warm re-

m Oviedo Hilt. ap. Ramus. iii. 113. Venegas, i. 68. Naufrag. de Cabcca de Vaca,

cap. 26. See NOTE LXXXIX. n Stadius ap de Bry, iii. 1 l r.
Lery, ibid. 175. g

giOnS,

R °\°o K gions, the delicate and sensible frame of the inhabitants does

r_
---~' not require the flimulation of fermented liquors. In colder

countries, the constitution of the natives, more robust and
more sluggish, flands in need of generous liquors to quicken
and animate it. But among savages, the desire of something
that is of power to intoxicate, is in every situation the fame.
All the people of America, whether natives of the torrid
zone, or inhabitants of its more temperate regions, or placed
by a harder fate in the severe climates towards its northern
or southern extremnity, appear to be equally under the domi-
nion of this appetite". Such a similarity of tasse, among peo-
ple in such different situations, mufi be ascribed to the influ-
ence of some moral cause, and cannot be confidered as the
effec of any physical or conflitutional want. While engag-
ed in war or in the chafe, the savage is often in the most in-
terefling situations, and all the powers of his nature are rouz-
ed to the most vigorous exertions. But those animating
scenes are succeeded by long intervals of repose, during which
the warrior meets with nothing that he deems of sufficient dig-
nity or importance to merit hisattention. Helanguifhesand
mopes in this season of indolence. The poflure of his body
is an emblem of the slate of his mind. In one climate, cower-
ing over the fire in his cabin; in another, firctched under the
shade of some tree: he dozes away his time in sleep, or in an
unthinking joyless inactivity, not far removed from it. As
firong liquors awal:c him from this torpid slate, give a brifrer
motion to his spirits, and enliven him more thoroughly than
either dancing or gaming, his love of them is cxceflive. A fa-
vage, when not cngagced in action, is a pensive melancholy

oG ui :llli, i. 2,7. Loz.no Dtcrip. id Grin Chlico, 56. lo3. Ribas, S. Ullon, i.

.' 3i,. . I.l: i, v.

1 .

* F'crinandl z Mvillion. de l1,1 Clliluitt. 35. Barrcrc, p. 203.
Bianco Convccrls dle l'iiuL, l.

animal;

animal; but as soon as he tafles, or has a profpedC of tailing, ' 0 K
the intoxicating drauht, he becomes gay and frolicsome:. -
\hatever be the occasion, or pretext, on which the Americans
affcmble, the metting always. termninates in a dcbauch. Ma-
ny of tlhir fcftivals have no other objedt, and they welcome
the return of them with transports of joy. As they are not
accuiomiicd to reflrain any appetite, they fct no bounds to this.
The riot often continues without intermilTion fcvcr.il clays:
and whatever be the fatal cffects of their cxcefs, they ne-
-cr cease from drinkingas long as one drnp ofliquor remalins.
The persons of greatest eminence, the mofl diflinguifhed
warriors, and the c!icfs mofR renowned for their wiftiom, have
no more command of thl'mfclves than the most obscure mem-
lber of the community. Their eagcrnefs for present enjoyment
renders them blind to its fatal confe iuences; and thoee very men,
who, in other situations, seem to possess a force of mind more
than human, are in this inflance inferior to children in fore-
fight, as well as consideration, and mere slaves of brutal ap-
petite". When their pafions, naturally flrong, are height-
ened and inflamed by drink, they are guilty of the most e-
normeous outrages, and the fef'ivity seldom concludes with-
out deeds of violence, or bloodshed'.

BUT, ainidft this wild debauch, there is one circumflancc

remarkable ; the women, in most of the American tribes, are
not permited to pirt:kle of it . Thcir province is to prepare
the liquor, to f;. rve it about to the gucfis, and to take care of
their husbands and friends, when their rcafon is overpowered.

| '.L.',, 'z I.t'ol bro, \x c,1i.lc. iii . 3> . * I'-,.i, i .

. U lon, i. -..
'l.t',r . l.'i. ii. i 7S. 'l u i L'.; \ui, ,, j 1 . . . N ) ' 1 ''.

'1 Ilis;

B 0 0 K This exclusion of the women from an enjoyment so highly va-

IV.
Iv l«j tlued by savages, may be justly confidered as a mark of their

inferiority, and as an additional evidence of that contempt
with which they were treated in the New World. The peo-
ple of North America, when first discovered, were not ac-
quainted with any intoxicating drink; but as the Europeans
early found it their interest to supply them with spirituous li-
quors, drunkenness soon became as universal among them as
among their countrymen to the south; and their women
having acquired this new taste, indulge it with as little de-
cency and moderation as the men'.

Put to death IT were endless to enumerate all the detached cufloms
hne aged and
;iculable. which have excited the wonder of travellers in America; but

I cannot omit one seemingly as singular as any that has been
mentioned. When their parents and other relations become
old, or labour under any diflemper which their slender know-
ledge of the healing art cannot remove, they cut short their
days with a violent hand, in order to be relieved from the
burden of supporting and tending them. This pracicc pre-
vailed among the ruder tribes in every part of the continent,
from Hudson's Bay to the river De la Plata; and however
shocking it may be to those sentiments of tcndcrnefs and at-
tachment, which, in civilized life, we are apt to confider as
congenial with our frame, the condition of man in the savage
slate leads and reconciles him to it. The fame hardships and
difficulty of procuring subsistence, which dctcr savages, in tome
cafes, from rearing their children, prompt them to destroy the
aged and infirm. The declining fiate of the one is as hclplcfs

' -lut nril.lfun, l ill of Maffachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. 125. Sag:rt, 146.

as

as the infancy of the other. The former are no less unable ' )
than the latter to performn the funditiis thit btlong to a war- --
rior or hunter, or to endure those v:rious diftrcfles in which
fiv'ages arc io often involvcedl, hy !heir owCn wX:;lit of ifrefigJlit
and induflry. Their relations fecl tli ;; an:! iIc-.tioIe of at-
tending to the wants or weakleftics of u(tl!ers, thliir imlpntienc
under an additional burden proimpts tlcm to extin,;;ii' h it
lifewhich they find it dif' ult to fufiain. This is notregarclcd
as a deed of cruelty, but as an act of mercy. An American,
broken with years an: infirmiies, conscious that lie can no
longer dcpfrni on the aid of tliofe around him, places }liinmflf
contentcdly in his grave; and it is by the hands of his children
or nearest relations that the tlong is pulled, or the blow in-
flidced, which releases him for ever from tlhe sorrows of life"

IX. A FT ER contemplating the rude American tribes in such Ccnernl citi-

various liohts, after taking a view of their cufloms and nman- c,..,c.'.
ners from so many different fiations, nothing remains but to
form a general eflimate of their character, compared with that
of more polishcd nations. A human being, as he comes ori-
ginally from the hand of nature, is every where the fame.
At his first appearance in the slate of infancy, whether it be
among the rudefc favaegs, or in tle moIt civilized focicty, we
can difccrn no quality which marks any dtilincoion or fupe-
ri, rity. The capacity of improvement seems to be tle fame;
and the talents he may aftcrwar,'s acquire, as well as the vir-
tues lie may be rendered c;p ible of cxcrcifing, depcnd entirc-
ly upon the ftatc of focict) in wlihlic lie is placed. To this {late

u (C' ifrii llt. tie N. Rcv! no d Gran p 31,(, . 'ilo, p. 6. Elliia \oy. i91. Gu-
nilla, i. 3 33.

Vol,. 1. 3 F his

3 0,O K his mind naturally accommodates itself, and from it receives

V.
L---- its discipline and culture. In proportion to the wants which

it accufloms a human being to feel, and the funcions in
whic'i thcfe engage him, his intellectual powers are called
forth According to the conncdcions which it cfrabliflcs be-
tween him and the reft of his fpecics, the .ffcclions of his
heart are exerted. It is only by attending to this great prin-
ciple, that we can discover what is the character of man in
cvwry different period of his progress.

Intillcual IF we apply it to savage life, and measure the attainmenis of
pow\er. the human mind in that fiate by this flandard, we shall find,

according to an obfcrvation which I have already made, that
the intelleCtual powers of man must be extremely limited in
their operations. They are confined within the narrow sphere
of what he deems necessary for supplying his own wants.
VWhatever has not sone relation to there, neither attraCts his
attention, nor is the objeCt of his inquiries. But however nar-
row the Lounds may be within which the lnowlcdge of a fa-
vage is circumscribcd, he possesses thoroughly that finall por-
tion of it which le has attained. It was not communicated to
him by formal inflrui.ion; he does not attend to it as matter
of Inrec fpcculation andl curiosity; it is the rcfult of his own
obfcrviation, the fruit of his own experience, and accommodat-
ed to his condition and cxigencies. While employed in the ac-
tive occupations of war or hunting, lie often finds himself in
di2i;iult ndl pe)rilos situations, from which the cfforts of hlis
o'\vnI ;la icity muinf extricate him. IIc is fr(cucntly cngaged
ill mCilc lfltCS wlhlrc every flici depcn(ds upon his own ability to
decide, w; 11: c lie muf re-ly folcly up1on llis own pcnctratilon
to di rccirn llic (! tcr:o to whicl ie is cxpolfd, and upon his
o .'n wilfdo:, iln ol virOiLli; ; g'inft them.

As

As the talents of ind(ividuals are exerciecd and improved by l 0 ) K

such exertions, much political wisdom is faidt to be displaycd r.-v--
in eonduain' thle affairs of their finail communities. Thc l,,
council of old men in an American tribe, deliberating upon its
interefis, and determining with rcfpect to peace or war, has
been compare.! to the senate in more poli.hed republics. The
proceedings of t!l forler, we are told, are often no le's for-
inal and faciouso than tofe of t!he latter. Great political \ if-
dom is exhibited in

I pondering tih various mcafures propo'ed,

and in balancing, tlicir probable advantagcs,againfi thle evils of
wlhich they may be produCtive. Much address and eloqucnce
are enploy)cd by the leaders, who afpirc at accluiring such
confidence with their countrymen, as to have an afccndant in
those afTcmblies . But, ainong savage tribes, tlie field for dif-
playing political talents cmnnot be extensive. Where the idea
of private property is unknown, and no criminal jurifdislion
is eftablilhed, there is hardly any funCtion of internal govern-
ment to exercise. Where there is no commerce, and fearccly
any intercourse among separate tribes; where enmity is im-
placable, and hoflilities are carried on alnoflt wvitllhot intcr-
miflion; there will be few points of public concern to adjust
with their neighbours; and that department of tl)c;r aiflirs
which may be clenoninated foreign, cannot be so intiic.ite as
to requcire any refined policy in conducting it. Vlcre ind;vi-
duals are so thoughtlcfs and improvident ;:s feldo.i: Lo tllac cf-
feStlual prcc.tiuions for fclf-)rcfcriv.ition, it is vaill ;o expcctt
th:it public mncafurcs and deliberationi wvill be reiulated ,y
tihe c(cntcmpl.itin, n of remote events. It is the genius of sav 'uas
to ad1( from tile imlinulle of prcfcnt paflion. They have ncitlitr

l' v. . F'. ii. ii ') , , ;

3 F 2 forcfillt

B o o K foresight nor temper to form complicated arrangements with

IV.
v__ ~rcfped to their future conduct. The consultations of the Ame-

ricans, indeed, are so frequent, and their negociations are so
many ', and so long protracted, as to give their proceedings
an extraordinary afpeat of wisdom. But this is not owing so
much to the depth of their fchemcs, as to the coldness and
phletrgm of their temper, which render them flow in detcrmin-
ing'. If we except the celebrated league, that united the
Five Nations in Canada into a federal republic, which Ihall be
confidered in its proper place, we can difccrn few such traces
of political wifdoin, among the rude American tribes, as dif-
covers any great degree of foresight or extent of intellectual
abilities. Even among them, we shall find public measures
more frequently dirececd by the impetuous ferocity of their
youth, than regulated by the experience and Ywifdom of their
old men,
.):.(.csofar- As the condition of man in the favagc slate is unfavourable

iz.un to the prOzrcrfs of the undlcrfianding, it has a tcndency li!ec-

vwic, in some rcli-p-ls, to cllecc> tlle excrcilf of aflcetion, and
to render the e;iart contralcci. The firoilgct feeling in the
mind of a falvagec is a fcnfe oihlis own indcependence. IHe has
ficrif^cc( so f i :all a portion of his natural liberty by bccoming
a mrlc;nblc of fIcicty, that he remains, in a great degree, the
kl!c mn;icr of hlis own ati(lns :'. He often tle.cs his refolu-
tio)ns alone, witlhout co(l utin, or fccliwg aizv connecdion
w i']l tie pe-s) n ls !ro)llll ]li:n. Inl rm;illy o)f his operation., lie

slaHi ,s f;s

:;'ucli (lea(. l'ed roum '!ie reft ofl:is fi)rcics,as il lie liad

folin ld

i ') i!lli(,;i \' l lc . ( 'oi? io

ti)l lio)\\' little lie depends

,j): );1 )t!hir icl.n, lie is apt to vic'.v tl]c:n with a carlefs indlif-

: ce NO'' XC. XC I. C, .

. ' l. ii271.
I J'; .:lmZ. M i;i:L' d.* I,)S Chiicll it .3.

fcrcncc.

fcrcnce. Even the force of his mind contributes to increase C o o K
this unconcern, adl as he looks not beyond hirmelf in dclibe-
lating with refpct to the part which he should act, his folici-
tudc about the confequenccs of it Celdon extends farther. He
pursues his own career, and indulges his o\-n fancy, without
inquiring or regarding lwether whlat he does be agreeablle or
ofienfivc to others, whetlher tllcy may derive benefit, or receive
hurt from it. Hlencc the ungovcrnable caprice of flaagcs,
their impatience under any fpecics ofrcilr.tint, their inability
to fupp)rcfs or moderate any inclination, the feorn or neglet
witll which they receive advice, their high estimation ofthcm-
selves, and their contempt of othlr men. Among them, the
pride of independence produces alinoft the faime cff'cls with
intcreflcdncrs in a more advanced state of society, it refers
every thing to a man hiinfelf, and renders the gratification of
his own wiihes, the mcaflure and end of co.!uil.

To the fiaine caure may be imputed the hardners of heart, illir!liei -.r

and insensibility, remarkable in all fltvage nations. Their
minds, rouzed only by strong emotions, are little fufccitiblc
of gentle, delicate, or tender aflcdiions '. Their union is so
incomplete, that each individual ads as if he retained all his
natural rights entire and undi miniil ed. If a favour is con-
ferrcd nupon hii l, or a service performed for hlis htehof, lie

'Cc iv\c i!: x itlh IlcAl h (.ltisfai;ion, bcc:' us.e it con!riih-ltcs to

ii: lij )V n;icit; llt thlis f- ntiIelt exte;,ds not hbcondll limfellf
it texcitc= I)o (ri-le of ol)li;!tiOnll, lielC ithler f (ls T'rlitttl(c , nor
thinkls ('f nakin.a , anly return'. l'ven, alnong p, rIons the
7n1,it cL,(..ly (cnel.ccicd, there is little corciire llpndencl r cx-

I, 1,;l .l.
. I. iii 3o). L Oviu li,. lib. xvi. c. 2. Sce Nu l., ..l 'I.

e'lIal'i,1''

lB o0 Kr chlange oftthofe good oflicecs which flrengthcn attachmcnt, mol-
'-;v--» lify the heart, and fvceten the intercourfc of life. Their

hihl ilciua of indcpendelice nourish a fullcn reserve, w-hich
l;crps tllem at a difiance from each other. The nearest rela-
tions are mutually afraid to make any demand, or to solicit
any f rvice ', les it lfould be confidcred by the otiier as im-
pofind-, a burden, or laying a rcfiraiit upon his will.
lFrenfiLiii,. I i .XVE already marked the influence of this hard unfeel-

ing temper upon domestic life, with rcfpet to the conncelion
hbct\-ccn IIllfband and wife, as vecll as that between parents
and children. Its cffelts are no lets con picuous, in the pcr-
frinnl:ncc of tlofe mutual offices of tenderness lwhich the in-
firinities of our nature frequently exait. Among some tribes,
wvhcn any of their number are seizcd with a diftempcr, they
are generally abandoned by all around them, who, careless
of their rccovery,fly in the utmofi confiernation from the sup-
posed danger of infc-tion '. But even where they are not thus
defcrted, the cold indifference with which they are attended
can afford them little confulation. No look of sympathy, no
foot i ngexprelTions, no officious services contribute to alleviate
or to maike them forget their fufferingsr' Their nearest rela-
tions will often refuse to submit to the finallet inconveniency,
or to part with the Icait trifle, however much it may tend to
their accommoda;tion or relief-'. So little is the breast of a
savage furecptible of those fcntitncnts which prompt men to
that feelin- attention \hich mitigates diflrcss, that, in fomne
provinces of Anmclica, tlie Spaniards have found it nccefiary to

Dt l1 I (,, i' .

'i . 2 1 t lu '

I 1. C i(trineo lp luranori C'(lrilinn.

i. to0 :. 'I'tr'!C, ii. Io. I.o/-io,, 1( o. HIcicil, tlhe.. ;. iil, viii. c S. (ec. g. lib. iv.

c. . . l all. n.l';, i..li

l (1 1'.'.: , : , . iu lli, . 3
,. L.o-

'mo, i"o' . u ^ti.;:li. Ob i:, ,.'c. 1(. IJcric3i, (l.dc. -. lib. vii. c. .

inforce

inforce the common duties of humannity by positive laws, and o o
to oblige husbands and wives, parents and children, under fe-
vcre panalties, to take care of each other during their sickness .
The fame harshness oftemper is fill more conspicuous in their
treatment of the animal creation. Prior to their intcrcourfe
with the people of Euro}pe, the Northi-Anmericans had some
tame dogs, which accompanied tlcm in their hunting excur-
sions, and served them witli all the ardui r and fidelity pecu-
liar to their fpccics. But, inflead of tlhat fond attachment,
which the hunter naturally feels towards those ufcful conpa-
nions of his toils, they requite their fLrviccs with neglect,
seldom feed, and never caress them. In other provinces,
the Americans have become acquainted witli the domestic
animals of Europe, and avail themselves of their fcrvice ; but
it is universally obfcrved that they always treat them harlhly',:
and never employ any method either for breaking or ma-
naging them, but force and cruelty. In every part of the de-
portment of man in his savage itate, whether towards his
equals of the human fpccies, or towards the animals below
him, we recognize the fame charatcer, and tlacc the opera-
tions of a mind, intent on its own gratificalions, and regulat-
ed by its own caprice, without much attention or sensibility
to the sentiments and feelings of the beings around him.

A FT E R explaining how unfallvourble)l the savage iate is to Taciu:.;: .

lhe cultivation of tlhe uldclrfa nil li , and to tle improvement
of the heart, I ihoulld nit hatve thought it ncefr.r-y to men-
tion h!1;tt. l iv Ie dIeemed its Iclef-r dcfcc'is, if lie chlaratcr of

I Ci.;'l;', i lill d.' . p. 3,. rllF. iii.
p11. 337'

, c.. ':.i u''.l. .\ ii riciCal. 31 2.

n1 t ion-;

B o o K nations as well as individuals, were not often more diflinCly
.----' mnarked by circumflances apparently trivial, than by those of

greater moment. A savage, frequently, placed in situations of
danger and difirefs, depcnding on himfclf alone, and wrapt up
in his own thoughts and schemes, is a serious melancholy ani-
mal. His attention to others is small. The range of his own
ideas is narrow. Hence that taciturnity which is so disgust-
ing to men accustomed to the open intercourse of social con-
vcrEition. When not engaged in action, the Americans often
fit wvhole days in one poflure, without opening their lips
When they go forth to war, or to the chace, they usually
march in a line at some diflance from one another, and wi hout
exchanging a word. The fame profound silence is observed
when they row together in a conoe -. It is only when they
are animated by intoxicating liquors, or rouzed by the jollity
of the feflival and dance,that they become gay and converfible.
Cunlning. To the fame caufcs may be imputed the refined cunning

with which they form and execute their schemes. Men, who
are not habituated to a liberal communication of their own
sentiments and wishes, are apt to be so diflruflful, as to place
little confidence in others, and to have recourse to an insidious
craft, in accomplifiing their own purposes. In civilized life,
those pcrfons, who, by their situation, have but a few objets
ofpurfuit on which their minds inccflantly dwell,are moRi re-
imarl.able for low artifice in carrying on their little projecs.
Among favales, whose views arc equ-lly confined, and their
attention no less perfevcring, those circumfiances mufI operate
flill more piowerfully, and gradually accuflom them to a difin-

I \'oyagc e Ibouiuicr, . 02. mi Chlallcv. iii. 340

rgcnuous

genuous subtlety in all their tranCtdicions. The force of this is B Co K

IV.

increased by habits which they acquire in carrying on the two
moltintereiting operations wherein they are engaged. With them
war is a fyflem ofcraft, in which they trust for success tofira-
tagem more than to open force, and have their invention con-
tinually on the firetch to circumvent and surprise their ene-
mies. As hunters, it is their conflant obijed to cnfnarc, in or-
der that they may deflroy. 'Accordingly, art and cunning have
been universally obfurved as distinguishing charaderiftics of
all savages. The people of the rude tribes of Amcrica are re-
markable for their address and duplicity. Impenetrably secret
in forming their measures, they pursue them with a patient
undeviating attention, and there is no refinement of difflimu-
iation which they cannot employ, in order to insure their fuc-
cess. The natives of Peru were engaged above thirty years,
in concerting the plan of their infurredion, under the vice-
royalty of the marquis de Villa-Garcia, and though commu-
nicated to a great number of all different ranks, no indication
of it ever transpired during that long period ; no man betray-
ed his trust, or by an unguarded look, or raif word, gave
rife to any fufpiclon of what was intended ". The dinlniiula-
tion and craft of individuals is no less remarkable than that
of nations. When set upon deceiving, they wrap thcmfclves
up so artificially, that it is impoffiblc to penetrate into their
intentions, or to deted their designs ".

BUT if there be defecds or vices peculiar to the savage fiate, Virtues.
there arc, likewise, virtues which it infpircs, and good quali-

m Voyage de Ulloa, ii. 309 . Gumila, l.

i6. (harl. iii. 1o0.
VOL. I. 3 G tics

B 0 0 K tics, to the cxercitc of which it is friendly. The bonds of so-

,--.--... cicty fit so loose upon the members of the more: rude Am ric in
rfjlhit. tribes, thit they hardly feel any restraint. Hence the spirit of

independence, which is the pride of a savage, and which he
coiflders ;is the unalienable prerogative of man. Incapable
of controul, and disdaining to ackn wle e any superior, his
min:l, thoullh limited in its powers, and erring in m ny of
its pursuits, acquires such elevation by the confciou.ncfs of
its own freedom, that he alts on some occasions with aflo-
nilling force, and perseverance, and dignity.
Fortitude. As independence nourishes this high spirit among savages,

the perpetual wars in which they are engaged call it forth into
ation. Such long intervals of tranquillity as are frequent in
polishcd societies, are unknown in the savage slate, Their
enmities, as I have observed, arc implacable and immortal.
The valour of the youth is never allowed to rust in inaction.
The hatchet is always in their hand, either for attack or de-
fence. Even in their hunting excursions, they must be on
their gu rd againit surprise from the hostile tribes, by which
they are surrounded. Accuflomed to continual alarms, they
grow familar with danger, and courage becomes an habitual
virtue, resulting naturally from their situation, and flrength-
ened by conflant exertions. The mode of displaying fortitude
may not be the fame in finall and rude communities, as in
more powerful and civilized flates. Their fyflem of war, and
flandard of valour may be formed upon different principles,
but in no situation does the human mind rife more superior
to the sense of danger, or the dread of death, than in its moil
simple and uncultivated slate.

ANOTH-ER

AN oTllER virtue remarkable among savages, is attachment B 0 0 K
to the community of which they are members. From the na- t

Attachment-

ture of their political union, one might cxpect this tie to be to the.ir con-
extremely feeble. But there are circumfian:es which render ""ullity
the influence, even of their loose motie of association, very
powerful. The American tribes are finall ; combined against
tlheir neighbours, in prosecution of ancient enmities, or in
avenging recent injuries, their interests and operations are
neither numerous nor complex. The% are objects, which
the uncultivated underfianding of a ifvage can comprehend.
His heart is capable of forming conneEtions, which are so little
diffused. He assents with warmth to public meafurcs, dictated
by passions, similar to thocwhich influence his own conduct.
Ience the ardour with which individuals undertake the most
perilous service, when the community deems it necessary.
Hence their fierce and deep-rooted antipathy to the public
enemies. Hence their zeal for the honour of their tribe, and
that love of their country, which prompts them to brave dan-
ger that it may triumph, and to endure the moll exquisite
torments without a groan, that it may not be disgraced.

Ticus. in every situation where a human being can be placed, S ttitaciim
even the mofi unfavourable, there are virtuds that peculiarly ,, .i
belong to it; t!'ere are affections which it calls forth ; there is °'
a peccics of happincfs which it yields. Nature, wit moll bene-
scent intcntion,conciliates and forms the m'nd to itscolidition,
the ideasand wvifl cs , f man c tend noi be)'ond t.lhat ft.ite of so-
cicty to wvllicl lie is li hitu; ted. V h t it prc cnts as objteds
of conlcmlpl t:on or enjo. mcnt, fi'l and f..tisfy his mindcl, and
lie can ,hardly conceive any other niode of life to he uIlc:ifCint
or cvcn tolerable. The Tartar, acciufomcd to roam ovecr X :-

3 G 2 t,.nfivc

Bo r0 K tensive plains, and to fubfifl on the product of his herds, im-
---c---t precates upon hi. enemy, as the greatest of all curses, that he

may be condemned to reside in one place, and to be nouri.hed
with the top ofa weed. The rude Americans, fond of their
own pursuits, and satisfied with their own lot, are equally un-
able to comprehend the intention or utility of the various ac-
commodations, which, in more polished society, are deemed
cffTntial to the comfort of life. Far from complaining o^ their
own situation, or viewing that of men in a more irrproved
slate with admiration or envy, they regard themselves as the
standard of excellence, as beings the belt entitled, as well
as the moit perfelly qualified, to enjoy real happiness. Un-
acclufomed to any restraint upon their will or their ations,
they behold with amazement the inequality of rank, and the
subordination which take place in civilized life, and confider
the voluntary submission of one man to another, as a renun-
ciation, no less base than unaccountable, of the first diflindi-
on of humanity. Void of foresight, as well as free from care
themfelves,and delighted with that state of indolent security,
they wonder at the anxious precautions, the unceasing indus-
try, and complicated arangements of Europeans, in guarding
againfi diflant evils, or providing for future wants, and ex-
claim againfi their prepoflerous folly, in thus multiplying the
troubles, and increasing the labour of life o. This preference
of their own manners is conrpicuouson every occasion. Even
ihc nanies, by which the various nations wish to be diflin-
guifhed are atfumed from this idea of their own pre-eminence.
The appellation which the Iroquois give to themselves is, the
chitfof men r. Caraibc, the original name of the fierce inhabi-
o Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 308. Lahontan, ii. 97, p Colden, i. 3.

tants

tants of the windward islands, signifies the warlike peopleq. The B V0 !

IV.

Cherokee, from an idea of their own fupzrioritv, call the ,-^--
Europrans Notlbi7Ts, or the accurJfed race, and affunc them-
fc!vcs the name of The beloved people ,. The fame principle
regulated the notions of the Americans concerning the Euro-
pe:ns ; for although, at firfl,they were filled with astonishment
at their arts, and with dread of their power, they focn came to
abate their ctiimation of men, whose maxils of life were so
differcnt from their own. Hence tley called them the froth of
the fca, men without father or mother. They supposed, that
either they had no country of their own, and therefore invad-
ed that which belonged to others ; or, that, being deflitutc
of the necessaries of life at home, they were obliged to roam
over the ocean, in order to rob such as were more amply
provided.

M'IE!i, thus satisfied with their condition, are far from any in-
clination to relinquish theirown habits, or to adopt those ofci-
vilized life. The transition is too violent to be suddenly made.
Even where endeavours hive been used to wean a savage
from his own culloms, and to render the accommod.itions of
polished society familiar to him; even where he has been al-
lowed to taste of those pleafures,and has been honoured with
those diftindions, which are the chief obje ls of our delirc,
he droops and languilhes under the refiraint of laws and
forms, he seizes the firfi opportunity of brea' ing loose from
them, and returns with transport to the forefl or the wild,
where lie c.n enjoy a carelc s and uncontrouled freedom t.

q Rochefoit Ilil. des Antil'es, 4-5. Adair, I-lil. of Aumer Indiln,

p. 32. s Bcnzon. -liil. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21. t Clailiv.
N. Fr. iii. 322.

TliL u

B 0 0 K THUs I have finished a laborious delineation of the characer

IV.
_ _vc- and manners of the uncivilized tribes scattered over the vast

continent of America. In this, I aspire not at rivalling the
great masters who have painted and adorned savage life,either
in boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty of their co-
louring. 1 am satisfied with the more humble merit of having
perfifled with patient indufiry, in viewing my subjet in many
vorious lights, and in collecting from the most accurate ob-
servers such detached and often minute features, as might
enable me to exhibit a portrait that resembles the original.

General cau- BE SO R E I close this part of my work, one observation more
tion ith e- is necessary, in order to juflify the conclusions which I have
fpea. to ihis
inquiry. formed, or to prevent the mistakes into which such as examine

them may fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a country
fowidely extended as America, great attention should be paid
to the diversity of climates under which they are placed. The
influence of this I have pointed out with refped to several im-
portant particulars, which have been the objec of research;
but even where it has not been mentioned,it ought not to be
overlooked. The provinces of America are of such different
temperament, that this alone is sufficient to conflitute a dif-
tindion between their inhabitants. In every part of the earth
where man exifls, the powtr of climate operates, with decisive
influence, upon his condition and charaaer. In those coun-
tries which approach nearer to the extremes of heat or cold,
this influence is so conspicuous as to firike every eye. Whether
we confider man merely as an animal, or as a being endowed
with ration:l powers, which fit him for ativity and fpcculi-
tion, we flall find that he has uniformly attained the grcatcft

pcrfedion

perfection of which his nature is capable, in the temperate D C0 K
regions of the globe. There his conflitution is woft vigorous,
his organs molt acute, and his form moCf beautiful. There,
too, lie pofleffes a superior extent of capacity, greater fertility
of imagination, more enterprising courage, and a sensibility of
heart which gives birth to passions, not only ardent, but pcr-
fevering. In this favourite situation he has displaycd the ut-
mol cfflorts of his genius, inlitcrature, in policy, inco:nrnerce,
in war, and in all the arts which improve or cmbclliih life u.

TiiIS powerful operation of climate is felt most fenfiblyby

rude nations, and produces greater effcdis than in societies
more highly polished. The talents of civilized men are con-
tinually exeited in rendering their condition more comfort-
able and by their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a
great measure, supply the defeEts, and guard against the in-
conveniencies of any climate. But the improvident savage is
affected by every circumstance peculiar to his situation. He
takes no precaution either to mitigate or to improve it. Like
a plant, or an animal, he is formed by the climate under
which he is placed, and feels the full force of its influence.

IN surveying the rude nations of America, this natural dif-

tindion between the inhabitans of the temperate and torrid
zones is very remarkable. They may, accordingly, be divided
into two great classes. The one comprehends all the North-
Americans, from the river St. Laurence to the Gulf of Mex-

u Dr. Fcrgufon's Eflay on the Hist. of Civil Society, part iii. c. i,

ico,

B 0 0 K ico, together with the people of Chili, and a few small tribes

IV. a__-- towards the extremity of the southern continent. To the other

belong all the inhabitants of the islands, and tliofe fettled in
the various provinces which extend from the ifihmus of Da-
rien almost to the southern confines of Brasil, along the east
fide of the Andes. In the former, the human species appears
manifcfily to be more perfect. The natives are more robust,
more active, more intelligent, and more courageous. They
pofTefs, in the most eminent degree, that force of mind, and
love of independence, which I have pointed out as the chief
virtues of man in his savage slate. Tley have defended their
liberty with persevering fortitude against the Europeans who
subdued the other rude nations of America with the greatest
ease. The natives of the temperate zone are the only people in
the NewWorld whoare indebted for their freedom to theirown
valour. The N. Americans, though long encompassed by three
formidable European powers, still retain part of their original
poffefions, and continue to exist as independent nations. The
people of Chili, though early invaded, frill maintain a gallant
contest with the Spaniards, and have set bounds to their en-
croachments; whereas, in the warmer regions, men are more
feeble in theirframe, less vigorous in the efforts oftheir mind,
of a gentle but daflardly spirit, more enslaved by pleafureand
funk in indolence. Accordingly, it is inthetorrid zonethat the
Europeans have mofl completely cftablifhcd their dominion
over America; the mofi fertile anddefirableprovinces in it arc
fulhjc-lcd to their yoke; and if fevcral tribes there fiill enjoy
independence, it is either bccaufe they have never been attack-
ed by an cenemy already satiatcd with conqucfl, and poffeflcd
of largcr territories than he was able to occupy,or because they

have

have been saved from oppression by their remote and inacccf- r Co0 K
fible situation.

CONSPICUOUS as this difiinclion may appear bctwccn the

inhabitants of those direrent regions, it is not, however, uni-
versal. Moral and political causes, as I have foriierly obferv-
ed, affcst the difpolition and character of individuals as well
as nations, flill more powerfully than the influence of climate.
There are, accordingly, some tribes, in various parts of the tor-
rid zone, posSessed of courage, high spirit, and the love of in-
dependence, in a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more
temperate climates. We are too little acquainted with the
hifiory of those people, to be able to trace the fcvcral cir-
cumftances in their progress and situation, to which tley are
indebted for this remarkable pre-eminence. The fact, ne-
verthelefs, is certain. As early as the sir2s voyage of Colum-
bus, he received information that several of the islands were
inhabited by the Caribbees, a fierce race of men, nonwife refem-
bling their feeble and timid neighbours. In his second expe-
dition to the New World, he found this information to bejuft,
and was himself a witness of their intrepid valour '. The fame
character they have maintained invariably in all fubfcquent
contefis with the people of our continent ; and, even in our
own times, we have fecn them make a gallant fland in defence
of the last territory which the rapacity of the Europeans had
left in their poffeflion '. Some nations in Brasil were no less
eminent for vigour of mind, and bravery in war:. The pco-

. Iili of Columbus, c. 47, 4S. Sce NOTE XCI'I. Y Rocliefort I-lft.
des Artiillc,, 531. z Sec NOTE XCIV. ' Lei y np De Bry, iii. 207, &c.

VoJ,. . 3 H ple

B ° v K pie of the ifihmus of Darien boldly met the Spaniards in the

,-. _ field, and frequently repelled those formidable invaders b.

Other initances might be produced. It is not by attending to
any tingle cause or principle, however powerful and extensive
its influence may appear, that we can explain the actions, or
account for the character, of men. Even the law of climate,
more universal, perhaps, in its operation than any that affecs
the human species, cannot be applied, in judging of their
conduct, without many exceptions.

b Herreia, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15, &c.; dec. z. pafimn.

NOTES

N O T E S
LLUSTANDN S

HLLUSTRATIONS.
3H a

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 7.

TYRE was situated at such a distance from the Arabian Gulf or
Red Sea, as made it impossible to convey commodities from thence to
that city by land-carriage. This induced the Phenicians to render
themselves masters of Rhinocrura, or Rbinocohtrla, the nearest port in
the Mediterranean to the Red Sea. They landed the cargoes which
they purchased in Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at Elath, the safest
harbour in the Red Sea towards the north. Thence they were carried
by land to Rhinocolura, the distance not being very considerable; and
being refhipped in that port, were transported to Tyre, and difsri-
buted over the world. Strabon. Georgr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p. II28.
Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. Hiitor. Edit. Weffelingi, lib, i. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. Io.

THE Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic monument of the Car-
thaginian {kill in naval affairs, and one of the moil curious frag-
ments tranfinitted to us by antiquity. The learned and industrious
Mr. Dodwell, in a dissertation prefixed to the Periplus of Hanno, in
the edition of the Minor Geographers published at Oxford, endea-
vours to prove that this is a spurious work, the composition of ofme

Greck,

Greek, who affumedHanno's name. But M. de Montesquieu, in his
l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de Bougainville, in a differ-
tation published tom. xxvi. of the Memoires de l'Acadenme des Ii-
scriptions, &c. have established its authenticity by arguments which to
me appear unanswerable. Ramufio has accompanied his translation
of this curious voyage with a dissertation tending to illustrate it.
Racolte de Viaggi, vol. i. p. z12. M. de BDugainville has, with
great learning and ability, treated the fmre fubjeats. It appears
that Hanno, acccording to the mode of ancient navigation, undertook
this voyage in small vessels, To constructed thathe could keep close in
with the coast. He failed from Gades to the island of Cerne in twelve
days. This is probably what is known to the moderns by the name
of the Isle of Arguim. It became the chief flation of the Carthagi-
nians on that coast; and M. de Bougainville contends, that the cif-
terns found there are monuments of the Carthaginian power and in-
genuity. Proceeding from Cerne, and still following the winding of
the coast, he arrived, in seventeen days, at a promontory which he
called 7ITe [Yeft Horn, probably Cape Palmas. From this he ad-
vanced to another promontory, which he named The South Horn, and
which is manifestly Cape de Tres Puntas, about five degrees north of
the line. All the circumstances contained in the short abftraft of his
journal, which is handed down to us, concerning the appearance and
state of the countries on the coast of Africa, are confirmed and
illustrated by a comparison with the accounts of modern navigators.
Even those circumstances, which, from their teeming improbability,
have been produced to invalidate the credibility of his relation, tend
to confirm it. He observes, that in the country to the south of Cerne,
a profound silence reigned through the day; but during the night, in-
numerable fires were kindled along the banks of the rivers, and the
air resounded with the noise of pipes and drums, and cries of
joy. The fame thing, as Ramufio observes, still takes place. The
excellive heat obligee the negroes to take shelter in the woods, or in
their houfcs, during the day. As soon as the fun sets, they sally out,
and by torch-light enjoy the pleasure of music and dancing, in which

they

they spend the night. Ramus. i. 1 3, F. In another place, he men-
tions the lea as burning with torrents of fire. What occurred to M.
Adanfon, on the fame coast, may explain this. " As soon," fays
he, " as the fun dipped beneath the horizon, and night overspread
the earth with darkness, the lea lent us its friendly light. While the
prow of our vessel ploughed the foaming surges, it seemed to set them
all on fire. Thus we failed in a luminous inclofure, which surrounded
us like a large circle of rays, from whence darted in the wake of the
ship a long stream of light." Voy. to Senegal, p. 176.

NOTE III. p. I.

Lo N G after the navigation of the Phenicians and of Eudoxus round
Africa, Polybius, the most intelligent and best informed historian of
antiquity, affirms, that it was not known, in his time, whether Africa
M as a continued continent, firetching to the south, or whether it was
encompassed by the sea. Polybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny the naturalist asserts,
that there can be no communication between the southern and northern
temperate zones. Plinii Hist. Natur.Edit. in ufum Delph. 4to, lib. ii. c.
68. If they had given full credit to the accounts of those voyages,
the former could not have entertained such a doubt, the latter could
not have delivered such an opinion. Strabo mentions the voyage of
Eudoxus, but treats it as a fabulous tale, lib. ii. p. I55.; and, ac-
cording to his account, no other judgment can be formed with refpe&t
to it. Strabo seems not to have known any thing with certainty con-
cerning the form and slate of the southern parts of Africa. Geogr. lib.
xvii. p. i i80. Ptolemy, the most inquisitive and learned of all the
ancient geographers, was equally unacquainted with any part of Afri-
ca situated a few degrees beyond the equinoftial line; for he supposes
that this great continent was not surrounded by the sea, but that it
firetched, without interruption, towards the south pole: and he so
far mistakes its true figure, that he describes the continent as becom-
ing broader and broader as it advanced towards the south. Ptolomei
Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9. Blietii Parlallela Geogr. veteris et novae, p. 86.

NOTE

N O T E IV. p. I6.

A FACT, recorded by Strabo, affords a very strong and singular
proof of the ignorance of the ancients with refpe to the situation of
the various parts of the earth. When Alexander marched along the
banks of theHydafpes and Acefine, two of the rivers which fall into
the Indus, he observed that there were many crocodiles in those rivers,
and that the country produced beans of the fame species with tlofe
which were common.in Egypt. From these circumstances, he con-
cluded that he had discovered the source of the Nile, and prepared a
fleet to fail down the Hydafpes to Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p.
1ozo. This amazing error did not arise from any ignorance of geo-
graphy peculiar to that monarch; for we are informed by Strabo,
that Alexander applied with particular attention in order to acquire the
knowledge of this science, and had accurate maps or defcLiptions of
the countries through which he marched. Lib. ii. p. 2o But in his
age, the knowledge of the Greeks did not extend beyond the limits
of the Mediterranean.

NOTE V. p. 7.

A S the flux and reflux of the Tea is remarkably great at the mouth
of the river Indus, this would render the phenomenon more formidable
to the Greeks. Varen. Geogr. vol. i. p. 251.

NOTE VI. p. 20.

IT is probable that they were seldom induced to advance so far,
cither by motives of cuiiofity, or views of commercial advantage.
In consequence of this, the idea of the ancients concerning the position
of that great river was very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch
of the Ganges which he diltinguifhlcs by the name of the Gieat Mcuth,
in the Hundred and forty-fixth degree of longitude from I is fift'l me-
ridian in the Fortunate islands. But its true longitude, computed

si om

from that meridian, is now determined by astronomical observations
to be only a hundred and five degrees. A geographer so eminent
mutll have been betrayed into an error of this magnitude by the
imperfeEtion of the information which he had received concerning
those distant regions; and this affords a firiking proof of the inter-
course with them being extremely rare. With refpef to the coun-
tries of India beyond the Ganges, his intelligence was still more de-
fetive, and his errors more enormous. I shall have occasion to ob-
serve in another place, that he has placed the country of the Seres, or
China, no less than sixty degrees farther east than its true position.
M. d'Anville, one of the most learned and inquisitive of the modern
geographers, has set this matter in a clear light, in two dissertations
published in Mem. de l'Academ. des Infcript. &c. tom. xxxii. p. 573.
604.

NOTE VII. p. 20.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients were made
chiefly by land; those of the moderns are made chiefly by sea. The
progress of conquest led to the former, that of commerce to the latter.
It is a judicious observation of Strabo, that the conquests of Alexander
the Great made known the East, those of the Romans opened theWeft,
and those of Mithridates king of Pontus the North. Lib. i. p. 26.
When discovery is carried on by land alone, its progress must be flow,
and its operations confined. When it is carried on only by sea, its
sphere may be more extensive, and its advances more rapid; but it
labours under peculiar defe&s. Though it may make known the
position of different countries, and ascertain their boundaries as far as
there are determined by the ocean, it leaves us in ignorance with re-
fpeE to their interior slate. Above two centuries and a half have
elapsed since the Europeans failed round the southern promontory of
Africa, and have traded in most of its ports; but, in a considerable
part of that great continent, they have done little more than survey its
coasts, and mark its capes and harbours. Its interior regions are in a

VOL. I. 3 I greal

great meafilre unknown. The ancients, who had a very imperfect
knowledge of its coasts, except where they are washed by the Medi-
terranean or Red Sea, were accustomed to penetrate into its inland
provinces, and, if we may rely on the testimony of Herodotus and
Diodorus Siculus, had explored many parts of it now altogether un-
known. Unless both modes of discovery be united, the geographical
knowledge of the earth must remain incomplete and inaccurate.

NOTE. VIII. p 23.

TH E notion of the ancients concerning such an excessive degree of
heat in the torrid zone, as rendered it uninhabitable, and their
persisting in this error long after they began to have some commercial
intercourse with several parts of India lying within the tropics, must
appear so singular and absurd, that it may not be unacceptable to some
of my readers to produce evidence of their holding this opinion, and
to account for the apparent inconsistence of their theory with their
experience. Cicero, who had bestowed attention upon every part of
philosophy known to the ancients, seems to have believed that the
torrid zone was uninhabitable, and, of consequence, that there could
be no intercourse between the northern and southern temperate zones.
He introduces Africanus thus addressing the younger Scipio: " You
fee this earth encompassed and bound in by certain girdles, of which,
two, at the greatest distance from each other, and sustaining the op-
pofite poles of heaven, are frozen with perpetual cold; the middle
one, and the largest of all, is burnt with the heat of the fun; two are
habitable, the people in the southern one are antipodes to us, with
whom we have no connection." Somnium Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a
Greek philosopher, contemporary with Cicero, delivers the fame doc-
trine, not in a popular work, but in his Ew, ( a, ,,ivLoula,r, a treatise
purely scientific. " When we speak," fays he, " of the southern
temperate zone, and its inhabitants, and concerning those who are
called antipodes, it must be always understood, that we have no cer-
tain knowledge or information concerning the southern temperate zone,

whether

whether it be inhabited or not. But from the spherical figure of the
earth, and the course which the fun holds between the tropics, we
conclude that there is another zone, situated to the south, which en-
joys the fame degree of temperature with the northern one which we
inhabit." Cap. xiii. p. 31. ap. Petavii Opus de Doctr. Tempor. in
quo Uranologium five Syftemata var. AuEtorum. Amft. I705.
vol. iii. The opinion of Pliny the naturalist, with refpedt to both
these points, was the fame: " There are five divisions of the earth,
which are called zones. All that portion which lies near to the two
opposite poles is oppressed with vehement cold, and eternal frost.
There, unbleit with the asped of milder stars, perpetual darkness
reigns, or at the utmost a feeble light refleced from surrounding
snows. The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the fun, is
scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery vapour. Between there
torrid and frozen diftriC-s lie two other portions of the earth, which
are temperate; but, on account of the burning region interposed,
there can be no communication between them. Thus Heaven has
deprived us of three parts of the earth." Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo de-
livers his opinion to the fame effect, in terms no less explicit: " The
portion of the earth which lies near the equator, in the torrid zone,
is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib. ii. p. i54. To there I
might add the authority of many other refpeatable philosophers and
historians of antiquity.

IN order to explain the sense in which this dotrine was generally

received, we may observe, that Parmenides, as we are informed by
Strabo, was the first who divided the earth into five zones, and he ex-
tended the limits of the zone, which he supposed to be uninhabitable
on account of heat, beyond the tropics. Ariffotle, as we learn like-
wife from Strabo, fixed the boundaries of the different zones in the
fame manner as they are defined by modern geographers. But the
progress of discovery having gradually demonfirated that several re-
gions of the earth which lay within the tropics were not only habitable,
but populous and fertile, this induced later geographers to circum-

3 I 2 scribe

scribe the limits of the torrid zone. It is not easy to ascertain with
precision the boundaries which they allotted to it. From a paflage in
Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only author of antiquity from
whom we receive any hint concerning this subjet, I should conjecture,
that those who calculated according to the measurement of the earth
by Eratosthenes, supposed the torrid zone to comprehend near sixteen
degrees. about eight on each fide of the equator; whereas such as
followed the computation of Pofidonius allotted about twenty-four
degrees, or somewhat more than twelve degrees on each fide of the
equator to the torrid zone. Strabo, lib. ii. p. iS5. According to
the former opinion, about two thirds of that portion of the earth which
lies between the tropics was confidered as habitable; according to the
latter, about one half of it. With this reftrition, the doctrine of the
ancients concerning the torrid zone appears less absurd; and we can
conceive the reason of their asserting this zone to be uninhabitable,
even after they had opened a communication with several places within
the tropics. When men of science spoke of the torrid zone, they confi-
dered it as it was limited by the definition of geographers to sixteen,
or at the utmost to twenty-four degrees; and as they knew almost
nothing of the countries nearer to the equator, they might flill suppose
them to be uninhabitable. In loose and popular discourse, the
name of the torrid zone continued to be given to all that portion of
the earth which lies within the tropics. Cicero seems to have been
unacquainted with the ideas of later geographers, and according to
the division of Parmenides, describes the torrid zone as the largest of
the five. Some of the ancients rejeEted the notion concerning the in-
tolerable heat of the torrid zone as a popular error. This, we are
told by Plutarch, was the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we learn from
Strabo, that Eratosthenes and Polybius had adopted the fame opi-
nion, lib. ii. 154. Ptolemy seems to have paid no regard to the an-
cient doctrine and opinions concerning the torrid zone.

NOTE

NOTE IX. p. 42.

TH E court of inquisition, which effecually checks a spirit of liberal
inquiry, and of literary improvement, wherever it is established,
was first introduced into Portugal by John III. who began his reign,
A. D. I52r.

NOTE X. . 49.

AN instance of this is related by Hackluyt, upon the authority of
the Portuguese historian Garcia de Refende. Some English mer-
chants having resolved to open a trade with the coast of Guinea,
John II. of Portugal dispatched ambassadors to Edward IV. in order
to lay lay before him the right which he had acquired by the Pope's bull
to the dominion of that country, and to request of him to prohibit
his fubjeas to prosecute their intended voyage. Edward was so much
satisfied with the exclusive title of the Portuguese, that he issued his
orders in the terms which they desired. Hackluyt, Navigations,
Voyages, and Traffics of the English, vol. ii. part ii. p. 2.

NOTE XI. p. 59.

THE time of Columbus's birth may be nearly ascertained by the
following circumstances. It appears from the fragment of a letter,
addressed by him to Ferdinand and Isabella, A. D. i5or, that he
had, at that time, been engaged forty years in a sea-faring life. In
another letter, he informs them, that he went to sea at the age of
fourteen; from those faCts it follows, that he was born A. D. 1447.
Life of Christ. Columbus, by his son Don Ferdinand. Churchill's
Collection of Voyages, vol. ii. p. 484, 485.

NOTE

NOTE XII. p. 65.

TH E spherical figure of the earth was known to the ancient geo-
graphers. They invented the method, fiill in use, of computing the
longitude and latitude of different places. According to their doc-
trine, the equator or imaginary line which encompasses the earth con-
tained three hundred and sixty degrees; these they divided into twen-
ty-fourparts, or hours, each equal to fifteen degrees. The country of
the Seres or Sine, being the farthest part of India known to the ancients,
was supposed, by Marinus Tyrius, the mofi eminent of the ancient
geographers before Ptolemy, to be fifteen hours, or two hundred
and twenty-five degrees to the east of the first meridian, pafling through
the Fortunate Islands. Ptolomaei Geogr. lib; i. c. I I. If this fuppo-
fition was well-founded, the country of the Seres, or China, was
unly nine hours, or one hundred and thirty-five degrees weft from the
Fortunate, or Canary Islands; and the navigation, in that direction,
was much shorter than by the course which the Portugueze were pur-
suing. Marco Polo, in his travels, had described countries, particu-
larly the Island of Cipango or Zipangri, supposed to be Japan, confi-
derably to the east of any part of Asia, known to the ancients. Marcus
Paulus de Region. Oriental. lib. ii. c. 70. lib. iii. c. 2. Of course, this
country, as it extended further to the east, was still nearer to the Canary
islands. The conclusions of Columbus, though drawn from inaccurate
observations, werejult. If the suppositions of Marinus had been well
founded, and if the countries, which Marco Polo visited, had been
situated to the east of those whose longitude Marinus had ascertained,
the proper and nearest course to the East Indies must have been to
fleer directly weft. Herrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 2. A more exten-
five knowledge of the globe has now discovered the great error of
Marinus, in supposing China to be fifteen hours, or two hundred
and twenty-five degrees east from the Canary Islands, and that even
Ptolemy was mistaken, when he reduced the longitude of China to
twelve hours, or one hundred and eighty degrees. The longitude

of

of the western frontier of that vail empire is seven hours, or one
hundred and fifteen degrees from the meridian of the Canary Islands.
But Columbus followed the light, which his age afforded, and relied
upon the authority of writers, who were, at that time, regarded as
the inftrutors and guides of mankind in the science of geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 86.

As the Portugueze, in making their discoveries, did not depart
far from the coast of Africa, they concluded that birds, whose
flight they observed with great attention, did not venture to any con-
fiderable distance from land. In the infancy of navigation, it was
not known, that birds often stretch their flight at an immense dif-
tance from any land. In failing towards the Weft-Indian islands,
birds are often seen at the distance of two hundred leagues from any
land. Sloane's Nat. Hist. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30. Catefby saw
an owl at sea, when the ship was fix hundred leagues distant from
land. Nat. Hist. of Carolina, pref. p. 7. Hist. Naturelle de M. de
Buffon, tom. xvi. p. 32. From which it appears, that this indica-
tion of land, on which Columbus seems to have relied with some con--
fidence, was extremely uncertain.

NOTE XIV. p. 96.

IN a letter of the admiral's to Ferdinand and Isabella, he describes
one of the harbours in Cuba, with all the enthusiastic admiration of a
discoverer.- " 1 discovered a river which a galley might easily en-
ter; the beauty of it induced me to found, and I found from five to
eight fathoms of water. Having proceeded a considerable way up
the river, every thing invited me to fettle there. The beauty of the
river, the clearness of the water through which I could fee the sandy
bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of different kinds, the tallest
and finest I had seen, and an infinite number of other large and flou-
riffing trees, the birds, and the verdure of the plains, are so wonder-

fully

fully beautiful, that this country excels all others as far as the
day surpasses the night in brightness and splendour, so that I often
said, that it would be in vain for me to attempt to give your high-
neffes a full account of it, for neither my tongue nor my pen could
come up to the truth, and indeed I am so much amazed at the fight of
such beauty, that I know not how to describe it." Life of Columb.
c. 30,

NOTE XV. p. Ioo.

THE account which Columbus gives of the humanity and orderly
behaviour of the natives on this occasion is very striking. " The
king (fayshe, in a letter to Ferdinand and Isabella) having been in-
formed of our misfortune, exprefied great grief for our loss, and
immediately sent aboard all the people in the place in many large
canoes; we soon unloaded the ship of every thing that was upon
deck, as the king gave us great assistance, he himself, with his bro-
thers and relations, took all possible care, that every thing ihould
be properly done both aboard and on shore. And, from time to
time, he sent some of his relations weeping, to beg of me not to
be dejeEted, for he would give me all that he had. I can assure your
highnesses, that there would not have been so much care taken in
securing our effeEts in any part of Spain, as all our property was put
together in one place near his palace, until the houses which he wanted
to prepare for the custody of it were emptied. He immediately
placed a guard of armed men, who watched during the whole night,
and those on shore lamented as if they had been much intereited in
our loss. The people are so affectionate, so tracable, and so peace-
able, that I swear to your highnesses, that there is not a better race
of men, nor a better country in the world. They love their neigh-
bour as themselves; their conversation is the f v eeteft and mildest in
the world, cheerful, and always accompanied with a smile. And
although it is true that they go naked, yet your highnesses may be
assured that they have many very commendable customs; the king is

served

served with great itate, and his behaviour is so decent, that it is
pleasant to fee him, as it is likewise to observe the wonderful memory
which these people have, and their desire of knowing every thing,
which leads them to inquire into its causes and effecs. Life of Co-
lumbus, c. 32. It is probable that the Spaniards were indebted for
this officious attention, to the opinion which the Indians entertained
of them as a superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI. p. Io6.

EVERY monument of such a man as Columbus is valuable. A
letter which he wrote to Ferdinand and Isabella, describing what
paled on this occasion, exhibits a most striking piture of his intre-
pidity, his humanity, his prudence, his public spirit, and courtly
address. " I would have been less concerned for this misfortune,
had I alone been in danger, both because my life is a debt that I owe
to the Supreme Creator, and because I have at other times been ex-
posed to the most imminent hazard. But what gave me infinite
grief and vexation was, that after it had pleated our Lord to give
me faith to undertake this enterprize, in which I had now been so
successful, that my opponent would have been convinced, and the
glory of your highnefles, and the extent of your territory increased
by me; it ihould please the Divine Majesty to flop all by my
death. All this would have been more tolerable, had it not been
attended with the loss of those men whom I had carried with me,
upon promise of the greatest prosperity, who feeing themselves in
such diflrefs, cursed not only their coming along with me, but that
fear and awe for me, which prevented them from returning as they
often had resolved to have done. But besides all this, my lbrrow was
greatly increased, by recolleAing that I had left my two sons at
school at Cordova, destitute of friends, in a foreign country, when
it could not in all probability be known that I had done such services
as might induce your highnesses to remember them. And though I
comforted myself with the faith that our Lord would not permit that

VOL. I. 3 K \which

which tended so much to the glory of his church, and which I had
brought about with so much trouble, to remain imperfedt, yet I con-
fidered.that, on account of my fins, it was his will to deprive me
of that glory, which I might have attained in this world. While in
this confured state, I thought on the good fortune which accompanies
your highnesses, and imagined, that although I should perish, and
the vessel be loft, it was poflible that you might somehow come to
the knowledge of my voyage, and the success with which it was at-
tended. For that reason I wrote upon parchment with the brevity
which the situation required, that I had discovered the lands which
I promised, in how many days Ihad done it, and what course I had
followed. I mentioned the goodness of the country, the character of
the inhabitants, and that your highnesses subjects were left in pof-
feflion of all that I had discovered. Having fealed this writing, I
addressed it to your highnesses, and promised a thousand ducats to
any person who should deliver it fealed, so that if any foreigners
found it, the promised reward might prevail on them not to give
the information to another. I then caused a great cask to be brought
to me, and wrapping up the parchment in an oiled cloth, and afterwards
in a cake of wax, I put it into the cask, and having ftopt it well, I
cast it into the sea. All the men believed that it was some a(t of de-
votion. Imagining that this might never chance to be taken up, as
the ships approached nearer to Spain, I made another packet like the
first, and placed it at the top of the poop, so that if the ship funk,
the cask remaining above water might be commited tu the guidance of
fortune."

NOTE XVII. p. io.

SOME Spanilh authors, with the meanness of national jealousy,
have endeavoured to detrac from the glory of Columbus, by infinu-
ating that he was led to the discovery of the New World, not by
his own inventive, or enterprising genius, but by information which
he had received. According to their account, a vessel having been

driven

driven from its course by easterly winds was carried before them far
to the weft, and landed on the coast of an unknown country, from
which it returned with difficulty ; the pilot, and three tailors, being
the only persons of the crew that survived the distresses which they
suffered, from want of provisions and fatigue in this long voyage.
In a few days after their arrival, all the four died, but the pilot
having been received into the house of Columbus, his intimate friend,
disclosed to him, before his death, the secret of the discovery which
he had accidentally made, and left him his papers containing a jour-
nal of the voyage, which served as a guide to Columbus in his
undertaking. Gomara, as far as I know, is the first author who
published this story, Hist. c. 13. Every circumstance is dcftitute of
evidence to support it. Neither the name of the vessel nor its deftina-
tion is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one of the sea-port
towns in Andalusia, and was failing either to the Canaries, or to Ma-
deira; others, that it was a Biicayner in its way to England; others
a Portuguese ship trading on the coast of Guinea. The name of the
pilot is alike unknown, as well as that of the port in which he landed
on his return. According to some, it was in Portugal; accord-
ing to others, in Madeira, or the Azores. The year in which
this voyage was made is no less uncertain. Monfon's Nav. Tradts.
Churchill, iii. 371. No mention is made of this pilot, or his disco-
veries, by And. Bernaldes, or Pet. Martyr, the contemporaries of
Columbus. Herrera, with his usual judgment, passes over it in
silence. Oviedo takes notice of this report, but confiders it as a tale
fit only to amufc the vulgar. Hist. lib. ii. c. 2. As Columbus held
his course diredly weft from the Canaries, and never varied it, rome
later authors have fuppoled, that this uniformity is a proof of his
being guided by some previous information. But they do not recol-
let the principles on which he founded all his hopes of ficcefs, that
by holding a weflcrly course, he mull certainly arrive at those re-
gions of the east described by the antients. His firm belief of his
own si flem led him to take that course, and to pursue it without de-
viation.

3 K 2 OTHI.r

OTHER nations beside the Spaniards have called in question Co-
lumbus's claim to the honour of having discovered America. Some
German authors ascribe it to Martin Behaim, whom they suppose to
be their countryman. But they mention neither the year in which he
made the discovery, nor the place from which he failed, nor one cir-
cumftance of the voyage. Jo. Frid. Stuvenius, in a Dissertation de
vero Novi Orbis Inventore, published at Francfort in the year I714,
warmly aflerts the title of Behaim, but without producing in confirma-
tion of it, any thing that has even the shadow of evidence. There
was indeed a Martin de Boemia, a noted cosmographer in the fifteenth
century, whom Herrera mentions as a friend to Columbus, dec. i.
lib. i. c. 2. but he assures us that he was a Portuguese, and born in
the island of Fayal, one of the Azores. Ibid. and dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19.
Gomara informs us, that Magellan was poffefied of a terrestrial globe,
made by this Martin de Boemia, on which he demonstrated the course
he purposed to hold, in searching for that strait which he afterwards
discovered. Hist. c. I9. It seems probable, then, that the Germans
have been induced, merely by the name of this artist, to suppose him
a native of Bohemia, and on that supposition, have raised their ima-
ginary pretensions.

THOSE of the Wellh seem not to reft on a foundation much more

solid. In the twelfth century, according to Powell, a dispute having
arisen among the sons of Owen Guynoth, king of North-Wales, con-
cerning the succession to his crown, Madoc, one of their number,
weary of this contention, betook himself to sea in quest of a more
quiet Settlement. He fleered due weft, leaving Ireland to the north,
and arrived in an unknown country, which appeared to him so de-
firable, that he returned to Wales, and carried thither several of his
adherents and companions. This is said to have happened about the
year 1170, and after that, he and his colony were heard of no more.
But it is to be observed, that Powell, on whose testimony the authen-
ticity of this flory refts, published his history above four centuries
from the date of the event which he relates. Among a people so

rude

rude and so illiterate as the Welsh, at that period, the memory of a
transaction so remote must have been very imperfectly preserved, and
would require to be confirmed by some author of greater credit, and
nearer to the ara of Madoc's voyage than Powell. Later antiquaries
have indeed appealed to the testimony of Meredith ap Rhees, a Welsh
bard, who died A. D. 1477. But he too lived at such a distance of
time from the event, that he cannot be confidered as a witness of
much more credit than Powell. Betides his verses published by Hak-
luyt, vol. iii. p. i. convey no information, but that Madoc, diffa-
tisfied with his domestic situation, employed himself in searching the
ocean for new poffeflions. But even if we admit the authenticity of
Powell's story, it does not follow that the unknown country which
Madoc discovered by fleering weft, in such a course as to leave Ire-
land to the north, was any part of America. The skill of the Welsh
in the twelfth century was hardly equal to such a voyage. If he
made any discovery at all, it more probably might be Madeira, or
some other of the western isles. The affinity of the Welsh language
with some dialeAts spoken in America, has been mentioned as a cir-
cumitance which confirms the truth of Madoc's voyage. But that has
been observed in so few instances, and in some of these the affinity is
so obscure, or so fanciful, that no conclusion can be drawn from
the casual resemblance of a small number of words. There is a bird,
which as far as is yet known, is found only on the coasts of South Ame-
rica, from Port Desire to the Straits of Magellan. It is distinguished
by the name of Pengzuin. This word in the Welsh language signifies
YWhite-bead. All the authors who favour the pretensions of the Welsh
to the discovery of America, mention this as an irrefragable proof of
the affinity of the Welsh language with that spoken in that region of
America. But Mr. Pennant, who has given a scientific description of
the Penguin, observes, that all the birds of that genus have black lheads,
" so that we mull resign every hope (adds he) founded on this
hypothesis of retrieving the Cambrian race in the New World."
Philof. TranfaC. vol. iviii. p. 9I, &c. Besid-e tlis, if the Wclfl,
towards the close of the twelfth century, had fettled in any part of

America,

America, some remains of the Christian dotiine and rites must have
been found among their descendants, when they were difcoveied
about three hundred years poflerior to their migration, a period so
short, that, in the course of it, we cannot well suppose that all Euro-
pean ideas and arts would be totally forgotten.

THE pretensions of the Norwegians to the discovery of America,

seem to be better founded than those of the Germans or Welfl.
The inhabitants of Scandinavia were remarkable in the middle ages
for the boldness and extent of their maritime excursions. In
874, the Norwegians discovered, and planted a colony in Iceland.
In 982, they discovered Greenland, and established settlements there.
From that, some of their navigators proceeded towards the weft,
and discovered a country more inviting than those horrid regions with

hllich they are acquainted. According to their representation, this
country was sandy on the coasts, but in the interior parts level and
covered with wood, on which account they gave it the name of Helle-
llnd, and Mark-land, and having afterwards found some plants of the
vine which bore grapes, they called it Win-land. The credit of this
story refts, as far as I know, on the authority of the saga, or chro-
nicle of king Olaus, composed by Snorro Sturlonides, or Sturhlfons,
published by Perinfliold at Stockholm A. D. 1697. As Snorro was
was born in the year I 179, his chronicle might be compiled about two
centuries after the event which he relates. His account of the na-
vigation and discoveries of Biorn, and his companion Litf, is a very
rude ccnfufed tale, p. 104. 10o. 326. It isimpofible to discover
from him, what part of America it was in which the Norwegians
landed. According to his account of the length of the days and
nights, it muiil have been as far north as the fifty-eighth degree of
latitude, on some part of the coafl of Labradore, approaching near
toth ecntry of Hudson's Straits. Grapes, certainly, are not the pro-
duction of that country. Torfens ulippolcs that there is an error in
the tcxt, by rcoTifying of which, the place v,, ere the Norwegians
Ja.ndcd mayl lie fuplp!c'Ll to bc situated ii la itudc 49g. But thlat iS

nc(t

not the region of the vine in America. From perusing Snorro's tale,
I should think that the situation of Newfoundland corresponds belt
with that of the country discovered by the Norwegians. But grapes
are not the produdtion of that barren island. Other conjectures are
mentioned by M. Mallet, Introd. a l'Hifi. de Dannem. 175, &c. I
am not sufficiently acquainted with the literature of the noith, to ex-
amine them. It seems manifest, that if the Norwegians did discover
any part of America at that period, their attempts to plant colonies
proved unsuccessful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft.

NOTE XVIII. p. IiI.

PETER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gentleman, who re-
fided at that time in the court of Spain, whose letters contain an
account of the tranfittions of that period, in the order wherein they
occurred, describes the sentiments with which he himself and his
learned correspondents were affected, in very striking terms. " Prea
laetitia profiluilre te, vixque a lachrymis pra gaudio temperafie,
quando literas adfpexifti meas quibus, de antipodum orbe latenti
haEtenus, te certiorum feci, mi fuavillime Pomponi, infinualti. Ex
tuis ipfe literis colligo, quid fenferis. Senfiili autem, tantique rem
fecifti, quanti virum summa dotrina infignitum decuit. Quis nam-
que cibus fublimibus praeflari protest ingeniis, iio fuavior ? quod
condimentum gratius ? A me facio conjeturam. Beati fentio spiritus
meos, quando accitos alloquor prudentes aliquos ex his qui ab
ea redeunt provincia. Implicent animos pecuniarum cumulis augen-
dis miferi avari, libidinibus obfcoeni; noftras nos mentes, pollquam
Deo pleni aliquando fuerimus, contemplando, hlujuFcemodi rerum
notitia demulciamus." Epili. 152. Pomponio Laeto.

NOTE XIX. p. I22.

SO firmly were men of science, in that age, persuaded that the coun-
tries which Columbus had discovered wern connected with the Ear:
Indies, that Bernaldes, the curate of Los Palacios, who seems to hia\ve

been

been no inconsiderable proficient in the knowledge of cosmography,
contends that Cuba was not an island, but a part of the continent,
and united to the dominions of the Great Khan. This he delivered
as his opinion to Columbus himself, who was his guest for some time
on his return from his second voyage; and he supports it by several
arguments, moitly founded on the authority of Sir John Mandeville.
MS. penes me. Antonio Gallo, who was secretary to the magifiracy of
Genoa towards the close of the fifteenth century, published a short
account of the navigations and discoveries of his countryman Colum-
bus, annexed to his Opufcula Hiftorica de rebus populi Genuenfis; in
which he informs us, from letters of Columbus which he himself had
seen, that it was his opinion, founded upon nautical observations,
that one of the islands he had discovered was difiant only two hours or
thirty degrees from Cattigara, which, in the charts of the geographers
of that age, was laid down, upon the authority of Ptolemy, lib. vii.
c. 3. as the moit easterly place in Asia. From this he concluded,
that if some unknown continent did not obftrut the navigation, there
muff be a short and easy access, by holding a westerly course, to this
extreme region of the East. Muratori Scriptores Rer. Italicarum,
vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE XX. p. 127.

BERNALDES, the curate de los Palacios, a contemporary writer,
fays, that five hundred of there captives were sent to Spain, and
fold publickly in Seville as slaves; but that, by the change of climate,
and their inability to bear the fatigue of labour, they all died in a short
time. MS. penes me.

NOTE XXI. p. Iq9.

COLUMBUS teems to have formed fomnc very singular opinions
concerning the countries which he had now discovercd. The
violent swell and agitation of the waters on the coast of Trinidad led

h1im

him to conclude, that this was the highest part of the terraqueous
globe, and he imagined that various circumstances concurred in prov-
ing that the sea was here visibly elevated. Having adopted this
erroneous principle, the apparent beauty of the country induced him
to fall in with a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. io2. that the ter-
refirial paradise was the higeft land in the earth; and he believed
that he had been so fortunate as to discover this happy abode. Nor
ought we to think it strange that a person of to much sagacity should
be influenced by the opinion or reports of such a fabulous author as
Mandeville. Columbus and the other discoverers were obliged to
follow such guides as they could find; and it appears from several
passages in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend of Colum-
bus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was given to the testimony
of Mandeville in that age. Bernaldes frequently quotes him, and
always with refpet.

NOTE XXII. p. I50.

IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara or Oviedo, the most ancient
Spanish historians of America, nor Herrara, confider Hojeda, or
his companion Vespucci, as the first discoverers of the continent of
America. They uniformly ascribe this honour to Columbus. Some
have supposed that national resentment against Vespucci, for deserting
the service of Spain, and entering into that of Portugal, may have
prompted there writers to conceal the actions which he performed. But
Martyr and Benzoni, both Italians, could not be warped by the fame
prejudice. Martyr was a contemporary author; he resided in the
court of Spain, and had the best opportunity to be exacly informed
with refpet to all public transactions; and yet, neither in his Decads,
the first general history published of the New World, nor in his Epif-
ties, which contain an account of all the remarkable events of his time,
does he ascribe to Vespucci the honour of having first discovered the
continent. Benzoni went as an adventurer to America in the year
1541, and resided there a considerable time. He appears to have

VOL. I. 3 L been

been animated with a warm zeal for the honour of Italy, his native
country, and yet does not mention the exploits and discoveries of
Vespucci. Herrera, who compiled his general hiflory of America
from the most authentic records, not only follows those early writers,
but accuses Vespucci of falsifying the dates of both the voyages which
he made to the New World, and of confounding the one with the
other, in order that he might arrogate to himself the glory of having
discovered the continent. Her. dec. i. lib. iv. c. 2. He asserts,
that in a judicial inquiry into this matter by the royal fiscal, it was
proved by the testimony of Hojeda himself, that he touched at Hifpa-
niola when returning to Spain from his first voyage; whereas Vespucci
gave out that they returned directly to Cadiz from the coast of Paria,
and touched at Hispaniola only in their second voyage; and that he
had finished the voyage in five months; whereas, according to Vefpuc-
ci's account, he had employed seventeen months in performing it.
Viaggio primo de Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag. fecundo, p. 45.
Herrara gives a more full account of this inquest in another part of his
book, and to the fame effeat. Her. dec. I. lib. vii. c. 5. Colum-
bus was in Hispaniola when Hojeda arrived there, and had by that
time come to an agreement with Roldan, who opposed Hojeda's at-
tempt to excite a new infurretion, and, of consequence, his voyage
muff have been posterior to that of the admiral. Life of Columbus,
c. 84. According to Vespucci's account, he set out on his first voyage
May Ioth, I497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At that time Columbus was
in the court of Spain preparing for his voyage, and seems to have
enjoyed a considerable degree of favour. The affairs of the New
World were at this juncture under the direction of Antonio Torres, a
friend of Columbus. It is not probable, that at that period a com-
miflion would be granted to another person, to anticipate the admiral,
by undertaking a voyage which he himself intended to perform.
Fonseca, who patronized Hojeda, and granted the licence for
his voyage, was not recalled to court, and reiniftated in the direc-
tion of Indian affairs, until the death of prince John, which happened
September 1497, P. Martyr, Ep. 182. several months poflerior to

the

the time at which Vespucci pretends to have set out upon his voyage.
A life of Vespucci was published at Florence by the Abate Bandini,
A. D. 1745, 4to. It is a work of no merit, written with little judg-
ment, and less candour. He contends for his countryman's title to the
discovery of the continent with all the blind zeal of national partiality,
but produces no new evidence to support it. We learn from him,
that Vespucci's account of his voyage was published as early as the
year 1510, and probably sooner. Vita di Am. Vefp. p. 52. At
what time the name of AM ERICA came to be first given to the New
World, is not certain.

NOTE XXIII. p. I92.

THE form employed on this occasion served as a model to the
Spaniards in all their subsequent conquelts in America. It is so
extraordinary in its nature, and gives us such an idea of the proceed-
ings of the Spaniards, and the principles upon which they founded
their right to the extensive dominions which they acquired in the New
World, that it well merits the attention of the reader. " I Alonfo de
Hojeda, servant of the most high and powerful kings of Castile and
Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations, their messenger and cap-
tain, notify to you and declare, in as ample form as I am capable,
that God our Lord, who is one and eternal, created the heaven and
the earth, and one man and one woman, of whom you and we, and all
the men who have been or shall be in the world, are descended. But
as it has come to pass, through the number of generations during
more than five thousand years, that they have been dispersed into dif-
ferent parts of the world, and are divided into various kingdoms and
provinces, because one country was not able to contain them, nor
could they have found in one the means of fubfiflence and preferva-
tion; therefore God our Lord gave the charge of all those people to
one man, named St. Peter, whom he constituted the lord and head
of all the human race, that all men, in whatever place they are born,
or in whatever faith or place they are educated, might yield obedience

3 L 2 unto

unto him. He hath fubjeted the whole world to his jurifdiCion,
and commanded him to establish his residence in Rome, as the most
proper place for the government of the world. He likewise promised
and gave him power to establish his authority in every other part of
the world, and to judge and govern all Christians, Moors, Jews, Gen-
tiles, and all other people, of whatever fee or faith they may be. To
him is given the name of Pope, which signifies admirable, great father
and guardian, because he is the father and governor of all men.
Those who lived in the time of this holy father obeyed and acknow-
ledged him as their lord and king, and the superior of the universe.
The fame has been observed with refpeat to them who, since his time,
have been chosen to the pontificate. Thus it now continues, and will
continue to the end of the world.

' O'NE of there pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath made a grant of

these islands, and of the Terra Firma of the ocean sea, to the Catholic
kings of Castile, Don Ferdinand and Donna Isabella, of glorious
memory, and their successors, our sovereigns, with all they contain,
as is more fully exprefied in certain deeds passed upon that occasion,
which you may fee, if you desire it. Thus his majesty is king and
lord of these islands, and of the Terra Firma, in virtue of this dona-
tion; and, as king and lord aforesaid, most of the islands to which his
title hath been notified, have recognized his majesty, and now yield
obedience and fubjetion to him as their lord, voluntarily and without
refintance; and instantly, as soon as they received information, they
obeyed the religious men sent by the king to preach to them, and to
inftrut them in our holy faith; and all there, of their own free-will,
without any recompence or gratuity, became Christians, and continue
to be so; and his majesty having received them graciously under his
proteEtion, has commanded that they should be treated in the fame
manner as his other fubjets and vassals. You are bound and obliged
to aft in the fame manner. Therefore I now entreat and require you
to confider attentively what I have declared to you; and that you
may more perfectly comprehend it, that you take such time as is rea-

fonable,

fonable, in order that you may acknowledge the Church as the fupe-
rior and guide of the universe, and likewise the holy father called the
Pope, in his own right, and his majesty by his appointment, as king
and sovereign lord of there islands, and of the Terra Firma; and that
you content that the aforesaid holy fathers Ihall declare and preach to
you the doctrines above mentioned. If you do this, you at well,
and perform that to which you are bound and obliged; and his ma-
jefty, and I in his name, will receive you with love and kindness, and
will leave you, your wives and children, free and exempt from fervi-
tude, and in the enjoyment of all you possess, in the fame manner as
the inhabitants of the islands. Besides this, his majesty will bellow
upon you many privileges, exemptions, and rewards. But if you
will not comply, or maliciously delay to obey my injunation, then,
with the help of God, I will enter your country by force, I will carry
on war againit you with the utmost violence, I will subjea you to
the yoke of obedience to the church and the king, I will take your
wives and children, and will make them slaves, and fell or dispose of
them according to his majesty's pleasure; I will seize your goods, and
do you all the mischief in my power, as rebellious fubjets, who will
not acknowledge or submit to their lawful sovereign. And I protest,
that all the bloodshed and calamities which shall follow are to be im-
puted to you, and not to his majesty, or to me, or the gentlemen who
serve under me; and as I have now made this declaration and re-
quifition unto you, I require the notary here present to grant me a
certificate of this, subscribed in proper form," Herrara, dec. i.
lib. vii. c. I4.

NOTE XXIV. p. 205.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, observes, that of the hundred
and ninety men whom he took with him, there were never above
eighty fit for service at one time. So much did they sussei from hun-
ger, fatigue, and sickness. Herrera, dec. I.. lib. x. c. r6. P. Mart.
decad. p. 226.

NOTE

NOTE XXV. p. 217.

FONSECA, bishop of Palencia, the principal director of American
affairs, had eight hundred Indians in property; the commendator
Lope de Conchillos, his chief associate in that department, eleven
hundred; and other favourites had different numbers. They sent
overseers to the islands, and hired out those slaves to the planters.
Herr. dec. L. lib. ix. c. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p. 239.

TH HOUGH America is more plentifully supplied with water than
the other regions of the globe, there is no river or stream of water in
Yucatan. This peninsula projets from the continent a hundred lea-
gues, but, where broadest, does not extend above twenty-five leagues.
It is a flat plain, without mountains. The inhabitants are supplied with
water from pits, and wherever they dig them, find it in abundance. It
is probable, from all those circumstances, that this country was for-
merly covered by the sea. Herrera: Defcriptio Indiae Occidentalis,
p. 14. Hiftoire Naturelle, par M. de Buffon, tom. I. p. 593.

NOTE XXVII. p. 249.

THE height of the most elevated point in the Pyrenees is, ac-
cording to M. Cassini, fix thousand fix hundred and forty-fix feet.
The height of the mountain Gemmi, in the canton of Berne, is ten
thousand one hundred and ten feet. The height of the Pike of
Tencriffe, according to the measurement of P. FeuillU, is thirteen
thousand one hundred and feventy-eight feet. The height of Chim-
borazo, the most elevated point of the Andes, is twenty thousand
two hundred and eighty feet. Voyage de D. Juan Ulloa, Obferva-
tions Astron. et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. i 14. The height of that part of

Chimborazo

Chimborazo which is covered perpetually with snow, is two thousand
four hundred feet. Prevot. Hist. Gener. des Voyages, vol. xiii.
p. 636.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 249.

A s a particular description makes a stronger impreflion than general
assertions, I shall give one of Rio de la Plata by an eye-witness.
P. Cattaneo, a Modenefe jesuit, landed at Buenos Ayres in 1749,
and thus represents what he felt when such new objects were first pre-
sented to his view. " While I resided in Europe, and read in books
of history or geography that the mouth of the river De la Plata was
an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I confidered it as an exag-
geration, because in this hemisphere we have no example of such vait
rivers. When I approached its mouth, I had the most vehement desire
to ascertain the truth with my own eyes, and 1 have found the matter
to be exactly as it was represented. This I deduce particularly from
one circumstance: When we took our departure from Monte-Video,
a fort situated more than a hundred miles from the mouth of the river,
and where its breadth is considerably diminished, we failed a complete
day before we discovered the land. on the opposite bank of the river;
and when we were in the middle of the channel, we could not discern
land on either fide, and saw nothing but the sky and water, as if we
had been in some great ocean. Indeed, we should have taken it to
be Tea, if the fresh. water of the river, which was turbid like the Po,
had not satisfied us that it was a river. Moreover, at Buenos Ayres,
another hundred miles up the river, and where it is still much nar-
rower, one cannot discern the opposite coast, which is indeed very
low and flat; but one cannot perceive the houses or the tops of the
tfeeples in the Portuguese settlement at Colonia on the other fide of
the river." Lettera prima, published by Muratori, II Chriftianefimo
Felice, &8c. i. p. 257.

NOTE

NOTE XXIX. p. 252.

NEWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and Canada, are
the countries which lie in the fame parallel of latitude with the king-
dom of France; and in all of them the water of the rivers is fro-
zen during winter to the thickness of several feet; the earth is covered
with snow as deep; almost all the birds fly, during that season,
from a climate where they could not live. The country of the
Efkimaux, part of Labrador, and the countries on the south of Hud-
son's Bay, are in the fame parallel with Great Britain; and yet in all
there the cold is so intense, that even the industry of Europeans has
not attempted cultivation.

NOTE XXX. p. 254.

ACOSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know, who en-
deavoured to account for the different degrees of heat in the old
and new continents, by the agency of the winds which blow in
each. Hist. Moral. &8c. lib. ii. & iii. M. de Buffon adopts this
theory, and has not only improved it by new observations, but has
employed his amazing powers of descriptive eloquence in embellishing
and placing it in the most firiking light. Some remarks may be added,
which tend to illustrate more fully a doctrine of much importance in
every inquiry concerning the temperature of various climates.

WHEN a cold wind blows over land it must in its passage rob the

surface of some of its heat. By means of this, the coldness of the
uind is abated. But if it continue to blow in the fame diretion, it
will come, by degrees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will
susser no longer any abatement of its own keenness. Thus, as it ad-
vances over a large traa of land, it brings on all the severity of intense
frost.

LIET

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep sea; the super-

ficial water must be immediately cooled to a certain degree, and the
wind proportionally warmed. But the superficial and colder water
becoming specifically heavier than the warmer water below it, descends;
what is warmer supplies its place, which, as it comes to be cooled in
its turn, continues to warm the air which passes over it, or to di-
minifh its cold. This change of the superficial water, and successive
ascent of that which is warmer, and consequent successive abatement of
coldness in the air, is aided by the agitation caused in the Tea by the me-
chanical action of the wind, and also by the motion of the tides.
This will go on, and the rigour of the wind will continue to diminish
until the whole Mater is so far cooled, that the water on the surface is
no longer removed from the action of the wind, fast enough to hinder
it from being arrefled by frost. Whenever the surface freezes, the
the wind is no longer warmed by the water from below, and it goes on
with undiminished cold.

FROM those principles may be explained the severity of winter frosts

in extensive continents; their mildness in small islands; and the fupe-
rior rigour of winter in those parts of North America with which we
are best acquainted. In the north-west parts of Europe, the severity
of winter is mitigated by the weft winds, which usually blow in the
months of November, December, and part of January.

ON the other hand, when a warm wind blows over land, it heats the

surface, which must therefore cease to abate the fervour of the wind.
But the fame wind blowing over water, agitates it, brings up the
colder water from below, and thus is continually losing somewhat of
its own heat.

BuT the great power of the sea to mitigate the heat of the wind or

air passing over it, proceeds from the following circumstance, that on
account of the transparency of the Tea, its surface cannot be heated to a
great degree by the fun's rays; whereas the ground, fubjeated to their in-

VOL. I. 3 M fluence,

fluence, very soon acquires great heat. 'When therefore, the wind
blows over a torrid continent, it is soon raised to a heat almost into-
lerable; but during its pafage over an extcnfive ocean, it is gradually
cooled; so that on its arrival at the farthefR shore, it is again fit for
respiration.

THOSE principles will account for the sultry heats of large con-

tinents, in the torrid zone; for the mild climate of islands in the fame
latitude; and for the superior warmth in summer which large con-
tinents, situated in temperate or colder zones of the earth, enjoy,
when compared with that of islands. The heat of a climate depends
not only upon the immediate effet of the fun's rays, but on their
continued operation, on the effed which they have formerly produced,
and which remains for rome time in the ground. This is the reason
why the day is warmeli about two in the afternoon, the summer
warmest about the middle of July, and the winter coldest about the
middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the sun-beams from

heating the ground, are a great cause of the temperate climate of the
equatorial parts. The ground, not being heated, cannot heat the
air; and the leaves, which receive the rays intercepted from the
ground, have not a mass of matter sufficient to absorb heat enough
for this purpose. Betides, it is a known fad, that the vegetative pow-
er of a plant occasions a perspiration from the leaves in proportion
to the heat to which they are exposed; and, from the nature of
evaporation, this perspiration produces a cold in the leaf proportional
to the perspiration. Thus the effet of the leaf in heating the air in
contat with it, is prodigiously diminished. For those observations,
which throw much additional light on this curious fubjeat, I am in-
debted to my ingenious friend, Mr. Robifon, professor of natural
philosophy in the university of Edinburgh.

NOTE

NOTE XXXI. p. 255.

THE climate of Brasil has been described by two eminent natu-
ralifts, Pifo and Margrave, who observed it with a philosophical ac-
curacy, which, we desiderate in the accounts of many other provin-
ces in America. Both represent it as temperate and mild, when com-
pared with the climate of Africa. They ascribe this chiefly to the
refrelhing wind which blows continually from the Tea. The air is not
only cool, but chilly through the night, in so much that the natives
kindle fires every evening in their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafili-
enfi, lib. i. p. i, &c. Margravius Hiftor. Rerum Natural. Brafiliae,
lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who resided long in Biafil, confirms
their description. Churchill's Collection, vol. ii. p. 26. Gumilla,
who resided many years in the country, upon the river Orinoco,
gives a similar description of the temperature of the climate there.
Hiss. de l'Orenoque, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a very considerable
degree of cold in the countries on the banks of the river Amazons. Re-
lat. vol. ii. p. 56. M. Biet, who lived a considerable time in Cayenne,
gives a similar account of the temperature of that climate, and ascribes
it to the fame cause. Voyage de la France, Exquinox, p. 330. No-
thing can be more different from these descriptions than that of the
burning heat of the African coaff given by M. Adanfon. Voyage
to Senegal, passim.

THE most obvious and probable cause of this superior degree of

cold, towards the southern extremity of America, seems to be the form
of the continent there. Its breadth gradually decreases as it ifretches
from St. Antonio southwards, and fiom the bay of St. Julian to the
Straits of Magellan its dimenfons are much contracted. On the east
and weft fides, it is walhed by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. From
its southern point it is probable that an open sea firetches to the
Aniartic pole. In \shichever of these direc ions the wind blows, it is
cooled before it approaches the Magellanic regions, by pafling over

3M 2 a vail

a vail body of water, nor is the land there of such extent that it can
recover any considerable degree of heat in its progress over it. There
circumfiances concur in rendering the temperature of the air in this
diftrid of America, more similar to that of an insular, than to that of
a continental climate, and hinder it from acquiring the fame degree
of summer heat, wvith places in Europe and Asia, in a corresponding
northern latitude. The north wind is the only one that reaches this
part of America, after blowing over a great continent. But from
an attentive survey of its position, this will be found to have a ten-
dency, rather to diminish than augment the degree of heat. The
southern extremity of America is properly the termination of the im-
mense ridge of the Andes, which firetches nearly in a diret line from
north to south, through the whole extent of the continent. The
most sultry regions in South-America, Guiana, Brasil, Paraguay, and
Tucuman, lie many degrees to the eafft of the Magellanic regions.
The level country of Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situ-
ated considerably to the weft of them. The north wind then, though
it blows over land, does not bring to the southern extremity of
America, an increase of heat collected in its passage over torrid re-
gions, but before it arrives there, it must have swept along the fum-
mits of the Andes, and come impregnated with the cold of that fro-
zen region.

NOTE XXXII. p. 256.

Tw 0 French frigates were sent upon a voyage of discovery in
the year 1739. In latitude 440 south, they began to feel a confider-
able degree of cold. In latitude 480, they met with islands of float-
ing ice. Hiftoire des Navigations aux Terres Australes, tom. ii.
256, &c. Dr. Halley fell in with ice in latitude 590. Id. tom. i.
p. 47. Commodore Byron, when on the coafl of Patagonia, latitude
500 33' south, on the fifteenth of December, which is midsummer
in that part of the globe, the twenty-firfi of December being the
longest day there, compares the climate to that of England in the

middle

middle of winter. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 25. Mr. Banks
having landed at Terra del Fuego in the Bay of Good Success, lati-
tude 550, on the fixteeth of January, which corresponds to the month
of July in our hemisphere, two of his attendants died in one night of
extreme cold, and all the party were in the most imminent danger of
perifh.ng. Id. ii. 51, 52. By the fourteenth of March, correspond-
ing to September in our hemisphere, winter was set in with rigour,
and the mountains were covered with snow. Ibid. 72.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 258.

M . CONDAMINE is one of the latest and molt accurate ob-
servers of the interior state of South-America. " After descending
from the Andes (fays he) one beholds a vast and uniform profpet of
water and verdure, and nothing more. One treads upon the earth,
but does not fee it; as it is so entirely covered with luxuriant plants,
weeds, and shrubs, that it would require a considerable degree of la-
bour to clear it, for the space of a foot. Relation abrege d'un Voy-
age, &c. p. 48. One of the singularities in the forests is a fort of
osiers, or withs, called bejucos by the Spaniards, and lianes by the
French, and nibbees by the Indians, which are usually employed as
ropes in America. This plant twists about the trees which it meets
with, and rising above their highest branches, its tendrils descends per-
pendicularly, strike into the ground, take root, rife up around ano-
ther tree, and thus mount and descend alternately. Other tendrils
are carried obliquely by the wind, or some accident, and form a
confusion of interwoven cordage, which resembles the rigging of a
fllip. Bancroft, Nat. HiiLt. of Guiana, 99. These withs are often as
thick as the arm of a man. Ib. p. 75. M. Bouguer's account of the
forests in Peru perfectly resembles this description. Voyage au Peru,
p. i6. Oviedo gives a limilar description of the forefis in other parts
of America. Hist. lib. ix. p. 144. D. The country of the Moxos
is so much overflowed, that they are obliged to reside on the summit

of

of some rising ground during some part of the year, and have no
communication with their countrymen at any distance. Lettres Edi-
fiantes, tom. x. p. 187. Garcia gives a full andjuff description of the
rivers, lakes, woods, and marshes in those countries of America wnich
lie between the tropics. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. § 4, 5. The
incredible hardships to which Goncalez Pizarro was expoied in at-
tempting to march into the country to the east of the Andes, gives a
very firiking idea of that part of America in its original uncultivated
slate. Garcil. de la Vega, Royal. Comment. of Peru, part ii. book iii.
C. 2-5.

NOTE XXXIV. p. z60.

THE animals of America seem not always to have been of a size
inferior to those in other quarters of the globe. Near the banks of
the Ohio, a considerable number of bones of an immense magni-
tude have been found. The place where this discovery has been
made lies about one hundred and ninety miles below the junction
of the river Scioto with the Ohio. It is about four miles diitant from
the banks of the latter, on the fide of the marsh called the Great
Salt Lick. The bones lie in vast quantities about five or fix feet un-
der ground, and the firatum is visible in the bank on the edge of the
Lick. journal of Colonel George Croglan, MS. penes me. This spot
seems to be accurately laid down by Evans in his map. These bones
must have belonged to animals of enormous bulk, and naturalists
being acquainted with no living creature of such size, were at firfl
inclined to think that they were mineral fubflances. Upon receiving a
greater number of specimens from various parts of the earth, and after
infpeaing them more narrowly, they are now allowed to be the bones
of an animal. As the elephant is the largefi known quadruped, and
the tufls which were found nearly resembled, both in form and qua-
lity, the tufiks of an elephant, it was concluded that the carcases de-
pnfited on the Ohio were of that species. But Dr. Hunter, one of

the

the persons of our age belt qualified to decide with refpe& to this point,
having accurately examined several parcels of tufkls, and grinders, and
jaw-bones, lent from the Ohio to London, gives it as his opinion,
that they did not belong to an elephant, but to rome huge carnivo-
rous animal of an unknown fp:ccies. Phil. Tranfac. vol. 1\ iii .

p. 34.

Bones of the fame kind, and as remarkable for their size, have been
found near the mouths of the great rivers, Oby, Jenifeia, and Lena,
in Siberia. Stralhrenbeler, DL'Lf-ipt. of norltl anid eat Parts of Europe
azd Afii,, p. 402, &c. The elephant seems to be confined in his
range to the torrid zone, and never multiplies beyond it. In fiich
cold regions as those bordering on the frozen lea, he could not live.
The existence of such large animals in America might open a wide
field for conjeature. The more we contemplate the face 'of nature,
and confider the variety of her productions, the more we must be fa-
tisfied that astonishing changes have been made in the terraqueous
globe by convulsions and revolutions, of which no account is prcferv-
ed in history.

NOTE XXXV. p. 26r.

THIS degeneracy of the domestic European animals in Ame-
rica ought to be imputed partly to each of there causes. In the Spa-
nifh settlements, which are situated either within the torrid zone, or
in countries bordering upon it, the increase of heat, and diversity of
food, prevent sheep and horned cattle from attaining the fame size as
in Europe. They seldom become so fat, and their flefl is not so
juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In North-America, where the
climate is more favourable, and similar to that of Europe, the qua-
lity of the grases which spring up naturally in their paiiurc-grouLnd
is not good. Mitchell, p. I51. Agriculture is fill To much in its
infancy, that artificial food for cattle is not railed in any quantity.
During a winter, long in many provinces, and rigorous in all, no
proper care is taken of their cattle. The general treatment of their
horses and horned cattle is injudicious and harsh in all the Englihl

colonies.

colonies. There circumfiances contribute more, perhaps, than any
thing peculiar in the quality of the climate, to the degeneracy of
breed in the horses, cows, and sheep, in molt of its provinces.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 261.

IN the year 1518, the island of Hispaniola was afflited with a dread-
ful visitation of those deftrudtive infedts, the particulars of which Her-
rera describes, and mentions a singular infiance of the superstition of
the Spaniffih planters. After trying vaiious methods of exterminating
the ants, they resolved to implore protection of the faints, but as the
calamity was new, they were at a loss to find out the faint who could
give them the mofi effetual aid. They cafl lots in order to discover
the patron whom they ihould invoke. The lots decided in favour of
St. Saturninus. They celebrated his festival with great solemnity, and
immediately, adds the historian, the calamity began to abate. Her-
rera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 15. p. 107.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 263.

THE author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les Americains sup-
poles this difference in heat to be equal to twelve degrees, and that
a place thirty degrees from the equator in the old continent, is as warm
as one situated eighteen degrees from it in America. tom. i. p. I . Dr.
Mitchell, after observations carried on during thirty years, contends
that the difference is equal to fourteen or fifteen degrees of latitude.
Present State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 263.

JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head of St. John's
river in East Florida, observed a frost so intense, that in one night,
the ground was frozen an inch thick upon the banks of the river.
The limes, citrons, and banana trees, at St. Augufline were de-

stroyed.

stroyed. Bertram's Journal, p. 20. Other inflances of the extraor-
dinary operations of cold in the southern provinces of North-Ame-
rica are collcated by Dr. Mitchell. Present State, p. 206, &c. Fe-
bruary 7th, 1747, the fioft at Charleftown was so intense, that a per-
son having carried two quart bottles of hot water to bed, in the morn-
ing they were split to picces, and the water solid lumps of ice. In a
kitchen where there was a fire, the water in a jar, in which there was
a large live eel, was Frozen to the bottom. Aliofl: all the orange and
olive trees were deftro)cd. Description of South-Carolina, 8vo.
Lond. I76I.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 264.

A Remarkable instance of this occurs in Dutch Guiana, a country
every where level, and so low, that during the rainy seasons it is ufially
covered with water near two feet in height This renders the foil so
rich, that on the surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is a firatum of
perfect manure, and as such has been transported to Barbadoes. On
the banks of thzEffequebo, thirty crops of ratoon canes have been
raifedfucceflively, whereas in Welt-Indian islands more than two is
never expected. The expedients by which the planters endeavour
to diminish this excessive fertility of foil are various. Bancroft, Nat.
Hist. of Guiana, p. io, &c.

NOTE XL. p. 274.

MN ULLER teems to have believed, without sufficient evidence,
that the Cape had been doubled, tom. i. p. i i, &c. and the Imperial
Academy of St. Peterfburgh give some countenance to it, by the man-
ner in which Tfchbkotfioi-nofs is laid down in their charts. But I am as-
fured, from undoubted authority, that no Ru'lian vessel has ever fail-
ed round that cape, and as the counltry of t/7';butki is not subje-t to the
Ruffian empire, it is very imperfectly known.

VOL. . 3 N NOTE

NOTE XLI. p. 276.

W ERE this tle place for entering into a long and intricate geo-
graphical dilquifit.:o, many curious observations might arise from
comparing thc accounts of the two Ruffian voyages, and the charts
of their refpetive navigations. One remark is applicable to both.
We cannot rely with abfClute certainty on the position which they
aflign to several of the places vwhich they visited. The weather was
so extremely fuggy, that they seldom saw the fun or stars, and the
position of the islands and supposed continents was commonly deter-
mined by reckoning, not by observation. Beering and Tfchirikow
proceeded much farther towards the east than Krenitzin. The land
discovered by Bzering, which he imagined to be part of the American
continent, is in the 236th degree of longitude from the firfi me-
ridian in the isle of Ferro, and in 58° 28' of latitude. Tfchirikow
came upon the fame coast in longit. 241°, lat. 560. Muller, i.
248, 249 The former muff have advanced 60 degrees frcm the
port of Petropawlowika, from which he took his departure, and the
latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of Krenitzin's voyage, it ap-
pears that he did not fail farther towards the east than the 280th de-
gree, and only 32 degrees from Petropawlowfla. In 1741, Beering
and Tfchirikow, both in going and returning, held a course which
was moltly to the south of that chain of islands which they discovered,
and observing the mountanious and rugged afpeEt of the head-lands
which they defciied towards the noith, they supposed them to be
promontories belonging to rome part of the American continent,
which, as they fancied, firetched as far south as the latitude 56. In
this manner they are laid down in the chart publilhed by Muller,
and likewise in a manuscript chart diawn by a mate of Beering's
flip, communicated to me by Mr. Proeffor Robifon. B.t in 1769,
Krenitzin, after wintering in the island Alaxa, flood lb far towards the
north in his return, that his course lay through the middle of what
they had supposed to be a continent, which he found to be an open

fca,

sea, and that they had mistaken rocky isles for the head-lands of a
continent. It is probable, that the countries discovered in 1741, to-
wards the east, do not belong to the American continent, but arc
only a continuation of the chain of islands. From the extreme
fummcr cold of all those ifics, one is led to conjecture that no large
continent lies very near to them. The number of volcanos in this
region of the globe is remarkable. There are several in Kamfchatka,
and not one of the islands, great or mall, as far as the Ruffian na-
vigation extends, is without them. Many are actually burning, and
the mountains in all bear marls of having been once in a iRate of
eruption. Were I disposed to admit such conjectures as have found
place in other inquiries concerning the peopling of America, I might
suppose that this part of the earth, having suffered violent convul-
sions from earthquakes and volcanos, an isthmus, which may have
formerly united Asia to America, has been broken, and formed into
a cluster of islands by the shock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian navigators were

attempting to make discoveries in the north-west of America, the
Spaniards were prosecuting the fame deiign from another quarter. In
1769, two small vessels failed from Loretto in California to explore
the coasts of the country to the north of that peninsula. They ad-
vanced no farther than the port of Monte-Rey in latitude 36. But,
in several fucceflive expeditions fitted out from the port of St. Blas in
New Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as far as the latitude 58.
Gazeta de Madrid, March i9, and May 14, 1776. But as the jour-
nals of those voyages have not yet been publilihe, I cannot compare
their progrels with that of the Ruffians, or Ihew how near the naviga-
tors of the two nations have approached to each other. It is to be hop-
ed, that the enlightened minifler, who has now the direction of Ame-
rican affairs in Spain, will not withhold this information from the
public.

3N2, NOTE

NO T E XLII. p. 290.

FEW travellers have had such opportunity of observing the na-
tivesof America, in its various diftrifts, as Don Antonio Ulloa. In
a work lately publiihed by him, he thus describes the charafteriflical
features of the race: " a very small forehead, covered with hair
towards its extremities, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; little
eyes; a thin nose, small and bending towards the upper lip; the
countenance broad; the ears large; the hair very black, lank, and
coarse; the limbs well turned, the feet small, the body of just pro-
portion; and altogether smooth and free from hair, until old age,
when they acquire some beard, but never on the cheeks." Noticias
A'nericanas, &c. p. 307. M. le Chevalier Pinto, who resided several
years in a part of America which Ulloa never visited, gives a sketch
of the general afpeEt of the Indians there. " They are all of a copper
colour, with some diversity of lhade, not in proportion to their dif-
tance from the equator, but according to the degree of elevation of
the territory which they inhabit. Those who live in a high country
are fairer than those in the marshy low lands on the coast. Their
face is round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any people
from an oval shape. Their forehead is small, the extremity of their
ears far from the face, their lips thick, their nose flat, their eyes black,
or of a chefnut colour, small, but capable of discerning objets at a
great distance. Their hair is always thick and fleck, and without
any tendency to curl. They have no hair on any part of their body
but the head. At the first aspet, a southern American appears to be
mild and innocent, but on a more attentive view. one discovers in
his countenance something wild, diftrurfitfl, and fullen." MS. penes
ite. The two portraits, drawn by hands very different from those of
common travellers, have a near resemblance.

NOTE

NOTE XLIII. p. ^90.

A MAZING accounts are given (f the pcfrverng, speed of the
Americans. Adair relates the adventures of a Chikkafi'h warrior,
who run through woods and over mounts;i.s, t'ree hundred c, mI u'cd
miles in a day and a half and two nights. iHjl. of Amer. Ind. 396.

NOTE XLIV. p. 2z4.

JM . GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years among the In-
dians of Peru and Quito, and twenty years in the French colony of
Cayenne, in which there is a constant intercourse with the Galibis,
and other tribes on the Orinoco, observes, that the vigour of confli-
tution among the Americans is exacly in Froportion to their habits
of labour. The Indians, in warm climates, such as those on the coasts
of the South Sea, on the river of Amazons, and the river Orinoco,
are not to be compared for strength with those in cold countries;
and yet, fays he, boats daily set out from Para, a Portuguese fettle-
rne'nt on the river Amazons, to ascend that river against the rapidity
of the ftrearri, and with the fame crew they proceed to San Pablo,
which is eight hundred leagues diflant. No crew of white people, or
even of negroes, would be found equal to a task of such pelfevering
fatigue, as the Portuguese have experienced, and yet the Indians,
being accustomed to this labour from their infancy, perform it.
MS. penes me.

NOTE XLV. p. 300.

DON ANTONIO ULLOA, who visited a great part of Peru and
Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and several of the provinces
bordering on the Mexican Gulph, while employed in the fame service
with the French mathematicians during the space of ten years, and

rho

who afterwards had an opportunity of viewing the North-Americans,
asserts, " that if we have seen one American, we may be said to have
seen them all, their colour and make are so nearly the fame." Notic.
Americanas, p. 308. A more early observer, Pedro de Cieca de Leon,
one of the conquerors of Peru, who had likewise traversed many pro-
vinces of America, affirms, that the people, men and women, although
there is such a multitude of tribes or nations as to be almost innumer-
able, and such diversity of climates, appear nevertheless like the chil-
dren of one father and mother. Chronica del' Peru, parte i. c. I9.
There is, no doubt, a certain combination of features, and peculiarity
of aspect, which forms what may be called a European or Asiatic
countenance. There must likewise be one that may be denominated
American, common to the whole race. This may be supposed to
firike the traveller at firit fight, while the various shades, which diftin-
guifh people of different regions, escape his observation. But when
persons who had resided so long among the Americans concur in bear-
ing testimony to the similarity of their appearance in every climate, we
may conclude that it is more remarkable than that of any other race.
See likewise Garcia Origen de los Indies, p. 54. 242. Torquemada
Monarch. Indiana, ii. 57 1.

N 0 T E XLVI. p. 301.

\M. LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in the interior parts
of Brasil, he had been informed that some persons resembling the white
people of Darien have been found; but that the breed did not conti-
nue, and their children became like other Americans. This race,
however, is but very imperfetly known. MS. penes ine.

NOTE XLVII. p. 304.

H E teflimnones of different travellers, concerning the Patagonians,

have been collected and stated with a considerable degree of accu-
racy by the author of Rccherches Philofophiques, &c. tom. i. 28 1, &c.

iii.

iii. 11, &c. ;:nce t!e puh:lcation of his w'v rk, fevecl. n-. i.ators
have ifired the Maeilln:c re2:irn, an3, 'ilk rlheir p.cd-cefonrs, d:fier
very widely in t'-e r acc( unts ( f its ii'abit:'.; s. B, C:;rrmcd';re Byron
and his crew, M ho failed th. ough the Sr;aits in 1764, the cornmcn size
of the Pat3ag)nians was estimated to be eight feet, a.-d many cf them
much tall'r. Phil. Tranfat. vol. lvii. p. 78. By Cip:ains Wailis
and Cateret, who aAuailly meafuied them in 1766, they were ftaund to
be from fix feet to fix feet five and f-ven i.lches in height. Phil. Tranf.
vol. Ix. p. 22. These seem to have been the very people whose file
had been so much over-rated in the year 1764; for several of them
had beads and red baize of the fame kind xith what had been put
aboard Captain Wallis's ship, and he naturally concluded that they had
got these from Mr. Byron. Hawvkefw. i. In 1767 they were again
measured by M. Bougainville, whose account agrees nearly with that
of Captain Wallis. Voy. 129. To these I shall add a teftimo.iy of
great weight. In the year 1762, Don Bernardo Ibagnez de Echavarri
accompanied the Marquis de Valdelirios to Buenos Ay res, and resided
there several )ears. He is a very intelligent author, and his refutation
for veracity unimpeached among his countrymen. In speaking of
the country towards the foutbern extremity of America, " By what
Indians," fa)s he, " is it possessed? Not certainly by the fabulous
Patagonians, who are fuppo ed to occupy this difirict. I have frcm
many eye-witnesses, who have lived among those Indians, and traded
much with them, a true and accurate de;cription of their persons.
They are of the fame stature with Spaniards. I never saw one
who rose in height two varas and two or three inches," i. e. about
80 or 81. 332 inches Englifl, if Echavarri makes his computation ac-
coiding to the varn of Madiid. This agrees neaily with the measure-
ment of Captain Wallis. Re) no Jefuitico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who
resided as a miflionary forty years in the southern parts of America,
fays, that " the Patagonian, or Puelches, are a anrge-bcdied people;
but I never heard of that gigantic race which others have mentioned,
though I have seen p rfons of all the dilere;nt tiibes of touilhcrn In-
dianr." Introd. p. 26.

NOTE

NOTE XLVIII. p. 308.

ANTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and ingenious physician,
published a dissertation in the year 1765, in which he endeavours to
prove, that this disease was not introduced from America, but took
its rife in Europe, and was brought on by an epidemical and malig-
nant disorder. Did I chute to enter into a disquisition on this subjet,
which I should not have mentioned, if it had not been intimately con-
neEted with this part of my inquiries, it would not be difficult to point
out some mistakes with refpeat to the fats upon which he founds, as
well as some errors in the consequences which he draws from them.
The rapid communication of this disease from Spain over Europe,
seems to resemble the progress of an epidemic, rather than that of a
disease transmitted by infection. The first mention of it is in the year
I493, and before the year 1497 it had made its appearance in most
countries of Europe, with such alarming symptoms as rendered it ne-
ceflary for the civil magifirate to interpose, in order to check its career.

NOTE XLIX. p. 3II.

THE people of Otaheite have no denomination for any number
above two hundred, which is sufficient for their tranfaftions. Voyages,
by Hawkefworth, ii. 228.

NOTE L. p. 3I7.

As the view which I have given of rude nations is extremely dif-
ferent from that exhibited by very refpeatable authors, it may be
proper to produce tIme of the many authorities on which I found my
delciipiion. The manners of the savage tribes in America have ne-
ver been viewed by persons more capable of observing them with dif-
cernment, than the pllilofophers employed by France and Spain, in

the

the year r735, to dtermine the figure of the earth. M. Boiguer
d'Antonio Ulloa, and D. George Juan, resided long among tl:e na-
lives of the least civilized provinces in Peru. M. de la Ccndamine
had not only this opportunity for observation, but, in I is vo age
down the Maragnon, he had access to inspeCt the slate of the various
nations feated on its banks, in its vast course acro s the continent of
South America. There is a wonderful resemblance in their represent-
ation of the chara&er of the Americans. " They are all extremely
indolent," fa s M. Buuguer, " they are itupid, they pa's whole
days silting in the fame place, without moving, or speaking a
single word. It is not easy to describe the degree of their indifference
for wealth, and all its advantages. One does not well know what
motive to propose to them, when one would persuade them to per-
form any service. It is vain to offer them money; they answer, that
they are not hungry." Voyage au Perou, p. 102. If one confiders
them as men, the narrowness of their understanding seems to be
incompatible with the excellence of the foul. Their imbecillity is so
visible, that one can hardly form an idea of them different from
what one has of the brutes. Nothing disturbs the tranquillity of their
fouls, equally insensible to difaflers and to prosperity. Though half-
naked, they are as contented as a monarch in his moit splendid array:
Riches do not attraft them in the finalleft degree, and the authority
or dignities to which they may aspire, are so little the objets of their
ambition, that an Indian will receive with the fame indifference the
office of a judge (Alcalde) or that of a hangman, if deprived of the
former and alppointed to the latter. Nothing can move or change
them. Interest has no power over them, and they often refuse to
perform a small service, though certain of a great recompence. Fear
makes no impreflion upon them, and refpeat as little. Their difpofi-
tion is so singular, that there is no method of influencing them, no
means of rouzing them from that indifference, which is proof against
all the endeavours of the wisest persons; no expedient that can induce
them to abandon that giofs ignorance, or lay aside that careless negli-
gence, which difconceit the prudence and disappoint the care of such

VOL. 1, 30 as

as are attentive to their welfare. Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. 335,
356. Of those singular qualities he produces many extraordinary
instances, p. 336-347. " Insensibility," fays M. de la Condamine,
" is the basis of the American charaEter. I leave others to determine,
whether this should be dignified with the name of apathy, or disgraced
with that of fupidity. It arises, without doubt, from the small num-
ber of their ideas, which do not extend beyond their wants. Gluttons
even to voracity, when they have wherewithal to satisfy their appetite.
Temperate, when necessity obliges them, to such a degree that they
can endure want without teeming to desire any thing. Pusillanimous
and cowardly to excess, unless when they are rendered desperate by
drunkenness. Averse to labour, indifferent to every motive of glory,
honour, or gratitude; occupied entirely by the objet that is present,
and always determined by it alone, without any solicitude about
futurity; incapable of foresight or of reflection; abandoning them-
selves, when under no reitraint, to a puerile joy, which they express
by frisking about, and immoderate fits of laughter; without object
or defigul, they pass their life without thinking, and grow old without
advancing beyond childhood, of which they retain all the defets.
If this description were applicable only to the Indians in some pro-
vinces of Peru, who are slaves ir every refpec but the name, one
might believe, that this degree of degeneracy was occasioned by the
servile dependence to which they are reduced; the example of the
modern Greeks being proof how far servitude may degrade the human
species. But the Indians in the millions of the Jesuits, and the savages
who frill enjoy unimpaired liberty, being as limited in their faculties,
not to fay as tfupid as the other, one cannot observe, without humi-
liation, that man, when abandoned to simple nature, and deprived of
the advantages resulting from education and society, differs but little
from the brute creation." Voyage de la Riv. de Amaz. 52, 53. M.
de Chanvalon, an intelligent and philosophical observer, who visited
Martinico in 1751, and rcfided there fix years, gives the following
description of the Caiaibs. " It is not the red colour of their com-
plexion, it is not the singularity of theirfeatures, which conflitutes

the

the chief difference between them and us. It is their exceflive firn-
p'icity; it is the limited degree cf their faculties. Their reason is
not more enlightened or more provident than the inltin:t of brutes.
The reason of the molt g-o's peasants, that of the ncgiocs brought
up in the parts of Africa most remote from intcrcour: v. ith Euro-
peans, is such that we discover appearances of int( l'igcncc, which,
though unfolded, is capable of increase. But of this the undro sand-
ing of Caraibs seems to be hardly fi!ceptible. If found p'ilofophy
and religion did not afford us their light, if we were to decide acc'rd-
ing to the firfi impreflion vhich the view of that people makles upon
the mind, we fiould be disposed to believe that they do not belong
to the fame species with us. Their flupid eyes are the true mirrour
of their fouls; it appears to be without functions. Their indolnce
is extreme; they have never the leafi fulicitude about the moment
which is to succeed that which is present." Voyage a la Ma. tin que,
p. 44, 45, 51. M. de la Borde, Tertre, and Rochefort, confirm
this delcription. " The charafteriltics of the Califoinians," fays P.
Venegas, " as well as of all the other Indians, are it.:pidity and in-
sensibility; want of knowledge and refleeion; inconstancy, impetuo-
fity, and blindness of appetite; an exceflive sloth, and abhorrence of
all labour and fatigue; an exceflive love of pleasure and amuse-
ment of every kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity; and,
in fine, a most wretched want of every thing which contfitutes the
real man, and renders him rational, inventive, tractable, and useful
to himself and society. It is not easy for Europeans, who never were
out of their own country, to conceive an adequate idea of those peo-
ple: for, even in the least frequented corners of the gli be, there is not
a nation so tfupid, of such contracted ideas, and lb weak both in
body and mind, as the unhappy Californians. Their undertfanding
comprehends little more than what they fee; abftrac ideas, and much
less a chain of reasoning, being far beyond their power; so that they
scarce ever improve their filit ideas, and these are in gcneal false, or
at leafi inadequate. It is in vain to represent to them any filture ad-
vantages which will result to them f.om doing or abltaining from this

30 or

or that particular immediately present; the relation of means and ends
being beyond the itretch of their faculties. Nor have they the leait
notion of pursuing such intentions as will procure themselves some fu-
ture good, or guard them against future evils. Their will is propor-
tional to their faculties, and all their passions move in a very narrow
sphere. Ambition they have none, and are more desirous of being
accounted firong than valiant. The objects of ambition with us, ho-
nour, fame, reputation, titles, pofls, and distinctions of superiority,
are unknown among them; so that this powerful spring of action, the
cause of so much seeming good and real evil in the world, has no pow-
er here. This disposition of mind, as it gives them up to an amaz-
ing languor and lassitude, their lives fleeting away in a perpetual in-
activity and deteflation of labour, so it likewise induces them to be at-
trated by the first object which their own fancy, or the persuasion of
another, place before them; and at the fame time renders them as
prone to alter their resolutions with the fame facility. They look with
indifference upon any kindness done them; nor is even the bare re-
membrance of it to be expected from them. In a word, the unhap-
py mortals may be compared to children, in whom the developement
of reason is not completed. They may indeed be called a nation who
never arrive at manhood." Hilt. of Californ. Engl. Tranf. i. 64, 67.
Mr. Ellis gives a similar account of the want of foresight and incon-
fiderate disposition of the people adjacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage,
p1. 94, I95.

THE incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable, that negroes

from all the different provinces of Africa are observed to be more
capable of improving by inftruftion. They acquire the knowledge of
several particulars which the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence
the negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a superior order of
beings, and look down upon the Americans with contempt, as void
of capacity and of rational discernment. Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322,
323.

NOTE

NOTE LI. p. 322.

I HAVE observed, p. 297. that, for the fame reason, they never
attempt to rear children who are feeble, distorted, or defective in their
make. So deeply were both these ideas imprinted in the minds of the
Americans, that the Peruvians, a civilized people, when compared
with :he barbarous tribes whose manners I am describing, retained
them; and even their intercourse with the Spaniards has not been able
to root them out. When twins are born in any family, it is still con-
fidercd as an ominous event, and the parents have recourse to rigorous
acts of mortification, in order to avert the calamities vwith vwhich they
are threatened. When a child is born with any deformit)y, they will
not, if they can possibly avoid it, bring it to be baptized, and it is
with difficulty they can be brought to rear it. Arriaga Extirpac. de la
Idolat. del Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE LII. p. 325.

THE number of the fish in the rivers of South America is so ex-
traordinary, as to merit particular notice. " In the Maragnon," fays
P. Acugna, " fish are so plentiful, that, without any art, they may take
ihem with their hands." p. I38. " In the Oiinoco," fays P. Gu-
milla, " beides an infinite variety of other fish, tortoises or turtle
abound in such numbers, that I cannot find words to express it. I
doubt not but that such as read my account will accuse me of exagge-
ration : but 1 can affirm, that it is as difficult to count them, as to count
the sands on the banks of that river. One may judge of theil nlum-
ber by the amazing confiimption of themn; for all the nations con-
tiguous to the river, and even many who are at a dillance, flock thi-
ther at the season of breeding, and not only find i'ufleniiinc during
lhat time, but carry qoff

va\l quantities both of the lurtles and (of their

egsrs, &c." ilifl. dc l'Orcnoque, ii. c. 22. p. 59. M. de la Conda
Jm inei confirms their accounts, p. 1 59.

NO T ;.

NOTE LIII. p. 36.

PIso dcfcribes two of these plants, the Clrurzualpe, and the Guajana-
7imbo. It is remarkable, that though they have this fatal effect upon
fiihes, they are so far fiom being noxious to the human species, they
are u:ed in medicine vith succeSs. Pifo, lib. iv. c 88. Bancroft men-
tions another, the Hiarree, a finall quantity of which is sufficient to in-
cbriate all the fish to a considerable distance, so that in a few minutes
they float m(tionlefs on the surface of the water, and are taken with
ca e. Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, p. io6.

NOTE LIV. p. 328.

REt MARKABLE instances occur of the calamities which rude na-
tions susser by famine. Alvar Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, one of the
mofi gallant and virtuous of the Spanilh adventurers, resided almost
nine ea-s among the savages of Florida. They were unacquainted
with every species of agriculture. Their subsistence was poor and pre-
carious. " They live chiefly," fays he, " upon roots of different
plants, which they procure with great difficulty, wandering from place
to place in feaich of them. Sometimes they kill rome game, some-
times they catch fiflh, but in such small quantities, that their hunger is
so extreme as compels them to eat spiders, the eggs of ants, wo,ms, li-
zards, serpents, a kind of unauous earth, and I am persuaded, that if
in this country there were any stones, they would swallow these. They
preserve the bones of fishes and serpents, which they grind into pow-
der, and eat. The only season when they do not susser much from
famine, is when a certain s-uit, which he calls T'unas, is ripe. They are
sometimes obliged to travel far from their ufiial place of residence, in
order to find them." Naufragias, c. xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. In another
place, he oblerves that they are fiequently reduced to pass two or three
days without food, c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE LV. p. 33o.

M . FII,,Mt[N has given an accurate description of the two species
of man:oc, with an account of its culture, to which he has added some
experiments, in order to ascertain the poisonous qualities of the ju;ce

extracted

extrafted from that species which he calls the biter cassava. Among
the Spaniards it is known by the name of 2'rca brava. Defcr. de Surin.
tom. i, p. 66.

NOTE LVI. p. 330.

THE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as in America.
Oviedo contends, that it is not an indigenous plant of the New
World, but was introduced into the ifiand of Hilpaniola, in the year
51 6, by father Thomas de Berlanga, and that he transplanted it
from the Canary islands, whither the original flips had been brought
from the East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii. c. i. But the opinion of
Acoffta and other naturalists, who reckon it an American plant, seems
to be better founded. Acofta Hist. Nat. lib. iv. 21. It was culti-
vated by rude tribes in America, who had little intercourse with the
Spaniards, and who were destitute of that ingenuity which disposes
men to borrow what is useful from foreign nations. Gumil. iii. 86.
Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

NOTE LVII. p.331.

IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the mofi accurate and best in-
formed writers concerning the Weft Indies, affirms, that maize,
though cultivated in the continent, was not known in the islands, the
inhabitants of which had none but caffada bread. Hist. Nat. lib. iv.
c. 6. But P. Martyr, in the firfi book of his first Decad, which was
written in the year 1493, upon the return of Columbus from his first
voyage, expressly mentions maize as a plant which the islanders cul-
tivated, and of which they made bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise as-
ferts, that they were acquainted with the culture of maize. Hillor.
Gener. cap. 28. Oviedo describes maize without any intimation of
its being a plant that was not natural to Hispaniola. Lib. vii. c. i.

NOTE

NOTE LVIII. p.337.

NEW HOLLAND, a country which formerly was only known,
has lately been visited by intelligent observers. It lies in a region of
t!e globe where it must enjoy a very favourable climate, as it stretches
from the loh to the 38tl degree of northern latitude. It is of great
extent, and from its square form mufft be much more than equal to all
Europe. The people who inhabit the various parts of it appear to be
of cne race. They are evidently ruder than moil of the Americans, and
have made fill less progress in improvement and the arts of life.
There is not the leait appearance of cultivation in any part of this
vafi region. The inhabitants are extremely few, so that the country
appears almoit desolate. Their tribes are frill more inconsiderable
than those of America. They depend for subsistence, almost entirely,
on fishing. They do not fettle in one place, but roam about in quest
of food. Botl sexes go ftark-naked. Their habitations, utcnfils,
&c. are more simple and rude than those of the Americans. Voyages,
by Hawkewvorth, iii. 622, &c. This, perhaps, is the country where
man has been discovered in the earliefl stage of his progress, and it
exhibits a miserable specimen of his condition and powers in that un-
cultivated slate. If this country shall be more fully explored by fu-
ture navigators, the comparison of the manners of its inhabitants with
those of the Americans will prove an inftruaive article in the hiltory of
the human species.

NOTE LIX. p. 337.

P. GABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his fiation among the
Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus describes the face of the country:
" We have marched twelve days without meeting a tingle human
creature. Sometimes we found ourselves in vast meadows, of which
we could not fee the boundaries, through uwhich there flowed many
brooks and rivers, but without any path to condudt us. Some-
times we were obliged to open a passage across thick forests, through

bufles,

bushes and underwood filled with briars and thorns. Somcimes we
had to pass through drep marshes, in v. hich we funk up to t he n i;d!lc.
After being fatigued through the day, we had the earth fr;, orr btd,
or a few leaves, cxpofed to the wind, the rain, and all the inj .i .s

i 1

the air. Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 36o. Dr. Brickell, in an cxtu.l liI
from North Carolina towards the rnount.ins, A. D. 1730, t'. ('l!.-d
fifteen days without meeting with a human creatuie. Nat. H.I-i. of
North Carolina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in aitcirpting to m:i:e a fct-
tlcmcnt in South America, A. D. I532, marchedl fifty Days tlliioulgh
a country without one inhabitant. Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. It.

NOTE LX. P. 338.

I STRONGLY fuFpccp that a community of goods, and an undivided
ltore, are known only among the rudest tribes of hunters; and that
as toon as any species of agriculture or regular indufiry is known,
the idea of an exclusive right of property to the fruits of thcm is in-
troduced. I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which I have
received concerning the slate of Property among the Indians in very
different regions of America. " The idea of the natives of Brasil
concerning prop.rrty is, that if any person cultivate a field, he alone
ought to enjoy the produce of it, and no otlier lhas a title to pretend
to it. If an individual or a family go a-hunting or fifling, what is
caught belongs to the individual or to the family, and they commu-
nicate no part of it to any but to their cazique, or to such of their
kindred as happen to be indisposed. If any Person in the village come
to their hut, he may fit down freely, and eat without asking liberty.
But this is the conlequence of their general principle of hospitality;
for I ne er observcd any l-artition of the increase of their fields, or
the produce of the chace, \x hich I could confider as the rcfult of any
ideal concerning a community of goods. On the contrary, they are
io much aiached lo \what they deem to he their property, that it
v. uildi be cxtremll y dangerous to cncroa-cl' up!on it. As far as I have
fccn, or can learn, thlere is not one tribe of Indians in South America,

Vol, I. 3 P among

among whom that community of goods which has been so highly ex-
tolled is known. The circumstance in the government of the Jesuits,
most irksome to the Indians of Paraguay, was the community of
goods which they introduced. This was repugnant to their original
ideas. They were acquainted with the rights of private exclusive
property, and they submitted with impatience to regulations which
destroyed them." M. le Cheval de Pinto, MS. penes me. Adual
poffeflion (fays a milsionary who resided several years among the
Indians of the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil, but whenever
a possessor fees fit to quit it, another has as good right to take it as he
who left it. This law, or cufiom, refpets not only the particular spot
on which he erets his house, but also his planting ground. If a man
has prepared a particular spot of ground, on which he designs in fu-
ture to build or plant, no man has a right to incommode him, much
less to the fruit of his labours, until it appears that he voluntarily gives
up his views. But I never heard of any formal conveyance from one
Indian to another in their natural Rfate. The limits of every canton
is circumscribed; that is, they are allowed to hunt as far as such a
river on this hand, and such a mountain on the other. This area is
occupied and improved by individuals and their families. Individuals,
not the community, have the ife and profit of their own labours, or
success in hunting. MS. of Mr. Gideon Hawley, penes mne.

NOTE LXI. p. 339.

T H I S difference of temper between the Americans and negroes is
so remarkable, that it is a proverbial faying in the French islands,
" Regarder un fauvage de travers, c'eft le battre; le battre, c'eft le
tuer; battre un negre, c'eft le nourrir." Tertre ii. 490.

NOTE LXII. p. 340.

THE description of the political state of the people of Cinaloa,
perfetly resembles that of the inhabitants of North America, "They
have neither laws nor kings (fays a miflionary who resided long

among

among them) to punish any crime. Nor is there among them, any
species of authority, or political government, to restrain them in any
part of their conduct. It is true, that they acknowledge certain
Caziques, who are heads of their families or villages, but their autho-
rity appears chiefly in war, and the expeditions against their enemies.
This authority the Caziques obtain not by hereditary right, but by
their valour in war, or by the power and number of their families and
relations. Sometimes they owe their pre-eminence to their eloquence
in displaying their own exploits." Ribas Hiftor. de las Triumph.
&c. p. i. The state of the Chiquitos in South America is nearly
the fame. "They have no regular form of government, or civil
life, but in matters of public concern they liften to the advice of
their old men, and usually follow it. The dignity of Cazique is not
hereditary, but conferred according to merit, as the reward of valour
in war. The union among them is imperfe.c Their society refem-
bles a republic without any head, in which every man is master of
himself, and, upon the least disgust, separates from those with whom
he seemed to be connected. Ralacion Hiltorical de las Mifliones de
los Chiquitos, por P. JuanPatr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33. Thus, under
very different climates, v hen nations are in a similar state of society,
their infiitutions and civil government assume the fame form.

NOTE LXIII. p. 352.

"I HAVE known the Indians (fays'a person well acquainted with their
mode of life) to go a thousand miles for the purpose of revenge, in
pathless woods, over hills and mountains, through huge cane swamps,
exposed to the extremities of heat and cold, the viciflitude of sea-
sons, to hunger and thirst. Such is their over-boiling revengeful tem-
per, that they utterly contemn all those things as imaginary trifles,
if they are so happy as to get the scalp of the murderer, or enemy,
to satisfy the craving ghosts of their dcceafed relations." Adair's Hist.
of Amer. Indians, p. 150.

3P2 NO TE

NOTE LXIV. p. 353.

IN the account of the great war between the Algonquins and Iro-
quois, the atchievements of Pifkaret, a famous chief of the Al-
gonquins, performed mostly by himself alone, or with one or two
companions, make a capital figure. De la Potheri, i. 297, &c.
Colden'sHift. of Five Nations, 125, &c.

NOTE LXV. p. 355.

THE life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger, and he is al-
ways degraded from the rank which he had acquired by his former ex-
ploits. Adair, p. 388.

NOTE LXVI. . 355.

A. S the ideas of the North Americans with refpea to the mode of
carrying on war, are generally known; I have founded my obfer-
vations chiefly upon the testimony of the authors who describe them.
But the fame maxims took place among other nations. Ajudicious mif-
fionary has given a view of the military operations of the people in
Gran Chaco, in South America, perfectly similar to those of the Iro-
quois. " They are much addicted to war (fays he) which they carry
on fiequently among themselves, but perpetually against the Spaniards.
But they may rather be called thieves than soldiers, for they never
make head against the Spaniards, unless when they can aflault them by
stealth, or have guarded againit any mischance by spies, who may
be called indefaligable; they will watch the settlements of the Spani-
ards for one, two, or three years, observing by night every thing that
passes with the utmofi folicitudc, whether they may expe&t refifl-
ance or not, and until they are perfcily fecire of the event, they
v ill nt vcnit urc ul pon an attack ; so tllat wlhen the)y do give the assault,
lihey arc ccit;lin of success, and frce from all danger. Tllece spies, in

order

order that they may not be observed, will creep c;n ali-fours 1k;' cats
in the night; but if they are difcco ered, make their ci. pe

p i .h much

dexterity. But, although they never chufe to face the Spaniards, if
they be surrounded in any place, whence they cannot escape, :hey will
fight with desperate valour, and fell their lives very dear." Lozano
Defcrip. delGran Chaco, p. 78.

NOTE LXVII. P. 36.

LE RY, who was an eye-witness of the proceedings of the 7'oipill-
a/nilos, a Brafilian tribe, in a war against a powerful nati;n of their
enemies, describes their courage and ferocity in very firiking terms.
Ego cum Gallo altero, paulo curiofius, magno noftro periculo
(si enim ab hoftibus capti aut lefi fuiflemus, devorationi fuilenemus
devoti) barbaros nofiros in militiam euntes comitari volui. Hi, nu-
mero 4000 capita, cum hoftibus ad littus decertarunt, tanta fcrocitate,
ut vel rabidos & furiosos quofque fuperarent. Cum primum hostes
confpexere, in magnos atque editos ululatus perruperunt. Haec gens
adeo sera efll & truculenta, ut tantifper dum vi;-ium vel tantillum re-
rfat, continuo dimicentt, fugamque nunquam capeffant. Quod a na-
tura illis inditum effe reor. Teftor interea me, qui non femel, tilr.
peditur turn equitum copias ingentes, in acicm inftructas hic confpexi,
tanta numquam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis fulgenti-
b.is, quanta turn pugnantibus iftis percuffium suisse. Lery Hilt. Na-
vigat. in Brasil. ap de ;ry, iii. 207, 208, 209.

NOTE LXVIII. . 357.

THE Americans, like other fierce naltins, originally cut off tle
heads of Ihe enemies whom they flew in war, and carried them aswa%
as trophies. But, as they found these cumberrfeme in their rc-
treat, which they always make very rapidly, and often through a vr.'

C .'n

extent of country, they became satisfied with tearing off t'eir scalps.
This cufomr, though most prevalent in North America, v.as not ua-
kno.,'n among the sout!hen tribes. Lozano, p. 79.

N O T E LXIX. p. 361.

TH E terms of the war-fong seem to be diEtated by the fame fierce
fpilit of revenge. " I go. to war to revenge the death of my bro-
thers; I lhall kill; I shall exterminate; I hall burn my enemies;
I shall bring away slaves; I shall devour their heart, dry their flesh,
drink their blood; I shall tear off their scalps, and make cups of
their fi1lls." Boffu's Travels through Louisiana, vol. i. p. I02. I am
informed, by persons on whose testimony I can rely, that as the num-
ber of people in the Indian tribes has decreased so much, almoff none
of their prisoners are put to death. It is confidered as better policy to
spare and to adopt them. Those dreadful scenes which I have de-
fcribed occur now so rarely, that miflionaries and traders who have re-
iided long among the Indians, never were witnesses to them.

NOTE LXX. p. 361.

ALL the travellers who have visited the most uncivilized of the
American tribes, agree in this. It is confirmed by two remarkable
circumfl:ances, which occurred in the conquest of different provinces.
In the expedition of Narvaez into Florida in the year 1528, the Spa-
niards were reduced to such extreme ditlrefs by famine, that in order
to preserve their own lives, they eat such of their companions as hap-
pened to die. This appeared so flocking to the natives, who were
accustomed to devour their prisoners, that it filled them witl horror
and indignation againfi the Spaniards. Torquemada Monarch. Ind.
ii. p. 584. Naufragios de Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv.
p. 5. During the siege of Mexico, though the Mexicans devoured

with

with greediness the Spaniards and Tlafcalans, whom they took prison-
ers, the utmofl rigour of the fami ie which they fuffred cjuld not in-
duce themt to touch the dead bodies o their own cuntr men. Ber.
Diaz. dcl Caflillo Conquifl. de la N. Ei'pagna, p. 156.

N OTE LXXI. p. 363.

M1VANY fiiLgular circumstances concerning the treatment of l'r!-
foncrs among the pcolle of Brfil, are contained in the narratike
of Stadius, a German Officer, in the fertice of the Portuguese, pub-
lilhcd in tlle ear 556. 1He was taken prisoner by the Toupihlamnioj,
and remained in captivity nine ycars. I-e was often present at thole
horrid festivals v. hich he desc;ribes, and was delfined himself to tlhe
fame cruel fate with other prisoners. But he saved his life by extra-
ordinary efforts of courage and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c.
M. De Lery, who accompanied M. De Villegagnon in his expedition
to Brasil, in the year 1556, and who resided a good time in that country,
agrees with Stadius in every circumstance of importance. He was
frequently an eye-witness of the manner in which the Brafilians treat-
ed their prifiners. De Bry, iii. 21o. Several firiking particulars
omitted by them, are mentioned by a Portuguese author. Purch.
Pilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

N O T E LXXII. p. 366.

THOUGH I have followed that opinion concerning the apathy
of the Americans, which appeared to me, most rational, and sup-
ported by tlh authority of the mofi refpedtable authors, other theories
have been formed \ith regard to it, by writers of great eminence.
D. Ant. Ulloa, in a late work, contends, that the texture of the flin
and bodily habit of the Americans is such, that they are lel's sensible
of pain than the reft of mankind. He produces several proofs of this,
from tle manner in which they endure the mofl cruel chirurgical

operations,

opcrarioons, 8&c. Nu'ticins Anmricanas, p. 313, 314. The fame ob-
fcr\ ation lhas been made by surgeons in Brasil. An Indian, they fay,
never complains under p'in, andl xill bear the amnputation of a leg or
arnim v-i l;ot uttering a finglc groan. MS. penes me.

N O T E IXXIII. p. 367.

T-I IS is an idec natural to all rude nations. Among t'e Romans,
i;l the carly periods of thelir commnonwealth, it was a maxil tl:al
a p. ilncr, " tuin decellifF, videtur cum captus l!i." Digest. lib. xlix.
tit. 5. c. 18. and afterwards xs\hen the progrcfs of refincment rcnldred
themc m:nrc indulgent with rcfpcct to this article, tlhey wcrc uolig, d to
cript' two fitions of law to Iccure thie property, and p4-nlit thc re-
ilr'n o0fl a caplive, the one by the Lcx Cornelia, and the other by the
Je:s Poflimlniii, Hcincc. Elem. Jur. Civ. scc. ord. Pand. ii. p. 294.
Amoing tell ncgroes the fame ideas prcvail. No ranfum was ever ac-
ccpt ccl fUr a priloier. As soon as one is taken in war, lie is rel-uted
to be dead; and he is o in cffeFt to his country and his family. Vo.
d.t Cic\al. des Mar;ais, i. p. 369.

NOTE LXXIV. p. 368.

Ti-iF. ipopl of Chili, the mofi gallant and hh-of ali he
Amrnericans,li aie t1he only exception to this observation. They attack
11 kir eclnmies in thle open si!ld , their troops are ranged in regular
oldcr; their battalions advance to tlie charge not only with courage,
but \with difcill;iin. The North imericans, though many of them
have ilubntitlitel tle llEurpfc.n filir-alrlms inl placc of their ow;n bo).,. s
*.ndl arrl-ow\ , still adhere to ;ier ani'.t m s of a, and carry it

,i 1 'c

* 0, tiiheir (o\wn p li.i- t,1'-ncm. But the Chlieie nearly

,':l Illc ' l d

.h:i'c l \ v

i i pi . ci(

lm ,

1n t' li i.
:','in:r); (-)va'1 '.. Ihiati,'n (;f Chlil. Churel's Coi l iii. p. . Lo-

N0 T .'

NO T0' E LXV. p. 371.

r:M:. I 21re a
Cr 1 r . ku p1 I

"3 '

1'~s

s

X

17s~..1 i~13(A Cf U OaU I hai U - . .,tx t01,' ca7 ','imu

0. ii. e.. -i~n v olo t~law .a h. 0 1021·' tfls.AS ;niiio 1)1. ]?i*22<21>.n

ma.or,_.,:~ xa'e I ho C.
3.el;~1i~s Tl ai~s a~eal r... 2.

n:2 lex'. *-,-g' on .` ,

A. -

10V. :. r j' ---I , 01r to brx ho hc LV. np : s
..athcrs.o rp'' \i Leni I ic~ A.enl.c. Inuc YViaoi. S Oif R, ii; u'Ore

Ii

\x

~y~~

\1.~

W~slC.,

CA

-
r Ica(;

ol icNn tlin

s Za FifLC. CJ ,. p. , 1G.

N 0 T £ LXXVI. .371.

SI Hve ventured to cel 111: imodc of ann paintlin thei
beche4,c s of Ioc Aicis. This is agrecable to tjeir can

ino.As the~y fc:rfir a-broad if tbey are flat copl nlyCs;int-'

cd; they ecrcufe thernfelves mhen inthis liutoby ifa \ing., thnt
they cannot a~plpear beeiical2h) are nte.Gumiili H-lft. do P0 rec-

sloyl?, 1.9 91.

N 0 T E. LNV ),p 32

S OMVE trihcs inl tlim m i):a n ' ~rU
s'ecil to be a mow Ith 17u IL il 1 *~Q I0127 nth Pa Clt.
They. nei~thici cal;i'at mrL'. I'( .K ill \Villich they re-
ilc. Thoi-C in teindcm u.1,v l iA toC li te fee-
C a,1i chlIofl ybs hi nr-. othl (c1: ' pn 'al tavi' po
,,f the earth1, frui s, an c '' :. skl.inte<;

eabas they have no hb 1;:;to a.11te Icti .
VO L. 1.

bundles of reeds, or strong grass, and binding them together at one
end, they open them at the other, and fitting them to their heads,
they are covered as with a large cap, which like a pent-house throws
off the rain, and will keep them dry for several hours. During the
warm season, they form a filed with the branches of trees, which pro-
teEts them from the sultry rays of the fun. When exposed to cold
they make large fires, round which they sleep in the open air. Hiffo-
ria de los triumfos de nueftra fanta fee entre gentes las mas barbaras,
&c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7, &c.

N O TE LXXVIII. p. 373.

THESE houses resemble barns. We have measured some which
were a hundred and fifty paces long, and twenty paces broad. Above
a hundred persons reside in some of them. Wilson's Account of
Guiana. Purch. Pilgr. vol. iv. p. 263. Ibid. 1291. The Indian houses,
fays M. Barrere, have a most wretched appearance, and are a firiking
image of the rudeness of early times. Their huts are commonly built
on some rising ground, or on the banks of a river, huddled sometimes
together, fometimcs tRraggling, and always without any order. Their
aspet is melancholy and disagreeable. One fees nothing but what is
hideous and savage. The uncultivated fields have no gaiety. The
silence which reigns there, unless when interrupted by the disagreeable
notes of birds, or cries of wild beafis, is extremely dismal. Relat.
de la France Equin. p. 146.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 375.

SOME tribes in South America can fend their arrows to a great
diflance, and with considerable force, without the aid of the bow.
They make use of a hollow reed, about nine feet long, and an inch
thick, which is called a Sarbacanc. In it they lodge a small arrow,
with tome unfpun cotton wound about its great end; this confines the
air, so that they can blow it with aflonifhing rapidity, and a sure aim,

to

to the distance of above a hundred paces. These small arrows are al-
ways poisoned. Fermin. Defcr. de Surin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hilt. of
Guiana, p. 281, &c. The Sarbacane is much used by the East In-
dians.

NOTE LXXX. p. 375.

I Might produce many infiances of this, but shall satisfy myself with
one, taken from the Efltinaux. " Their greatest ingenuity (fays
Mr. Ellis) is fhlen in the structure of their bows, made commonly of
three pieces of wood, each making part of the fame arch, very nicely
and exatly joined togethe-. They are commonly of fir or larch;
and as this wants firength and elasticity, they filpply both by bracing
the back of the bow, with a kind of thread, or line, made of the si-
news of their deer, and the bow-string of the fame materials. To make
them draw more stiffly, they dip them into water, which causes both
the back .of the bow and the firing to contraSt, and consequently gives
it the greater force; and as they praftife from their youth, they shoot
with very great dexterity." Voyage to Hudson's Bay, p. 138.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 376.

NECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of mankind in
their inventions. There is, however, such inequality in some parts
of their progress, and some nations get so far the start of others in cir-
cumftances nearly similar, that we mist ascribe this to some events in
their flory, or to some peculiarity in their situation with which we are
unacquainted. The people in the island of Otaheite, lately discover-
ed in the South Sea, far excel moul of the Americans in the know\ledge
and practice of the arts of ingenuity, and yet they had not invented
any method of boiling water, and having no vessel that would bear
the fire, lhcy had no more idea lhat water could be made hot, than
lhat it could be made solid. Voyages by Hawkcfworth, i. 466. 484.

3 Q, NOTE

NO T E LXXXII. p. 376.

ONE of lhefe boats, which could carry nine men, weighed only
sixty pounds. Gofnol Rclat. des Voy. a la Virgin Rec. de Voy. au
Nord. tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LXXXIII. . 378.

A RcmarkablDe pr-oof of this is produced by Ulloa. In wav ing ham-
mocks, coverlets, and the other coarie cloaths, xS hich they are ac-
cuflomcd to nmalnufacure, their induf;iry h;s diicovered no morc ex-
peditious method, than to take up thread after thread, and after count-
ing and forting them each time, to pass the woof between them, to
that in finilhing a finall piece of tiefc fluffs, they frequently spend
mo:c than two )years. Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame dc-
scription of the Indians of Guiana, p. 255. According to Adair, the
ingenuity and dispatch of the North American Indians are not greater,
p. 422. From one of the engravings of the Mexican paintings in
Purchas, vol. iii. p. i Io6. I think it prcbable that the people of Mex-
ico were unacquainted with any better or more expeditious mode of
Awcaing. A luum was an invention beyond the ingenuity of the most
improved Americans. In all their -orlks they advance so slowly, that
one of their artisis is two, months at a tobacco-pipe with his knife, be-
for he finifhcs it. Ibid. p. 423.

N OTE LXXX1V. p. 380.

THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Mceurs des Suvages, c.-
tunds to 347 tedious pages in qua;to.

NO T E LXXXV. p. 3C1.

] Have re fc; cd the reader to fcxeral of the authors who ldefciiVi
tihe m'fl uncivi li:cld a,a iis in Amiei.

i a. Their tcfiimony is t:i 'o:'n).

Thai , P. R','d o ,,:). .:c' .': ilg the pcopiC of Cinnlao, coinicidcs with

tde

rcft. " I v\':s .:t !;-!1.,! atlCti yeC ( lays he), during the cyars I rcfid-
cd nmon1; 1'ihn, to a.;:.:;tin .' hctler they were to be confidc:;cd as

idlolator. ;

i'at'l,'c!- ; and it 11'.: h ab iri 'i1 the Ioi prS- C-t i t
tlou h a onn ';-;-: of th!' r- t?-'- c ina. e' tiC.c of id'l .' , '

;ct . :

1aven.' 11,, t;he l '

t. l ''v

icd'l .c :'Go d, or cven of any si. ':. d- ii , 11 r. p '

an: formal adj :raion to the S:i. cme B :>, l' h exercl.cs. o;u':!. n
o'.cr 'lic v. cii l; nor ;n lI!th . ;

'. : C(l.n C pli!1n ,of th! p ',lc,. icn' c o(,f,

cLreal:or or govcrnor, from \..)hom t!heC cxp -t in lic n :xt lir t!he ree. .d
ot ih'lir r ),d, or Lh p.I'i:i'h! sl. 0 icr c\il .i deds. N ii1cr l: ii']

,
pui/.l, jo:i.in a:ny tct i. i ', incl v, :rlslp."l' iba Trimhlol, &'tc. ;- ig.

N 0 T E LXXXVI. p. 182.

i HIE peopIle of Bra'il \vcrc o i-ruch afright1cncd biy thundlr, v.

!ij,!

is ficquent and drecdfi in their country!, as v.dll as in o;thcr ]:p.;s of
the torrid zone, that i \was not) only te ojct (jo r.ilii'rs rcvci'cncc
b' tt the moi exr e;i.e ne nC i thcir langiiacgF for tlhc Dcit , \ .'as T,'-
/'!,? t!-e !"-m: b' v\!ich they difnilzuillicd thunderc. Pil) du Idclec,-.

T^, p. . it'CcI C
C c-Cl i . i32.

N OTE LXXXVI . p.

V;9.

BY the account hich i. DuiDmonn, an c-e-¥.iknefs give:, of the il:-
neral of t]ie great chief of the N.tchcz, it lpp'lars, tlh,;' tihe fccin';
of tlh ]pcrfos v'r . : fs)lutred ( I that

c - occfin cr .,

f(!liciled the l-: ,-;:::' v.'h h

ea^cr:':3s; othcrt Il2oturcd to av(.d ;!: ir

.Jom7, r;-d \.rml Ia'vcQ meir liecs b siin ; t) the v.o,(d';. As

i'::

indian :aimins ,,i'e an i;n'oxcalinv cmau:;,c'.t ,.lo i *n..,

h.. .;o.

to be burnt lo-,c -her v. itl the ibcdics of ti luii ,ti'and , \vl-li : 'ln .I
themn in .e i li;e o,' their applroaci!nZ: fate, !:.. N'a,..:: oli';, 1 t, i

NrO1 I''. X 11. lp. 95.

ON io':-,:c cecaifi;.q%, pl'. i

tkCntl.'', i:l d..i ':.'; ': Il ill;u,. : ril i'i- 'r. )-

' rc' o' 0 p r;on:; .'ho') arc in li' ;" *:.l, l, . u.. t:' . ", ,1_ !, ii..' *z:'::

, ti:;

a;l:l ind:ccnll. DC la Pothlc;ri. ,

i iTll. ILi. . '..
!. . iii.

P.

p. 319. But the nature of their dances is commonly such as I have
decfri bed.

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 397.

T HE Othjoinacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of the Orinoco, em-
ploy for the fame purpose a composition, which they call 7upa. It is
formed of the feeds of an unknown plant, reduced to powder, and
certain (hells burnt and pulverized. The effects of this when drawn
up into the nostrils are so violent, that they resemble madness rather
than intoxication. Gumilla, i. 286.

NOTE XC. p. 399.

THOUGH this observation holds true among the greater part of
the southern tribes, there are Come in which the intemperance of the
women is as excessive as that of men. Bancroft's Nat. Hilt. of Gui-
ana, p. 275.

NOTE XCI. p. 404.

EVEN in the most intelligent writers concerning the manners of
the Americans, one meets with inconsistent and inexplicable cir-
cumflances. P. Charlevoix, who, in consequence of the controversy
between his order and that of the Franciscans, with refpeEt to the ta-
lents and abilities of the North Americans, is disposed to represent
both their intellectual and moral qualities in the most favourable light,
asserts, that they are engaged in continual negociations with their
neighbours, and conduEt these with the mrft refined address. At the
fame time, he adds, " that it becomes their envoys or plenipoten-
tiaries to exert their abilities and clcquence, ser if the terms which
they offer are not accepted of, they had need to stand on their guard.
It frequently happens, that a blow with a hatchet s the only return
given to their propositions. He is not out of danger even if he is so
fortunate as to avoid the iftrke, he may explct to be pursued, and if
taken, to be burnt." HI-ifl. N. Fr. iii. 251. Men capable of such

ads

acs of violence, seem to be unacquainted with the first principles up-
on which the intercourfc betwen nations is founded ; and in lead of the
perpetual negociations vlIich Charlevoix mentions, it seems impoflile
that there flould be any ccrref;pondence v.whatever among them.

NOTE XCII. p. 405.

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Gcrmans, " Gaudent munc-
ribus, fed nec data imputant, ncc acceptis obligaltur." C. 21. An
author who had a good opportunity of observing the principle which
leads savages neither to exprcfs gratitude for favours which they had
received, nor to expect any return for such as they bestowed ; thus ex-
plains their ideas: " If, fay they, you give me this, it is because you
have no need of it yourself; and as for me, I never part with that
which I think necessary to me." Memoir fur les Galibis; Hifl. des
plantes de la Guiane Francoise par M. Aublet, tom ii. p.
p io.

NOTE XCIII. p. 417.

AND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of Columbus,
hath preserved some circumstances concerning the bravery of the Ca-
ribbees, which are not mentioned by Don Ferdinand Columbus, or
the other historians of that period, whose works have been publified.
A Caribbean canoe, with four men, two women, and a boy, fell in unex-
pectedly with the fleet of Columbus in his second voyage, as it was
fleering through their islands. At first, they were ifruck almoit flupid
with altonifhment at such a strange spectacle, and hardly moved from
the spot for above an hour. A Spanifl bark, with twenty-fivc men,
advanced towards them, and the fleet gradually surrounded them, so
as to cut off their communication with the f-lore. " When they saw
lhat it was imlpolible to escape (lays the hillorian), they f:izeci their
arms with undaunted resolution, and began the atlack. I use the
expreflion, 'wil undaunted refohltion, for they were few, and b''icld
a: vail number ready to assault them. They wounded fcvcral (,r the

SpaIniards,

Spie-iord.d, altl;houh they had targets, .s wrll as other deft ifi,.c .:-
n;n'.::; ;and ev cn after their canoe was ovcrsicl, it ;;v as xv.'ih no l'.; l'
dcTI:-c!t:y aind dlanger, tlint part of them wvere taken, -as ihey C(oAlinit
to de(i·di ti .

.'-... i·.cs, and r0t ufr; their bows :.wi'h grcat d;lxtcrhi'y ,1 i.:

;v. nriin:ag hi thel fca.-- I-lift. dc D. Fl:er .
y D . Yial. MSS. c. 119.

N OTE XCIV. p. 47.

A Pro,1h;.lc1 crinjiture may be formed . iih rcl',ec to the c:'fe ci.
tllc uiifliictio in character between the Caribbccs and t!2e inhabitan's
* f the larger iilands. The foinmcr appear manifcftly to be a clk',ratc
r.*.::. Thcir langage is tota:lly diffcrcnt from that of their neiglbours

i.! .c laI'rc illa ids. They tl-emf-lves have a tradition, that thlir an-

cc iL.!s camne Crrginally from forne part of the continent, and havino
conqcl(lc1l -and e xterminated the antient inhlabitants, touk of lo(ion of
ileir lands, and of tlheir women. Roch!:fort 384. Tertre, 360.
-l;ILnc they call thelmelves B.r:;i-'Ct, \liilch sign iics a man ccome from
b:' ,ond fil. Labat. vi. 131. Accordingly, the Caribbees still use
t\wo diiUinc't languages, cne peculiar to the men, and the other to the
v;'omnen. Tertre, ,61. The language of the men has notling con-
m:)n \ilh that iploken in the large iilands. The dialect of the women
conliderably refcmbles it. Labat. I29. This firongly confirms the
tadiiion \vwhich I have mcntionid. The Caribbees themselves imagine,
that they \ere a c.jlony from thle G. Ilb, a powerful nation of G Luiana,
in S tih America. Tertre, ,61. Rochcfort, 348. But as their
!icrce manncir-s n]lpr:acli nearer to llioe of the people in the northern
con'inc-lt, tl:,n l tl) thl of the nati es of S:;uthl Amrcrica ; and as
t!:ei-' language a :; li'^ ifc r mc niily to la; fkcn in Florida, their
*:.,i:, ' Io!'tldi iJ,c d.:duc:-d ra-il.cr fiom the fcrn.cr thlan fcinm llhe latter.
I,' :.:''. 128, h',c,. 1-l:'rrara, ,Dec. i. lilh. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they
flill ,;l.rT','·rt !l cir '

a ricnt piactic of dnlrn, ing all th1 males, and prc-

sl',\i: ~g 'ihc ,,,o a in
1 l ler for f.\ itlude lc for breed ng.

i N D OF1 TI E, FIRS I'S V 0 OLU MEI.
