THE
H I S T O R Y

O E
A M E R I C A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH, HISTORIQ-

GRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND, AND

MEMBEB OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

HISTORY AT,MADRID.

VOL. III.
A NEW EDITION.

BASIL:
Printed for j. . TOURNEISEN; and . . LEGRAND.

M D C CX C.

# CONTENTS.

CONTEN TS.

VOLUME THE THIRD.

B 0 0 K VI.
Hi/ifory of the conquejf of Peru, by Pizarro-and of the

difenJions and civil vars of the Spaniards i that
country-Origin-progrefs-and effes ofthefe. Page r

BOO 0K VIT.
View of the institutions and manners of the Mexicans

and Peruvians-Civilized flates in comparison of other
Americans - Recent origin of the MAexicans- Fals
which prove their progress in civilization-o-ief of
their policy in its various branches--s their art--
Fatls nwhich indicate a fmnall progress in civilization-
What opinion should be formed on comparing tofe
contradil7ory fals- Genius of their religiou-Peruvian
monarchy more ancient-Its policy founded on religion-
Singular efells of this-PeczliarJfate of property among
the i rzuvians-TTheir public works and arts-roads-
bridges-buildings- Tleir unlarlike fpirit-Vie- of
other dominions of Spain in America-Cinaloa and
Sonora-California- Tucatan and Honduras-Chili-
gTuctuman-lsingdom of Tierra Firme-NewT ingdom
of Granada. 143

B 0 0 K VIII.
View of the interior government , commerce, &c. of the

Spanish colonies-Depopulation of America firJf eec of
their fettlements-not the conJequence of any fyflent of
policy-nor to be imputed to religion-Number of Indians
fill remaining-Fundamental maxims on which the
Spanisb fyJiem of colonization is founded-Condition of
diferent orders of men in their colonies-Chapetoner -
Creoles - Negroes - Indians - Ecclejiefical slate and
policy-Charaer of secular and regular clergy -Small
pro%refs of CriJfianity among the natives-Mlines chief
object of their attention-Mode of working thefe-their
produce-Effes of encouraging this species of indttfiry
-Other commodities of Spanisb Amnerica-FirJf eels
of this new commerce with America on Spain -Why
the Spanisb colonies have not been as beneficial to the
parent-jate as those of other nations-Errors in the
Spanish fyfien of regulating this comnerce-confined to
one port-carried on by annual fleets-Contraband
trade-Decline of Spain both in population and wealth
*-Remnedies propofed-View of the wife regulations of the
Bourbon princes - A newo and more liberal fyJfem
introduced - Beneficial effecs of this - Probable
consequences - Trade betwreen New Spain and the
Philippines-Revenue of Spain from America--whence
it arifes-~to what it amnot,.rs. Page 237

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T OR Y

F
AMERIC A.

BOOK VI.

FROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- r o o K
vered the great Southern Ocean, and received the .v.
first obscure hints concerning the opulent coun- 152-.
tries with which it might open a communication, Schenves fr
the wilhes and schemes of every enterprising per- Peru.
son in the colonies of Darien and Panama were
turned towards the wealth of those unknown re-
gions. In an age when the spirit of adventure was
so ardent and vigorous, that large fortunes were
wafted i and the most alarming dangers braved, in
pursuit of discoveries merely poflible, the faintest
ray of hope was'followed with eager expecation,
and the flightef information was sufficient to in-
spire fich perfet confidence, as condudted men to
the most arduous undertakings '.

Accordingly, several armaments were fitted nruceerq-

out in order to explore and take poffeflion of the fulforl bm
countries to the ealt of Panama, but under the ti

' ce NOTE I.
VOL. III. B

Bo o RK conduct of leaders vwhofe talents and resources

vi. were unequal to the attempt . As the excufions
s3-. of those adventurers did not extend beyond the

limits of the province to which the Spaniards have
given the name of Tierra Firme , a rhountainous
region covered with woods, thinly inhabited, and
extremely unhealthy, they returned with difnal
accounts concerning the distresses to which they
had been exposed , and the unpromising afpe of
the places which they had visited. Damped by
these tidings , the rage for discovery in that direc-
tion abated; and it became the general opinion,
that Balboa had founded visionary hopes, on the
tale of an ignorant Indian, ill underltood, or cal-
culated to deceive.

uLdert.ken But there were three persons fettled in Panama,
by fizarro, on whom the circumtances which deterred others
Almagro,
anid uque. made so little impreflion, that, at the very mo-

152 ement when all confidered Balboa's expectations of

discovering a rich country, by fleering towards
the ealt, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt
the execution of his scheme. The names of those
extraordinary men were Francisco Pizarro, Diego
de Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was
the natural son of a gentleman of an hondrable
family by a very low woman, and, according to
the cruel fate which often attends the offspring of
unlawful love , had been so totally negletded in his
youth by the author of his birth, tat he seems
to have detined him never to rife beyond the

Calancha Chroiica, p. 1oo.

condition of his mother. In consequence of this un- B o o K
generous idea, he set him , when bordering on man- vi.
hood, to keep hogs. But the aspiring mind of 1524.
young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble occupation,
he abruptiy abandoned his charge, enlilted as a
soldier, and, after serving some years in Italy, err
barked for America, which, by opening such a
boundless range to ative talents, allured( every
adventurer whose fortune was not equal to his
ambitious thoughts. There Pizarro early distinguish-
ed himself. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the constitution of his body was robust, he
was foremolt in every danger, patient under the
greatest hardships, and ufubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was soon confidered as a man formed to com-
mand. Every operation committed to his conduct
proved fuccef;ful, as, by a happy but rare con-
junction, he united perseverance with, ardor, and
was as cautious in executing, as he was bold in
forming his plans. By engaging early in ative 1
life, without any resource but his own talents
and industry, and by depending on himself alone
in his struggles to emerge from obscurity, he ac-
quired such a thorough knowledge of affairs, and
of men , that he was fitted to assume a superior part
in conluing the former, and in governing the
latter '.

Almagro had as little to boast of his descent

' errera, dec. x & 2, paflim. dec. iv. lib. vi. c. 107,
Gonlara, illt. 44. 44 Zarate, lib. iv. c. 9.

R
B

o o as Pizarro. The one was a baflard, the other a
vi. foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
14. camp, he yielded not to him in any of the

soldierly qualities, of intrepid valor, indefatigable
.a2ivity, or ifurmountable conflancy in enduring
the hardflhips inseparable from military service in
thle New World.'. .ut in Almagro these virtues
were accompanied with the openness, generosity,
and candor, natural to men wofe profellion is
arms; in Pizarro, they were united with the ad-
dress , the craft, and the diflimulation of a politi-
cian, with the art of concealing his own pur-
poses, and with sagacity to penetrate into those
.of other men.

Hernando de Luque was an ecclefiaflic, who

aeted both as priest and fchoolmatter at Panama,
and, by means which the contemporary writers
have not described, had amafetd riches that in-
spired him with thoughts of rising to greater emi-

nence.

Terms o Such were the men deflined to overturn one of
their affoi. the rnot extensive empires on the face of the
acion,

earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was
authorized by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Fach engaged to employ his whole fortune in the
adventure. Pizarro, the leafl wealthy of the
three, as he could not throw so large a fum as
his afToci;:tes into the common flock, engaged to
take the department of greatelt fatigue and (langer,
and to command i person the armament which was
to go first upon discovery. Alinagro offered to con-
duct the supplies of provisions and reinforcements

of troops, of which Pizarro might stand in need. B o o I
Luque was to remain at Panama to negociate with vi.
the governor, and superintend whatever was carry- 1524.
ing on for the general interest. As the spirit of
cnthufiafm uniformly accompanied that of ad-
venture in the New World, and by that firange
union both acquired an increase of force, this con-
federacy, formed by ambition and avarice, was
confirmed by the most solemn at of religion.
Luque celebrated mass, divided a consecrated host
into three, and reserving one part for himself, gave
the other two to his associates, of which they par-
took; and thus, in name of the Prince of Peace,
ritified a contradt of which plunder and bloodlhed
were the objets '.

The attempt was begun with a force more suit- Their frt

1ttempt.

ed to the humble condition of the three associates,
than to the greatness of the enterprise in which they
were engaged. Pizarro set fail from Panama with Nov. 14,
a single vessel, of small burden, and a hundred
and twelve men. But in that age, so little were
the Spaniards acquainted with the peculiarities ot
climate in America, that the time which Pizarro
chose for his departure was the most improper in
the whole year; the periodical winds, which were
then set in, being directly adverse to the course
which he purposed to fleer '. After beating about I*¶.
for seventy days, with much danger and incefTant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the fouth-ealt

4 Herrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. r . Zarate, lib. i. c. .
' Hcrrera, dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 8. Xerez, p. 179.

B3

o o was not greater than what a fkilfu! navigator will
vi. now make in as many hours. He touched at fe-
Iss. vcral places on the coast of Tierra Firme, but

found every where the fame uninviting country
which former adventurers had described; the low
grounds converted into swamps by the overflowing
of rivers; the higher, covered with impervious
wood ; few inhabitants, and those fierce and hof-
tile. F:namine, fatigue, frequent rencounters with
the natives, and above all, the distempers of a
moist, flctry climate, combined in waing his

Attenled slender band of followers. The undaunted refo-
with little
fucctcf ]ution of their leader continued, however,for for me

time, to sustain their spirits, although no sign had
yet appeared of discovering those golden regions
to which he had promised to conduct them. At
length he was obliged to abandon that inhofpi-
table coaSt, and retire to Chuchama, opposite to
the pearl-iflands , where he hoped to receive a sup-
plv of provisions and troops fiom Panama.

But Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, stood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his
associate. Not finding him there, he landed his
soldiers, who, in fcarching for their companions,
underwent the fame ditireffis , and were exposed to
the fame dangers, which had driven them out of the
country. Kepulfed at length by the Indians in a
fllarp conflict, inl which their leader loft one of his
eyes by the wound of an arrow, they ]ikewife were
compelled to rcinbark. Chance led them to he
place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found some

consolation in recounting to each other their ad- o o t
ventures, and comparing their sufferings. As Al- vi.
inagro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan ,
in the province of Popyan , where both the coun-
try and inhabitants appeared with a more pro-
mifing afpeet, that dawn of better fortune was sus-
ficicnt to determine inch sanguine projectors not to
abandon their fchcme , notwith flanding all that they
had suffered in prosecuting it '

Alnagro repaired to Panama, in hopes of re- *s-

They resume

cruiting their Ihattered troops. But what he and the under-
Pizarro had suffered, gave his countrymen fch an taking.
unfavorable idea of the service, that it was with
difficulty he could levy fourscore men 7. Feeble
as this reinforcement was, they did not hesitate
about resuming their operations. After a long
fcries of difaflt-s and difappointmentts, not inferior
to those which they had already experienced, part
of the armament reached the Bay of St. Matthew,
on the coast of Quito, and lanling at Tacamez,
to the south of the river of Lmeraulds , they beheld
a country more champaign and fertile than any
tlhey had yet discovered in the Southern Ocean, the
natives clad il garments of woollen or cotton ftlft,
.nd adorned with several trinkets of gold and
filvcr.

But, notwithflanding those favorable appear.

ances , magnified beyond the tth , both by the
vanity of the persons who brought the report from

Ilerrera, dec. . lib. viii . . , 12. See NOTE. II.
Zaratu, lib. i. c. .

B4

I o o , Tacamez, and by the fond imagination of those

VI. who lilened to them , Pizarro and Almagro durst

2 not venture to invade a country so populous with

a handful of men enfeebled by fatigue and diseases.
They retired to the small island of Gallo, where
rizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
associate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement as might enable them to take
possession of the opulent territories, whose existence
seemed to be no longer doubtful '.

Pizarro re- But some of the adventurers, less enterprising,
ovleIor of or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly
anama. conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings

and lofTes to their friends at Panama, Almagro met
with an unfavorable reception from Pedro de los
Rios, who had ficceeded Pedrarias in the govern-
ment of that settlement. After weighing the mat-
ter with that cold ceconomical prudence which ap-
pears the first of all virtues to persons whose limit-
ed faculties are incapable of conceiving or execut-
ing great designs, he concluded an expedition, at-
tended with fucli certain wafle of men, to be so
detrimental to an infant and feeble colony, that he
not only prohibited the raising of new levies , but
dispatched a veffcl to bring home Pizarro and his
companions from the island of Gallo. Almagro
and Luque, though deeply affected with those
rneafures, which they could not prevent, and durlt
not oppose, found means of communicating their
sentiments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him

'Xerez, ixS. Herrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. I3.

not to relinquish an enterprise that was the founda- B o o
tion of all thuir hopes, and the only means of re- VI.
efliblifling their reputation and fortune, which I526.
were both on the decline. Pizarro's mind, bent
with inflexible obltinacy on all its purposes , needed
no incentive to persist in the scheme. He per- Perflts in
emptorily refused to obey.the governor of Pana- his design
ma's orders, and employed all his address and
eloquence in persuading his men not to abandon
him. But the incredible calamities to which they
had been exposed were fill so recent in their memo-
ries, and the thoughts of revisiting their families
and friends after a long absence, rushed with fiuch
joy into their minds, that when Pizarro drew a
line upon the sand with his sword, permitting such
as wified to return home to pass over it, only
thirteen of all the daring veterans in his service had
rcfolution to remain with their commander .

This small, but determined band, whose names

the Spanish historians record with deserved praise,
as the persons to wihofe persevering fortitude their
country is indebted for the molt valuable of all its
American poffefions, fixed their residence in the
island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther re-
moved from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited,
they confidered as a more secure retreat, where,
uilmolclted, they might wait for supplies from
Panama, which they trulted that the activity of their
associates would be able to procure. Almagro and

Hcrrera, dec. . lib. x. c. 2, ;. Zarate, lib, i. c. .
Xcrez, i81. Gomara, Hilt. . o9.

B o o i Luque were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and

VT their incetltnt importunity was fcconded by the
x¶ 6. s:enral voice of the colony, which exclaimed

lioudly against the infamy of exposing brave men,
engaged in the public fcrvicc, and chargeable
with no error but what flowed from an exccfs of
zeal and courage, to perish like the most odious
criminals in a desert island. Overcome by those
intreaties and expostulations , the governor at last
consented to fend a finall vessel to their relief. But
that he might not seem to encourage Pizarro to
any new enterprise, he would not permit one
landman to embark on board of it.

Hardshipshe By this time, Pizarro and his companions had
endured, remained five months in an island, infamous for

the most unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
rica'°. During all this period, their eyes were
turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from
their countrymen; but worn out at length with
fruitless expedtations, and dispirited with suffering
liardfhips of which they saw no end, they, in de-
fpair, came to a rcfolution of committing them-
selves to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
in that detestable abode. But, on the arrival of
the velfel from Panama, they were tranfl)olrted with
fich joy, that all their filfferings were forgotten.
Their hopes revived , and, with a rapid transition ,
not unnatura-l among men accufllomd by their
mode of life to fuidden vicinitutles of fortune,
hligh confidence succeeding to extreme dejection,

° Sec NOTE IlL

Pizarro easily induced not only his own followers, o o K
but the crew of the vessel from Panama, to resume VI.
his former scheme with fresh ardor. Instead of return- ,is6.
ing to Panama, they flood towards the south east,
and more fortunate in this than in any of their pall
efforts, they, on the twentieth day after their de-
parture from Gorgona, discovered. the coast of
Peru. After touching at several villages on the Dircovers
coast no wife inviting, they landed at Tumbez, a Peru.
place of some note, about three degrees south of
the line, diflinguifhed for its stately temple, and a
palace of the Incas or sovereigns of the country ".
There the Spaniards feasted their eyes with the first
view of the opulence and civilization of the Peru-
vian empire. They beheld a country fully peopled,
and cultivated with an appearance of regular in-
duftry; the natives decently clothed, and possessed
of ingenuity so far surpassing the other inhabitants,
of the New World, as to have the use of tame do-
mcrfic animals. But what chiefly attracted their
notice, was such a flow of gold and silver, not
only in the ornaments of their persons and temples
but in fevcral vessels and utensils for common use,
formed of those precious metals, as left no room
to doubt that they abounded with profusion in
the country. Pizarro and his companions seem-
ed now to have attained to the completion of their
molt sanguine hopes, and fancied that all their
wifles and dreams of rich domains, and inexhaUft-
ible treafurcs, would soon be realized.

" Calancha, p. xo;.

B o K But with the slender force then under his corn.

vl. mand, Pizarro could only view the rich country of
' 27- which he hoped hereafter to obtain possession. He
Panamla. ranged, however, for some time along the coast,

maintaining every where a peaceable intercourse
with the natives, no less astonished at their new
visitants, than the Spaniards were with the uniform
appearance of opulence and cultivation which they
beheld. Having explored the country as far as
was requiite to ascertain the importance of the dif-
covery, Pizarro procured from the inhabitants some
of their Llamas or tame cattle, to which the Spa-
niards gave the name of Iheep, some vessels of gold
and silver, as well as fom specimens of their other
works of ingenuity, and two young men, whom
he proposed to infirud in the Castilian language,
that they might serve as interpreters in the expe-
dition which he meditated. With these he arrived
at Panama, towards the close of the third year from
the time of his departure thence ". No adventurer
of the age suffered hardships or encountered dan-
gers which equal those to which he was exposed
during this long period. The patience with which
lie endured the one, and the fortitude with which
he surmounted the other, exceed whatever is re-
corded in the history of the New World, where
so many romantic displays of those virtues occur.

Neither the splendid relation that Pizarro gave

Herrera, dec. . lib. x. c. -6. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 7,

8.Vega, . lib. i. c. o-14. Zaratc, lib.i. c. . Benzo,Hift.
Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. .

of the incredible opulence of the country which he B o o
had discovered, nor his bitter complaints on ac- vi.
count of that unseasonable recal of his forces,which 'e28

New

had put it out of his power to attempt making any ichemes
settlement there, could move the governor of Pa- oftheaffr.
nama to swerve from his former purpose. He fill cte
contended, that the colony was not in a condition
to invade such a mighty empire, and refused to
authorize an expedition which he foresaw would be
so alluring that it might ruin the province in which
he presided, by an effort beyond its strength. His
coldness, however, (lid not in any degree abate the
ardor of the three associates; but they perceived
that they could not carry their scheme into execu-
tion without the countenance offuperior authority,
and must solicit their sovereign to grant that per-
mission which they could not extort from his dele,
gate. With this view, after adjufRing among
themselves that Pizarro should claim the station of
governor, Almagro that of lieutenant-governor,
and Luque the dignity of bishop in the country
which they purposed to conquer, they sent Pizarro
as their agent to Spain, though their fortunes were
now so much exhausted by the repeated efforts
which they had made, that they found some diffi-
culty in borrowing the finall fum requisite towards
equipping him for the voyage "

Pizarro loft no time in repairing to court, and pizarro&re&,

new as the scene might be to him, he appeared be- to p;into
fore the emperor with the unembarraffed dignity of ";Cae

" Hcrrera, dec 4. lib. iii.c. . Vega, . lib. . . 14.

B o o a man conscious of what his services merited; atd

vi. he conduded his negociations with an insinuating
isss. dexterity of address, which could not have been

expected either from his education or former ha-
bits of life. His feeling description f his own sus-
ferings, and his pompous account of the country
which he had discovered , confirmed by the fpeci-
mens of its productions which he exhibited , made
such an imprclfion both on Charles and his minis-
tcrs, that they not only approved of the intended
expedition, but seemed to be interested in the fuc-
cess of its leader. Presuming on those dispositions
in his favor, Pizarro pid little attention to the

Neglefahis interest of his associates. As the pretensions of
aflboiates, Luque did not interfere with his own, he obtained

for him the ecclesiastical dignity to which he afpir-
ed. For Almagro, he claimed only the command
of the fortress which should be creted at Tumbez.
To himself he secured whatever his boundlcfs am-

July 2=. bition could desire. He was appointed governor,
and procures captain-general, and adelantado of all the country
the fIiprcme
command to which he had discovered, and hoped to conquer,
himrelf. with supreme authority, civil as well as military;

and with full right to all the privileges and emolu-
ments usually granted to adventurers in the New
World. is jurifdlition was declared to extend
two hundred leagues along the coast to the fonth
of the river St. Jago; to be independent of the
governor of Panama; an(d he had power to nomni-
nate all the officers who were to frve under him.
In return for those conceflions, which colt the court
of Spain nothing, as the enjoyment of them

depended upon the success of Pizarro's own efforts, I o o K
lie engaged to raise two hundred and fifty men, vl
and to provide the ships, arms, and warlike stores xs8.
requisite towards fubjeCling, to the crown of Castile,
the country of which the government was allotted
liin.

Inconsiderable as the body of men was which Slender rorcg

Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds and cre- hewasable
dit were so low that he could hardly complete half 1i:9.
the number; and after obtaining his patents from
the crown, he was obliged to feal privately out of
the port of Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny
of the officers who had it in charge to examine,
whether he had fulfilled the stipulations in his con.
tradt +. Before his departure , however, he received
some supply of money from Cortes, who having
returned to Spain about this time, was willing to
contribute his aid towards enabling an ancient com-
panion, with whose talents and courage he was well
acquainted, to begin a career of glory similar to
that which he himself had finifled 'I.

He landed at Nombre de Dios, and marchgd

across the iflhmus to Panama, accompanied by his
three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of
whom the firfl was born in lawful wedlock, the two
latter, like himself, were of illegitimate birth, ani
by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's brother.
They were all in the prime of life, and offuch abi-
lities and courage, as fitted them to take a diftin
guifled part in his subsequent tranfadcions.

" '* Hlerrcra, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9.

' Ibid. lib. vii. c. o.

B o o K On his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Almagrc

VI. so much exasperated at the manner in which he
Hi30- had conduted his negociation, that he not only

His re conci-
liationwith refuse' to ad any longer in concert with a man,
Almagro. by whose perfidy he had been excluded from the

power and honors to which he had a jult claim
but labored to form a new association, in ordei
to thwart or to rival his former confederate in hi!
discoveries. Pizarro, however, had more wifdorr
and address than to susser a rupture so fatal to al
his schemes, to become irreparable. By offeriuc
voluntarily to relinquish the office of adelantado,
and promising to concur in soliciting that title
with an independent government, for Almagro, he
gradually mitigated the rage of an open-heartec
follier, which had been violent, but was no
implacable. Luque, highly satisfied with having
been fccefsful in all his own pretensions, cordiall)
seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A reconciliatior
wvas ffeded; and the confederacy renewed on it
original terms, that the enterprise should be carric(
on at the common expense of the associates, am
the profits accruing from it fliould be equalli
divided among them '

Their arma. Even after their re-union, and the utmof effort
nlent. of their interrft, three finall veflels, with a hundrc(

and eighty soldiers, thirty - fix of whom wer
horsemen, composed the armament which thej
were able to fit out. But the aonifhing progref

Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. i. G. 3
Vega, 2. lib. i . . 14.

of

of the Spaniards in America had inspired them with o o si
fich ideas of their own fperiority, that Pizarro vr.
did not hesitate to fail with this contemptible force fml
to invade a great empire. Almagro was left at F'"bruary
Panama, as formerly, to follow hin with what
reinforcement of men he flould be able to inulter.
As the season for embarking was properly chosen,
and the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Piz.rrr) cownpleted
the oy.ige in thirteen dy; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried :bo\'e
a hundred leagues to the north of umbez the
place of his deltination , and obliged to land his
troops in the by of St. larthew. Without losing .and in
a moment, he began to advance towards the Peru.
south, taking care, however, not to depart far
from the sea-shore, both that he might easily effedc
a junction with the supplies which he expeded
from Panama, and secure a retreat in cafe of any
difafer, by keeping as near as pollible to his Ihips.
But as the country in several parts on the coast
of Peru is barren, unhealthful and thinly peopled;
as the Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near
their mouth, where the body of water is grcateft;
and as the imprudence of Pizarro, in attacking
the natives when he fiould have fludied to gain
their confidence, had forced them to abandon
their habitations; famine, fatigue, and diseases of
various kinds, brought upon him and his follow.,
ers calamities hardly inferior to thole which they
h11,d endured in their former expedition. What
they now experienced cozrefponded so ill ith

VOL. 11.. C

£ o the ,.liiing description of the country given b7

vi. lizarro, that many began to reproach him, and
'153. every soldier must have become cold to the

service, if, even in this unfertile region of Peru,
they had not met with ome appearances of wealth
and cultivation, which seemed to justify the report
Alril 14. of their leader. At length they reached the province

of Coa(ue; and, having urprifed the principal
settlement of the natives, they seized there veflcls
and ornaments of gold and silver, to the amount
of thirty thousand pesos, with other booty of such
value, as dispelled all their doubts, and inspired
the most desponding with sanguine hopes

Hismearures Pizarro himnfelf was so much delighted with this
*,r olin'ci" - rich spoil, which he confidered as the firstfruits of
a reinforce-
ment. a land abounding with treasure, that he instantly

dispatched one of his flips to Panama with a large
remittance to Almagro; and another to Nicaragua
with a considerable fum to some persons of influence
in that province, in hopes of alluring adventurer,
by this early display of the wealth which he had
acquired. Meanwhile, he continued his march
along the coast, and disdaining to employ any
means of reducing the natives but force, he
attacked them with fch violence in their fcattcred
habitations, as compelled them either to retire into
the interior counLry, or to submit to his yoke.
This fuddcn appearance of invaders, whose afpedt
and manners were so fIrange, and whose power
o, feeomcd to be so irrefitible, made the fame dreadful

'7 Iecrrcra, dec. 4.lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c . Xcres, xi2.

impression as in oher parts of merica. Pizarro n o o r
hlardly met wilh resistance until he attacked the vi.
ins.nd of Puna in the bay of Gua.yquil As that 13
vwa better peopled than the country throughl
which he hadl passed, and its inhabitants fiercer
and les civilized than those of the continent, thry
defened thcenfclve with stich obiinate valor,
that -'izarro spent fix month in reducing them to
fubjecdion. From 'una he proceeded to I umbez,
where the distempers which raged among his mea
compel!ed lim to remain for three months ".

\Vhile lie was thus employed, he began to reap

advantage from his attention , to spread the fame
of lis first fccefs at Coaque. Two different detach- teceivoe
ments arrived from Nicaragua, which, though fol all t
neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered as a advance.
reinforcement of great consequence to his feeble
band, especially as the one was under the command
of Sebastian Benalcazar, and the other of Hernando
Soto, officers not inferior in merit and reputation
to any who had served in America. From Tumbez hlay ii
he proceeded to the river Piura, and in an advan-
tageous flation near the mouth of it, he eftablilhed
the firfR Spansllh colony in Peru; to which' he
gave the n;iale of St. lichael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the cen-

tre of the PeroLvian empire, he graduially received
more fll information concerning its extent and

' P. Sanncho, ap. Ramiuf. iii. p. 3 7 t, F. -errera, dec. 4'

lil. vii. c. S . lib. ix, c. J. Zlnuitc, JiL. ii. . , j. X .-S

;
IJ. 18s , &C,

Ci

B o policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at that

vi. juncture. Vithout some knowledge of these, he
1 32. could not have conducted his operations with

propriety; and without a suitable attention to
them, it is impofllble to account for the progress
which the Spaniards had already made, or to
unfold the causes of their subsequent success.

State of the At the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru,
Peruvian the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length,

from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from east to
weft, was much less considerable; being uniformly
bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes, firetching
from its one extremity to the pther. Peru, like the
reft of the New World, was originally possessed
by small independent tribes, differing from each
other in manners, and in their forms of rude
policy. All, however, were so little civilized, that,
if the traditions concerning their mode of life,
preserved among their descendants, deserve credit,
they must be classed among the most unimproved
savages of America. Strangers to every species of
cultivation or regular indultry, without any fixed
residence, and unacquainted with those sentiments
and obligations which form the first bonds of social
union, they are said to have roamed about naked
in the forests, with which the country was then
covered, more like wild beasts than like men.
After they had struggled for several ages with the
hardfliips and calamities which arc inevitable in
such a fate, and when no circumstance seemcd
to indicate the approach of any uncommon effort

towards improvement, we are told that there i o o
appeared on the banks of the lake Titiaca, a man v.
and woman of majeltic form, and clothed in 5s3.
decent garments. They declared themselves to be
children of the Sun, sent by their beneficent
parent, who beheld with pity the miseries of the
human race, to inftrud and to reclaim them. At
their persuasion, enforced by reverence for the
divinity in whose name they were supposed to
speak, several of the dispersed savages united toge-
ther, and receiving their commands as heavenly
injunctions, followed them to Cuzco, where they
fettled, and began to lay the foundations of a
city.

Manco Capac and Mama Ocollo, for such were

the names of those extraordinary personages, having
thus collected some wandering tribes, formed that
social union, which, by multiplying the desires,
and uniting the efforts of the human species, excites
industry, and leads to inprovement. Nlanco Capac
inftruded the men in agriculture, and other useful
arts. Mama Ocollo taught the women to spin and
to weave. By the labor of the one sex, subsistence
became lets precarious; by that of the other, life
was rendered more comfortable. After securing
the objedts of firit neceflity in an infant slate, by
providing food, raiment, and habitations, for the
rude people of whom he took charge, Manco
Capac turned his attention towards introducing
such laws and policy as might perpetuate their
happiness. By his institutions, which fball be
mole particularly explained hereafter, the various

C

B o o T relations in private life were eflablifhlcd, and the (dties

vi. resulting from them prescribcd with fch propriety,
53''- as graduallv formed a barbarous pcople to decency

of nallmcls. In public iadminifiatiron, tle functions
of plrfol in au:'r, ity vtre so precisely deiilled,
an(d dle fu!bordina'ion of thnf,' untder ttheir juiillic-
tion m;lintained vi!h such a tecal'y hand, that the
so eieiv in whci l hie prcfidcd, oon assumcd the
as. 'c&' of rctilr ald well governed slate.

Tl'i-s, accord i,n to the Indian tradition, was

fonlundrd hte rempire of the lzcus or Lords of Peru.
iAt first ils extent \Vas fnall. The territory of
rVTI.fco C.ipac di! not reach above eight leagues
from Cuz,'o. E:t v wthit its narrow precincts he
cxcrclfcd absolute and uncontrolled authority. His
fucccfflrs, as their dominiions extended, arrogared
a ii!.,r- riifiction over the new fubjedts which
thy accuired ; the d, fpotifr of Asia was not
more cnii)l-te. Tie Incis were not only obeyed
ac mto)nar. hs, bit revered as divinitie. Their blood
was held to be sacred, and, by prohibiting inter-
m.rrilages with the peopli, was never contaminated
by mixing with that of any other race. 'The family,
thut separated from tle rcll of the nation, was
dirtinguiflhed by peculiarities in dress anti ornaments,
vhich it was unlawful for others to aflumc. The
monarch himfilf appeared with ensigns of rovalty
rcfcrvcd for hin alone; and reccived from his
fubjcs, marks of obl'c.lious homage and relpel,
which ap.proachcd almost to ad(oration.

Bur, among lie Peruvians, tis unbounded power
of their monarchs fcrins to have bccn uniforimly

accompanied with attention to the good of their r o o
filbjets. It was not the rage of concjueft, if we vi.
nimy believe the accounts of their countrymen, 's;-3
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions,
but the desire of diffusing the. blefin gs of civiliza-
tion, and the knowledge of the arts which they
poffelfcd, among the barbarous people whom they
reduced. During a fuccefiion of twelve monarchs,
it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
character ".

Wlhen the Spaniards first visited the coalt of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and(
twenty-fix, Hu,.na Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the fate, was feated on the
throne. He is represented as a prince distinguished
not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the
race, but eminent for his martial talents. By his
x'idorious arms the kingdom of Quito was fubjeded,
a conquest of such extent and importance as almolt
doubled the power of the Peruvian empire. He
was fond of residing in the capital of that valuable
province, which he had added to his dominions;
and, notwithlanldiing the ancient and fundamental
law of the monarchy against polluting the royal
blood by any foreign alliance, he married the
daughter of the vanquilhed monarch of Quito.
Sh bore him a son namedi Atahualpa, whom, oi
S)is dcath at Quito, which seems to have hapipened
.bout the year one thousand live hundred ant

Cicca de Lcon , Chron1 . 4 . lrr ,c.

4. r , dc. . lib. x.
c. 4. dec. . lib. iii. c. 17.

C4

s o o twenty-nine, he ap)ointed his ficceffor in that

vr. kingdom, leaxving the reft of his dominions to
1s34I. -tulfcar, his eldest fnn by a mother of the royal

race. Greatly as the Peruvians revered the memory
of a monarch who had reigned with greater repu-
tation and splendor than any of his predecessors,
the deltination of Huana Capac concerning the
fuiLeffion, appeared so repugnant to a maxim
coeval with the empire, and founded on authority
deemed sacred, that it was no sooner known at
Cuzco than it excited general disgust. Encouraged
by th:ife sentiments of his fuibjedts, Huafcar required
Li brother to renounce the government of Quito,
and to acknowledge him as his lawful fperior.
But it had been the firfI care of Atahualpa to
gain a large body of troops wlich had accompanied
hi ftiaher to Quito. Thef' were the flower of the
Peruvian varri r , to whose valor Iuana Capac
had been indebted for all his victories. Kelying on
their fpport, Atahualpa first eluded his brother's
demand, and then mrched against him in hostile
array.

'Thus the ambition of two young men, the title

of the one founded on ancient usage, and that of
the other afTerted by the veteran troops, involved
Pelu in civil war, a calamity to which, under a
succession of virtnous princes, it had hitherto been
a stranger. In such a cont, ft the issue was obvious.
The force of arms triumphed over the authority of
laws. Atahualpa remained vidtorious, and made a
cruel ufc of his vidory. Confclous of the defect
in his own title tQ the crown, he attempted to

exterminate the royal race, by putting to death B o o t
all the children of the Sun descended from Manco vi.
Capac, whom he could seize either by force or I('.
firatagem. From a political motive, the life of his
unfortunate rival Iltafcar, who had been taken
prisoner in the battle which decided the fate of
the empire, wis prolonged for some time, that,
by iffTing orders in his name, the usurper might
more cafily eliabiflh his own authority".

WIhen Pizarro landed in the bay of St. 1Matthew, ravorab'

to the ,:r¢-

this civil war agcd between the two brothers in grers ozl'i-
its grcatefl fury Had he made any hostile attempt arra.
in his former visit to Peru in the year one thousand
five hundied and twenty seven, he must then have
encountered the force of a powerful slate, united
under a monarch, poffcffed of capacity as well as
courage, and unembarraffed with any care that
could divert him from opposing his progress. But
at this time, the two competitors, though they
received early accounts of the arrival and violent
proceedings of the Spaniards, were so intent upon
the operations of a war, which they deemed more
interesting, that they paid no attention to the
motions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in number
to excite any great alarm, and to whose career, it
would be easy, as they imagined, to give a check
when more at leisure.

Hy this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof Heavoili
Pizarro could have no foresight, and of which , irFlror

vand a&

" Zarate, lib. i. c. i c. Vega, . lib. ix. c. 12 and ; --
40. Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. 2. lib. iii. c. 17.

n o o from his defective mode of intercourse with the

vi people of the country, he remained long ignorant,
15 3- lie was permitted to carry on his operations unmo-

leflted, and advanced to the centre of a great
empire. before one effort of its power was exerted
to stop his career. During their progress, the
Spaniards had acquired sone imperfedc knowledge
of this struggle between the two contending
facdions. The firfi complete information with
refped to it, they received from messengers whoin
Huafcar sent to Pizarro, in order to solicit his aid
againlt Atahualpa, whom he represented as a
rebel and an usurper . Pizarro perceived at once
the importance of this intelligence, and foresaw so
clearly all the advantages which might be derived
from this divided state of the kingdom , which
he had invaded, that, without waiting for the
reinforcement which he expected from Panama, he
determined to push forward, while interline discord
put it out of the power of the Peruvians to attack
him with their whole force, and while, by taking
part, as circumstances fiould icline him , with
one of the competitors, he might be enabled with
greater cafe to crufli both. nterprifing as the
Spaniards of that age were in all their operations
against Americans, and distinguished as Pizarro
vas among his countrymen for daring courage,
vwe can hardly fppofe , that after having pro-
cceded hitherto lowly, and with mtuch caution,
'hc would have changed at once his fyltcm of

2' Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 3.

operation, an(t have ventured upon a measure foi o o
hazardous, without obme new motive or prospect vi.
to jlftify it.' 13.

As he was obliged to divide his troops, in Stteufhis

order to leave a garrison in St. Mlichael, sufficient forccS.
to defend a station of equal importance as a place
of retreat in cafe of av difaler, and as a port
for receiving any supplics which fiould come
from Panama, he'began his march with a very
slender and ill.accoutred train of followers. They
confilted of fixty-two herfemen :', and a hundred
and two foot - foldicrs, of whom twenty were
armed with cross-bows, and three with muskets.
IHe directed his course towards Caxamalca, a small
town at the distance of twelve days march from
St. MNichael, where Atahualpa was encamped with
a considerable body of troops. Before he had
proceeded far, an officer dispatched by the Inca
met him with a valuable present from that prince,
accompanied with a proffer of his alliance, and
aifturances of a friendly reception at Caxamalca.
Pizarrn, according to the usual artifice of his
countrymen in America, pretended to come as
the ambassador of a very powerful monarch,
annd declared that he was now advancing with an
intention to offer Atahualpa his aid against those
enemies who ifputed his title to the throne".

As the objct of the Spaniards in entering their lcas of(tu
country was altogether incomprchenfibcl to the . rl,,;,ln"

cotrriUb

"2 Sec NOTE V.
2' Ilcrrcra, dcc. s. ib. i. c. . Xerez, p. JiS .

n o o Ic Peruvians, they had formed various conjecures

vr. concerning it, without being able to decide whether
th'i3d' they should confider their new guests as beings of
their de.
gins. a superior nature, who had visited them from

some beneficent motive, or as formidable avenger;
of their crimes, and enemies to their repose and
liberty. The continual professions of the Spaniards,
that they came to enlighten them with the
knowledge of truth, and lead them in the way
of happiness, favored the former opinion; the
outrages which they committed, their rapaciousness
and cruelty, were awful confirmations of the latter.
While in this slate of uncertainty, Pizarro's declara.
tion of his pacific intentions so far removed all the
Inca's fears, that he determined to give him a
friendly reception, In consequence of this resolution,
the Spaniards were allowed to march in tranquillity
across the sandy desert betw-een St. Michael and
Motupe, where the most feeble effort of an enemy,
added to the unavoidable difireffes which they
suffered in pafifng through that comfortless region,
must have proved fatal to them ". From Motupe
they advanced towards the mountains which en.
compassed the low country of Peru, and passed
through a defile so narrow and iacceffible, that
a few men might have defended it againfl a
numerous army. But here likewise, from the fame
inconsiderate credulity of the ic1ca, the Spaniards
met with no opposition, and took quiet poffellion
of a fort eresded for the fccurity of that important

' See NOTE V.

flation. As they now approached near to Caxa- B o o o
malca, Atahualpa renewed his professions of vt.
friendflhip; and as an evidence of their sincerity, Is3.
sent them presents of greater value than the
former.

On entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took poffeffior Arrive at
f a large court, on one fide of which was a Caxamaici
house which the Spanish hiflorians call a palace
of the Inca, and on 'the other a temple of the
un, the whole surrounded with a strong rampart
r wall of earth. When he had posted his troops in
his advantageous station, he dispatched Hernando
oto, and his brother Ferdinand, to the camp of
tahualpa, which was about a league diltant
rom the town. He inftruded them to confirm
he declaration which he had formerly made of
is pacific disposition, and to desire an interview
vith the Inca, that he might explain more fully
he intention of the Spaniards in visiting his
ountry. They were treated with all the refpecdful
ofpitality usual among the Peruvians in the recep.
ion of their most cordial friends, and Atahualpa
romifed to visit the Spanifl commander next day
n his quarters. The decent deportment of the
eruvian monarch, the order of his court, and
he reverence with which his fubjedts approached
is person and obeyed his commands, aftonilhed
hose Spaniards, who had never met in America
ith any thing more dignified than the petty cazique
f a barbarous tribe. But their eyes were still more
owerfully attraded by the vast profusion of wealth
hich they qbferved i the nca's camp. 'Th

B o o rich ornaments worn by him and his attendants,

vi. thile vclels of gold and silver in wvhich tile repaSt
1532. osiercd to them was served up, tie multitude of

utenlils of every kind formed of those precious
metals, opened p)rofpcds f.r exceeding any idea
of opulence that a European of the sixteenth
centurv could form.

rerfitdinis On their return to Caxamalca, while their minds
fL htm, of
iLhzrrof wvere yet warm with admiration and desire of the

wealth which they had beheld, they gave filch a
dcfeiiption of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.
From his own observation of American manners
during his long service in the New World, as
well as from the advantages which Cortes had
derived from seizing IMontezuma, he knew of what
consequence it was to have the Inca in his power.
For this purpose, he formed a plan as daring as
it was perlidious. Notwithftandingi the charater
that he had assumed of an ambassador from a
powerful monarch, who courted an alliance vwth
the Inca, and in violation of the repeated offers
which ihe had made to himn of his own fiiendfip
nlnd afiitalnce, he determined to avail iinmfr'lf of
the ulifulp;ciou fiinplicity with which Atahllual)a
relied on his profeliions, and to fcize the person
of the Inca during the interview to which he h.d
invited him. llc prepared for the cxecution of hs
ftlieme with tlie nne deliberate arrangement, and
with as little c:ollpurlnCtion, as il it had reflected
no difracc on hiill ls or his country. lie divid(d
his caval\'y into three fn:all fludrons1, under tle

command of his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and 3'o o
Benalcazar; his infantry were formed in one body, v.
except twenty of most tried courage, whom he 1532.
kept near his own person to fpport him in the
d(ingerots service which ie reserved for himself;
the artillery, consisting of two field-pieces", and
the cross - bow-men , were placed opposite to
the avenue by which Atahualpa was to approach.
All were commanded to keep within the square,
and not to move until the signal for aion was
given.

Early in the morning the Peruvian camp was Nov. t.

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to tbelnca.
appear with the greatest splendor and magnifi-
cence in his first interview with the strangers, the
preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march.
Even then, left the order of the proceflion should
be deranged, he moved so slowly, that the Spa-
niards became impatient, and apprehensive that
some ffpicion of their intention might be the
cause of this delay. In order to remove this, Pi-
zarro dispatched one of his officers with frcfh affur-
anccs of his friendly disposition. At length the
Inca approached. First of all appeared four hun-
dredn men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to
clear the way before him. He himself, fitting on
a throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colors, and alnmof covered with plates of gold
and i!vcr enriched with precious ltones, was carried

1' Xcrcz, p. 194.

o o on the foulders of his principal attendants,
vi. Behind him came fom, chief officers of his court,
1532 carried in the fame manner, Several bands of

fingers and dancers accompanied this cavalcade;
and the whole plain was covered with. troops,
amounting to more than thirty thousand men.

Stange ha. As the Inca drew near the Spanifl quarters,
Tg:ue of fatherVincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,
fathtr Val.
verde. advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre.

viary in the other, and in a long discourse explain.
ed to him the dotrine of the creation, the fall of
Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and refur,
redion of Jesus Christ, the appointment of St,
Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranfmif.
sion of his apostolic power by succession to the
popes, the donation made to the king of Cartile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Christian faith, to ac
knowledge the supreme jurifdidion of the pope,
and to fibmit to the king of Caflile as his lawful
foverign ; promnifing, if he complied instantly
with this requisition, that the Castilian monarch
would protect his dominions, and permit him to
continue in the exercise of his roy;l authority; but
ii he should impiously refuse to obey this summons,
be denounced war againlt him in his mailer's name,
and threatened him with the molt dreadful cffets
of his vengeance.
Rely oftlbe This flrange harangue, unfolding deep my[.

lla. teries, and alluding to unknown facts, of which

no powycr of cloqucncc couild have conveyed at

once

once a difind idea to an American, was so lamely B o o
translated by an unskilful interpreter, little ac- VI.
quainted with the idiom of the Spanifl tongue, and S23z.
incapable of expressing himself with propriety in
the language of the Inca, that its general tenor
was altogether incomprehensible to Atahualpa.
Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him with afloniflment and indignation. His re-
ply, however, was temperate. He began with
observing, that he was lord of the dominions over
which he reigned by hereditary succession; and
addled, that he could not conceive how a foreign
priet should pretend to dispose of territories which
did not belong to him; that if fich a preposterous
grant had been made, he, who was the rightful
poffeforr, refused to confirm it; that he had no in-
clination to renounce the religious inltitutions eltab-
lifhed by his ancestors; nor would he forsake the
service of the Sun, the immortal divinity whom he
and his people revered, in order to worlhip the
God of the Spaniards, who was fibjed to death;
that with respect to other matters contained in his
discourse, as he had never heard of them before,
and did not now uiderfand their meaning, he de-
fired to know where the priest had learned things
so extraordinary. "In this book," anfwcred Val-
verde, reaching out to him his breviary. The
Inca opened it eagerly, and turning over the leaves,
liftcd it to his ear: "This," fays he, "is silent;
it tells me nothing ;" and threw it wih disdain to
the ground. sThe enraged monk, running towards
lis countrymen, cried out, "To arlns, Chriltians,

VOL. III. D

a o o to arms; the word of God is insulted; avenge this

vi. profanation on those impious dogs "
T :.- Pizarro, who, during this long conference,
tPiaik the had with difficulty restraincd his soldiers, eager to
Peruvians, seize the rich spoils of which they had now so near

a view, immediately gave the signal of assault. At
once the martial music struck up, the cannon and
muskets began to fire, the horse sallied out fiercely
to the charge, the infantry rufied on sword in
hand. I he Peruvians, astonished at the sudden.
ness of an attack which they did not expect, and
dismayed with the defirudcive effedcs of the fire.
.arns, and the irresistible impression of the cavalry,
fled with universal conflernation on every fide,
without attempting either to annoy the enemy, or
to defend themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his
chosen band, advanced diredly towards the Inca;
and though his nobles crowded around him with
officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while
they vied one with another in sacrificing their own
lives, that they might cover the sacred person of
their fovercign, the Spaniards loon penetrated to

n,,n i7es the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the
the Inca. arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him

as a prisoner to his quarters. '.Ihe fate of the mo-
narch increased the precipitate flight of his follow.
ers. T he Spaniards puifued tlic towards every
quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting bar.
barity continued to l.lughtcr wretched fugitixce,
vwho never once offered to refill. The carnage did

" Scc NOTE VI.

not cease ntil the close of day. Above four thou- B o K
fland Peruvians were killed. No;t a tingle Spaniard VI.
fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro himfclf, 's;3
whose hand was fliihtly hurt by one of his own
soldiers, while Itlriuglig eagcrly to lay hold on the
Inca .

The plu:nder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru, and they were so transport-
ed with the value of the acquisition, as well as the
greatness of their fucceis, that they passed the night
in the extravagant exultation natural to indigent
adventurers on such an extraordinary change of
fortune.

At first the captive monarch cotuld hardly be- Deieionof

the Inca.

lieve a calamity which he so little expected to be
real. But he soon felt all the misery of his fate,
and the dejedion into which lie funk was in pro-
portion to the height of grandeur from which he
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the ad-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the pof-
session of fiich a prisonei', labored to console him
with profeflions of kindness and refpcl, that cor-
rcfponded ill with his actions. By residing among
the Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovercd their
ruling paflion, which, indeed, they were no-wise
lflicitous to conceal, and by applying to that,
made an attempt to recover his liberty. He offer- Hiscfferof
ed as a ransom what aftoniilcd the Spaniards, even a ran"ot
after all they now knew concerning the opulence

" Sec NOTE VII.

D =

B o o of lis kingdom. 1 lhe apartment il which he was

Vi. confined was twenty-two feet in length ad sixteen
I3 2. in breadth ; he undertook to fill it wi.h ve(iL'ls of

gold as high as he could reach. Pizairo closed
eagerly with this temptitig proposal , and a line
was drawn upon the walls of the chamber, to mark
the stipulated height to which the treasure was
to rife.

Atahualpa, transported with having obtained

forne profped of liberty, took measures inflantly
for fulfilling hi.s part of the agreement, by fending
mefcngers to Cuzco , Quito, and other places,
where gold had been amaflcd in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of theni go:t, or the
houses of the Inca, to bring what was necelIary for
completing his ranlom direcily to Caxamlal',.
Though Atahualpa was now in the cufiody of his
enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians accuf.
tomed to refpetl every mandate ilfucd by their Io-
vereign, that his orders were executed \with tlhe
greatest alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recover.
ing his liberty by this means, tie Illbjc&d of the
Inca were afraid of endangering his life by formilng
any other fchcme for his relief; and though tle
force of the empire was (till entire, no iprepalra
tions were made, and no army allembled to avenge
their own wrongs or those of their monarch '. he
Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and un-

ThcSpa. molested. Small\ detachments of their number
liards vilit marched into remote provinces of the empire, and,
ililfcrent
provinces.

" Xere?. 20.

instead of meetingwith any opposition, were every n o o
svhere received with marks of the molt fibmiffive Vl.
I clip edt . 1I32.

liiconfidcrable as those parties were, and de- Ainagro ar-

rives with a

ffrous as Pizarro might be to obtain ofme know- reinforce.
ledge of the interior state of the country, he could neuc.
not have ventured upon any diminution of his main
body, if he had not about this time received an December.
account of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael
with such a reinforcement as would almost double
the number of his followers ". The arrival of this
long-expeded succour was not more agreeable to
the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca. He saw
the power of his enemies increase; and as he knew
neither the source whence they derived their sup-
plies, nor the means by which they were conveyed
to Peru, he could not soresec to what a height the
inundation that poured in upon his dominions
might rife. While disquieted with such apprehen- 1533.
sions, he learned that some Spaniards, in their way toallPu
to Cuzco, had visited his brother Hutafcar in the
placc where he kept him confined, and that the
c;ptive prince had represented to them the justice
of his own cause, and as an inducement to cfpoufe
it, had promised them a quantity of treasure greatly
beyond that which Atahualpa had engaged to pay
or his ransom. If the Spaniards fhonld liften to
lhis proposal, Atahualpa perceivcd his own de-
'lirdlioL to be inevitable; and fufpcding that their

"Sec NOTE VIII.
' Xcrcz , zo4. lierrcra, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. , 2.

1) 3

B o o K insatiable thiift for gold would tempt them lo lend

vi. a favorable ear to it, lie determined to sacrifice his
;153. brotllr's life, that lie might eivc his own ; and

Lis orders for this purpose were executed , like all
Iis other commands, with fcrlpnulous pun&uality ".

The Spani- Mleanwhile, Indians daily arrived at Caxamalca
irlsl' oa from dif'rent parts of the kingdom, loaded with
ther flil treasure. A great part of the flipulated quantity

was now armaifed, and Atahualpa assured the Spa-
niards, that the only thing which prevented the
whole from being brought in, was the remote-
ness of the provinces where it was deposited. But
such vaRn piles of gold presented continually to the
view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed their ava-
rice, that it was impossible any longer to restrain
their impatience to obtain polfeflion of this rich
booty. Orders were given for melting down the
whole, except some pieces of curious fabric, re-
served as a present for the emperor. After setting
apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hundred
thousand pesos as a donative to the soldiers which
arrived with Altnagro, there remained one million
five hundred and twenty-eight thousand five hun-
dlred pesos to Pizarro and his followers. 'lhe fcf-
July s. tival of St. James, the patron faint of Spain, was

the day chosen for the partition of this val fumn
and the manner of condudling it fIinonlly nmarks
tlhat lrange allian(:ce of ifnaticifin with avarice,
vwhich 1 have more than once had occasion to p)oint

'/Z ratc, lib. ii. c. 6. Gonara, I-lift. c. i . lcrrcra,
dec. . lib. iii. c. 2.

out as a striking feature in the characer of the B o o
conquerors of the New World. Though assem- vi.
bled to divide the spoils of an innocent people, ,533-
procured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty, the
tranfadion began with a solemn invocation of the
name of God , as if they could have expected the
guidance of Heaven il distributing those wages of
iniquity. In this division above eight thousand
pesos, at that time not inferior in cffediive value
to as many pounds Sterling in the present century,
fell to the share of each horseman, and half that
film to each foot-foldier. Pizarro himself, and
his officers, received dividends in proportion to the
dignity of their rank.

There is no example in history of such a sudden The effee

acquisition of wealth by military frvice, nor was Of it
ever a fum so great divided among so small a num-
ber of soldiers. Many of them having received a
recompence for their services far beyond their most
sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire from
fatigue and danger, in order to spend the remain-
der of their days in their native country, ill cefc and
opulence, that they demanded their difchai;:e with
clamorous importunity. Pizarro, fenfiblc thL'i, rron
such men he could expecdt neither cntc; pi fe il :(:
tion nor fortitude il lIfL1ncril) , i;lnd p: 't '.,t l (,it
vwhrevcr they went, (ie diflil;y o (i;,o r i il
woutld allure adventurers, lcl' ) o[)lII ;'t i>!t ii,',i;.

lhardy, to his lLindard(, grante(l ttLi !;,r \vi'. ! t.
reluctance, and permnitted above fi.sty ol (lhcaiii lt

2 lle
1; rcr , dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

D 4

n o o r accompany his bother Ferdinand, whom he sent

vr. to Spain with an account of his fticclfs and the
1533. present destined for the emperor ".
The Inca 'The Spaniards having divided among them the
his liberty treasure amaed for the Inca's ransom , he insisted
in vin. with them to fulfil their promise of setting him at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. During his long service in the New
World, he had imbibed those ideas and maxims of
his fellow-foldiers, which led them to confider its
inhabitants as an inferior race, neither worthy of
the name, nor entitled to the rights, of men. In
his compact with Atahualpa, he had no other ob-
jed than to amuse his captive with such a profpcd
of recovering his liberty, as might induce him to
lend all the aid of his authority towards colleding
the wealth of his kingdom. Having now accom-
plifled this, he no longer regarded his plighted
faith; and at the very time when the credulous
prince hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had
secretly resolved to bereave him of life. Many
circumstances seem to have concurred in prompting
him to this action, the most criminal and atrocious
that tains the Spanish name, amidPt all the deeds
of violence committed in carrying on the conquest
of the New World.

Ie and the Though Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imita-
lpaniardls tion of Cortes's condud towards the Mexican mo-
kmutually
jeJaous. narch, he did not polfefs talents for carrying on

the fame artful plan of policy. Deflitute of the

Herrera, dec. . lib. iii. c. 4. Vega , p. 2. lib. i. c. 8.

temper and address requisite for gaining the cons- B o o T
dence of his prisoner, he never reaped all the ad- vT.
vantages which might have been derived from be- I'3
ing malter of his person and authority. Atahualpa
wv.,s, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and dif-
cernment than Montezuma, and seems to have pe-
netrated more thoroughly into the characer and
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual suspicion and
(liltruft accordingly took place between then. The
firi attention with which it was necessary to guard
a captive of such importance, greatly increased the
fatigue of military duty. The utility of keeping
him appeared inconsiderable; and Pizarro felt him
as an encumberance, from which he wifled to be
delivered .

Almagro and his followers had made a demand Almaro
of an equal share in the Inca's ransom; and though loers he.
Pizarro had bestowed upon the private men the 1madI hlis
large gratuity which I have mentioned, and en- lie.
deavoured to sooth their leader by presents of great
alue, they still continued dissatisfied. They were
apprehcnfive, that as long as Atahualpa remained
a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would apply whatever
trcafire should be acquired to make up what was
\vanting of the quantity flipulated for his ranforn,
and under that pretext exclude them from any part
of it. They insisted eagerly on putting the Inca
to death , that all the adventurers in Peru might
thereafter be on an equal footing'

Ilerrera, dec. s. lib. iii. c. 4.

,'s ', rate, lib. ii. c. . Vcga, p. 2. lib. i. c. 7. Ilerrie ,
dec, q. lib. iii. c, 4.

i o o Pizarro himself began to be alarmed with an ac.

Xv. count of forces affcmbling in the remote provinces
' n'. of the empire, and fufpeded Atahualpa of having

lI1oiveq
,i i,. in- issued orders for that purpose. 'These fears and
.!i.,ic i. filficions were artfully increased by Philippillo,

7.1r onle of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried of
t uiuin t.

from Tumnbez in the year one thousand five hun.
dred and twenty-feven, and whom he employed as
an interpreter. The funfcion which he performed
admitting this man to familiar intercourse with the
captive monarch, he presumed, notwithstanding
the meanness of his birth, to raise his affections to
a Ca, or descendant of the Sun, one of Atahual
pa's wives; and feeing no profpet of gratifying
that pafion during the life of the monarch, he en.
deavoured to fill the ears of the Spaniards with such
accounts of the Inca's secret designs and prepara.
tions , as might awaken their jealousy, and incite
them to cut him off.

\Vhile Almanro and his followers openly de

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo la.
bored to ruin him by private machinations , that
unhappy prince inadvertently contributed to haften
his own fate. During his cnfinemcent he had at
tachtled hilnl'-lf with peculiar affction to Ferdinanl
Iizarro and IIel;crado Soto; xvho, as they wcre
peirolns of birth ;and( c(ducation. uipcrior to the rougl
;i(veCnturcrsi wVith \i ho Ihy Ifrvced, were accuf
Wollc:d to ,1ho1.'vc w\tli norc decency and attcntio
;t the capi\'e n:I',,' 1l. Sooithcd witih thlis rfpcc
Itron1 lttons ol 1 ,tlI. lilh ri.ank

L , he dlli'lted ill
theil l)cicty, luLt ill tlc i) prelic o0 the governci

he was always uneasy, and overawed. This dread B o o
soon came to be mingled with contempt. Among all. v.
the European arts, what he admired molt was that 1I33.
of reading and writing ; and he long deliberated
with himself, whether he should regard it as a na-
tural or acquired talent. In order to determine
this, he desired one of the soldiers, who guarded
him to write the name of God on the nail of his
thumb. This he showed fucceffivcly to feverat
Spaniards, alking its meaning; and to his amaze-
ment, they all, without hesitation, returned the
fame answer. At length Pizarro entered; and on
presenting it to him, he bluflled , and with ome
confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno-
rance. From that moment, Atahualpa confdered
him as a mean person, less inftruded th2n his own
soldiers; and he had not address enough to conceal
the sentiments with which this discovery inspired
lrn. To be the objec of a barbarian's scorn, not
only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but excited
fich rcfentment in his breast, as added force to all
the other considerations which prompted him to
put the Inca to death ".

But in order to give some color of justice to I:stti;l.

tlhis violent adlion, and that he himself might be
exempted fromn lanlding fil gly rCl fonliblc for the
commiflion of it, -'izalro tfolved to try the Inca
with all the formalities ohfcrv(d in the crimlinal
courts of Spalin. 'izarro himfclf, and Almlgro,
with two aillants, were appointcd judgcs, witli

' Ilcrnera , dec. ;. lib. iii. c, . Ve;g , p. li. lib. i. c. 38

B O O I full power to acquit or to condemn; an attorney.

vi. general was named to carry on the prosecution in
iS33.* the king's name; counsellors were chosen to as.

silt the prisoner in his defence ; and clerks were
ordained to record the proceedings of the court. Be-
fore this strange tribunal, a charge was exhibited
fill more amazing. It confrited of various ar.
ticles; that Atahualpa, though a bastard, had dif.
pofleffcd the rightful owner of the throne, and
usurped the regal power; that he had put his bro-
ther and lawful sovereign to death; that he was
an idolater, and had not only permitted, but
commanded the offering of human sacrifices ; that
lie had a great number of concubines; that since
his imprisonment he had wafted and embezzled the
royal treasures, which now belonged of right to the
conquerors; that he had incited his fbjeds to
take arms against the Spaniards. On these heads
of accusation, some of which are so ludicrous,
others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pizarro, in
making them the foundation of a serious proce-
dure, is not less surprising than his injustice, did
this ftrangc court go on to try the sovereign of a
great empire, over whom it had no jurifdidtion.
1With refped to each of the articles, witnesses were
rxaminced; but as they delivered their evidence in
their native tongue, Philippillo had it in his power
to give their world whatever turn best fuitedl his
malevolent intentions. To judges predetermined
in tlieir opinion , this evidence appeared futffiicnt.

;ie in-l- 'nThey pronounced Atahualpa guilry, and con-
drmned, demncd im to be burnt alive. lriar Valverdc

pirofllutcd the authority of lis.facred funltion to B 0 0
conlirmn this fentcnce, and by his signature war- vi.
rln:tdi it to be julf. Allonifhed at his fate, Ata. 153;-
Iuialpa endeavoured to avert it by tears , biy pro-
mises, and by intreaties, tat he might be lent to
Spaliin, where a monarch would be the arbiter of
his lot. But pity never touched the unfeeling heart +
of Pizarro. He ordered him to be led instantly
to cxecution; and,. what added to the bitterness
of his aft moments, the fame monk who had just
ratified his doom, offered to con sole, and attempted
to convert him. The most powerful argument
Valverde employed to prevail with him to embrace
the Christian faith, was a promise of mitigation in
hbis punifment. The dread of a cruel death ex-
torted from the trembling victim a desire of receiv-
[ing baptifrm. The ceremony was performed; and andexeut.
Atilnialp1, inlftead of being burnt, was firangled at ed.
the flake 17.

H;ppily for the credit of the Spanili nation, several spi.
MeCII among the profligate adventurers wvhich it niards;pro-
rent forth to conquer and desolate the New WVorld, *a
:lhee were persons who retailied ome tindure of
le Calilian generosity and honor. Though , be-
nie te trial of Atahu.ilpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had
ct oullt for Spain, and Soto was sent on a separate
oiiimand at a diltatce from Caxamalca, this odious
rul;falion was not carried on without censure

7 Zarate, lib. ii. c. 7. Xeres , p. 23 . Vega, p. r r.

1I. i. c. 36, 37. Goinara, Hill. c. 117. Hexzera, dec. 5.
b, iii . 4.

B o o and opposition. Several officers, and among those

vi. some ot the greatell reputation and molt refpedablk
533. f.na;l:cs in the service, not only remonstratcd, but

pxofte.ed :against this icatfure of their general, a
diTgracefnl to their country, a repugnant to every
maxim of equity, as a violation of public s.ith, and
an usurpation of juiificion over an independen!
monarch, to which they hadl no title. But thei
laudable endeavours were vain. Numbers, and thl
opinion o such as held every tling to be lawfu
which they deemed advantageous , prevailed. Hl
tory, however, records even the utllfuccefsful exer
tions of virtue with applause ; and the Spanish writ
ers, in relating events where the valor of their na
tion is more conspicuous than its humanity, have
not failed to preserve the names of those who mad
this laudable effort to save their country from the
infamy of having perpetrated such a crime "

DilTolution On the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro inveftc
mos gvenor one of his sons with the cnfigns of royalty , hopin1
derin Peru. that a young man without experience might pros

a more passive inflrument in his hands, than a
ambitious monarch , who had been accuflomed t
independent commiiand( The people of Cuzco
and the adjacent country, acknowledged Jlanc
Capac , a brother of Huafcar , as Inca ". Bi
neither pofflTedl the authority which belonged to
sovereign of leru. The violent convulsions int

'" Vcg, p. ii. lib. i. c. 37. Xcrcs, i. 235.lerrer
dec . lib. i. c. ;.

' Vcga, p. i i. lib. ii. c. 7.

which the empire had been thrown, firfl by the B o o
civil war between the two brothers, and then by vi
the invasion of the Spaniards, had not only de- 'l33.
ranged the order of the Peruvian government , but
alrnoft dissolved its frame. When they beheld
their monarch a captive in the power of strangers,
and at last suffering an ignominious death , the
people in several provinces , as if they had been
set free from every restraint of law and decency,
broke out into the molt licentious excesses '4. So
many descendants of the Sun , after being treatedt
with the utmost indignity, had been cut off by
Atahualpa, that not only their influence in the tate
diminished with their number, but the accuflomed
reverence for that sacred race sensibly decreased.
In consequence of this state of things , ambitious
men in different parts of the empire aspired to in-
dependent authority, and usurped a jurifdiion to
which they had no title. The general who com-
manded for Atahualpa in Quito , seized the brother
and children of his master , put them to a cruel
cath, and disclaiming any connexion with either
Inca, endeavoured to ellablill a separate kingdom
or himself 4'.

The Spaniards, with pleafnre, beheld the flirit ri/.rro -.

f dilcord diffnfing itself, and the vigor of go- C7'1''"
crnment relaxing among the lPcruvians. They
onlidered those difordcrs as fymptomns of a slate
aflening towards its dilfolution. Pizarro no longer

' lcrrera, dec. s. lib. ii. c .

1 l .

lib . ii . . .
'/ Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 8. Vega, p. i. lib. ii. c. , 4.

n o o hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had

vi. received such considerable reinforcements, that he
i;3. could venture, with little danger, to penetrate so

far into the interior part of the country. The
account of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca
operated as he had forereen. No sooner did his
brother Ferdinand, with the officers and foldirs
to whom he had given their discharge after the
partition of the Inca's ransom , arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their
astonished countrymen, than fame spread the ac-
count with such exaggeration through all the
Spanish settlements on the South-Sea, that the
governors of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua,
could hardly restrain the people under their jurif.
dilion, from abandoning their possessions, and
crowding to that inexhaustible source of wealth
ivhich feemeed to be opened in Peru . In spite of
every check and regulation, such numbers resorted
thither, that Pizarro began his march at the head
of five hundred men , after leaving a considerable
garrison in St. Mlichael, under the command of
Benalcazar. The Peruvians had aflembled ome
large bodies of troops to oppose his progress.
Several fierce encounters happened. But they
terminated like all the actions in America; a fexv
Spaniards were killed or wounded ; the natives
were put to flight with incredible slaughter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and took

` Gomara, lift. c. z 12. Vega, p. I . lib. ii. c. . Hcr.
rcra, dec. . lib. iii. c. s.

qu iet

quiet possession of that capital. The riches found o o
there, even after all that the natives had carried off vr.
and concealed, cither from a fuperltitious venera- 533.
tion for the ornaments of their temples, or out of
harred to their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in
value what had been received as Ataliualpa's ran-
fonm. But as the Spaniards were now accufomred
to the wealth of the country, and it came to be
parcelled out aong a greater number of adven-
turers, this dividend did not excite the fame fur-
prise either from novelty , or the largeness of the
fum that f 1 to the share of each individual .

During the march to Cuzco, that son of

Atahualpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died;
and as the Spaniards fubltituted no person in his
place the title of JIanco Capac seems to have been
universally recognised ".

While his fellow-folders were thus employed, Quitocon.

Benalcazar, governor of St. Micbael, an able and B'ynaiar
enterprising oificer. ws :flnamed of remaining in-
active, and impatient to have his nane diftin-
guiIfhd among the discoverers and conquerors of
the New World. The fiafonable arrival of a fresh
body of recruits from Pan'ama and Nicaragua, put
it in his power to gratify this passion. Leaving a
fufficicnt force to protedc the infant settlement in-
truficd to his care, lie placed himself at the head
of the reft, and set out to attempt the redudcion of
<uito, where, according to the report of the
natives, Atahualpa had left the greatest part of

"' See NJOTE IX, 4+ Ierrera, dec. . lib. v. c. .
VoL. Il. E

o o t his treasure. Notwithfanding the distance of
vr. that city from St. Michael, the difficulty of march.
1E5- ing through a mountainous country covered with

woods, and the frequent and fierce attacks of the
bel troops in Peru, commanded by a kilful
leader, the valor, good condud, and perseverance
of Benalcazar surmounted every obstacle, and he
entered Quito with his vidorious troops. But
they met with a cruel mortification there. The
natives, now acquainted, to their sorrow, with the
predominant passion of their invaders, and know.
ing how to disappoint it, had carried off all those
treasures, the profpet of which had prompted them
to undertake this arduous expedition, and had
supported them uinder all the dangers and hard-
ships: wherewith they had to struggle in carrying
it on .

Alvarado's Benalcazar was not the only Spanish leader
expedition. who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame

of its riches attracted a more powerful enemy.
Pedro de Alvarado, who had diftinguilhed him.
self so eminently in the conquest of Mexico, hav-
ing obtained the government of Guatimala as a
recompence for his valor, soon became disgusted
with a life of uniform tranquillity, and longed to
be again engaged in the butle of military service.
The glory and wealth acquired by the conquerors
of Peru heightened this paflion, and gave it a de-
termined direction. Believing, or pretending to

4 Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. i . lib. ii. c. 9. Her-
rara, dec. 5. lib. iv. *j 1I, 12. lib. v. c. 2, . lib. vi. c. 3.

believe, that the kingdom of Quito did not lie B o o ;
witlin the limits of the province allotted to Pi- VL
zjrro, he resolved to invade it. The high reputa. 13. .
tion of the commander allured volunteers from.
every quarter. He embarked with five hundred.
enii, of whom above two hundred were of such
[iftinclion as to serve on horseback. He landed at
lucrto Viejo, and without sufficient knowledge of
the country , or proper guides to conduct him,
attempted to march directly to Quito by follow-
ing the course of the river Guayquil, and crossing
the ridge of the Andes towards its head, But in
this route, one of the most impracticable in all
Anrerica, his troops endured filch fatigue in forcing
their way through forefis and marshes on the
low grounds, and suffered so much from exceflive
:old when they began to ascend the mountainsh
hat before they reached the plain of Quito, a fifth
)art of the men and half of their horses died , and
he reft were so much dispirited and worn -out, as
o be almost unfit for service ', There they met
vith a body, not of Indians but bs Spaniards~
rawn up in hostile array against them.. Pizarro
aving received an account of Alvarado's arma-
ient, had detached Almagro with some troops to
ppofe this formidable invader of his jurisdiction;
id there were joined by Benalcazar and his vido-
oLls party. Alvardo, though surprised at th&i
iht: of enemies whoin he did not expect, advanced
:Idly to the charge. But, by the interposition of

" See NOTE X.

,tir

o o some moderate men in each party, an amicable
vi. accommodation took place , and the fatal period,
t53 . when Spaniards suspended their conquests to em-

brue their hands in the blood of their countrymen,
was postponed a few years. Alvarado engaged to
return to his government, upon Almagro's paying
him a hundred thousand pesos to defray the expense
of;his armament. Most of his followers remained
in the country; and an expedition, which threat.
ened Pizarro and his colony with ruin , contributed
to augmeht its strength +7

5314. By this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in
onfrredon Spain. The immense quantities of gold and silver
1'i7arro and which he imported ", filled the kingdom with no
Aiagro. less astonishment than they had excited in Panama

and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was received
by the emperor with the attention due to the
bearer of a present so rich, as to exceed any idea
which the Spaniards had formed concerning the
value of their acquisitions in America, even after
they had been ten years masters of Mexico. In
recompence of his brother's services, his authority
was confirmed with new powers and privileges,
and the addition of seventy leagues , extending
a.long the coalt, to the southward of the territor
granted in his former patent. Almagro received
the honors which he had so long defred. Tlit
title of Adelantado, or governor, was conferred

Z7 Zarate, lib. ii. c. o-i . Vega, p T . lib. ii. c. , '

9, &c. Gomara, llilt. c. 126, &c. Renmeal, -lift. Guatima
lib. iii. c. 6. Iterrera, dec. ;. lib. vi. c. , 2. 7, g.

'" Sec NOTE XI.

upon him, with jurifdidion over two hundred n o o t
leagues of country, firetching beyond the southern vi.
limits of the province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdi- 'I4s.
nand himself did not go unrewarded. He was ad-
mitted into the military order of St. Jago, a dif-
tindion always acceptable to a Spanifr gentleman,
and soon set out on his return to Peru, accompa-
nied by many persons of higher rank than had yet
fcrved in that country '.

Some account of his negociations reached Peru Reginningof

before he arrived there himself. Almagro no dbetlifi, i.
sooner learned that he had obtained the royal grant zarrnand
of an independent government, than, pretending Almagro.
that Cuzco, the imperial residence of the Incas,
lay within its boundaries, he attempted to render
himself master of that important station. Juan
and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppose him.
Each of the contending parties was supported by
powerful adherents, and the dispute was on the
point of being terminated by the sword, whea
Francis Pizarro arrived in the capital. The recon-
ciliation between him and Almagro had never been
cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in engrossing
to himself all the honors and emoluments, which
ought to have been divided with his afociate, was
always present in both their thoughts. The former,
conscious of his own perfidy, (lid not expet for-
givenefs; the latter, feeling that he had been de-
ceived, was impatient to be avenged; and though

" 'arate, lib. iii. c. . Vcga, p. . lib.ii.c. g1. H r-
icrn, dec. S. lib. vi. c. .

E3

X o o K avarice nd ambition had induced them not only

vr. to diffeble their sentiments, but even to ad in
J534. concert while in purfit of wealth and power, no

sooner did they obtain polfeffion of these, than the
fame pffions which had formed this temporary
union, gave rife to jealousy and discord. To each
of them was attached a finall band of interested
dependants, who , with the malicious art peculiar
to such men, heightened their suspicions, and mag.
nified every appearance of offence. But with all
those feeds of enmity in their minds, and thus
assiduously cherished, each was so thoroughly ac.
quainted with the abilities and courage of his rival,
that they equally dreaded the consequences of an
open rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firmness
which he manifested in his expostulations witl
Almagro and his partisans , averted that evil for
the present. A new reconciliation took place i the
chief article of which was, that Almagro should
attempt the conquest of Chili; and if he did not
find in that province an eftabliflment adequate to
his merit and expectations, Pizarro, by way of in-
demnification , should yield up to him a part of
June i2, Peru. This new agreement, though confirmed with

the fame sacred folemnities as their first contract,
was observed with as little fidelity '.

Iegillaticns Soon after he concluded this important tranf.
olPizarro. ation, Pizarro marched back to the countries on

' Zarate, lib. ii. c. r . Vega, p. I . lib. ii. c, 19. Benzo
lib. iii. c. 6, 1-errera, dec. 5. lib. vii, c. 8,

the sea-coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval of n o o K
tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either vi.
Spanish or Indian , he applied himself with that zs34.
persevering ardor, which diftinguilhes his cha-
rader, to introduce a form of regular government
into the extensive provinces subjed to his autho-
rity. Though ill qualified by his education to
enter into any disquisition concerning the principles
of civil policy, and little accustomed by his former
habits of life to attend to its arrangements , his
natural sagacity supplied the want both of science
and experience. He distributed the country into
various difrrids ; he appointed proper magistrates
to preside in each; and established regulations con-
cerning the administration of justice, the collecion
of the royal revenue, the working of the mines,
and the treatment of the Indians, extremely simple,
but well calculated to promote the public profpe-
rity. But though, for the present, he adapted his
plan to the infant state of his colony, his aspiring
mind looked forward to its future grandeur. He Pouidation
confidered himself as laying the foundation of a ofLima.
great empire, and deliberated long, and with much
solicitude, in what place he should fix the feat of
government. Cuzco, the imperial city of the
Incas, was situated in a corner of the empire , above
four hundred miles from the tea, and much farther
rolnn Quito, a province of whose value he had
formed a high idea. No other fettlemcnt of the
l'eruvians was so considerable as to merit the name
of a town , or to allure the Spaniards to fix their
residence in it. But, in marching through the

E4

o o r country, Pizarro had been firuck with the beauty
v. and fertility of the valley of Rimac , one of the
1534. most extensive and belt cultivated in Peru. There,

on the banks of a finall river, of the fame name
with the vale which it waters and enriches, at the
diflance of fix miles from Callao, the molt com-
modious harbour in the Iacific Ocean, he founded
a city which he deitined to be the capital of his
government. He gave it the name of Ciudad de
'3. los Reyes , either from the circumstance of having

laid the firl stone , at that season when the church
celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or, as
is more probable, in honor of Juana and Charles,
thefoverigtls of Caflile. Thil name it ltill retains
among the Spaniards , in all legal and formal
deeds; but it is better known to foreigners by that
of Limla, a corruption of the ancient appellation of
the valley in which it is fituared. Under his in-
fpeion , the buildings advanced with such rapi-
dity, that it soon afuimed the forin of a city, whiclh,
by a magniricent palace that he erecld for himself;
and by the stately hotifes built by several of his
otlicers, gave, even in its inlancy , forme indication
of i.s subsequent grandeur ".

In consequence of what had been agreed with

Almagro in-Pizarro, Almagro began his march tovwards Chili;
vades Chili.

and as he possessed in an eminent degree the virtues
molt admired by soldiers, bouinlef. liberality and
scarless courage , his standard was followed by live

" Ilcrrcra, dec. . lih. vi. c. 12. lib. vii. c. i . Calancho,
Chronica, lib. i. c. 37. arnucvo, Lima undada, ii. 294.

hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of B o o c

uropeans that had hitherto been assembled in vi.
Peru. rom impatience to finifi the expedition, 13-
or from that contempt of hardlhip and danger
acquired by all the Spaniards who had served
loi) in America, Almagro, instead of advancing
alolng the level country on the coat , chof to
m;rch across the mountains by a route that was
iliorter indeed, but almost impradticable. In this
attemnpt his troops were exposed to every calamity
vwhich men can susser, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigor of the climate in those elevated
regions of the torrid zone , where the degree of
cold is hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perifhled; and the
ftrvivors , when they descended into the fertile
plains of Chili , had new difliculties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different from
the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, independent,
lnd in their bodily constitution, as well as vigor
f spirit, nearly resembling the warlike tribes in
\orth-America. Though filled with wonder at
he firlt appearance of the Spaniards , and ill
iore astonished at the operations of their cavalry
nll the eflfcts of their fire-arms, the Chilefe soon
('covered so far from their surprise, as not only to
lcfend theinfelves with obstinacy, but to attack
lheir new enemies with more determined fiercenels
han any American nation had hitherto diicovered.
lhe Spaniards , however, continued to penetrate
lto the country, a(nd collected some considerable
lu;.ititics of gold ; but were so far from thinking

B o o ;r of making any settlement amidst such formidable

vi. neighbours, that, in spite of all the experience and
'$i< valor of their leader, the final issue of the expedi.

tion still remained extremely dubious, when they
were recalled from it by an unexpeced revolution
in Peru . The causes of this important eventI
shall endeavour to trace to their source.

An inrur- So many adventurers had flocked to Peru
rAtion of from every Spanish colony in America, and all
the Peru-
vians. with such high expectations of accumulating inde.

pendent fortunes at once, that, to men possessed
with notions so extravagant, any mention of ac-
quiring wealth gradually, and by schemes of
patient industry, would have been not only a
disappointment , but an insult. In order to find
occupation for men who could not with safety
be allowed to remain inaCtive , Pizarro encouraged
some of the molt diftinguilhed officers who had
lately joined him , to invade different provinces o
the empire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto
visited. Several large bodies were formed for this
purpose; and about the time that Almagro set out
for Chili, they marched into remote diftrits o
its ire, the country. No fooncr (lid Manco Capac , th

Inca, observe the inconfiderote security of the Spa
niards in thus dispersing their troops , and that onl
a handful of soldiers remained in Cuzco, unde
Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro, than he thought tlh

5 Zarate, lib. iii. c. . (Gomara, Ti. c. c. r. Vega, p.

lib. ii. c. 20. Ovallc, Hist. de Chili, lib. iv. c. x5, &
Herrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 9. lib. x, c. i, &c.

the happy period was at length come for vindicat- o o
ing his own rights, for avenging the wrongs of his vi.
country, and extirpating its opprelfors. Though Xs3s.
tritdly watched by the Spaniards, who allowed
him to reside in the palace of his ancestors at
Cuzco, he found means of communicating his
scheme to the persons who were to be intrusted
with the execution of it. Among people ac-
customed to revere their sovereign as a divinity,
every hint of his will carries the authority of a
command; and they themselves were now con-
vinced , by the daily increase in the number of
their invaders , that the fond hopes which they
had long entertained of their voluntary departure
were altogether vain. All perceived that a vi-
gorous effort of the whole nation was requisite to
expel them , and the preparations for it were car-
ried on with the secrecy and silence peculiar to
Americans.

After some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca aldprogrers.

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per- 1536.
million from him to attend a great festival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capi-
tal. Under pretext of that solemnity, the great
men of the empire were aflembled. As soon as
the Inca joined them, the standard of war was
erecded; and in a liort time all the fighting men,
from the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely
on the settlements allotted them, were massacred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelessly

B o
O through a country which eemed to be tamely sub.

vi. missive to their dominion, were cut off to a man.
1536. An army amounting ( if we may believe the Spa.

nifh writers) to two hundred thousand men, at.
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothers endea.
voured to dfeni with only o;~i hun(lred and
seventy Spaniards. Another formidable body in.
vested Limla, and kept the governor closely fiut
up. There w.is no longer any communication be.
tween the two cities; the numerous forces of the
Peruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every meflenger ; and as the parties in Cuzco and
Lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worst concerning
the other, and imagined that they themselves were
the only persons who had survived the general
extinction of the Spanish name in Peru ".

Siege of It was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded
cU"c°. in person, that the Peruvians made their chicf

effort. During nine months they carried on the
siege with incessant ardor, and in various forms;
and though they displayed not the fame undaunted
ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they cotnduted
some of their operations in a manner which disco-
vered greater sagacity, and a genius more fufccp.
tible of improvement in the military art. 'hley
not only observed the alvantagcs which the Spa
niards derived from their discipline and their

, Vega, p. . lib. ii. c. 2 . Z7 ratc, lib. iii. c. . Cieci

'e Leon, c. P,2. (;unara, llilt. c. 135. llcrrera, dec. .
ib. viii. c. 5.

weapons, but they endeavoured to imitate the for. n o o K
rner, and turn the latter against them. They armed a vl.
considerable body of their bravest warriors with 1536-
the swords, the spears, and bucklers, which they
had taken from the Spanish soldiers whom they
had cut off in different parts of the country. These
they endeavoured to marshal in that regular com-
padc order, to which experience had taught them
that the Spaniards were indebted for their irre-
fiftible force in action. Some appeared in the field
with Spanifli muskets, and had acquired kill and
resolution enough to use them. A few of the
boldest, among whom was the Inca hirnfelf, were
mounted on the horses which they had taken, and
advanced briskly to the'charge like Spanish cava-
liers, with their lances in the reft. It was more by
their numbers, however, than by those imperfect
essays to imitate European arts and to employ Eu-
ropean arms, that the Peruvians annoyed the Spa.
niards . In spite of the valor , heightened by
despair, with which the three brothers defended
Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered possession of one
half of his capital ; and in their various efforts to
drive him out of it , the Spaniards loft Juan Pizar-
to, the belt beloved of all the brothers, together
with some other persons of note. Worn out with
the fatigue of incessant duty, distressed with want
of provisions , and despairing of being able any
longer to refilt an enemy whose numbers daily in*
creased, the foldiers-became impatient to abandon

" See NOTE XII.

a o o K Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their country.

vi. men, if any of them yet survived, or of forcing
536. their way to the sea, and finding some means of

efcliping from a country which had been so fatal to
the Spanifli name . While they were brooding
over those defponling thoughts, which their officers
labored in vain to dispel , Almagro appeared fud.
denly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

Arrivalof The accounts transmitted to Almagro concern.
Almagro., ing the general infurredion of the Peruvians, were
and motives
f hiscon. such as would have induced him, without hefita.
dut. tion, to relinquish the conquest of Chili, and

halten to the aid of his countrymen. But in this
resolution he was confirmed by a motive less gene.
rous, but more interesting. By the fame messen.
ger who brought him intelligence of the Inca's
revolt, he received the royal patent creating him
governor of Chili, and defiining the limits of his
jurifdidion. Upon confidering the tenor of it, he
deemed it manifest beyond contradiction, that
Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his govern.
ment, and he was equally solicitous to prevent the
Peruvians from recovering possession of their capi.
tal, and to wreQ it out of the hands of the Pizarros.
From impatience to accomplifhl both, he ventured
to return by a new route; and in marching through
the sandy plains on the coast, he suffered, from
heat and drought, calamities of a new species,
hardly inferior to those in which he had been in.
volved by cold and famine on the summits of the
Andes.

Ilcrrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. 4.

His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment. B o o it
lie Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes upon vl.
imn with equal solicitude. The former, as he 1537.
id not study to conceal his pretensions, were at tions.'
loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or
o take precautions against him as an enemy. The
atter, knowing the points in conteff between him
nd his countrymen, flattered themselves that they
ad more to hope than to dread from his opera-
ions. Almagro himself, unacquainted with the
etail of the events which had happened in his
bfence, and solicitous to learn the precise posture
f affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
nd with great circumfpetion. Various negocia-
ions with both parties were set on foot. The
nca conducted them on his part with much ad-
refs. At first he endeavoured to gain the friend.
ip of Almagro; and after many fruitless over-
ures, despairing of any cordial union with a Spa-
iard, he attacked him by surprise with a nume-
ous bodyof chosen troops. But the Spanifi difci-
line and valor maintained their wonted fuperiori.
. The Peruvians were repulsed with such flaugh-
er, that a great part of their army dispersed, and
Imagro proceeded to the gates of Cuzco with.
ut interruption.
The Pizarros, as they had no longer to make Take pnr.
ead against the Peruvians, directed all their at- r1i"" f
lction towards their new enemy, and took mea-
ires to obftrudc his entry into the capital. Pru-
cncc, however, restrained both parties for some
line from turning their arrus againit one another,

B o o r while surrounded by common enemies, who would

vr. rejoice in the mutual slaughter. Different schemes
1537. of accommodation were proposed. Each endea.

voured to deceive the other, or to corrupt his
followers. The generous, open, affable temper of
Almagro gained many adherents of the Piz3rros,
who were difgtufled with their harfl domineering
manners. Encouraged by this (ldfeion, he ad.
vanced towards the city by night, surprised the
centinels, or was admitted by them, and invelting
the house where the two brothers resided, compel.
led them, after an obstinate defence, to surrender
at difcrction. Almagro's claim of jurifdiclion over
CuzcS was universally acknowledged, and a form
of administration established in his name .

Civilwar. Two or three persons only were killed in this
cend ift r'. first ad of civil holtility; but it was soon followed
magro, by fcencs more bloody, Francis Pizarro having

dispersed the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received some considerable reinforcements from
Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hundred
men, under the command of Alonfo de Alvarado,
to march to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving his bro.
thers, if they and their garrison were not already
cut off by the Peruvians. This body, which, at
that period of the Spannif power in America, rnmul
be deemed a considerable force, advanced near to
the capital before they knew that they had an
enemy more formidable than Indians to encounter

" Zarate, lib. iii. c. 4. Vc ,a, p. . lib. ii. c. 29.
Comara, ilc. c34. Herrera, dec, 6. lib. ii. c. i-l.

It

It was with atonlhment that they beheld their n o o
countrymen posted on the banks of the river Aban- vi.
pay to oppose their progress. Almagro, however, 157.
wiflied rather to gain than to conquer them, and
by bribes and promises endeavoured to seduce their
leader. The fidelity of Alvarado remained un-
flhaken; but his talents for war were not equal to
his virtue. Almagro amused him with various
movements, of which he did not comprehend the
meaning, while a large detachment of chosen July I.
soldiers passed the river by night, fell upon his
crimp by surprise, broke his troops before they had
time to form, and took him prisoner, together
with his principal officers "

By the sudden rout of this body, the contest but dnesnot
between the two rivals must have been decided, imprne his

aav'anges

f Almagro had known as well how to improve as
low to gain a vidCory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
fficer of great abilities, who having served under
he confiable Bourbon,'when he led the Imperial
rmy toRome, had been accufRomed to bold and
ecifive measures, advised him inltantly to issue
rders for putting to death Ferdinand and Gon-
alo Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons
whom he could not hope to gain, and to march
dirccly with his vidornous troops to Lima, be-
fore the governor had time to prepare for his de-
[clce. But Almagro, though hedifcerned at once the
utility of the coufel , and though he had courage

Z7 Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gom. Itilt c. r 38. Vega, p. .
:b, ii . , 4. llerrcrn, dec4 6. Jib. ii. c. ).

VoL. 111. F

if

B o o c to have carried it into execution, suffered him.

vi. self to be influenced by sentiments unlike those of a
i537. soldier of fortune grown old in service, and by

scruples which suited not the chief of a party who
had drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings of hu.
manity restrained him from shedding the blood of
his opponents; and the dread of being deemed a
rebel, deterred him from entering a province
which the king had allotted to another. Though
he knew that arms muff terminate the dispute be-
tween him and Pizarro, and resolved not to flun
that mode of decision, yet, with a timid delicacy
preposterous at such a juncture, he was so solicitous
that his rival should be confidered as the aggressor,
that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, to wait
his approach".

DnIrefs o Pizarro was flill unacquainted wit'h all the in.
Pizarro. teresting events which had happened near Cuzco,

Accounts of Almagro's return, of the loss of the
capital, of the death of one brother, of the ipri.
fonment of the other two, and of the defeat of
Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a
tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a fpiri
which had continued firm and ered under th
rudest flocks of adversity. But the necelfity o
attending to his own safety, as well as the defir
of revenge, preserved him from finking under i
He took measures for both with his wonted saga

Ill artful city. As he had the command of the fea-coall
condula. and expedcted considerable supplies both of nnc

' Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 1o, r.

and military fores, it was no les his interest to o o
gain time, and to avoid aion, than it was that of vI.
Almagro to precipitate operations, and bring ihe li 37.
co1teft to a seedy issue. He had rcourfe to arts
which he had formerly pradifed with ficcefs, and

linagro was again weak enough to susser hi-nflf
o be anused with a profpec of trminating their
ifferences by forne anicabl acconmodation. By
varying his overtures, and fllifting his ground as
ftEn as it suited his purpose, sometimes seeming
to yield every thing which his rival could desire,
nd then retrading all that he had granted, Pizarro
exteroufly protradled the negociation to fuih a
ength, that though every day was precious to
IAmagro, several months elapsed without coming
o any hnal agreement. While the attention of
Anagro, and of the officers with whom he con-
ulted, was occupied in deteding and eluding the
rudulent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo
izarro and Alvarado found means to corrupt the
oldiers to whose custody they were committed,
nd not only made their escape themselves, but
erfuaded sixty of the men who formerly guarded
hem to accompany their flight . Fortune having
hus delivered one of his brothers, the governor
crupled not at one aCt of peridy more to procure
he release of the other. He proposed, that every
int in controvcrfy between Almagro and himself
]ould be submitted to the deciion of their fove-
cign ; that until his award was known, each

" Zaiate, lib. iii. c. 8. Hcrrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. x4.

F i

o o ; flhould retain undiffurbed possession of whatever
VI. part of the country he now occupied; that Ferdi.
37.- nand Pizarro fiould be set at liberty, and return

instantly to Spain , togetherwith the officers, whom
Almagro purposed to fend thither to represent the
jusice of his claims. Obvious as the design of
Pizarro was in those propositions, and familiar as
his artifices might now have been to his opponent,
Almagro, with a credulity approaching to infatua.
tion, relied on his sincerity, and concluded an
agreement on these terms .

Xisprepa. The moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered
rations for his liberty, thegovernor, no longer fettered in his
Walr.

operations by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw off every disguise which his concern for it
had obliged him to affuie. The treaty was for.
gotten: pacific and conciliating measures were no
more mentioned; it was in the field, he openly
declared, and not in the cabinet; by arms, and
not by negociation; that it muf now be deter.
mined who should be mafler oF Peru. The rapi.
dity of his preparations suited fiich a decisive relo.
lution. Seven hundred men were soon ready to
IS38. march towards Cuzco. The command of these

was given to his two brothers, in whom he could
perfectly confide for the execution of his mo
violent fchcmes, as they were urged on, not only
by the enmity flowing from the rivallhip between
their family and Almagro, but animated with the

'' Ilerrern, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iii. c. 9
Comara, Ail. c. 140. Vc[;;, . I1 . lib. ii. . } .

1

desire of vengeance, excited by recollection of B O O 1K
their own recent disgrace and sufferings. After an vr.
unflccefsful attempt to cross the mountains in thle s3s.
lirecd road between Lina and Cuzco, they
marched towards the south along the coast as far
as Nafca, and then turning to the left, penetrated
through the defiles in that branch of the Andes
which lay between tlem and the capital. Almagro,
iiillead of hearkeniig to some of his officers,
lwho advised him to attempt the defence of those
diiiicult passes , waited the approach of the enemy
in the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons seem to have
induced him to take this resolution. His followers
amounted( hardly to five hundred, and he was
afraid of weakening such a feeble body, by fend-
ing any detachment towards the mountains. His
cavalry far exceeded that of. the adverse party,
both in number and discipline, and it was only
in an open country that he could avail himself of
tlat advantage.

The Pizarros advanced without any obftrudion, His army
but what arose from the nature of the desert and ,arche to
lorrid regions through which they marched. As
son as they reached the plain , both fadlions-were
c:lually impatient to bring this long-protradced con-
tfll to an iflue. Though countrymlen and friends,
the fubjedls of the fame sovereign, and each with
the royal flandard displayed; and though they be-
hecll the mountains that surrounded the plain in
wvich they were drawn up, covered with a vafl
multitude of Indians, affetnblcd to enjoy the spec.
tacle of their mutual carnage, and prepared to

F3

*B o o ; attack whatever party remained mailer of the fieldl

vi. so fell and implacable was the rancor which had
S38. taken poffeflion of every breast, that not one pa

cific counsel, not a single overture towards accorn
modation proceeded from either fide. Unfortu.
nately for Almagro, he was f worn out with the
fatigues of fcrvice, to which his advanced age was
unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he could
not exert his wonted activity; and he was obliged
to commit the leading of his troops to Orgognez
who, though an officer of great merit, did not
pol{ess the fame ascendant either over the spirit 01
affedtions of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accustomed to follow and revere.

Api', 6. The conflict was fierce, and maintained by each
Ain-,gro party with equal courage. On the fide of Alma
def¢ated,

gro, were more veteran soldiers, and a larger pro
portion of cavalry; but these were counterbalancec
by i'izarro's superiority in numbers, and by twc
companies of well-difciplined mufqueteers. which
on receiving an account of the infurredion of tht
Indians, the emperor had sent from Spain ". A!
the use of tirearmns was not frequent among tht
adventurers in America ', hastily equipped so
service, at their own expense, this small band o
soldiers, regularly trained and armed, was a no
velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day
- 'herever it advanced, the weight of a heavy ant
well sustained fire bore down horse and foot befor

Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii c. 8.
*' Zarate, lib. iii. c. ;8.

it; andl Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally B o o K
and animate his troops, having received a dangerous VI.
wound, the rout became general. The barbarity 1s38.
of the conquerors stained the glory which they
acquired by this complete victory. The violence of
civil rage hurried on some to slaughter their coun-
trvmen with indiscriminate cruelty; the meanness
of private revenge inftigatJ others to tingle out
individuals as the objecs of their vengeance. Or-
gognez and several officers of diftindion were maf-
sacred in cold blood; above a hundred and forty
soldiers fell in the field; a large proportion, where
the number of combatants were few, and the heat
of the contest soon over. Amagro, thoug so
feeble that he could not bear the motion of a
horse, had infilled on being carried on a litter to an
eminence which overlooked the field of battle.
From thence, in the utmost agitation of mind, he
viewed the various movements of both parties, and
at last beheld the total defeat of his own troops,
with all the paflionate indignation of a veteran
leader long accustomed to victory. He endea- and taken.
voured to save himself by flight, but was taken
pifoner, and guarded with the firided vigilance".

The Indians, instead of executing the resolution

which they had formed, retired quietly after the
battle was over, and in the history of the New
World, there is not a more striking inflance of the
wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards had

' Zarate, lib. ii;. c. IJ, 12. Vega, p. l . lib. ii. c. 6.
38. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii . c. -12. lib. iv. c. -6.

F4

B o o acquired over its inhabitants, than that after feeinS

vi. one of the contending parties ruined and dispersed
'538. and the other weakened and fatigued , they hac

not courage to fall upon their enemies, when for
tune presented an opportunity of attacking their
with fch advantage'.
New cXep- Cuzco was pillaged by the victorious troops, wihc

diti. found there a confidr.,ble booty, conlifting partly

of the gleanings of the Indian treasures, and partly
of the wealth aafled by their antagonists from
the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far did this,
anlqvhatever the bounty of their leader could add
to )-', all below the high ideas of the recompence
'xvh'icthey conceived to be due to their merit, that
Ferdianid Pizarro, unable to gratify luch extra.
vxagat;' cxpectautions, had recourse to the fame ex.
pedic:lt which his brother had emplcvtd on a fimi.
lar occasion , and endeavoured to find occupation
for this turbulent assuming spirit, in order to pre.
vent it from breaking out into open mutiny. With
this view, he encouraged his most ative oflicers to
attempt the discovery and reducdion of various
provinces which had not hitherto submitted to the
Spaniards. To every standard eredted by the
leaders who undertook any of those new expedi.
tjons, volunteers resorted with the ardor and hope
peculiar to the age. Several of Almagro's soldiers
joined them, and thus Pizarro had the fatisfadcioi
of being delivered both from the importunity of

" Zaratc, lib. iii. c. il. Vega, p. il. lib. ii. c. 8.

his dicfontented friends. and the dread of his an- o o
cicnt enemies'. vl.

Alemagro himself remained for several months 153s.

Alnagro

in cutfody, under all the anguilh of fifplcnfe. For tricd,
although his doom was determined by the Pizarros
from the moment that he fell into their hands,
prudence conftiained them to defer gratifying their
vengeainc, until the soldiers who had served under
him, as well as several of their own followers in
whom they could not perfedly-confide, had left
Cuzco. As soon as they set out upon their differ-
ent expeditions, Almagro was impeached of trea-
son, formally tried, and condemned to die. The condemnetd
sentence alonifhed him, and though he had often
braved death with undaunted spirit in the field,
its approach under this ignominious form appalled
him so much, that he had recourse to abjet sup-
plications, unworthy of his former fame. He be-
fought the Pizarros to remember the ancient friend-
ship between their brother and him, and how much
he had contributed to the prosperity of their fa-
mily; he reminded them of the humanity with
which, in opposition to the repeated remonstrances
of his own molt attached friends, he had spared
their lives w/hen he had them in his power; he
conjured them to pity his age and infirmities, and
to fuFlcr him to pass the wretched remainder of his
daiys in bewailing his crimes, and in making his
cace with heaven. The intreatics, fays a Spanifl

' Zaratc, lib i. ii. . O. Golara, ifl.Cc.1 41. Hcrrera,
lcc. . lib. iv. . 7.

B o o d hiflorian, of a man so much beloved, touched

vi, many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears from
33a. many a stern eye. But the brothers remained in.

flexible. As soon as Almagro knew his fate to be
inevitable, he met it with the dignity and fortitude

ani put o of a veteran. He was firangled in prison, and as
jea"h. terwards publicly beheaded. He suffered in the

feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by
an Indian woman of Panama, whom, though at
that time a prisoner in Lima, he named as successor
to his government, pursuant to a power which the
emperor had granted him ".

JI39. As, during the civil diffenfons in Peru, all in
lions of the tercourfe with Spain was suspended, the detail o
court of the extraordinary tranfadions there did not soon
sPi^ncoe reach the court. Unfortunately for the vioriou
Cerning the reach the court. Unfortunately for the vitoriou
fIateof fation, the first intelligence was brought thithe
Peru. by some of Almagro's officers, who left the coun

try upon the ruin of their cause; and they relate
what had happened, with every circumstance un
favorable to Pizarro and his brothers. Thei
ambition, their breach of the molt solemn engage
ments, their violence and cruelty, were painte
with all the malignity and exaggeration of part
hatred. Ferdinand Pizarro, who arrived soon a
ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary fplen
dor, endeavoured to efface the impression whic
their accusations had made, and to justify his br
ther and himself by representing Almagro as tl

` Zarate, lib. iii. c. 12. Gomara, Hlift.c. x41. Vega,p.
lib. ii. . ;9. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 9. lib. v. c.

aggressor. 'Ihe emperor and his miniflers, though 1 o o X
they could not pronounce which of the contending vr.
factions was most criminal, clearly discerned the 1539.
fatal tendency of their difienfions. It was obvious,
that while the leaders, intrufed with the conduct
of two infant colonies, employed the arms which
Thould have been turned againll the common ene-
my, in destroying one another, all attention to the
public good must cease, and there was reason to
dread that the Indians might improve the advan-
tage which the disunion of the Spaniards presented
to them, and extirpate both the victors and van.
quifhed. But the evil was more apparent than the
remedy. Where the information which had beet
received-was so defective and suspicious, and the
scene of aion so remote, it was almofl impossible
to chalk out the line of conduct that ought to be
followed; and before any plan that hfould be ap.
proved of in Spain could be carried into execution,
the situation of the parties, and the circumtances
of affairs, might alter so entirely as to render its
effects extremely pernicious.

Nothing therefore remained but to fend a per. Vacade
son to Peru, vefled with extensive and discretionary citro feth

' *' thither with

power, who, after viewing deliberately the poflure atnpe
of affairs with his own eyes, and inquiring upon P0w"s'
the spot into the condudt of the different leaders.,
fiould be authorized to establish the government
in that formn which he deemed most conducive to
the interest of the parent Rate, and the welfare of
the colony. The man feleced for this important
charge was Chrifloval Vaca de Cafiro, a judge in

B o o K the court of royal audience at Valladolid; and his

vi. abilities, integrity, and firmncfs,jufitied the choice

His inltrudions, though ample, were not such a!
to fetter him in his operations. According to the
different asped of affairs, he had power to take
upon him different characters. If he found the
governor fill alive, he was to assume only the title
of judge, to maintain the appearance of aing ic
concert with him, and to guard against giving any
jufl cause of offence to a man who had merited o
highly of his country. But if Pizarro were, dead,
he was intrusted with a commiflion that he migh;
then produce, by which he was appointed his fuc
ceffor in the government of Peru. This attention
to Pizarro, however, seems to have flowed rathei
from dread of his power, than from any approbation
of his measures; for at the very time that the courl
seermd so solicitous not to irritate him, his brothel
Ferdinand was arreftedat MTadrid, and confined to;
prison, where he remained above twenty years'7.

140. While Vaca de Cafiro was preparing for hi:
Pidarro di. voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru
vides Peru '

- ·

among his The governor, confiderilng himself, upon the deati
followers. of Alnagro, as the unrivalled possessor of that vas

empire, procccded to parcel out its territorie|
among the conquerors; andl lad this division bee
made with any degree of impartiality, the cxten
of country which he had to bellow, was fuflicien
to have gratilied his friends , and to have gained i

(,;omara, lift. c. 142. Vega, p. t . lib. ii. c. 4o. lie
rcra, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. io, il. lib. x. c. i.

enemies. But Pizarro conduded this tranfadion, B O O K
not with the equity and candor of a judge atten- vI.
tie to discover and to reward merit, but with the I4Q*
illiberal spirit of a party-leader. Large diftrids,
l prts of the country most cultivated and popu-
ons, were set apart as his own property, or grant-
d to his brothers, his adherents and favorites.
'o others, lots less valuable and inviting were as-
igned. The followers of Almagro, amongst whom
were many of the original adventurers to whose
alor and perseverance Pizarro was indebted for
is fuiccefs, were totally excluded fiom any portion
n those lands , towards the acquisition of which they
ad contributed so largely. As the vanity of every
ndividual set an immoderate value upon his own
ervices, and the idea of each concerning the re-
ompence due to them rose gradually to a more
xorbitant height in proportion as their conquests
xtended, all who were disappointed in their ex-
edations exclaimed loudly against the rapacious-
ess and partiality of the governor. The partisans
f Almagro murmured in secret, and meditated
venge'.
Rapid as the progress of the Spaniards in South. Progre of
merica had been since Pizarro landed in Peru, tle Spanish
heir avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied. ar"s.
he officers, to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
ommand of different detachments, penetrated into
everal new provinces, and though some of them

Vega, p. x . lib iii. c. . IHerrera, dec. 6. lib. iii.

B o o Kt were exposed to great hardships in the cold anA

vI. barren regions of the Andes, and others suffered
iS4o. diftrcfs not inferior amidfl the woods and marlhes

cf the plains, they made discoveries and conquets
which not only extended their knowledge of the
country, but added considerably to the territories
of Spain in the New World. Pedro de Valdivia
reaffuned Almagro's scheme of invading 'Chili,
and notwithflanding the fortitude of the natives in
defending their possessions, made such progress in
the conquest of the country, that he founded the
city of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the eftab.
liliment of the Spanish dominion in that pro-

,emarkaile vince '. But of all the enterprises undertaken

c-'edition about this period, that of Gonzalo Pizarro was
i.a,,io. the molt remarkable. The governor, who seems

to have resolved that no person in Peru flould pof-
fess any station of diftinguillhed eminence or autho.
rity but therofe of his own family, had deprived Be.
nalcazar, the conqueror of Quito, of his com-
mand in that kingdom, and appointed his brother
Gonzalo to take the government of it. He in-
llrucLed him to attempt the difcovcry and conquest
of the country to the ealt of the Andes, which,
according to the information of the Indians,
abounded with cinnamon and other valuable spices.
Gonzalo, not inferior to any of his brothers in
coturage, and no les ambitious of acqutiring dif
tinrtion , eagerly engaged in hi (lilticult service.
He fct out from (Quito at the head of three hundred

*' Zarate , lib. iii. c. 3. Ovalle, lib. ii. c. I, &c

and forty soldiers, near one half of whom o o K
wvere horsemen, with four thousand Indians to vi.
carry their provisions. In forcing their way I543
through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of
which they were accustomed, proved fatal to the
greater part of their wretched attendants. The Hardship:
Spaniards, though more robust, and inured to a thley eldure
variety of climates suffered considerably, and loft
some men; but when they defcendediinto the low
country their distress increased. During two
months it rained incessantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough to dry their clothes '.
The vast plains upon which they were now entering,
either altogether without inhabitants, or occupied
by the rudest and east industrious tribes in the
New World, yielded little subsistence. They could
not advance a tep but as they cut a road through
woods or made it through marshes. Such-incef-
sant toil, and continual scarcity of food, seem more
than sufficient to have exhausted and dispirited any
troops. But the fortitude and perseverance of
Spaniards in the sixteenth century were infuper.
able. Allured by frequent but false accounts of
rich countries before them, they persisted in ftrug-
gling on, until they reached the banks of the Coca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whose waters
pour into the Maragnon, and contribute to its
grandeur. There, with infinite labor, they built
a bark, which they expedcd would prove of great

7 Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2.

B O o c utility, in conveying them over rivers, in procur.

vi. ing prov ifions, and in exploring the country.
a4o. This was manned with fifty soldiers, under the

command of Francis Orellana, the officer next in
rank to Pizarro. The fiream carried them down
with such rapidity, that they were loon far a-head
of their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
dificulty by land.

nererted by At this distance fiom his commander, Orellana,
Orai'i'a. a young man of an alpiring mind, began to fancy

himflf independent, and transported with the pre-
dominant pallion of the age, he formed the fchcme
of diftinguinfing himfclf as a difcovercr, by fol-
lowing the course of the MVaragnon , until it joined
the ocean, and by surveying the vast regions
through which it flows. This scheme of Orel-
lana's was as bold as it was treacherous. For, if
he be chargeable with the guilt of having violated
his duty to his commander, and with having aban-
doned his fellow-foldiers in a pathless desert, where
they had hardly any hopes of success, or even of
safety, bu what weie founded on the service which
they expected from the bark; his crime is, in some
imafure, balanced by the glory of having ventured
upon a navigation of near two thoufind leagues,
through unknown nations, in a vcffel hastily con-
liruded, with grecl timber, a( nd by vey unlkilfl
hands, without p)rovisions, without a conpafs, or
a pilot. But his coti llge ld

a lai City fuppliecl

Sas dlomn every dcfcct. Committing hilmfct fcarlelsly to the
thieMtrag- guidalnce of the (llre;mn, the Napo bore him alonl

to the olith, Until hce reaclcd the great cha.nll l oi

thel

the Maragnon. Turning with it towards the coat, B o o it
he held on his course in that direcion. He made vi.
frequent descents on both fides of the river, some- 154O.
times seizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce savages feated on its banks; and fonetimes
procuring a supply of food by a friendly intercourse
with more gentle tribes. After a long series of
dangers, which he encountered with amazing for-
titude, and of distresses which he supported with
no less magnanimity, he reached the ocean 7',
where new perils awaited him. These he likewise
furmnounted, and got safe to the Spanilh settlement
in the island Cubagua ;from thence he failed to Spain.
The vanity inatural to travellers who visit regions
unknown to the reft of mankind, and the art of an
adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own merit,
concurred in prompting him to mingle an extraor-
inary proportion of the marvellous in the narra-
ive of his voyage. He pretended to have disco-
'ered nations so rich, that the roofs of their
emrples were covered with plates of gold; and de-
ribed a republic of women so warlike and power-
Il, as to have extended their dominion over a con-
derable tract of the fertile plains which he had
itited. Extravagant as those tales were, they gave
ife to an opinion that a region abounditg with
old , liftinguifhed by the name of El Dorado , and
community of Amazons, were to be found il
is part of the New World ; and such is the pro-
enfity of mankind to believe what i wonderful

' See NOTE XIII.
VOL. Ill. G

B o o that it has been slowly and with difficulty that rea

vi. son and observation have exploded those fables,
i54o The voyage, however, even when stripped of every

romantic embellishment, deserves to be recorded,
not only as one of the most memorable occurrencei
in that adventurous age, but as the first event
which led to any certain knowledge of the im
mense regions that ftrctch eastward from the Andes
to the ocean .

niaterfsof No words can describe the confiernation of Pi.
Fizarro. zarro, when he did not find the bark at the con

fluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had
ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would noi
allow himself to fufped that a man, whom he had
intrustcd with such an important command, could
be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him al
such a juncture. But imputing his absence from
the place of rendezvous to some unknown accident
he advanced above fifty leagues along the banks
of the IVIaragnon, expecting every moment to fee
1541. the bark appear with a supply of provisions. Al

length he came up with an officer whom Orellanx
had left to pcrifli in the desert, because he had the
courage to remonstrate againflt his perfidy. Fro
him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime, anc
his followers perceived at once their own defperat(
situation, when deprived of their only resource
The spirit of the tfouteft heated veteran funk within
him, and all demanded to be led back inftautly

7 Zaratc, lib. iv. c.4. Gonlarn, Hlift. c. 86. Vega, p. l

lib. iii. c. 4. [Icrrera, dcc. 6. lib. i. c. 2 - s. Rodriguczi,
lariragil(ii y Amanzonas, lib. i. c. ).

pizarro, though he assumed an appearance of tran- B o o .
quillity, did not oppose their inclination. But he vr.
vas now twelve hundred miles from Quito; and is4,.
n that long march the Spaniards encountered hard-
flips greater than those which they had endured in
their progress outward, without the alluring hopes
which then soothed and animated them under their
ufferings. Hunger compelled them to feed on
oots and berries, to eat.all their dogs and horses,
o devour the most loathfore reptiles, and even to
nlaw the leather of their saddles and fword-belts.
our thousand Indians, and two hundred and ten
paniards , perished in this wild disastrous expedi.
ion, which continued near two years'; and as fifty
en were aboard the bark with Orellana, only
oiirfcore got back to Quito. These were naked
ike savages, and so emaciated with famine, or
orn out with fatigue, that they had more the ap-
carance of fpedCres than of men 7.
But, instead of returning to enjoy the repose Numberof
hich his condition required, Pizarro, on entering malecon-

'^~ .~ ~ ~~

. , r tent in

uito, received accounts of a fatal event that Peru.
reatened calamities more dreadful to him than
hose through which he had pasTed. From the
ime that his brother made that partial divilion of
is conquells which has been mentioned, the ad-
crcnts of Almagro, confidering themselves as pro-
ribcd by the party in power, no longer enter-

71 Zarate. lib. iv. c. 2-S. Vega, p. i. lib. iii. c. , 4, ,1

4. llcrrera, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, . lib. ix. c. 2-. dec.
lib. iii. c. 14. izar. Varones lllultr. 349, &c.

G 2

i 9 a tained any hope of bettering their condition

vi. Great numbers.tn despair resorted to Lima , where
154. the house of young Alinagro was always open to

them , and the iender portion of his father's for.
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them fubfiflence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
had served under the elder Almagro devoted
himself to his interests, was quickly transferred to
his on , who was now grown up to the age of
manhood; and possessed all the qualities which

Confider captivate the affedions of soldiers. Of a graceful
ouagr asa appearance, dexterous at all martial exercises, bold,
their leader. open , generous, he seemed to be formed for com.

mand ; and as his father, conscious of his own
inferiority, from the total want of education, had
been. extremely attentive to have him intruted in
every cience becoming a gentleman; the accom.
plifhments which he had acquired heightened the
respect of his followers, as they gave him diftindtio
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a point o0
union which they wanted, and looking up to him
as their head, were ready to undertake aly thin
for his advancement. Nor was affection for A
magro their only incitement; they were urged o
by their own diftrelfes. Many of them, deftitut
of colmmon necessaries ", and weary of loiterin
away'life, a burden to their chief, or to fucho
their associates as had saved fonme remnant of thei

7* See NOTE XIV.

rtune from pillage and confiscation, Tonged imp B o t
atiently for an occasion to exert their adivity and VI
ourage, and began to deliberate how they might ''
e avenged on the author of all their misery.
heir frequent cabals did not pass unobserved; Conrpire
nd the governor was warned to be on his guard lagfeoif pi
gaint men who meditated some desperate deed, zarre,
nd had resolution to execute it. But either from
he native intrepidity of his mind , or from con-
empt of persons whose poverty seemed to render
heir machinations of little consequence, be dif-
egarded the admonitions of his friends. "Re itr
opain, " said he carelessly, "about my life; it
perfectly safe , as long as every man in Peru
nows that I can in a moment cut off any head
vhich dares to harbour a thought against it. "This
ecurity gave the Almagrians full leisure to digest
md ripen every part of their fchme; and Juan de
errada, an officer of great abilties, who had the
harge of Almagro's education, took the direc-
ion of their consultations, with all the zeal which
his connexion inspired, and with all the authority
hich the ascendant that he was known to havd
y'er the mind of his pupil gave him.
On Sunday, the twenty-fixrh of June, at: mid- and kill
ay, the season of tranquillity and repose in all him.
!try climates, Herrada , at the head of eighteen
the most determined conspirators, allied out of
nagiro's house in complete armor; and draw-
g their swords, as they advanced haflily oward;
,c governor's palace, cried out, " Long live the.
ing, ut let the tyrant die! " Their aflfoiwteW

G3

B o o warned of their motions by a signal, were in arm

viL at different rtations ready to support them. Though
I4['. Pizarro was usually surrounded by such a nume.

rous train of attendants as suited the magnificence
of the moit opulent subjed of the age in which he
lived, yet as he was just risen from table , and molt
of his domestics had retired to their own apart.
ments, the conspirators passed through the two
outer courts of the palace unobserved. They were
at the bottom of the staircase, before a page in
waiting could give the alarm to his master, who
was converting with a few friends in a large hall,
The governor, whose fleady mind no form of dan.
ger could appal, starting up, called for arms, and
commanded Francisco de Chaves to make fast the
door. But that officer, who did not retain so much
presence of mind as to obey this prudent order,
running to the top of the flair-cafe, wildly aked
the conspirators what they meant, and whither
they were going ? Instead of answering, they ltab,
bed him to the heart, and burfl into the hall,
Some of the persons who were there threw them.
selves from the windows; others attempted to fly;
and a few drawing their swords, followed their
leader into an inner apartment. The confpiratos,
animated with having the object of their vengeance
now in view, rushed forward after them. Pizarro,
with no other armns than his sword and buckler,
defended the entry, and supported by his hail
brother Alcantara, and his little knot of friends
he maintained the unequal contest with intrepiditi
worthy of his past exploits, and with the vigor ol

a youthful combatant. " Courage, " cried he, n o o I
" companions, we are yet enow to make those vi.
traitors repent of their audacity. " But the armor 54
of the conspirators protected them, while every
thrust they made took effec. Alcantara fell dead
at his brother's feet; his other defenders were
mortally wounded. The governor, so weary that
he could hardly wield his sword, and no longer
able to parry the many weapons furiously aimed at
him, received a deadly thrust full in his throat,
funk to the ground, and expired.

As soon as he was slain, the assassins ran out Almagro
into the streets, and waving their bloody swords, ckdgno

ledged as his

proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two successor.
hundred of their associates having joined them,
they conduAed young Almagro in solemn pro-
ceflion through 'the city, and assembling the magif.
trates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge him as lawful successor to his father
in his government. The palace of Pizarro, toge-
ther with the houses of several of his adherents,
were pillaged by the soldiers, who had the satis-
fation at once of being avenged on their enemies,
and of enriching themselves by the spoils of those
through whose hands all the wealth of Peru had
patted .7

The boldners and success of the conspiracy, as Newap.
well as the name and popular qualitics of Alma- P,,,l'.
gro, drew many soldiers to his standard. Every

71 Zarat, lib. iv. c. 6-. Goinara, Ilif. c. 144, 14q.

cgan, p. I . lib. iii. c. -7. llcrrerd, lcc. 6. lib. x. c. 4-7.
I'i'.ilrro, Var. lilult p. 183.

G 4

B o o K adventurer of desperate fortune, all who Yer

vi. dissatisfied with Pizarro, ad from the rapacious
iS4i. ness of his government in the latter years of his

life, the number of malecontents was considerable,
declared without hesitation in favor of Almagro,
and he was soon at the head of eight hundred of
the most gallant veterans in Peru, As his youth
and inexperience disqualified him, from taking the
command of them himself, he appointed Herrada
to ad as general. But thotugh lrmagro fpecdily
collected such a respectable force, the acquiescence
in his government was far fromr being general.
Pizarro had left many friends to whom his memory
was dear; the barbarous affalination of a man to
whom his country was so highly indebted, filled
every impartial person with horror. The igpomi-
nious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubtful
tite on which he founded his pretensions, led
others to confider him as an usurper. The officers
who commanded in some provinces refused to re-
cognise his authority, until it was confirmed by
the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco,
the royal standard was erected, and preparations
made to revenge the murder of their ancient
leader.

Arrivalof Those feeds of discord, which could not have
acarde lain long dormant, acquired great vigor and ai-

vity, when the arrival of Vaca de Castro was
known. After a long and disastrous voyage, he
was driven by stress of weather into a small har-
bour in the province of Popayan ; and proceeding
from thence by land, after a journey no Icfs tedious

thandifficult, he reached Quito. In his way he R o o K
received accounts of Pizarro's death, and of the vi.
events which followed upon it. He immediately t'4r

, , . ,rr . . , . who assume~

produced the royal commission appointing him the title f
governor of Peru, with the fame privileges and governor.
authority; and his jurifdidion was acknowledged
withoQut hesitation by Benalcazar, Adelantado, or
ieitenant-general for the emperor in Popayan,
nd by edro de Puelles, who, in the absence of
Gonza!o Pizarro, had the command of the troops
eft in Quito. Vaca de Castro not only assumed
he supreme authority, but showed that he pof-
esed the talents which the exercise of it at that
undure required. By his influence and address he
bon affernbled such a body of troops, as not only
t him above all fear of being exposed to any in-
ult from the adverse party, but enabled him to
dvance frorm Quito with the dignity that became
is charader. By dispatching perfoins of confi-
ence to the different settlements in Peru, with a
ormal notification of his arrival and of his com-
iffiop, he communicated to his countrymen the
oyal pleasure with refped to the government of
he coyntry. By private emissaries, he excited
uch officers as had discovered their disapprobation
f Almagro's proceedings, to manifest their duty
o their sovereign by supporting the person honored
ith his commission. Those measures were pro-
tucive of great effets. Encouraged by the ap-
roach of the new governor, or prepared by his
anchinations, the loyal were confirmed in their
rinciples, and avowed them with greater bold-,

o' t ness; the timid ventured to declare their senti.
vl. rents; the neutral and wavering, finding it ne.
Sr1. ceffary to chufe a fide, began to lean to that which

now appeared to be the safest, as well as the mos
just"7

Conduct of Almagro observed the rapid progress of this
Alnldgro. spirit of difaffedion to his cause, and in order to

give an effectual check to it before the arrival of
154:. Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head of his troops

for Cuzco, where the most considerable body of
opponents had erected the royal standard, under
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During
his march thither, Herrada, the skilful guide of
his youth and of his counsels, died; and from that
time his measures were conspicuous for their vio.
lence, but concerted with little sagacity, and exe.
cuted with no address. Holguin, who, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de.
scending towards the:coaft at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco, deceived his
unexperienced adversary by a very firnple strata.
gem, avoided an engagement, and effedted a june.
tion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who had
been the first to declare against Almagro as an
usurper.

rrrers of Soon after, Vaca de Cafiro entered their camp
Vaicde with the troops which he brought from Quito,

and ereding the royal standard before his own
tent, he declared, that as governor, he would

7 Benzoi, fih. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib. iv. c. Ir. Comara,
c. 146, 47. -Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x. c. , 2, 3. 7,&c.

discharge in person all the fundtions of general of o o rc
their combined forces. Though formed by the VI.
tenor of his past life to the habits of a sedentary 1¶42.
and pacific profession, he at once affuned the adi-
vity and discovered the decision of an officer long
accustomed to command. Knowing his strength to
be now far superior to that of the enemy, he was
impatient to terminate the contest by a battle.
Nor did the followers of Almagro , who had no
hopes of obtaining a pardon for a crime so atro-
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that
mode of decision. They met at Chupaz, about two Sept. I.
hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with all
the fierce animosity inspired by the. violence of
civil rage, the rancor of private enmity, the
eagerness of revenge, and the last efforts of despair.
Victory, after remaining long doubtful, declared' Defeats Al
at last for Vaca de Caflro. The superior number "a'rQ.
of his troops, his own intrepidity, and the martial
talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a veteran officer
formed under the great captain in the wars of
Italy, and who on that day laid the foundation of
his future fame in Peru, triumphed over the
bravery of his opponents, though led on by young
Almagro with a gallant spirit, worthy of a better
cause, and deserving another fate. The carnage
wvds great in proportion to the number of the com-
batants. Many of the vanquiflhed , especially fucl
as were conscious that they might be charged with
being accessory to the affiffination of Pizarro, rufn-
ing on the swords of the enemy, chose to fall like
foldicrs, rather than wait an ignominious doom.

B o o Of fourteen hundred men, the total amount of cott.

v[. batants on both fides, five hundred lay dead on
I542, the field, and the number of the wounded was

frill greater".

Severity of If the military talents displayed by Vaca de
hpisroceed- Cafiro, both in the council and in the field, fur.
ings. '

prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were (till more
afronifhed at his condud after te victory. As he
was by nature a rigid dispenser ofjuftice, and per.
fuaded that it required examples of extraordinary
severity to reflrain the licentious spirit of soldiers
so far removed from the feat of government, he
proceeded directly to try his prisoners as rebels.
Forty were condemned to susser the death of trai.
tors, others were banished from Peru. Their
leader, who made his escape from the battle, be-
ing betrayed by some of his officers, was publicly
beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the name of
Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was ex-
tind ".

aonnflta. During those violent convulsions in Peru, the
tionsofthe emperor and his minilters were intently employed
emperor n
concerning in preparing regulations, by which they hoped not
his domli- only to re-eflablifh tranquillity there, but to intro-
.ions ecia duce a more perfet system of internal policy into

all their settlements in the New World. It is ma-
nifeft from all the events recorded in the history of

"Zarate, lib. iv. c. 12-19. Gomara, c. 148. Vega,

p . ii. lib. iii. c. rI- 18. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. i. c. r,2, 3.
lib. iii. c - Ir.

' Zarate, lb.iv. . 21. Gomara, c. Iso. Herrera,
dec. 7. lib. iii. c. iz. lib. vi. c. .

,

America, that rapid and extensive as the Spanish n o o
conquests there had been, they were not carried vi.
on by ay regular exertion of the national force, Is4j.
but by the occasional efforts of private adventurers.
After fitting out a few of the first armaments for
discovering new regions, the court of Spain, during
the busy reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V,
the former the most intriguing prince of the age,
and the latter the moft.ambitious, was encumbered
with such a multiplicity of schemes, and involved
in war with so many nations of Europe, that it had
not leisure to attend to distant and less interesting
objects. The care of prosecuting discovery, or of
attempting conquest, ,was abandoned to individuals;
and with such ardor did men push forward in
this new career, on which novelty, the spirit of
adventure, avarice, ambition, and the hope of
meriting heaven, prompted them with combined
influence to enter, that in less than half a century
almost the whole of that extensive empire which
Spain now possesses in the New World, was sub-
jeted to its dominion. As the Spanifi court con-
tributed nothing towards the various expeditions
undertaken in America, it was not entitled to claim
much from their success. The sovereignty of the
conquered provinces, with the fifth of the gold
and silver, was reserved for the crown; every
thing else was seized by the associates in each ex-
pedition as their own right. The plunder of the
countries which they invaded served to indem-
nify them for what they had expended in equip-
ping themselves for the service , and the

B o o conquered territory was divided among them, ac

vi. cording to rules which custom had introduced, a

permanent establishments which their fuccefsfu
valor merited. In the infancy of those settlements
when their extent as wel! as their value were un
known , many irregularities escaped observation,
and it was found necessary to connive at- man)
cxceffcs. The conquered people were pillaged witi
deftrudive rapacity, and their country parcelled
out among its new masters in exorbitant shares, fai
exceeding the highest recompence due to thei
services. The rude conquerors of America, in.
capable of forming their eftablifhmcnts upon any
general or extensive plan of policy, attentive only
to private interest, unwilling to forego present gain
from the profped of remote or public benefit, seen
to have had no object but to amass sudden wealth,
without regarding what might be the consequence!
of the means by which they acquired 'it. But
when time at length discovered to the Spanifi
court the importance of its American poffeflions,
the necessity of new-modelling their whole frame
became obvious, and in place of the maxims and
practices , prevalent among military adventurers,
it was found requisite to fubltitute the iftitutions
of rcgl:lar government.

One evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the illands, and employed themselves in
searching for gold and silver with the fame inconi
fidarate cagernefs. Similar cfi'cds followed. Thl

natives employed in this labor by maflers, who in B o o K
imposing talks had no regard either to what they vI.
felt or to what they were able to perform, pined I42.
away and perished so fast, that there was reason to
apprehend that Spain, instead of pofefling coun-
tries peopled to such a degree as to be susceptible
of progressive improvement, would soon remain
proprietor only of a vast uninhabited desert.

The emperor and his ministers were so sensible
of this, and so solicitous to prevent the extinction
of the Indian race, which threatened to render their
acquisitions of no value, that from time to time
various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for securing to that unhappy people more
gentle and equitable treatment. But the distance
of America from the feat of empire, the feebleness
of government in the new colonies, the avarice and
audacity of soldiers unaccustomed to restraint, pre-
vented these salutary regulations from operating
with any considerable influence. The evil' conti-
nued to grow, and at this time the emperor found
an interval of leisure from the affairs of Europe to
take it into attentive consideration. He consulted Thl perrou
not only with his ministers and the members of the "it' ,,h""'
council of the Indies, but called upon several
persons who had resided long in the New World, to
aid them with the result of their experience and
observation. Fortunately for the people of Ame.
rica, among these was Bartholomew de las Casa%,
who happened to be then at MVldrd on a miflion
from a Chapter of his order at Chipa7. Though,

" Remefal, Iil. de Chiapa, p. 146.

a o since the miscarriage of his former schemes for ti

vr. relief of the Indians, he had continued flhut up i
154.2 his cloister, or occupied in religious funtions, hi

zeal in behalf of the former objets of his pit,
was so far from abating, that, from an increafei
knowledge of their sufferings, its ardor had aug
mented. He seized eagerly this opportunity
reviving his favorite maxims concerning th
treatment of the Indians. With the moving elo
quence natural to a man on whose nind thi
scenes which he had beheld had made a deec
impression, he described the irreparable waste
the human species in the New World, the Indiat
race almost totally swept away in the island it
less than fifty years, and hastening to extinction or
the continent with the fame rapid decay. Witi
the decisive tone of one strongly prepossessed with
the truth of his own system, he imputed all tlii
to a single cause, to the exactions and cruelty l
his countrymen, and contended that nothing could
prevent the depopulation of America, but the de
daring of its natives to be freemen, and treating
them as fubjetds, not as slaves. Nor did he con.
fide for the success of this proposal in the powers
of his oratory alone. In order to enforce them, he
composed his famous treatise concerning the de
itruction of America", in which he relates, with
many horrid circumstances, but with apparent
marks of exaggerated description, the devastation

" Remefal, p. i9g. 199.

of

of every province which had been visited by the o o
Spaniiards. vi.

The emperor was deeply afflided with the re- I. -

cital of so nmany aions shocking to huianity. t
But as is views extended fr beyond those of Las troii.' a
Caifs, he perceived that relieving the Indians from er, r

A '* r foriT'll t 1

pprefflon was but one Itep towards rendering 111is govcrn II)elt.
pofffions in the New WVorld a valuable acquifi-
ion, and would be of'little avail, unless he con;d
ircumfcribe the power and usurpations of his own
ubjects there. The conquerors of America , how-
ver great their merit had been towards their coun-
rv, were motly persons of such mean birth, and of
uch an abjet rank in society, as gave no diftinc-
ion in the eye of a monarch. The exorbitant
Wealth with which some of them returned, gave
mbrage to an age not accustomed to fee men in
iferior condition elevated above their level, and
iGing to emulate or to surpass the ancient nobility

splendor. The territories which their leaders
ad appropriated to themselves were of such enor-
ous extent", that if the country should ever be
mproved in proportion to the fertility of the foil,
hey mnuft grow too wealthy and too powerful for
bjeds. It appeared to Charles, that this abuse
cjiired a remedy no less than the other, and that
he regulations concerning both mufit be enforced
y a mode of government more vigorous than had
et been introduced into America.
With this view he framed a body of laws, Ncvwregt.

litiolls for
this )urlore

See NOTE XV.
VOL. 111. t

u o K containing many salutary appointments with re

VI. sped to the constitution and powers of the suprem
54a2. council of the Indies; concerning the station ant

jurifdi'tion of the royal audiences in different part
of America; the administration of justice; thi
order of government, both ecclesiastical and civil
These were approved of by all ranks of men. Bu
together with them were issued the following regu
lations, which excited universal alarm, and occa
sioned the most violent convulsions : "That as the
7rparti:ientos or hares of land seized by fevera
persons appeared to be exceflive, the roya
audiences are empowered to reduce them to;
moderate extent: That upon the death of anj
conqueror or platter, the lands and Indians grantee
to him shall not descend to his widow or children
but return to the crown: That the Indians fial
henceforth be exempted from personal service ant
shall not be compelled to carry the baggage o
travellers, to labor in the mines, or to dive ii
the pearl-fifheries : That the stated tribute due b,
them to their superior shall be ascertained, an
they shall be paid as servants for any work the
voluntarily perform : That all persons who arec
have been in public offices, all ecclefiaflics of ever
denomination, all hospitals and monafleries, fhiallb
deprived of the lands and Indians allotted t
them, and these be annexed to the crown : Th
every person in Peru, who had any criminal coi
cern in the contests between Pizarro and Almagrc
flould forfeit his lands and Indians "".

` Herrcra, dec. 7. lib. vi. c. . Fernandez, lilt. lii
C. I, 2.

All the Spanish ministers who had hitherto B o o
eenl intrnfted with the diredion of American VI.
ffairs, and who were best acquainted with the state r4-;
f the country, remonstrated againfl those regula- Htersminr
ions as ruinous to their infant colonies. l hey frateagainn
eprefented, that the number of Spaniards, who t1"1'
ad hitherto emigrated to the New World was so
xtrenely f:nall, that nothing could be expected
rom any effort of theirs towards improving the
'aft regions over which they were scattered; that
h fccefs of every scheme for this purpose mufl
epend upon the ministry and service of the In-
ians, whose native indolence and aversion to la-
or, no profpedc of benefit or promise of reward
ould surmount; that the moment the right of im-
ofing a talk, and exacting the performance of it,
as taken from their malters, every work of
duftry must cease, and all the sources from
hich wealth begun to pour in upon Spain must
ftopt for ever. But Charles tenacious at all
nes of his own opinions, and so much impressed
present with the view of the disorders which
igned in America, that he was willing to ha-
rd the application even of a dangerous remedy,
rlifted in his resolution of publishing the laws.
hat they might be carried into execution with
eater vigor and authority, e authorized Fran-
:o Tello de Sandoval to repair to Mexico as
itador or superintendent of that country, and to
operate with Antonio de Ilendoz.a, the viceroy,
enforcing them. He appointed Blasco Nugncz A vteroy
'I to be governor of Peru,, with the title of appointed

H , iur Peru.

. o o K Viceroy; and in order to strengthen his adminif,

vi. tration, he established a court of royal audience
X543. in Lima, in which four lawyers of eminence were

to preside as judges"

SEficsof The viceroy and superintendent failed at th
tio i ew.a fame time; and an account of the laws which tey
Spaia. were to enforce reached America before then

TIhe entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed
the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited gran
of liberty to the Indians affected every Spaniard i
America without diftintion, and there was hardl
one who might not on some pretext be include
under the other regulations, and fiffer by then
But the colony in New Spain had now been
long accuflomed to the restraints of law and auth
rity under the steady and prudent adminiftratio
of Mendoza, that how much soever the spirit
the new statutes was detested and dreaded, no a
tempt was made to obftrud the publication
them by any at of violence unbecoming fubjedJ
The magistrates and principal inhabitants, how
ever, presented dutiful addresses to the vicer
and superintendent, representing the fatal cons
quences of enforcing them. Happily for them
Mendoza, by long rcfidence in the country,
so thoroughly acquainted with its state, that
knew what was for its interest a well as what
could bear; and Sandoval, though new in office
lifplayed a degree of moderation seldom poeffe
by persons just entering upon the exercise

Zarate, lib. iii. c. 24. Gomara, c. ir. Ve
p, . lib. iii. c. o.

ower. They engaged to suspend, for some time, 'A o r
he execution of what was offensive in the new VT.
aws, and not only consented that a deputation of 1S43
itizens should be sent to Europe to lay before the
mperor the apprehensions of his fubjeds in New
pain with refped to their tendency and effects,
ut they concurred with them in fiupporting their
ntiments. Charles, moved by the opinion of
en whose abilities and integrity entitled them to
ecide concerning what fell immediately under
eir own view, granted such a relaxation of the
gor of the laws as re-established the colony in its
rmer tranquillity .
In Peru the storm gathered with an asped fill n Pera.
ore fierce and threatening, and was not so soon
ispelled. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
uch inferior to those who had fubjedted Mexico
the Spanish crown, farther removed from the
fpedion of the parent fRate, and intoxicated with
e sudden acquisition of wealth, carried on all
eir operations with greater licence and irregula-
ty than any body of adventurers in the New
'orld. Amidst the general subversion of law
d order, occasioned by two successive civil wars,
hen each individual was at liberty to decide for
mfelf, without any guide but his own interest or
irions, this turbulent spirit rose above all sense
subordination. To men thus corrupted by
rchy, the introduction of regular government,

Fcrnande7, Hi. lib. i. c. , 4, . Vega, p. 1X.

111. c. i, 22. Herrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. lib. vii.
14, i. Torquem. Mun. Ind. lib. v. c. 1;.

H3

x o o , the power of a viceroy, and the authority of a re.

vi. fpectable court of judicature, would of themselves
543' have appeared formidable restraints, to which they

would have submitted with reludance. But they re.
volted with indignation aaintf the idea of comply.
ing with laws, by which they were to be stripped at
once of all they had earned so hardly during many
years of service and fffering. As the account of
the new laws spread fucceflively through the dif.
ferent settlements, the inhabitants ran together,
the women in tears, and the men exclaiming
against the injustice and ingratitude of their fove.
reign in depriving them, unheard and unconvited,
of their possessions. "Is this," cried they, "the
iecompence due to persons , who without public
aid, at ther own expense, and by their own va
lor, have fubjcded to the crown of Castile terri
tories of such vast extent and opulence Are thee
the rewards bestowed for having endured unpara
]elled diflrefs, for having encountered every fpe.
cies of danger in the service of their country?
Wlhofe merit is so great, whose condut has been
so irreproachable, that he may not be condemned
by some penal claufc in regulations, conceived in
terms as loose and comprehensive , as if it had
been intended that all flould be entangled in thci
snare ? Evcry Spaniard of note in Peru has hed
some public office, and all, without difindtioil
have been colnfiained to take an ative part in th
contell between the two rival chiefs. Were th
formnr to be robbed of thelir property because ttl'
had done their duty ? cre the latter to be pl
ninicd on account of what they could not avoid

Shall the conquerors of this great empire, instead n o o K
of receiving marks of diftindion, be deprived of vi.
the natural consolation of providing for their wi- 143.
dows and children, and leave them to depend for
subsistence on the scanty supply they can extort
from unfeeling courtiers"? We are not able now,
continued they, to explore unknown regions in
quefl of more secure settlement; our conftitu-
tions, debilitated withage, and our bodies cover-
cd with wounds, are no longer fit for active ser-
vice; but still we possess vigor sufficient to assert
ourjutf rights, and we will not tamely susser them
to be wrelted from us "."

By discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe- An inrr
mence, and listened to with universal approbation, reion pre-

vented by

their passions were inflamed to such a pitch, that the mote.
they were prepared for the most violent measures; ration of
and began to hold consultations in different places. Ca
how they might oppose the entrance of the viceroy
and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws. From this,
however, they were diverted by the address of
Vaca de Castro, who flattered them with hopes,
than, as soon as the viceroy and judges hfould ar-
rve, and had leisure to examine their petitions and
renonflrances, they would concur with them in
endeavouring to procure some mitigation in the
rior of laws which had been framed without Idue

Ilerrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. r , i.
(;onara, c. I ? . lclrrera, dec. 7. lib. vi. c.
1o, I . Vcgla p. ii. lib. iii. c. 20. 12. lib. iv. C. 3,4..

lI 4

1 o o R attention either to the Itate of the country, or to

vi. the sentiments of the peple. A greater degree of
4a-. accommodation to these, and even fonme concefions

on the part of government, were now become re.
quiite to compofi the present ferment, and to
sooth the colonifis into fubmiflion, by inspiring
them with confidence in their superiors. But with.
out profound difcernmcnt, conciliating manners,
and flexibility of temper, such a plan could not be

The pirit carried on. The viceroy pofleffed none of these
iof''n < Of all the qualities that fit men for high command,
creased hy he was endowed only with integrity and courage;
the viceroy. the former harsh and uncomplying, the latter bor.

dering so frequently on rashness or obflinacy, that
in his situation they were defects rather than vir.
March 4. tues. From the moment that he landed at Tumr

bez, Nugnez Vela seems to have confidered him-
self merely as an executive officer, without any dif.
cretionary power; and, regardless of whatever he
observed or heard concerning the state of the
country, he adhered to the letter of the regulations
with unrelenting rigor. In all the towns through
which he passed , the natives were declared to be
free, every person in public office was deprived of
his lands and servants ; and as an example of obe.
dicnce to others, he would not fffer a single In.
dian to be employed in carrying his own baggage
in his march towards Lima. Amazement and
conflrnation went before him as he approached;
and so little solicitous was he to prevent these from
augmenting, that, on entering the capital, he
opcily avowed that he came to obey the orders

f his sovereign, not to dispense with his laws. B o o t
his harlh declaration was accompanied with what vi.
cndered it still more intolerable, haughtiness in IS43
eportmcnt, a tone of arrogance and decision in
dicoliufe, and an insolence of office grievous to
en little accustomed to hold civil authority in
i;h refped. Every attempt to procure a sus.
ciifion or mitigation of the new laws, the viceroy
onlidered as flowing from a spirit of difaffecdion
hat tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank
were confined, and some put to death, without
ny form of trial. Vaca de Castro was arrested,
nd notwithstanding the dignity of his former
ank, and his merit in having prevented a general
nfirredtion in the colony, he was loaded with
hains, and shut up in the common jail ".
But however general the indignation was against The male;
uch proceedings, it is probable the hand ofautho- ents
ity would have been frong enough to suppress it, czahiearro
r to prevent its burlting out with open violence, tobe their
f the malecontents had not been provided with a leader.
eader of credit and eminence to unite and to di-
ed their efforts. From the time that the purport
f the new regulations was known in Peru, every
paniard there turned his eyes towards Gonzalo
izarro, as the only person able to avert the ruin
vith which they threatened the colony. From all
uarters, letters and addresses were sent to him,
onjuring him to stand forth as their common

*7 Zarate, lib. iv. . 2 4,,24, 2. onnara, c. i ;- i .
cga, p. . lib. iv. c. 4, S. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 6-10.

B o o protedor, and offering to support him in the attemp

yi. with their lives and fortunes. Gonzalo, thougi

inferior in talents to his other brothers, was equalli
ambitious, and of courage no less daring. Th
behaviour of an ungrateful court towards his bro
thers and himself, dwelt continually on his mind
Ferdinand a ftate-prifoner in Europe, the childrer
of the governor in cuflody of the viceroy, and feni
aboard his fleet, himself reduced to the conditior
of a private citizen in a country, for the discovery
and conquest of which Spain was indebted to his
family. These thoughts prompted him to seek si
vengeance, and to assert the rights of his family,
of which he now confidered himself as the guar.
dian and the heir. But as no Spaniard can easily
surmount that veneration for his sovereign which
seems to be interwoven in his frame, the idea of
marching in arms against the royal standard filled
him with horror. He hesitated long, and was ill
unresolved, when the violence of the viceroy, the
universal call of his countrymen, and the certainty
of becoming soon a victim himself to the feverityof
the new laws, moved him to quit his residence at
Chuquifaca de la Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All
the inhabitants went out to meet him, and re.
ceived him with transports of joy as the deliverer
of the colony. In the, fervor of their zeal, they
clected him procurator-general of the Spanifli na
tio n Peru, to solicit the repeal of' the late regu.
lations. They empowered him to lay their re.
inoiilrt.incsc before the royal audience in Lima,
and upon pretext of danger fronL the Idians,

authorized him to march thithetn arms. Under B o o x
fandion of this nomination Pizat took possession vi.
of the royal treasure, appointed officers, levied 1544.
soldiers, seized a large train of artillery which
Vaca de Cafiro had deposited in Guamanga, and
set out for Lima, as if he had been advancing
againfl a public enemy. Difaffedion having now
assumed a regular form, and being united under
a chief of such diftinguiifed name, many persons
of note resorted to his standard; and a confider-
able part of the troops, raised by the viceroy to
oppose his progress, deserted to him in a body".

Before Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had Difenfons
happened there, which encouraged him to proceed otthevice-
with almost certainty of fucccfs. The violence of coutof
the viceroy's adminifiration was not more formi- audience.
dable to the Spaniards of Peru than his overbear-
ing haughtiness was odious to his associates, the
judges of the royal audience. During their
voyage from Spain, some symptoms of coldness
between the viceroy and them began to appear "
But as soon as they entered upon the exercise of
their refpetive offices, both parties were so much.
exasperated by frequent contfts, arising firom in-
terference of jurifdidion, and contrariety of opi-
nion, that their mutual difgufl soon grew into
open enmity. The judges thwartcd the viceroy
in every measure, set at liberty prisoners whon

" Zarate, lib. v. c. i. Gonara, c. iX6, 157.

Vega, p. ii. lib. iv. c. 4.-12. Fcrnandez, lib. i. c. 12.
-17. Ilerrera, dec. 7. lib. vii. c. 8, &c. lib. viii. c. -5.

Is unara, c. 171.

B o iK he had confined justified the malecontents, and

vi. applauded their 'Tmn onflrances. At a time when
I44. both departments of government should have

united against the approaching enemy, they were
contending with each other for superiority. The

The viceroy judges at length prevailed. The viceroy, univer.
imprisoned, sally odious, and abandoned even by his own

guards, was seized in his palace, and carried to a
desert island on the coast, to be kept there until
he could be sent home to Spain.
viewsof The judges, in consequence of this, having

assumed the supreme direction of affairs into their
own hands, ifTued a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a mef.
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to dismiss his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or
twenty attendants. They could hardly exped that
a man so daring and ambitious would tamely corn
ply with this requisition. It was made, probably,
with no such intention, but only to throw a de.
cent veil over their own conduct; for Cepeda, the
president of the court of audience, a pragmatical
and aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret
correspondence with Pizarro, and had already
formed the plan, which he afterwards executed,
of devoting himself to his service. The imprison-
rnent of the viceroy, the usurpation of the judges,
together with the univerftl confusion and anarchy
confeqent upon events so fingularand unexpected,
opened new and vast profpeds to Pizarro. He
now beheld the supreme power within his reach.

or did he want courage to push on towards the n o o x
object which fortune presented to his view. Car- vI.
vajal, the prompter of his resolutions, and guide 1544
of all his ations, had long fixed his eye upon it
s the only end at which Pizarro ought to aim.
Instead of the inferior function of procurator for
the Spanish settlements in Peru, he openly de-
manded to be governor and captain-general of the
whole province, and required the court of audi-
ence to grant him a commission to that effect. At
the head of twelve hundred men, within a mile of
Lima, where there was neither leader nor army to
oppose him , such a request carried with it the au-
thority of a command. But the judges, either
fiom unwillingness to relinquish power, or from
a desire of preserving some attention to appear-
ances, hesitated, orfeemed to hesitate, about com-
plying with what he demanded. Carvajal, impatient He affumet
of delay, and impetuous in all his operations, march- thegovern-
ed into the city by night, seized several officers
of diftindion bnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged
them without the formality of a trial. Next morn-
ing the court of audience issued a commiflion in
the emperor's name, appointing Pizarro governor
of Peru, with full powers, civil as well as mili-
Lary, and he entered the town that day with ex-
traordinary pomp, to take possession of his new
dignity '.

' Zarate, lib. v. c. 8-Io. Vega, p. Ti. lib. iv. c.

3--19. Gomara, c. 159-I63. Fernandez, lib. i. c.
18-as. Ierrcra, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. lo-2o.

o o I But amidst the disorder and turbulence which
vI. accompanied this total dissolution of the frame
1544. of government, the minds of men, set loose from

Oct. '.
The iceroy the ordinary restraints of law and authority, aed
recovershis with such capricious irregularity, that events no
ljberty. less extraordinary than unexpeded followed in a

rapid succession. Pizarro had scarcely begun to
exercise the new powers with which he was in.
vested, when he beheld formidable enemies rife
up to oppose him. The viceroy having been put
on board a vessel by the judges of the audience,
in order that he might be carried to Spain under
custody of Juan Alvarez , one of their own num-
ber; as soon as they were out at sea, Alvarez,
either touched with remorse or moved by fear,
kneeled down to his prisoner, declaring him from
that moment to be free, and that he himself, and
every person in the ship, would obey him as the
legal representative of their sovereign. Nugnez
Vela ordered the pilot of the vessel to fliape his
course towards Tumbez, and as soon as he land-
ed there, ereted the royal standard, and refum-
ed his functions of viceroy. Several persons of
note, to whom the contagion of the fclitious
spirit which reigned at Cuzco and Limna had not
reached, inflantly avowed their resolution to sup.
port his authority". The violence of Pizarro's
government, who observed every individil
with the jealouly natural to usurpers, and who

'' Zarate, lib. v. c . 9. Gomara, c. 16S. Fernandez,
lib. i. c. l3. llcrrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. if.

punifled every appearance of difaffetion with B o o ;
unforgiving severity, soon augmented the number vl.
of the viceroy's adherents, as it forced some
leading men in the colony to fly to him for re-
ftge. While he was gathering such strength at
Tumbez, that his forces began to assume the ap-
pearance of what was confidered as an army in
America, Diego Centeno, a bold and aive offi-
cer, exasperated by the cruelty and oppression of
Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in the province of
Charcas, formed a conspiracy against his life,
cut him off, and declared for the viceroy '.

Pizarro, though alarmed with those appear- 14,.
ances of hostility in the opposite extremes of the Fizarro

i Iarci:es

empire, was not disconcerted. IHe prepared to againit him.
assert the authority to which he had attained, with
the spirit and condut of an officer accustomed to
command, and marched diredtly againit the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as most
formidable. As he was mailer of the public re-
venues in Peru, and most of the military men
were attached to his family, his troops were so
numerous, that the viceroy, unable to face them,
retreated towards Quito. Piza;rro followed him;
and in that long march, through a wild moun-
tainous country, suffered hardihips and encoun-
tered difficulties, which no troops but those ac-
customed to serve in America could have endured
or fulrmounted ". The viceroy had scarcely reached

" Zrate, lib. v. c. 18. Comara, c. 69. Hernera,
dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 7. " See NOTE XVI.

o o K Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's forces ap
vi. peared, led by Carvajal, who, though near four

score, was as hardy and aive as any young so
dier under his command. Nugnez Vela inftantl
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and witb
a rapidity more resembling a flight than a retreat
marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarrc
continued to pursue; but finding it impossible to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From thenc
he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Centeno, wha
was growing formidable in the southern province
of the empire, and he himself remained there to
make head against the viceroy ,

The viceroy By his own ativity, and the assistance of Be
defeated, nalcazar, Nugnez Vela soon assembled four hun.

dred men in Popayan. As he retained, amidftall
his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and tht
fame high sense of his own dignity, he rejedted witb
disdain the advice of some of his followers, who
urged him to make overtures of accommodation
to Pizarro, declaring that it was only by the sword
1546. that a contest with rebels could be decided. With

this intention he marched back to Quito. Pizarro
relying on the superior number, and still more o
the discipline and valor of his troops, advancei
Januaryis. resolutely to meet him. The battle was ierce and

bloody, both parties fighting like men who knel
that the pollilion of a great empire, the fate o

P' Zarate, lib. v. . i , 6-24. Gonara, c. 167. Vega

p. ii. lib. iv. c. :2-28. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 4. 40
jlerrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c, 16. 20-27.

their

theirleaders, and their own future fortune, de- n o o
pernded upon the issue of that day. But Pizarro's vr.
veterd.ns pushed forward with such regular and Is46.
well-direded force, that they soon began to make
jiprcflion on their enemies. The viceroy, by ex-
traordinary exertions, in which the abilities of a
commander and the courage of a foldicr were
equally displayed, held vidory for some time in.
fuflenfe. At length he fell, pierced with many antlflaib
wounds; and the rout of his followers became
general. They. were hotly pursued. His head
was cut off, and placed on the public gibbet in
Quito, which Pizarro entered in triumph. The
troops assembled by Centeno were dfperfed son
fter by Carvajal, and he himfclf compelled to fly
o the mountains, where he remained for several
months concealed in a cave. Every person in
cru, from the frontiers o Popayan to those of
hili, submitted to Pizarro; and by his fleet, un-
er Pedro de Hinojofa , he had not only the unri.
alled command of the South-Sea, but had taken
olefcion of Panama, and placed a garrison in
ombre de Dios, on the opposite fide of the
fthmus, which rendered him iafter of the only
veinue of communication between Spain and
elIr, that was used at that period".

After this cecifiev vidory, Pizarro and his P,,tto id,
llovwcs remained for some time at O(uito, and 'feltoaf

rulne tile

'" Zarate, lib. v. c. tr, t. Gomara, c. 170. Vega, p. it. l'vertigtnt
iv. c. c. 1, 34. Fernandez, lib. i. c. i51- 4. lterrera,
ec. 7. lib. x. c. 2. 19- 2. dec. 8. lib. i. c. . Benzo,

iii. . 12.
VO(L. I.

n o o during the first transports of their exultation, they

vr. ran into every exccs of licentious indulgence, with
1546. the riotous spirit usual among low adventurers

upon extraordinary ficcefs. But amidst this dif.
fipation, their chief and his confidents were obliged
to turn their thoughts sometimes to what was fe.
rious, and dliberated with much solicitude con.
ccrning the part that he ought now to take. Car.
vajal, no less bold and decisive in counsel than in
the field, had from the beginning warned Pizarro,
that in the career on which he was entering , it was
vain to think of holding a middle course; that lie
mufi either boldly aim at all, or attempt nothing.
From the time that Pizarro obtained poffcllion of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater earnestness. Upon receiving
an account of the victory at Quito, he remonstrated
with him in a tone Rill more peremptory. "You
have usurped (said he, in a letter written to Pizarro
on that occasion) the supreme power in this coun.
try, in contempt of the emperor's comrnilion to
the viceroy. You have marched, in hostile array,
against the royal standard ; you have attacked the
representative of your fovercign in the field, have
defeated him, and cut off his head. Think not
that ever a monarch will forgive fich inflits on lhis
dign ity, or that any reconciliation with him can be
cordial or sincere. l)epend no longer on the pre.
carious favor of another. Allime yourself tlhe
fovereigty over a country, to the dominion of
which your family has a title founded on the riglis
both of discovery and concjucfl. It is in your

power to attach every Spaniard in Peru of any B o o K
confequcnce inviolably to your interest by liberal vi.
grants of lands and of Indians, or by infli.uting i546.
ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honor
similar to those which are courted with so much
eagerness in Europe. By cleablilning orders of
knighthood, with privileges and diftinAtions re-
fenbling those in Spain, you may bestow a grati-
fication upon the officers in your service, suited to
the ideas of military men. Nor is it to your coun-
trymen only that you ought to attend; endeavour
to gain the natives. By marrying the Coya, or
daughter of the Sun next in succession to the crown,
you will induce the Indians, out of veneration for
the blood of their ancient princes, to unite with
the Spaniards in support of your authority. Thus,
at the head of the ancient inhabitants of Peru, as
well as of the new settlers there, you may set at
defiance the power of Spain , and repel with ease
any feeble force which it can fend at such a dif-
tance." Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pi-
zarro's confidential counsellor, warmly seconded
Carvajal's exhortations, and employed whatever
learning he poflcffed in demonstrating, that all the
founders of great monarchies had been raised to
pre-eminence, not by the antiquity of their lineage,
or the validity of their rights , but by tleir own
asir-ing valor and pelfonal merit'.

I'izarro listened attentively to both, and could Rutch,,re,

tu lnegoiace

Vega, p. i. lib. iv. c. 4o. Fernnndez, lib. i. c. 3..
lib, ii. c. . 49. Herrra, dt¢c. . lib. ii. c. 1o.

1 a

B O
0 R not conceal the satisfaction with which he conternt

vt. plated the objet that they presented to his view.
wis46' But happily for the tranquillity of the world, few
courrof men possess that superior frength of mind, and
Spain, extent of abilities, which are capable of forming

and executing such daring schemes, as cannot be
accomplifled without overturning the eftablilled
order of society, and violating those maxims of
duty which men are accuflomed to hold sacred.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed
his ambition within more narrow limits. Instead
of aspiring at independent power, he confined his
views to the obtaining from the court of Spain a
confirmation of the authority which he now pof-
sessed; and for that purpose, he sent an officer of
diftindtion thither, to give such a representation of
his condud, and of the state of the country, as
might induce the emperor and his ministers, either
from inclination or from necessity, to continue him
in his present station.

Conrulta. While Pizarro was deliberating with refped to
tions of the
Spanih m. the part which he flould take, consultations were
infltr. held in Spain , with no less solicitude, concerning the

measures which ought to be pursued in order tore.
eflablilh the emperor's authority in Peru. Though
unacquainted with the last excesses of outrage to
which the malecontents had proceeded in that coun,
try, the court had received an account of the infur,
rcdion against the viceroy, of his imprisonment, and
the usurpation of the government by Fizarro. A
revolution so alarming called for an immediate inter.
position of the emperor's abilities and authority.

But as he was fully occupied at that time in Ger. n o o
many, in conducting the war against the famous VI.
league of Smalkalde , one of the most interesting and 546
arduous enterprises in his reign, the care of providing
a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved upon
his son Philip, and the counsellors whom Charles
had appointed to afTift him in the government of
Spain during his absence. At first view, the ac-
tions of Pizarro and his adherents appeared so re-
pugnant to the duty of fubjedts towards their so-
vereign, that the greater part of the ministers in-
sised on declaring them inflantly to be guilty of
rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them with
exemplary rigor. But when the fervor of their
zeal and indignation began to abate, innumerable
obstacles to the execution of this measure presented
themselves. The veteran bands of infantry, the
strength and glory of the Spanish armies, were
then employed in Germany. Spain, exhaufled of
men and money by a long series of wars, in which
ihe had been involved by the restless ambition of
two successive monarchs, could not easily equip an
armament of sufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To
transport any refpeCdable body of troops to a
country so remote as Peru, appeared almost imr
pollible. While Pizarro continued master of the
South.Sea, the diret route by Nombre de Dios
and Panama was impracticable. An attempt to
march to Quito by land through the new kingdom
of Granada, and the province of Popayan, across
regions of vast extent, desolate, unhealthy, or in-
habited by fierce and hostile tribes, would be

I3

B o attended with unfrmountable danger and hardnl;ph.

vi. The pallage to the South-Sea by the Straits of
14-. J\lagellan was so tedious, so uncertain, and so

little known in that age, that no confidence could
be placed in any effort carried on in a course of
navigation so remote and precarious. Nothing
then remained but to relilnqiih the system which
the ardor of their loyalty had lirft suggested, and
to attempt by lenient mcafures what could not be
effecded by force. It was manifcft, from Pizarro's
solicitude to represent his con(dut in a favorable
light to the emperor, that, notwithstanding the
excesses of which he had been guilty, he ftillre.
tained sentiments of veneration for his sovereign.
By a proper application to these, together vth
some fch concessions as flould discover a spirit
of moderation and forbearance in government,
there was fill room to hope that he might be yet
reclaimed , or the ideas of loyalty natural to Spa.
niards might so far revive among his followers,
that they would no longerlend their aid to uphold
his usurped authority.

trafcaap- The success, however, of this negociation, no
poiited cO
repairom less delicate than it was important, depended en.
V'eri as pre. tirely on the abilities and address of the person to
si"e"t. whom it flhonld be committed. After weighing

with much attention the comparative merit of
various persons, the Spanif miniLters fixed with
unanimiy of choice upon Pedro de la Gafca, a
prierf in no higher station than that of counsellor
to the Inquisition. Though in no pblic office, he
had been occarionally employed by government in

affairs of trust and consequence, and had condudt- n o o
ed them with no less skill than success; displaying vi.
a gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied with s46.
much firmness; probity, fiperior to any feeling of
private interest; and a cautious circumfpcction ill
concerting measures, followed by such vigor in
executing them, as is rarely found in alliance with
the other. These qualities marked him out for the
l{iunioil to which he was defined. The emperor,
to whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly ap-
proved of the choice, and communicated it to him
in a letter, containing cxpreflions of good-will and
confidence, no less honorable to the prince who
wrote, than to the subjet who received it. Gafca,
notwithflanding his advanced age and feeble
c.lnfitution, and though, from the apprchenfions
natural to a man, who, during the course of his
life, had never been out of his own country, he
dreaded the effedts of a long voyage, and of an
unhealthy climate ", did not hesitate a moment
about complying with the will of his sovereign.
But as a proof that it was from this principle His mnodera
alone he ated, he refnfed a bifliopric which was tol"'
offered to him, in order that lie might appear in
Peru with a more dignified charader; he would
accept of no higher title than that of president
of the court of audience in Lima; and declared
Ihat lie would receive no salary on account of
his discharging the duties of that oice. All he
required was, that the expense of fpporting his

9' Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 17.

14

1 o family should be defrayed by the public, and as

v'. he was to go like a minifler of peace with his
I54s govwn and breviary, and without any retinue but

a few domestics, this would not load the revenue
with any enormous burden ".

Th- poers But while he discovered fch disinterested mo.
t',imited deration with rfped to whatever related pe fonally

to himself, he demanded his official powers in a
very different tone. He insisted, as he was to be
employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourse to
hi, fovrreign for new inftrudions on every emer.
gen c, an! as the whole success of his nego.
ciations mitfl depirid upon the confidence which
the people with whom he had to treat could place
in the extent of his powers, that he ought to be
invelved with unlimited authority); that his jllif-
dicio munuft reach to all persons and to all causes;
that he muff be empowered to pardon, to puniff,
or to reward, as circumflances and the behaviour
of different men might require; that, in cafe of
reffitance from the malecontents, he might be au-
thorized to reduce them to obedience by force of
arms, to levy troops for that purpose, and to call
for aiftance from the governors of all the Spanifi
settlements in America. These powers, though
manifestly conducive to the great objedts of his
million, appeared to the Spanifl miniflers to be

' Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Comara, c. 74 Fernandez, lib. ii.

e. 4- 16. Vcgi, p. ii. lib. v. c. . Herrcra, dec. . lib. i,
0. 4, &c,

alicnable prerogatives of royalty, which ought n o o
ot to be delegated to a subjed, and they refused vl.
o rant them. But the emperor's views were S46.
nre enlarged. As from the nature of his employ.
(clt, Gafca inutf be intrufled with discretionary
owcr in several points, and all his efforts might
rove incffcdual if he was circumscribed in any
ne paiticilar,' Charles scrupled not to invefl him
ith authority to the full extent that he demanded.
ighlv satisfied with this fresh proof of his malter's
nfidence, Gafca hastened hWs departure, and,
'ithout either money or troops, set out to quell
formidable rebellion '. May 6.
On his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found JJuly 27
erm;n M'exia, an officer of note, potled there, Hi rrival,
order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of
en, to oppose the landing of any hostile forces.
ut Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
in so little formidable, and with a title of no
ch dignity as to excite terror, that he was re-
ived with much refpecd. From Nombre de Dios
advanced to Panama, and met with a similar
ception from Hinojofa, whom Pizarro had in-
ulled with the government of that town, anid the
mmin(d of his fleet flationed there. In both
aces he held the fame language, declaring that

vas sent by their sovereign as a meffengcr of
ace, not as a miniftcr of vengeance; that he
me to redref£ all their grievances, to revoke the
s which had excited alarm, to pardon palt

Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 16-18'

n o o offences, and to re-eflablifh order and juflice in til

vr. government of Peru. His mild deportment, th
5i4S. simplicity of his manners, the fancdity of his prost

sion, and a winning appearance of candor, gaint
credit to his declarations. The veneration due to
person clothed with legal authority, and adingi
virtue of a royal commission, began to revin
among men accustomed for some time to nothit
more refpedable than an usurped jurifdicio
Hinojofa, Mexia, and several other officers
diftindion, to each of whom Gafca applied sei
rately, were gained over to his intcreft, a:
waited only for some decent occasion of declai
openly in his favor ".

VioTent pro- This the violence of Pizarro soon afforded the!
ceding of As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival at Panar
'izarro.

though he received, at the fame time, an accoe
of the nature of his commission, and was infornr
of his offers not only to render every Spanii
in Peru easy concerning what was palt, by
ad of general oblivion; but secure with refp
to the future, by repealing the obnoxious lav
inflead of accepting with gratitude his fovereil
gracious concessions, he was so much exafper
on finding that he was not to be continued
hiis flation as governor of the country, that
instantly resolved to oppose the prcfident's er
into Peru, and to prevent his exercising
jurifdiion there. To this desperate resolution

Fernande , lih. ii. c 2 r, <&c. Zarate, lib. vi. ,.'

Comara, c. 175. V\ep., p. l.
L v. c. .

I(dded another highly prepoflerous. He sent a new o o
yeputation to Spain to jutify this conduCt, and vi.
o insist, in name of all the communities in Peru, 1146.
or a confirmation of the government to himself
lring life, as the only means of preserving tran-
uillitv there. The persons intrulted with this
r.ng' commilfion, intimated the intention of
'z.Itrr to the president, and required him, in
is name, to depart from Panama and return to
plin. They carried likewise secret instructions to
inojonf, direting him to offer Gafca a present
f ifty thousand pesos, if he would comply
oluntaily with what was demanded of him; and
be flould continue obstinate, to cut him off
itler by assassination or poison''.

lMany circumflaices concurred in pulhing on Carcagains
izarro to those wild measures. Having been once hisfleet-
ccuftomed to supreme command, he could not
ear the thoughts ofdefcending to a private flation.
:onfcious of his own demerit, he ffpeded that
ie emperor fludied only to deceive him, and
ould never pardon the outrages which he had
ommitted. His chief confidents, no less guilty,
ntertained the Lime apprehensions. The approach
f Gafca without any military force excited no
rror. There were now above fix thousand Spa-
i;ard fettled in Peru"', and at the head of there
c doubted not to maintain his own independence,

' Zarate, lib. vi. c.. . Fernandc7,li,. ii. . 33, 4.
lerrcra;, (ec. 8. lib. ii. c. , lo.

Ilclrrcra, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. r.

B o o if the court of Spain should refuse to gran

v1. what he required. But he knew not that a fpiri

of defedion had already begun to spread arno
those whom he trusted molt. Hinojofa, amazed
Pizarro's precipitate resolution of setting himfe
in opposition to the emperor's commiflion, an
disdaining to be his instrument in perpetrating th
odious crimes pointed out in his secret inftrudion
publicly recognised the title of the president
the fpreme authority in Peru. The officers und
his command did the fame. Such was the contag
ous influence of the example, that it reache
even the deputies who had been sent from Peru
and at the time when Pizarro expected to he
either of Gafca's return to Spain, or of his dea
he received an account of his being matter
the fleet, of Panama, and of the troops ftatione
there.

a,~,. Irritated almost to madners by events so unex
PiziIrro re- peded, he openly prepared for war; and in orde
solves on

reson to give fom color of jultice to his arms,

appointed the court of audience in Lima to proce
to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes of havi
seized his flips, seduced his officers, and prevente
his deputies from proceeding in their voyage
Spain. Cepeda, though acting as a judge in 'virtu
of the royal commiflion, did not scruple to prof
tute the dignity of his function by finding Gas(
guilty of trcafon, and condemning him to dicIt
on that account'". Wild, and even ridiculou,

'' Fcrnandlcz, lib. ii. c. . Vega, p. i. lib. v.c.
IHc recia; , dc,. 8. lib. iii. c. 6.

is proceeding was, it imposed on the low illiter- Bo o K
eadventurers, with whom Peru was filled, by VI.
e semblance of a legal fandion warranting Pizarro 1S47'
carry on holtilities against a convidted traitor.
Idiers accordingly resorted from every quarter
his standard, and he was soon at the head of
thousand men, the belt equipped that had ever
ken the field in Peru.
Gafca, on his part, perceiving that force mufi Preparation
employed in order to accomplilh the purpose oftafca.
his mission, was no less alfiduous in collecting
oops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
tlements on the continent; 'and with such
ccefs, that he was soon in a condition to detach
squadron of his fleet, with a considerable body
soldiers, to the coast of Peru. Their appearance April,
cited a dreadful alarm; and though they did
t attempt for some time to make any descent,
ey did more effedual service, by setting ashore
different places persons who dispersed copies of
e ad of general indemnity, and the revocation
the late edits; and who made known every
here the pacific intentions, as well as mild tern
r, of the president. he effect of spreading
is information was wonderful. All who were
atisfied with Pizarro's violent administration,
who retained any sentiments of fidelity to their
ereign, began to meditate revolt. Some openly
ertcd a cause which they now deemed to be
uft. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he ifurrection
concealed, assembled about fifty of his former otCt"L'so,
berents, and with this feeble half-armed band

B o o advanced boldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attac

VI. in the night-time, in which he displayed no l
547. military Ikill than valor, he rendered hims

malter of that capital, though defended by
garrison of ive hundred men. Molt of the
having ranged themselves under his banners,
had soon the command of a refpedable body

104

troops

against Pizarro , though aflonilhed at beholding o
whon Pi. enemy approaching by sea, and another by lan
ma hes. at a time when he trusted to the union of all Pe

in his favor, was of a spirit more undaunted, an
mnore accustomed to the vicissitudes of fortune
than to be disconcerted or appalled. As the dang
from Centeno's operations was the most urgent,
instantly set out to oppose him. Having provid
horses for all his soldiers, he marched with amazin
rapidity. But every morning he found his for
diminifled, by numbers who had left him durin
the night; and though he became suspicious
excess, and punished without mercy all whom
fufpeded, the rage of desertion was too viole
to be checked. Before he got within fight oft
enemy at H-uarina, near the lake 'Titiaca, he col
not muster more than four hundred soldiers. B
these hejuftly confidered as men of tied attaclime
on whom he might depend. They were indeedt
boldest and most dcfperate of his followers, conl
ous like lhimfclf of climes for which they col

1'° Zarate, lib. vi. c. 1-i16. Colnara, . 18o, i
Fernaidez, lib. ii. .. zS. 64, &.;

rdly expec forgiveness, and without any hope o o K
it in the success of their arms. With these he did VT.
t hesitate to attack Centeno's troops, though I"47
uble to his own in number. The royalists did Ocro
tdecline the combat. It was the most obRinate
d bloody that had hitherto been fought in Peru.
tlength the intrepid valor of Pizarro, and the ani deFeats
periority of Carvajal's military talents, triumphed l'
er numbers, and obtained a complete vicory.
he booty was immcnfe "', and the treatment of
e anquifhed cruel. By this signal success the
putation of Pizarro was re-eltablifhed, and being
wv deemed invincible in the field, his army
creased daily in number ''.
Put events happened in other parts of Peru,
iich more than counterbalanced the splendid
dory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Lima,
hen the citizens, weary of his oppressive domi-
Dll, eretded the royal standard , and Aldana,
ith a detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took
ifefnion of the town. About the fame time '', Gafcalanda
fca landed at Tumbez with five hundred men. at PerU
icouraged by his presence, every settlement in
e low country declared for the king. The fitua-
n of the two parties was now perfedtly reversed;
izco and the adjacent provinces were possessed
P'izarro; all the relt of the empire, from
uito southward, acknowledged the jurifdidion

Scee NOTE XVII.
/.arate, lib. vii c. 2, . Goinara, c. ir . Vega, p. 1.

v. c. 18, &c. Fcmrande., lib. ii. c. 79. Herrcra, dec. .
iV. C. i, 2. L°7 ZZaratc, lib. i. c. 17.

B o o of the President. As his numbers augmented f,l

vs. Gafca advanced into the interior part of the counD
154*. try. His behaviour frill continued to be gentl

and unaffurning; he expressed on every occaflo
his ardent wins of terminating the contest withli
bloodfhle. More solicitous to reclaim than
punifhi, he upbraided no inan for pat offences
but received them as a father receives peniten
children returning to a sense of their duty, Thoug
dcfirous of peace, he did not flacken his prepar
tions for wr. He appointed the general rendez
vous of his troops in the fertile valley of Xaux

Arvaeces on the road to Cuzco °. There he remained so
towros some months, not only that he might have tim

to make another attempt towards an accommodi
tion with Pizarro, but that he might train h
new soldiers to the use of arms, and accustom the
to the discipline of a camp, before he led the
against a body of victorious veterans. Pizarro
intoxicated with the success which had hither
accompanied his arms, and elated with havin
again near a thousand men under his command
refused to litfen to any terms, although Cepeda
together with several of his officers, and eve
Carvajal himself '", gave it as their advice
close with the prefldent's offer of a general indem
nity, and the revocation of the obnoxious laws
Gafca having tried in vain every expedient t

Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 7. 82

'' See NOT'r XVII.
"* Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6. Vega, p. i. lib. v. c. 7

avoid

o avoid imbruing his hands in the blood of his n o o
ountrymen, began to move towards Cuzco, at vI.
ie head of sixteen hundred men. 547.

Dec. 29.

Pizarro, contidentof viCory, suffered the royalifs oth parties
o pass all the rivers which lie between Guamanga prep;re for
nd Cuzco without opposition, and to advance battle.
within four leagues of that capital, flattering himself
hat a defeat in such a situation as rendered a retreat
mpradticable would at once terminate the war.
e then marched out to meet the enemy, and
arvajal chose his ground, and made the difpofi. April .
ion of the troops with the difcerrning eye, and
rofound knowledge in the art of war, conspicuous
nall his operations. As the two armies moved
rwards slowly to the charge, the appearance of
ach was singular. In that of Pizarro, composed
f men enriched with the spoils of the most opulent
untry in America, every officer, and almost all
e private men were clothed in uffs of silk, or
rocade, embroidered with gold and silver; and
eir horses, their arms, their flandards, were
lorned with all the pride of military pomp'".
'hat of Gafca, though not so splendid, exhibited
hat was no less striking. He himself, accompanied
y the archbishop of Lima, the bishops of Quito
n( Cuzco, and a great number of ecclesiastics,
archiing along the lines, blessing the men, and
icouraging them to a resolute discharge of their
uty.
VWhen both were just ready to engage, Cepeda Pi7a.ro e.

ferted by hi

"1 Zarate, lib. vi. c. 1i. trot)ls
VOL. III. K

B o O K set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and surrendered

vi. himiflf to the president. Garcilaffo de la Vega, ain

other officers of note, followed his example. Thi
revolt of persons in such high rank struck all wi.t
amazement. The mutual confidence on which the
union and strength of armies depend , ceased at
once. Distrust and conflernation spread from rani
to rank. Some silently flipped away, others thrc\
down their arms, the grcatcft number went ove
to the royalists. Pizarro , Carvajal, and fom
leaders, employed authority, threats, and intreatic
to stop them, but in vain. In less than half a
hour, a body of men, which might have decide
the fate of the Peruvian empire, was totall
dispersed. Pizarro, feeing all irretrievably lot,
cried out in amazement to a few officers who ti
faithfully adhered to him, " What remains so
us to do?" " Let us rush, replied one of then
upon the enemy's firmest battalion, and die li
Romans. " Dejected with such a reverse of fortun
he had not spirit to follow this soldierly counfe
and with a tameness disgraceful to his form
takei, fame, he surrendered to one of Gafca's office

Carvajal, endeavouring to cfcape, was overtake
and seized.

and put to Gafca, happy in this bloodless victory, didno
'"ietii. tain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, ad

fnall number of the molt iltinguified or not
rious offenders, were punished capitally. Pizarr
was beheaded on the day after lie furrenderc
lie fiblnitted to his fate with a composed dignit
and fccmed detfrous to atone by repentance so

the crimes which he had committed. The end of o o
Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his trial he VI.
ofecred no defence. \rWhen the sentence adjudging 1s48.
him to be hanged was pronounced, he carelessly
replied, " One can die but once." During the
iterval between the fntence and execution, he
ifcovered no sign either of remorse for the pafl,
r of solicitude about the future; scoffing at all
vho vifite him, in his usual sarcastic vein of
irth, wit th hfame quickness of repartee and
ros pleasantry as at any other period of his life.
epeda , more riminal than either , ought to
iave filared the fame fate; but the merit of
living deserted his associates at such a critical
oment, and with such decisive effec , saved
im from immediate punishment. He was sent,
oxoever, as a prisoner to Spain, and died in
onfinement .
In the minute detail which the contemporary
iftorians have given of the civil dissensions that
agedin Peru, with little interruption, during ten
ears, many circurnftances occur so firiking, and
hich indicate such an uncommon ltate of manners,
s to merit particular attention.
Though the Spaniards who firfl invaded Peru Nomerce.
ere of the lowelt order in society, and the greater "ary oldict

i i the civil

art of those who afterwards joined them were wars of
erfons of dcfperate fortune, yet in all the bodies Peru,

"' Zarat,: lib. vii. c. 6, 7, 8. Gomara, C. iRs8

R6. Vega, p. . lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, lib.
c. 6, c. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &.

.' . , *i

R o K of troops brought into the field by the different

vi. leaders who contended for superiority, not one
l4L- manll aed as a hired soldier, that follows his

flandard for pay. Every adventurer in Peru
confidered hifellf as a conqueror, entitled, by
his frvices, to an eliabliflinent in that country
which had been acquired by his valor. In the
contests between the rival chiefs, each chose his
fide as he was directed by his own judgment or
affections. He joined his commander as a companion
of his fortune, and disdained to degrade himsel
by receiving the wages of a mercenary. It was
to their sword , not to pre-eminence in office, or
nobility of birth, that mofl of the leaders whom
they followed were indebted for their elevation,
and each of their adherents hoped, by the fame
means, to open a way for himself to the possession
of power and wealth "'.

Armiesin. But though the troops in Peru served without
mtnenrlyex. any regular pay, they were raised at immenfo

expense. Among men accuflomed to divide the
spoils of an opulent country, the desire of obtain,
ing wealth acquired incredible force. The ardot
of pursuit augmented in proportion to the hope of
success. Where all were intent on the fame obje,
and under the dominion of the fame passion, thet4
was but one mode of gaining men, or of fecurin
their attachment. Officers of name and influence
betides the promife.of future eftabliflnlents, received
in hand large gratuities from the chief with whbo

"' Vega, p. xi. lib. iv. c. 38. 41.

they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro, in order to raise B o o K
a thousand men, advanced five hundred thousand vl.
pesos ". Gafca expended in levying the troops I1(s
which he led against Pizarro nine hundred thousand
pesos"'. The distribution of property, bestowed
as the reward of services, was frill more exorbitant.
Cepeda, as the recompence of his perfidy and and im-
address, in persuading the court of royal audience menre-
to give the fancion of'its authority to the usurped dividuals:
jurisdiction of Pizarro, received a grant of lands
which yielded an annual income of a hundred and
fifty thousand pesos ". Hinojofa, who, by his early
defection from Pizarro, and surrender of the fleet
to Gafca, decided the fate of Peru, obtained a
diftrit of country affording two hundred thousand
pesos of yearly value "i. While such rewards were
dealt out to the principal officers, with more than
royal munificence, proportional liares were con-
ferred upon those of inferior rank.

Such a rapid change of fortune produced its Their pr.
natural effects. It gave birth to new wants, and fufoll and

luxury.

new desires. Veterans, long accustomed to hardship
and toil, acquired of a sudden a talle for profuse
and inconsiderate dissipation, and indulged in all
the excesses of military licentiousness. The riot of
low debauchery occupied some; a relifi for expen-
five luxuries spread among others ". The meanest
soldier in Peru would have thought himself

"+ Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 4.
' Zarate, lib. vii. c. o. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.

Gomara, c. 164. I' Vcga, p. it. lib. vi. c. 3.
lHerrcra, dec. . lib. ii. c. . dec. 8. lib. viii. . 10.

K3

B o o degraded by marching on foot; and at a time

vi. when the prices of horses in that country were
5483. exorbitant, each infifced on being furnished with

one before he would take the field. But though
left patient under the fatigue and hardships of
service, they were ready to face danger and death
with as much intrepidity as ever; and animated
by the hope of new rewards, they. never failed,
on the day of battle, to display all their ancient
valor.

Ferocity Together with their courage, they retained
their conh all the ferocity by which they were originally
tfts were distinguished. Civil discord never raged with a
carried o; more fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru,

To all the passions which usually envenom contests
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren.
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expected upon the
death of every opponent, slut the door againt
mercy. To be wealthy, was of itself sufficient to
expose a man to accusation, or to filbjed him to
punishment. On the flight n flfpicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the mofl opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching for
any pretext to justify his cruelty, cut off many
more. Thc number of those who suffered by the
hland of the cxeciLione, was not much inferior
to what fell in the field"'; and the greater pt
vas condemned without the formality of ainy
legal trial.

"' Scc NOTE XIX.

The violence with which the contending parties B o o K
treated their opponents was not accompanied with vI.
its usual attendants, attachment and fidelity to 1"4a

theyi~~~~~~~

i --I *and w-int

those with whom they ated. The ties of honor otfaith.
which ought to be held sacred among soldiers, and
the principle of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly
il the Spanifll charadter as in that of any nation,
seem to have been equally forgotteni. Even regard
for decency, and the sense of liame, were totally
lolt During their dissensions, there was hardly a
Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon the party
which he had originally espoused, betray the
afociates with whom he had united, and violate
the engagements under which he had come. 'I he
viceroy Nugnez Vela was ruined by the treachery
of Cepeda and the other judges of the royal
audience, who were bind by the duties of their
function to have supported his authority. The
chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo Pizarro's
revolt, were the firr to forsake him, and submit
to his enemies. His fleet was given up to Gafca,
by the man whom he had singled out among his
officers to intrust with that important conand.
On the day that was to decide his fate, an army
of veterans , in fight of the enemy, threw (!wn
their arms without striking a blow, and dcfertcd
a leader who had often condueted them to victory.
Infltnces of such general and vow(d contcnili
of the principles and obligations which att.lch
Ilmln to man, and bind them togethcr in foiil
ulion, rarely occur in hiltory. It is only whci
Mntl re far removed from the feat of govcrnmnt,

4

l o o K where the restraints of law and order are little

vi. felt, where the profpedl of gain is unbounded,
1s548 and where immcnfe wealth may cover the crimes

by which it is acquired, that we can find any
parallel to the levity, the rapacioufief, the perfidy
and corruption prevalent among the Spaniards in
Peru.

,Gaca de. On the death of Pizarro, the malecontents in
vires ei- every corner of Peru laid down their arms, and
ployment
fnr hisfol, tranquillity seemed to be perfecly re-established.
diets. But two very interesting objeds still remained to

occupy the president's attention. The one was to
find immediately such employment for a multitude
of turbulent and daring adventurers with which
the country was filled, as might prevent them
from exciting new commotions. The other, to
bestow proper gratifications upon those to whose
loyalty and valor he had been indebted for his
success. The former of these was in some measure
accomplifled, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to
prosecute the conquest of Chili; and by empower.
ing Diego Centeno to undertake the discovery of
the vast regions bordering on the river De la
Plata. The reputation of those leaders, together
with the hopes of acquiring wealth, and of
rising to consequence in some unexplored country,
alluring many of the most indigent and desperate
foldicis to follow their flandards, drained off no
inconsiderable portion of that mutinous spirit which
Gafca dreaded.

His divi The Ilatter was an affair of greater difficulty,
fioof th and to he adjusted with a more attentive and

elicate hand. The repartimintos, or allotments B o o r.
f lands and Indians which fell to be difiributed, vl.
consequence of the death or forfeiture of the 148.

contry

rmer possessors, exceeded two millions of Pesos among his
yearly rent '". Gafca, when now absolute followers.
lafcr of this immense property , retained the
me disinterested sentiments which he had origin-
ly professed, and refused to reserve the smallest
ortion of it for himself. But the number of
aimants was great; and whilst the vanity or
arice of every individual fixed the value of
is own services, and efiimated the recompence
hich he thought due to him, the pretension of
ach were so extravagant, that it was impossible
o satisfy all. Gafca listened to them one by one,
ith the most patient attention; and that he might
ave leisure to weigh the comparative merit of
eir several claims with accuracy, he retired,
ith the archbishop of Lima and a single secretary,
a village twelve leagues from Cuzco. There
e spent several days in allotting to each a
ifrid of lands and number of Indians, in propor.
on to his idea of their part services and future
portance. But that he might get beyond the
alch of the fierce florm of clamor and rage,
hich he foresaw would burst out on the publica-
on of his decree, notwithflanding the impartial
(lity with which he had framed it, he set out
r I.ima leaving the instrument of partition fealed
p, with orders not to open it for some days
ftcr his departure.

Vega, p. 11. lib. vi. c. 4.

B K The indignation excited by publishing the de

vr. cree of partition was not less than Gafca had ex.
s48. peted. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, fhamn

The dlcon- rage, and all the other passions which most vehe
tentitocca. mently agitate the minds of men when both their
silo". honor and their interest are deeply affected, con.

spired in adding to its violence. It broke out wit
all the fury of military insolence. Calumny,
threats , and curses, were poured out openly upo
the president. He was accused of ingratitude, c
partiality, and of injustice. Among soldien
prompt to ation, such seditious discourse wouIl
have been soon followed by deeds no less violen
and they already began to turn their eyes toward
some discontented leaders, expecting them to ftan
forth in redress of their wrongs. By some vigoroui
interpositions of government, a timely check w
given to this mutinous spirit, and the danger
another civil war was averted for the present

1t49. Gafca, however, perceiving that the flame wi
Rle.letal suppressed rather than extinguiflled , labored it
ier and go. the utmost afliduity to sooth the malecontents,by
veroment, beflowing large gratuities on sone, by promifinj

rf)artimientos, when they fell vacant, to others,ani
by caressing and flattering all. But that the pub
lic security might reft on a foundation more ftabll
than their good affedtion, he endeavoured t(
strengthen the hands of his successors in oice, b)

" Zar:ltc, lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara, c. 187. Vegi

p. ti. lib. vii. c. r, &c. Fernaindit., p.

) i. lib. i.
x, &c. licrrcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &c.

e.eftablilhing the regular adminiltration ofjuftice B o o IC
n every part of the empire. He introduced order VI.
nd simplicity into the mode of collecting the royal
evenue. He issued regulations concerning the
reatnent of the Indians , well calculated to protect
hem from oppression, and to provide for their in-
nrution in the principles of religion, without de-
riving the Spaniards of the benefit accruing from
eir labor. Having now accomplifed every iso.
bjcci of his mission, Gafca, longing to return
ain to a private fiation, committed the govern-
ent of Peru to the court of audience, and set out Feb .
r Spain. As, during the anarchy and turbulence andretsomt
fthe four last years, there had been no remittance fr Spain.
ade of the royal revenue, he carried with him
irteen hundred thousand pesos of public money,
hich the ceconomy and order of his adminiftra-
on enabled him to save, after paying all the ex-
enses of the war.
lie was received in his native country with uni- nis rerel.
erfal admiration of his abilities, and of his virtue. ti" therec
oth were, indeed, highly conspicuous. Without
my, or fleet, or public funds; with a train so
mple , that only three thousand ducats were ex-
ended in equipping him ', he set out to oppose
formidable rebellion. y his addrcfs and talents
c f)pplicd all thole dcfecs, and fccemcd to create
firuitlents for exc::CtiLlg his designs. lie ac-
nircd fich a n:val force, as gave hin the coin-
a'nd of the sea. lie r.iifcd body of men able

1: 'l. indcz ., lib. ii. c. i .

o o c to cope with the veteran bands which gave law
vr. to Peru. He vanquished their leader, on whose arms
15o. victory had hitherto attended, and in place ol

anarchy and usurpation, he eftablifled the govern.
ruent of laws, and the authority of the rightful
sovereign. But the praise beltowed on his abilities
was exceeded by that which his virtue merite(
After residing in a country where wealth presented
allurements which had seduced every person who
had hitherto poffefTed power there, he returne
from that trying flation with integrity not onl
untainted but unfufpeded. After diftributin
among his countrymen possessions of greater ex
tent and value than had ever been in the difpofa
of a subjed in any age or nation, he himfelfremaine
in his original state of poverty; and at the ver
time, when he brought such a large recruit to th
royal treasury, he was obliged to apply by petitio
for a small film to discharge some petty deb
which he had contracted during the course of hi
service "'. Charles was not insensible to such difi
terefled merit. Gafca was received by him wit
the most distinguishing marks of eteem, and b
ing promoted to the bishopric of Palencia,
passed the remainder of his days in the tranquillit
of retirement, refpedted by his country, honore
by his sovereign, and beloved by all.

Notwithstanding all Gafca's wife regulation

the tranquillity of Peru was not of long contill
ance. In a country, where the authority of g

"' MS. penes me.

'ernment had been almost forgotten during the long B o o K
revalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there vI.
were disappointed leaders ripe for revolt, and fedi- O'
ious soldiers ready to follow them, it was not
ifficult to raise combustion. Several successive
nfurrecions desolated the country for some years.
tit as those, though fierce, were only transient
orms, excited rather by the ambition and turbu-
ence of particular men, than by general or public
otives, the detail of them is not the objed of this
ifory. These commotions in Peru, like every
hing of extreme violence either in the natural or
olitical body, were not of long duration, and
y carrying off the corrupted humors which had
iven rife to the disorders, they contributed in
he end to strengthen the society which at first
hey threatened to destroy. During their fierce con-
efts, several of the first invaders of Peru, and
nany of those licentious adventurers whom the
ame of their success had allured thither, fell by
ach other's hands. Each of the parties, as they
ternately prevailed in the struggle , cleared the
ountry of a greater number, by executing, pro-
ribing, or banishing their opponents. Men less
terprifing, less desperate, and more accustomed
move in the path of fober and peaceable industry,
cttled in Peru; and the royal authority was gra-
Iually established as firmly there as in the other
;panifh colonies.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THE
H I S T OR Y

O F
AMERICA.

BOOK VII.

S the conquest of the two great empires of n o o x
exico and Peru forms the molt splendid and vii.
teresting period in the history of America, a
iew of their political institutions, and a defcrip.
on of their national manners, will exhibit the
uman species to the contemplations of intelli.
ent observers in a very singular stage of its pro.
refs '.
When compared with other parts of the New lexico and
orld, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as Pelrumehan

polished chan

olifed states. Instead of small, independent, otlher paris
oftile tribes, struggling for subsistence amidst ofrAmnc'a.
oods and marshes, firaugers to iduftry and arts,
nacqainted with subordination , and almost with-
t the appearance of regular government , we find
ulltrics of great extent fiubedce to the dominion
one sovereign, the inhabitants colledled toge.
cr in cities, the wisdom and forclight of rulers

' See NOTE XX.

C o o K employed in providing for the maintenance an

VII. security of the people, the empire of laws in for

measure eftablifhd , the authority of religion r
cognised, many of the arts essential to li
brought to some degree of maturity, and tl
dawn of such as are ornamental beginning t
appear.

Their ine- But if the comparison be made with the peopi
riorityto Of the ancient continent, the inferiority of An
the nations
ofthe anci- rica in improvement will be conspicuous , and nt
nt cnti- ther the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be entitl
1gllt.

to rank with those nations which merit the name
civilized. The people of both the great empir
in America, like the rude tribes a:ound them
were totally unacquainted with the useful metals
and the progress which they had made in extendin
their dominion over the animal creation was
considerable. The Mexicans had gone no farth
than to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a species
finall dogs, and rabbits '. By this feeble essay
ingenuity, the means of fubfiflence were rendere
fonewhat more plentiful and' secure, than we
men depend solely on hunting; but they had n
idea of attempting to subdue the more robust an
mals, or of deriving any aid from their minifry
carrying on works of labor. The Peruvians fee
to have neglected the inferior animals, and ha
not rendered any of them domestic except t
duck; but they were more fortunate in tami
the Llama, an animal peculiar to their countr

H lerrcra, dec. i . lib. vii. c. xi.

fa form which bears some resemblance to a deer, a..o o.
nt some to a camel, and of a size fonewhatc Jr- VtI.
er than a heep. Under the proteEtion of man,
is species multiplied greatly. Its wool furnished
e Peruvians with clothing ,-its flefli with soqd.
was even employed as a beast of burden, and
rried a moderate load with much patience and
ocility 3. It was never used for draught; and the
reed being confined to the mountainous country,
service, if we lnay judge by incidents which
ccur in the early Spanish writers, was not very
:tensive among the Peruvians in their original
ate.
In tracing the line by which nations proceed
wards civilization, the discovery of the useful
etals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
imal creation have been marked as steps of ca-
tal importance in their progress. In our copti-
nt, long after men had attained both, society
ntinued in that state which is denominated bar-
rous, Even with all that command over nature
hih there confer, many ages elapse, before in-
ftry becomes so regular as to render subsistence
cnre, before the arts which supply the wants and
rish the accommodations of life are brought to
y considerable degree of perfedion, and before
v idea is conceived of various inflitutions requ ifite
a well ordered society. The Mexicans and Pe-
ianls, without knowledge of the useful metals, or
e aid of domeltic animals, labored under difad-

Vega, p. 1. lib. viii. c. 6. Zarate, lib. i. c. 14.
VOL. IIt. E

- 0 0 OK vantages which must have greatly retarded their pr

vit. grefs, and in their highest state of improvement thei

power was so limited, and their operations so feeb
that they can hardly be confidered as having a
vanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

View ofthe After this general observation concerning tl
andit'mars rnoft ingular and distinguishing circumstance
of exc,. the lhate of both the great empires in America,

shall endeavour to give such a view of the cons
tution and interior police of each, as may enable
to ascertain their place in the political scale, to all
them their proper station between the rude tribesi
the New World, and the polished states of th
ancient, and to determine how far they had ri
above the former, as well as how much theyfe
below the latter.

Imperfet MIexico was first fubjeded to the Spanish crow
infotrmation
conctrning But our acquaintance with its laws and manne
tllhTe of is not, from that circumstance, more complet
Alexico.

I What I have remarked concerning the defecdi
and inaccurate information on which we muftrc
with refpcd to the condition and customs of t
savage tribes in America, may be applied likewi
to our knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cote
and the rapacious adventurers who accompani
him, had not leisure or capacity to enrich eith
civil or natural history with new obfcrvations. Tb
undertook their expedition in quest of one obje
ant seened hardly to have turned their eyest
wards any other. Or, if during foine fiort inlt
val of tranquillity, when the occupations of w
ccafed, and the ardor of plunder was fufpendc

le infRitutions and manners of the people whom B o o ;j
hey had invaded drew their attention, the inquiries vr.
filliterate soldiers were conduced with so little
gacity and precision, that the accounts given by
eem of the policy and. order cltablified in the
lexican monarchy are fperficial., confused, and in-
xplicable. It is rather from: incidents which they
late occasionally, than from their own dedustions
nd remarks, that we are enabled to form some idea
the genius and manners of that people. The
bfcurity in which the ignorance of its conquerors
nvolved the annals of Mexico, was augmented by
e superstition of those who succeeded them. As
e memory of past events was preserved among the
lexicans by figures painted on skins, on cotton
oth, on a kind of pasteboard, or on the bark of
ees, the early mifionaries, unable to comprehend
eir meaning, and struck with their uncouth forms,
nceived them to be monuments of idolatry which
lght to be del roved, in order to facilitate the con-
eion of the Indians. In obedience to an edict
ued by Juan de Zumniaraga , a Franciscan monk,
e first bishop of Mlexico, as many records of the
cient Mexican flory as could be colleded were
inmitted to the flames. In consequence of this
natical zeal of the monks who irft visited News
ain (which their fucccffors soon began to la-
ent), whatever knowledge of remote events filc!l
(de monuments contained was alrnoft entirely loft,
il no information remained concerning the an-
ent revolutions and policy of the empire, but
lht wva derived frim tradition or from some trag?

* '
^9. . . '~~;

B o o K ments of their historical paintings that escaped t

vil. barbarous researches of Zummaraga . From

experience of all nations it is manifest, that them
mory of pafl tranfadtions can neither be long p
served, nor be transmitted with any fidelity,
tradition. The Mexican paintings, which arefu
posed to have servcd as annals of their empire,
few in number, and ofambiguous meaning. Thu
amidst the uncertainty of the former, and theo
fcurity of the latter, we mutft glean what intelligen
can be collec'ed' from the scanty materials scatter
in the Spanifhl writers '.

Origin oFthe According to the account of the Mexic
Mexican
monarchy.

* Acofta, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquem. Proem. lib. ii. lib.
c. 6. lib. xiv. c. 6.

* In the firl edition, Iobferved thatinconfequenceof

deftrudtion of the ancient Mexican paintings, occasioned by
zeal of Zummaraga, whatever knowledge they might hi
conveyed was entirely loft. Every candid reader muflha
perceived that the expreflion was inaccurate; as in a
lines afterwards I mention ome ancient paintings to
still extant. M. Clavigero, not fitistied with layingh
of this inaccuracy, which I corrected in the fubfequ
editions, labors to render it more glaring, by the nm
ner in which he quotes the remaining part of the senten
He reprehends with great asperity the account which
give of the scanty materials for writing the ancient hist
of Mexico. Vol. I. Account of Writers, p. xxvi. V.
380. My words, however, are almost the fame with th
of Torquemada, who seems to have been better acquain
with the ancient monuments of the Mexicans than
Spanish author whofl works I have seen. Lib. xiv. c
I1. Clavigero himself gives a description of the dellru
of ancient paintings in almof the farme terms lhaveufe
and mentions, as an additional reason of there bcing

mfclves, their empire was not of long duration. o o i
eir country, as they relate, was originally pof- vii.

1 a nmber of ancient paintings known to the Spaniards,
tthe natives have become so solicitous to preserve and
ceal them, that it is " difficult, if not inipoffible, to
ake them part with one of them. " Vol. I. 407.
194. No point can be more ascertained than that
of the Mexican hiflorical paintings have been prefer-

Though several Spaniards have carried on inquiries
the antiquities of the Alexican empire, no engravings
m lexican paintings have been communicated to the
lic, except those by urchas, Gemelli Carreri, and
enzana. It affords me ome fatisfafion, that in the
rfe of my researches, I have discovered two collections of
xican paintings which were unknown to former inquirers.
ecut which I published is an exad copy of the original,
gives no high idea of the progress which the Mexicans had
e in the art of painting. I cannot conjeture what could
uce M. Clavigero to express ome dissatisfaction with me
having published it without the fame colors it has in the
inal painting. p. xxix. He might have recollected, that
her Purchas, nor Gemelli Carreri, nor Lorenzana, thought
ecefalrv to color the prints which they have published,
they have never been censured on that account. He may
assured, that though the colors in the paintings in the
erial Library are remarkably bright, they are laid on
hout art, and without" any of that regard to light and
h;ie, or the rules of perfpedive, " which M. Clavigero
uires.. . 7. 7 If the public express any desire to have
elven paintings ill in my pofleffion engraved, I am
dy to communicate them. The print published by Ge-
li Carreri, of the route of the ancient Mexicans when they
c led towards the lake on which they built the capital of
ir emipire, Churchill, Vol. IV. p. 48 r, is the mofi finished
nument of art brought from the New World, and yet a very
ht infpccion of it will satisfy every one, that the annals
a nation conveyed in this manner muff be very meagre and
crfct. L 3

R o O1 selfed, rather than peopled, by finall independent

vii. tribes, whose mode of life and manners resembled

those of the rudest savages which we have de.
fcribed. But about a period corresponding to the
beginning of the tenth century in the Christian
era, several tribes moved in fucceflive migrations
from unknown regions towards the north and
north-wef , and fettled in different provinces of
Anahuac, the ancient name of New Spain. There,
more civilized than the original inhabitants, began
to form them to the arts of social life. At length,
towards the commencement of the thirteenth cen,
tury, the 1Mexicans, a people more polished thaa
any of the former, advanced from the borderol
the Californian gulf, and took possession of tht
plains adjacent to a great lake near the centre ol
the country. After residing there about fifty years,
they founded a town, since distinguished by thi
name of Mexico, which from humble beginning!
soon grew to be the molt considerable city in thi
New World. The Mexicans, long after they wen
established in their new poffellions, continued, lik
other martial tribes in America, unacquainted vitl
regal dominion, and were governed in peace, an
conduced in war, by such as were entitled to pl
eminence by their wisdom or their valor. Bt
among them, as in other ates whose power an
territories become extenfivc, the supreme athl
rity centred at last in a ingle person; and \vhl
the Spaniards under Cortes invaded the count
Montezuma was the ninth monarch in order wi

,adfwayed the Mexican sceptre, not by hereditary B o o
ight, but by election. VIs,
Such is the traditional tale of the Mexicans con- Veryrecent.
erning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
ording to this, its duration was very fliort. From
he firlt migration of their parent tribe, they can
eckon little more than three hundred years. From
lie eftblillment of monarchical government, not
bove a hundred and thirty.years, according to
ne account , or a hundred and ninety-feven, ac-
ordiig to another computation', had elapsed. If,
i one hand , we suppose the Mexican state to
Lve been of higher antiquity, and to have sub-
ied during such a length of time as the Spanifl
ccounts of its civilization would naturally lead us
o conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, among
people who possessed the art of recording events
y pictures, and who confidered it as an essential
art of their national education, to teach their
lildren to repeat the hiflorical songs which cele-
rated the exploits of their anceflors', the know-
cdge of pald tranfadtions flould be so slender and
litedl. If, on the other hand , we adopt their
)\'., lyftem with relped to the antiquities of their
.ition, it is no less dilicult to account either for
ut ilnlproved lIate of society, or for the extensive
!,nlillion to wlhich their empire had attained, wlien
',ll viitecd by the Spaniards. The infancy of na-
oiis is so long, and, even when every circumstance

Acof. Illif. ib. i. c. 8, &c. 7 Purchas, Pilgr. iii.
Io6 , &(c. l -lerrcra, dec. 3. lib. ii c. g.

L 4

B o o is fvorable to their progress, they advance so

vit. slowly towards any maturity of strength or policy,

that the recent origin of the Mexicans seems to be a
itrong presumption of some exaggeration, in the
splendid descriptions which have been given of their
government and manners.

Yacttwhich But it is not by theory or conjedures that his.
,rogetriir tory decides with regard to the fbte or charaler of
cvilization. nations. It produces fads as the foundation of

every judgment which it ventures to pronounce. In
colleding those which mull regulate our opinion
in the prefcnt inquiry, some occur that suggest an
idea of confilerable progress in civilization in the
Mexican empire, and others which seem to indi.
cate that it had advanced but little beyond the
savage tribes around it. Both shall be exhibited
to the view of the reader, that, from comparing
them, he may determine on which fide the evidence
preponderates.

The right of In the.Mexican empire, the right of private pro.
prPverty perty was perfectly underflood, and efablifhedin
fully f0ab? a eaie
blished, its full extent. Among several savage tribes, we

have seen, that the idea of a title to the separate and
exclusive poffefion of any objet was hardly known;
and that among all, it was extremely limited and
ill defined. But in Mexico, where agriculture and
industry had made some progress , the diflinion
between property in land and property in goods had
taken place. Both might be transferred from one
person to another by falc or barter; both might
descend by inheritance. Every person who could
be denominated a freeman had property in land.

Thi, however, they held by various tenures. Some B o o 1e
possessed it in full right , and it descended to their VII.
heirs. '1 he title of others to their lands was de-
rived from the office or dignity which they enjoyed;
and when deprived of the latter, they loft posses-
sion of the former. Both these modes of occupy-
ing land were deemed noble, and peculiar to citi-
zens of the highest class. The tenure, by which
the great body of the people held their property,
was very different. In every diflric a certain quan-
tity of land was measured out in proportion to the
number of families. This was cultivated by the
nint labor of the whole, its produce was depo-
ited in a common orehoufe, and divided among
hem according to their refpedtive exigencies. The
embers of the Calpullee, or afociations, could not
lienate their share of the common estate ; it was
nindivifible permanent property, destined f6r the
ipport of their families . In consequence of this
iftribution of the territory of the slate, every man
id an interest in its welfare, and the happiness
f the individual was conneded with the public
ecurity.

Another firiking circumfance , which diftin- The number
uifhes the Mexican empire from those nations in a"egrf their
nerica we have already described, is the num- cities.
er and greatness of its cities. While society con-
inues in a rude slate, the wants of men are so
ew, and they fland so little in need of mutual

' errera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i5. Torquem. Mun. Ind.
b. xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.

s o o I assistance, that their inducements to crowd together

vii. are extremely feeble. Their industry at the fame

time is so imperfe , that it cannot secure subsist.
ence for any considerable number of families set.
tied in one spot. They live dispersed, at this pe.
riod, from choice as well as from neceflity, or at
the utmost assemble in small hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or on
the border of some plain left open by nature, or
cleared by their own labor. The Spaniards, ac.
customed to this mode of habitation among all the
savage tribes with which they were then acquaint
ed, were aftonifled, on entering New Spain, to find
the natives residing in towns of fch extent as re.
fembled those of Europe. In the fir[t fervor of
their admiration, they compared Zempoalla, though
a town only of the second or third size, to the ci.
ties of greatest note in their own country. When
afterwards, they ifited in fuccelfion Tlafcala , Cho
lula, Tacuba, Tezeuco, and Mlexico itself, thei
amazement increased so much, that it led them to
convey ideas of their magnitude and populou
ness bordering on what is incredible. Even whet
there is leisure for observation , and no interest tha
leads to deceive, conjedural estimates of the nul
ber of people in cities are extremely loose, an
:ifually much exaggerated. It is not surprising
then, that Cortes and his companions, little i
customed to such computations , and powerfull
tempted to magnify, in order to exalt the merits
their own difcovcrics and conquefs , should has
been betrayed into this common error , and hav

d

raised their descriptions considerably above truth. n o o
For this reason, some considerable abatement ought v11.
to be made from their calculation of the number
of ihaitants in the lMexican cities, and we may
si; thle standard of their population much lower
th:n they have done; but still they will appear
to be cities of such consequence, as are not to be
found but among people who have made some
considerable progress in' the arts of social life .
MeIxico, the capital of the empire , feerns to have
contained sixty thousand inhabitants.

' he separation of profeflions among the Mexi- Therepara.
cans is a fyniptom of improvement no less remark- tinnofpro.

sessions.

able. Arts, in the early ages of society, arefo few
andl so simple, that each man is sufficiently master
of them all , to gratify every demand of his own
limited desires. The savage can form his bow,
point his arrows , rear his hut, and hollow his ca-
noe, without calling in the aid of any hand more
skilful than his own. Time murt have augmented
the wants of men and ripened their ingenuity, be-
fore the productions of art became so complicated
in their ftruture, or so curious in their fabric, that

articular course of education was requisite to-

wards orming the artificer to expertness in con-
trivance and workmanfilip. In proportion as re-
inement spreads, the diftinclion of profefflons in-
criealcs, and they branch out into more numerous
and( minute fubdiviions. Among the Mexicans,
this separation of the arts neccffary in life had taken

Sec NOTE XXI.

n o o ; place to a considerable extent. The functions of

viI. the mason, the weaver, the goldsmith, the painter,

and of several other crafts, were carried on by dif.
ferent pcrfons. Each was regularly inftruded in
his calling. To it alone his industry was confined;
and by afiduous application to one object, together
with the peifevering patience peculiar to Ameri.
cans, their artisans attained to a degree of neatness
and perfection in work, far beyond what could have
been expected from the rude tools which they em.
ployed. Their various producions were brought
into commerce ; and by the exchange of them in
the dated markets held in the cities, not only were
their mutual wants supplied , in such orderly in.
tercourfe as characterizes an improved slate of so.
ciety, but their industry was daily rendered perse.
vering and inventive.

The difinc. The diflinceion of ranks eftablifled in the Mexi.
tion can empire is the next circumstance that merits at-

tention. In surveying the savage tribes of Ame.
rica, we observed, that consciousness of equality,
and impatience of Subordination , are sentiments na.
tural to man in the infancy of civil life. During
peace, the authority of a fperior is hardly felt
among them, and even in war it is but little ac-
knowledged. Strangers to the idea of property,
the difference in condition resulting from the in-
equality of it is unlknown. Birth or titles confer

Cortes, :elat. ap. Raniuf. iii. 29, &c. Gom. Chron. .

79. Torquem. lib. xiii. c. 34. tlerrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c.
i;, &c,
/

no pre-eminence; it is only by personal merit and n o o,R
accoinplifhments that diftindion can be acquired. vii.
The form of focicty was very different among the
Mexicans. 'The great body of the people was in a
molt humiliating state. A considerable number,
known by the name of Mayeques, nearly resembling
in condition those peafints who, under various de-
nominations , were confidered, during the preva-
lence of the feudal fyftemr, as instruments of labor
attached to the foil. 'Ihe Mayeques could not change
their place of residence without permiflion of the
superior on whom they depended. They were
conveyed, together with the lands on which they
were fettled, from one proprietor to another; and
were bound to cultivate the ground, and to per-
form several kinds of servile work ". Others were
reduced to the lowest form of fubjedion, that of do-
meftic servitude, and felt the utmost rigor of that
wretched state. Their condition was held to be so
vile, and their lives deemed to be of so little value,
that a person who killed one of those slaves was
not fbjeded to any punishment ". Fven those
confidered as freemen were treated by their haughty
ords as beings of an inferior species. The nobles,
offeffed of ample territories, were divided into
Various classes, to each of which peculiar titles of
honor belonged. Some of these titles, like their
land , descended from father to son in perpetual
succession. Others were annexed to particular

Herrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. 17. Corita, MS.
lHerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7.

o o ic offices, or conferred during life as marks of personal
vii. diftindtion . The monarch , exllted above all, en.

joyed extensive power, and supreme dignity. Thus
the diftindion of ranks was completely etablifhed,
in a line of regular fibordination, reaching from
the highest to the lowest member of the commu.
lnity. Each of there knew what he could claim, and
what he owed. The people, who were not allowe
to wear a dress of the fame fashion, or to dwell in
houses of a form similar to those of the nobles, ac.
cofled them with the most fubmitlive reverence. In
the presence of their sovereign , they durfl not lif
their eyes from the ground, or look him in th
face ". The nobles themselves, vwhen admitted to
an audience of their sovereign, entered bare-footed
in mean garments, and, as his slaves, paid him
homage approaching to adoration. This refpet due
from inferiors to those above them in rank, wa
eftablifled with such ceremonious accuracy , thati
incorporated with the language, and influenced it
genius and idiom. The Mexican tongue abounde
.in exprelfions of reverence and courtesy. The sty
and appellations, used in the intercourse between
equals, would have been so unbecoming in th
mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accosted
person in higher rank, as to be deemed an insult"
It is only in ocieties, which time and the inflitutio
of regular government have moulded into form,

" Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Corita, MS.

llecrrera, dec. I. lib. ii. c. 14.
" See NOTE. XXII.

that we find such an orderly arrangement of men o o
into different ranks, and such nice attention paid to vil.
heir various rights.

The spirit of the Mexicans , thus familiarized Theirpoliti.
ad bended to subordination , was prepared for sub- al conaitu.

tion.

itting to monarchical government. But the de,
criptions of their policy and laws, by the Spa-
lards who overturned them, are so inaccurate and
olitra(litory, that it is difficult to delineate the
arm of their constitution with any precision. Some-
imes they represent the monarchs of PMexico as
bfolute , deciding according to their pleasure
ith refpet to every operation of the slate. On
ther occasions , we discover the traces of eftab-
ihed curtoms and laws, framed in order to cir.
umfcribe the power of the crown, and we meet
ith rights and privileges of the nobles which seem
o be opposed as barriers against its encroachments.
his appearance of inconsistency has arisen from
nattention to the innovations of Montezuma upon
Ic Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition sub-
erted the original system of government, and in'
roduced a pure despotism. He disregarded the
ncient laws, violated the privileges held most
cred, and reduced his fubjeds of every order to
he level of slaves '7. he chiefs, or nobles of the
rft rank , submitted to the yoke with such reluc.
anle, that, from impatience to shake it off, and
ope of recovering their rights, many of them
ourted the protcdtion of Cortes, and joined a

Herrra, dec. 3. lib. ii. a. i 4. Torquem. ib ii." c. 69.

B o o Ic for in power against their domestic oppressor ". t

VII. is not then under the dominion of Montezuma, but

under the government of his predecessors, that we
can discover what was the original form and genius
of Mexican policy, From the foundation of the
monarchy to the election of Montezuma , it seems
to have subsisted with little variation. That body
of citizens, which may be diitinguifled by the
name of nobility formed the chief and mot re.
fpetable order in the state. They were of varioui
ranks, as has already been observed, and their
honors were acquired and transmitted in different
manners. Their number seems to have been great,
According to an author accustomed to exatni
with attention what he relates, there were in th
Mexican empire thirty of this order, each of whoa
had in his territories about a hundred thoufan
people , and fubordinate.to these, there were about
three thousand nobles of a lower class ". 1 he ter
ritories belonging to the chiefs of Tezeuco an
Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to thofeo
the Mexican monarch . Each of these polleled
complete territorial juriflidion , and levied taxes
from their own vassals. But all followed the stand
ard of Mexico in war, serving with a number o
men in proportion to their domain, and moll o
them paid tribute to its monarch as their fuprio
lord.

' Hetrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. io, r. orqueni. lib i
a. 49. l lerrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. 12.

.' Torquemi. lib. ii. c. s7. Corita, MS,

In

In tracing those great lines of the Mexican con- B o o it

fitution , an image of feudal policy in its most viI.
rigid form rifes to view, and we discern its three
distinguishing characterifics, a nobility poffefling
almolt independent authority, a people deprefted
into the lowest state of fubjedion , and a king in-
trusted with the executive power of the state. Its
ipirit and principles seem to have operated in the
New \World in the fame manner, as in the ancient.
Thejurifdidtion of the crown was extremely limit-
ed. All real and effective authority was retained
by the Mexican nobles in their own hands, and the
hadow of it only left to the king. Jealous to ex-
cess of their own rights, they guarded with mofl
:igilant anxiety against the encroachments of their
overeigns. By a fundamental law of the empire,
twas provided that the king hould not determine
oncerning any point of general importance, with-
ut the approbation of a council composed of the
rime nobility `. Unless he obtained their consent
ecould not engage the nation in war, nor could
e(lifpofe of the nmoft considerable branch of the
ublic revenue at pleasure ; it was appropriated to
:rtain purposes from which it could not be di-
erted( by the regal authority alone ". In order to
'cure full cffcet to those constitutional refiraints,
c lMexican nobles did not permit their crown to
efcend by inheritance, but di fpofed of it by eledtion.
lie right of election feeius to have been originally

1 lerrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 19. Id. dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 6.
ritr, MIS. Z Hlerrcri, dec. . lib. iv. c. 7.

vo II. M

n o o r vested in the whole body of nobility, but was after.

Vlr. wards committed to fix elecors, of whom the

Chiefs of Tczeuco and Tacuba were always two.
From refpe-t for the family of their monarchs, the
choice fell generally upon some person fprunz
from it. But as the activity and valor of their
prince were of greater moment to a people perpe-
tually engaged in war, than a ftrid adherence to
the order of birth , collaterals of mature age or of
diftinguilhed merit were often preferred to those
who were nearer the throne in diret dlefcent ". To
this maxim in their policy, the Mexicans appear
to be indebted for such a succession of able and
warlike princes, as raised their empire in a short
period to that extraordinary height of power,
which it had attained when Cortes landed in New
Spain.

Power and WVhile the jurifdidion of the Mexican mo.
fplcn(norof narchs continued to be limited, it is probable that
their mo.
,iarsh. it was exercised with little ostentation. But as

their authority became more extensive, the fplen.
dor of their government augmented. It was in
this laPt state that the Spaniards beheld it; and
struck with the appearance of Montezuma's court,
they efcribc its pomp at great length , and with
much admiration. The number of his attendants,
the order, the silence, ; nd the reverence with
which they served him ; the vast extent of his royal
mansion, the variety of its apartments allotted to

' Acofhi, lib. vi. c. 24. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. ii. c.
Coria, Asi.

different officers, and the oflentation with which B o o rI
is grandeur was ifplayed, whenever he permitted vii.
isfubjects to behold him, seem to resemble the
agnificence of the ancient monarchies in Asia,
rather than the simplicity of the infant states in the
Nev WVorld.

But it was not in the mere parade of royalty Orderof

hat the Mexican potentates exhibited their power, their gon'
hey manifested it more beneficially in the order
tnd regularity with which they conduced the in-
ernal administration and police of their dominions.
complete jurifdidion, civil as well as criminal,
ver its own immediate vassals, was vested in the
rown. Judges were appointed for each depart-
ent, and if we may rely on the account which
e Spanifl writers give of the maxims and laws
pon which they founded their decisions with re-
ed to the distribution of property and the punish-
ent of crimes , jultice was administered in the
Iexican empire, with a degree of order and equity
fembling what takes place in societies highly
vilized.

Their attention in providing for the support Provision
government was not less sagacious. Taxes were for he flp.

'port ofit.

id upon land, upon the acquisitions of indutry, p
d upon commodities of every kind exposed to
le in the public markets. These duties were
bnfiderable, but not arbitrary or unequal. They
tere imposed according to eftablifled rules, and
ich knew what fliare of the common burden he
id to bear. As the use of money was unknown,
I the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only

M

o o the natural productions of all the different pro,
viI. vinces in the empire, but every species of manufac.

turc, and every work of ingenuity and art, were
colledted in the public store-houses. From those the
emperor fiipplied his numeros train of attendants
in peace , and his armies during war , with food,
with clothes, and ornaments. People of inferior
condition , neither poffeifihg land nor engaged in
commerce, were bound to the performance of va
rious services. By their flated labor the crown.
lands were cultivated, public works were carried
on, and the various houses belonging to the emperor
were built and kept in repair .
Theirpolice. The improved state of government among th

Mexicans is conspicuous, not only in points effen
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, buti
several regulations of inferior consequence withre
sped to police. The institution which I have a
ready mentioned , of public couriers, stationed
proper intervals, to convey intelligence from 01o
part of the empire to the other, was a refinemen
in police not introduced into any kingdom of Eu
rope at that period. The firudure of the capita
city in a lake, with artificial dikes, and caufewai
of great length , which served as avenues to itfro
different quarters, erett-d in the water, with n
less ingenuity than labor, fems to be an idea tb
could not have occurred to any but a civilize
people. The fame observation may be appliedt

' Hlerrera, dec. . lib. vii. c. 13. dec. 3. lib. iv . . 6,
See NOTE XXIII.

the ftrudure of the aqueduts , or conduits, by B o o
which they conveyed a iream of fresh water, from VII.
a considerable diflance , into the city, along one
f the causeways . The appointment of a num-
eros persons to clean the streets, to light them by
res kindled in different places, and to patrol as
atchmen during the night "', discovers a degree
f attention which even polished nations are late in
cquiring.

The progress of the Mexicans in various arts, is Thelrarty
onfidered as the most decisive proof of their fupe-
ior refinement. Cortes, and the early Spanish au-
ors, describe this with rapture, and maintain,
at the most celebrated European artists could
oc surpass or even equal them in ingenuity and
eatnefs of workmanship. They represented men,
nimals, and other objects, by such a disposition
f various colored feathers , as is said to have
oduced all the effecs of light and hade, and to
ave imitated nature with truth and delicacy. Their
naments of gold and silver have been described
be of a fabric no less curious. But in forming
y idea, from general descriptions , concerning the
te of arts among nations imperfectly polilhed,
e are extremely ready to err. In examining the
orks of people whose advances in improvement
nearly the fame with our own, we view them
ti a critical, and often with a jealous eye.
hercas, when conscious of our own superiority,
*' See NOTE XXIV.

H lerrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. 4. Torribio, MS.

M3

o o we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
vii. we are aftonifled at works executed by them un.

der such manifest difadvantages,and ,in thewarmth
of our admiration, are apt to represent them as
produtions more finifled than they really are. To
the influence of this illusion , without supposing
any intention to deceive, we may impute the
exaggeration of some Spanish authors, in their ac.
counts of the Mlexican arts.

It is not from those descriptions, but from con

fidering such specimens of their arts as are still pre
served, that we muff decide concerning their de
gree of merit. As the ship in which Cortes fen
to Charles V, the most curious productions of the
Mlexican artisans, which were collected by th
Spaniards when they first pillaged the empire, va
taken by a French corsair ", the remains of the
ingenuity are less numerous than those of the Pe
ruvians. Whether any of their works with fe
thers, in imitation of painting, be still extant
Spain , I have not learned; but many of their 0
paments in gold and silver, as well as varion
utensils employed in common life, are depoite(li
the magnificent cabinet of natural and artifici
productions , lately opened by the king of Spain
and I am informed by persons on whose judgrne
and taste I can rely, that these boasted efforts
their art are uncouth representations of common
jects, or very coarse images of the human and foiT
other forms, destitute of grace and propriety

Rela?. de Cort. Ramus. iii. 294, F.
" Sec NOTE XXV.

The justness of these observations is confirmed by o o
infpleding the wooden prints or copper-plates of Vl.
their paintings, which have been publifled by va-
rious authors. In them every figure of men, of
quadrupeds ,.or birds, as well as every reprefenta-
tioa of inanimate nature , is extremely rude and
awkward `'. The hardest Egyptian yle, stiff and

2' As a pecimenofthe spirit and flylein which MI Clavi.

gero makes his firidtures upon my History of America, I shall
publish his remarks upon this pafTage. " Thus far Robertson; to
"' whom we answer, first, That there is no reason to believe
"that those rude works were really Mexican; secondly,
"That neither do we know whether those persons in whose
"judgment he confides, may be persons fit to merit our faith,
"because we have observed that Robertson trusts frequently
"to the testimony of Gage, Correal, Ibagnez, and other
"bfch authors, who are entirely undeferving of credit.-
"Thirdly, It is more probable that the arms of copper, be-
"lieved by these intelligent judges to be certainly Oriental,
"are really Mexican." Vol. Il. 91.-\When an author,
not entirely destitute of integrity or discernment, and who has
fume olicitude about his own characder, afferrs that he re-
ccived his information concerning any particular point from
pcrfons " on whose judgment and taste he can rely;" a very
Pender degree of candor, one lhould think, might induce
the reader to believe that he does not endeavour to inipofe
upon the public by an appeal to tclimony altogether un-
W'rthy of credit. Mly inlbrmnation conccrning the MAexican
w'orlks of art deposited in the ing of Sp;inl's cabinet,
W.is received from the late Lord (;rantrham , amlur;Fidor
Cextraordinary from the court ns l.ondon to thiit (I' Aladrid ,
1(l 1irom 5lMr. Archdceacon \atddilovc, chpl;iin to the
criblliy ; and it was iupon thcir authority that I prollotin-
ci l Ihe coat of armor, menitionCed in the note, to he
"' (riental fabric. As 'they \\crc both at lMatdrid in their

h1 4

B o oK imperfe as it was, is more elegant. The

vI. scrawls of children delineate objects almost as

accurately.

But however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different flation belongs to them, when
confidered as thle records of their country, as hifto.
ric.l moniiuncnts of its policy and tranflacions;
and they become curious as well as interesting ob.
jedts of attention. ' he noblest and most beneficial
invention of which human ingenuity can boast, is

public character, when the first edition of the iftory of
America was publiflhed, I thought it improper at that time
to mention their names. Did their decision concerning a
matter of taste, or their testimony concerning a point of
fat, stand in need of confirmation, I might produce the
evidence of an intelligent traveller, who, in describing
the royal cabinet of Madrid , takes notice that it contains
" specimens of Mlexican and Peruvian utensils, vases, &c,
"in earthen-ware,wretched both in taste and execution." Dillon's
Travels through Spain, p. 7i. As Gage composed his
Survey of NervS Spain with all the zeal and acrimony of
a new convert, 1 have paid little regard to his testimony
with refpecl to points relating to religion. But as lie
resided in several provinces in New Spain, which travel-
lers seldom visit, and as he eems to have observed their
manners and laws with an intelligent eye, 1 have availed
mvfelf of his information with respect to matters where
religious opinion could have little influence. Correal I
have seldom quoted, and never relied upon his evidence
alone. The station in which lbagnicz was employed in
America, as well as the credit given to his vcracty by
printing his Rccno Jefuitico among1 the large collection of
documents publifhecl (as I believe by authority) at Mladrid,
A. D. 767, justifies me for appcalin! to his authority.

that of writing. But the firrt essays of this art, n o 0 :
which hath contributed more than all others to the vrr.
improvement of the species, were very rude, and
it advanced towards perfecion slowly, and by a
Fradnal progreflion. WVhen the warrior, eager
or fame, wished to transmit some knowledge of
is exploits to succeeding ages; when the grati-
tul of a people to their sovereign prompted them
o hand down an account of his beneficent deeds
to posterity; the first method of accomplishing
hi, that seems to have occurred to them, was to
]lineatc, in the belt manner they could, figures
eprefenting the ation of which they were folici-
nlns to preserve the memory. Of this, which has
erv properly been called picture-uwriting '", we find
races among some of the most savage tribes of
merica. When a leader returns from the field,
c trips a tree of its bark, and with red paint
itcheles upon it some uncouth figures, which re-
refcnt the order of his march, the number of his
llowers, the enemy whom he attacked, the scalps
nd captives which he brought home. To those
mple annals he trufis for renown , and soothes
imfelf with hope that b their means he shall re-
eivc praise from the warriors of future times .
Compared with those awkward essays of their
vage countrymen , the paintings of the Mexicans
ay be confidered as works of composition and

Divine Legat. of AlMoes, iii. 7.

1 Sir W. Johnson, Philof Tranfad. vol.lxiii. p. 41.
nm. dela Hontan. ii. 191. Lafitau, Moeurs des Sauv. ii. 4;.

D Oo K design. They were not acquainted, it is true, with

VII. any other method of recording tranfadions, than

that of delineating the objedts which they wilhed
to represent. But they could exhibit a more corn.
plex series of events in progressive order, and de.
scribe, by a proper disposition of figures, the oc.
currences of a king's reign from his accession to
his death; the progress of an infant's education
from its birth until it attained to the years of ma.
turity; the different recompences and marks of
diftindcion conferred upon warriors, in proportio
to the exploits which they had performed. Son
singular specimens of this picture-writing hal
been preserved , which are justly confidered as th
most curious monuments of art brought from ti
New World. The rnoft valuable of these
published by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is d
vided into three parts. The first contains th
history of the Alexican empire under its ten n
narchs. The second is a tribute-roll, reprefentin
what each conquered town paid into the roy
treaftry. The third is a code of their institutions
domestic, political, and military. Another spec
ncen of Mexican painting has been published
thirty-two plates, by the present archbiflop
Tolcdo. To both are annexed a full explanatio
of what the figures were intended to reprefen
wvhich was obtained by the Spaniards from In(li
wvcllacquainted with their own arts. The style
painting in all these is the fame. They reprefe
thines, Inot ords. They exhibit images tol
eye, not ideas to the itderflanding. 1 hey rm

therefore, be confidered as the earliest and most n o o K
imperfed essay of men in their progress towards vir.
discovering the art of writing. The defects in
this mode of recording tranfadtions muff have been
early felt. To paint every occurrence was, from
its nature, a very tedious operation; and as affairs
became more complicated, and events multiplied
in any society, its annals muff have swelled to an
enormous bulk. Besides this, no objects could
be delineated but those of sense; the conceptions
of the mind had no corporeal form, and as long
as piture-writing could not convey an idea of these,
it muff have been a very imperfect art. The ne-
ceffity of improving it must have roused and' harp-
ened invention, and the human mind holding the
fame course in the NewV World as in the Old,
might have advanced by the fame fucceflive steps,
first, from an atual pidcure to the plain hierogly-
phic; next, to the allegorical symbol; then to the
arbitrary charadter; until, at length, an alphabet
of letters was discovered, capable of expressing al
the various combinations of found employed in
peech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we, ac-
cordingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
mong them. Upon an attentive infpedion of the
lates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
ome approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,
vherc some principal part or circumstance in the
ubject is made to tand for the whole. In the an-
als of their kings, publifled by Purchas, the
owns conquered by each are uniformly represented
n the fame manner by a rude delineation of ;t

B o house; but in order to point out the particular

vii. towns which submitted to their vitorious arms,

peculiar emblems, sometimes natural objets, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbilhop of To.
ledo, the house , which was properly the picture of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. The Mexicans seem
even to have made some advances beyond this,
towards the use of the more figurative and fanciful
hieroglyphic. In order to describe a monarch,
who had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
,subdued. But it is only in one instance, the no.
tation of numbers, that we discern any attemptto
exhibit ideas which had no corporeal form. The
Mexican painters had invented artificial marks, or
J7qns of convention, for this purpose. By means of
these, they computed the years of their kings
reigns, as well as the amount of tribute to be
paid into the royal treafiry. The figure of a
circle represented unit, and in small numbers, the
computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were expressed by a peculiar mark, nd
they had such as denoted all integral numbers,
from twenty to eight thousand. The short dura
tion of their empire prevented the Mexicans from
advancing farther in that long course which con.
ducts men from the labor of delineating real ob
jecs, to the simplicity and cafe of alphabetic
writing. Their records, notwithltanding some dawn

of such ideas as might have led to a more perfec n o o K
fyle, can be conlidered as little more than a species vii.
of picture -writing, so far improved as to mark their
superiority over the savage tribes of America; but
fill so defective, as to prove that they had not pro-
ceeded far beyond the first fpage in that progress
which mut be completed before any people can be
anked among polified nations .
Their mode of computing time may be confi- Thcirmode
ered as a more decisive evidence of their progress "oco'iit

ing time,

n improvement. They divided their year into
ighteen months, each confirling of twenty days,
mounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But
sthey observed that the course of the fun was not
ompleted in that time, they added five days to
e year. These, which were properly intercalary
ays, they termed fupernumernry or wafle; and as
hey did not belong to any month, no work was
one, and no sacred rite performed on them; they
ere devoted wholly to festivity and pastime . This
ear approach to philosophical accuracy is a re.
,rkable proof that the Mexicans had bestowed some
ttention upon inquiries and speculations, to which
en in a very rude state never turn their thoughts ".

See NOTE XXVI.

coita, lib. vi. c. 2.

1 The Mexican mode ofcomputing time, and every other

rticul:r relating to their chronology, have been confider-
ly elucidlited by M. Clavigero, Vol. L. 288; Vol. II. 22¢,

T.he observations and theories of the Mecxicans concern-
thole ubjets difcovcr a greater progress in feculative
ence than we find among any people in the New World.

B o K Such are the most striking particulars in the

vi1. manners and policy of the Mexicans which ex.
Pacts indi. hibit them to view as a people considerably refined.

allp ro. But from other circumstances, one is apt tofufpec2

grersin ci. that their charadter, and many of their infiitutions,
vilization. did not differ greatly from those of the other inha.

bitants of America.

Their wars Like the rude tribes around them, the Mexi.
ontilcual cans were incessantly engaged in war, and the
ous. motives which prompted them to hostility seer to

have been the fame. They fought, in order to
gratify their vengeance, by shedding the blood of
their enemies. In battle they were chiefly intent
on taking prisoners, and it was by the numberof
these that they estimated the glory of vidtory. No
captive was ever ransomed or spared. All were
sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh devoured
with the fame barbarous joy as among the fierce
savages. On fomc occasions it rose to even wilde
excesses. Their principal warriors covered them,
selves with the skins of the unhappy victims, an
danced about the streets, boafling of their own va
lor, and exulting over their enemies . Even
their civil inftitutious we discover traces of tha
barbarous dif)ofition which their fyftcm of wa
inspired. The four chief counsellors of the em
pire were diftinguifnicd by titles, which coul
have been aflumed only by a people who de
lighted in blood ". This ferocity of charade

' Hcrrera, dec. t. lib. ii. c. . Com. Chron. c. 1
' Scc NO'I.'E XXVLI.

evailed among all the nations of New Spain. B o o
he Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan, and VII.
ther flates at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted
qnally in war, and treated their prisoners with the
me cruelty. In proportion as mankind combine
social union, and live under the influence of
ual laws and regular policy, their manners sos-
n, sentiments of humanity arise, and the rights
fthe species come to be underflood. The fierce-
ess of war abates, and even while engaged in
ofility, men remember what they owe one to
other. The savage fights to destroy, the citizen
conquer. The former neither pities nor spares,
e latter has acquired sensibility which tempers
s rage. To this sensibility the IMlexicans seem
have been perfect firangers, and among them
ar was carried on with so much of its original
rbarity, that we cannot but fufped their degree,
civilization to have been very imperfet.
Their funeral rites were not less bloody than Theirfun
ofe of the molt savage tribes. On the death of ral rites.
y diftinguilhed personage, especially of the Em-
ror, a certain number of his attendants were
ofen to accompany him to the other world, and
ofe unfortunate victims were put to death without
rcy, and buried in the fame tomb 7.
Though their agriculture was more extensive Their a;i-
n that of the roving tribes who trufled chiefly clt-ure il.
their bow for food, it seems not to have sup- P"efc
cd them with such fubifllence as men require

l Hcrrora, dec. . lib. ii. c. . Goin. Chron.c. 202.

B o o K when engaged in efforts of ative industry. Th

VII. Spaniards appear not to have been struck with an

superiority of the Iexicans over the other peepl
of America in bodily vigor. Both, accordin
to their obfervatioul, were of such a feeble fram
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the ftrengt
of one Spaniard exceeded tlit of several Indian
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on po
fare, fiifficient to preserve life, but not to gi
firmness to the constitution. Such a remark coul
hardly have been made with refpet to any peop
furnished plentifully with the necessaries of li
The difficulty which Cortes found in procuri
subsistence for his small body of soldiers, v
were often constrained to live on the fpontaneo
productions of the earth, seems to confirm t
remark of the Spanish writers, and gives no hi
idea of the state of cultivation of the Mexic
empire "

A farther A practice that was universal in New Sp
proof ofthis. appears to favor this opinion. The Mexici

women gave fuck to their children for feve
years, and during that time they did not cohali
with their husbands ". his precaution againfl
burdensome increase of progeny, though neccffar
as I have already observed, among savages, wvh
from the hard(lips of their condition, and the p
carioufnefs of their subsistence, find it irnpoffib

' Rlaz.. ap. Ramus. iii. o6, A. Herrera, dec. lib i
,. 17. dec. 2. lib. vi. c. 16.

o Goie. Chron. c. 2zo. llerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c.

to

rear a numerous family, can hardly be supposed B o o K
have continued among a people who lived at vii.
fe and in abundance.
The vast extent of the Mlexican empire, which Doubts con-
as been confidered, and with juflice, as the moflt erng the

extent of the

cillve proof of a considerable progress in regular empire.
overnment and police, is one of those fadts in
history of the New World which seems to have
cn admitted without due examination or fuffi-
ent evidence. The Spanish historians, in order
magnify the valor of their countrymen, are
customed to represent the dominion of Monte-
ima as stretching over all the provinces of New
ain from the Northern to the Southern Ocean.
a great part of the mountainous country was
ITfefFed by the Oonzies, a fierce uncivilized
nple, who seem to have been the residue of the
ginal inhabitants. The provinces towards the
rth and weft of Mexico were occupied by the
ilcinccas , and other tribes of hunters. None
these recognised the Mexican monarch as their
erior. Even in the interior and more level
intry, there were several cities and provinces
'ich had never submitted to the Mexican yoke.
ifc;ll;l, though only twenty-one leagues from the
ital of the empire, was an independent and hof-
republic. Cholula, though flill nearer, had
n frubjcdted only a short time before the arrival
the Spaniards. Tepeaca , at the diflance of
ty leagues from Ilexico, seems to have been
'OL. III.

m o o a separate state, governed by its own laws

VsL TVlechoacan, the frontier of which extended with

forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom
remarkable for its implacable enmity to the Alei
can name ". By there hoflile powers the Mexic
empire was circumscribed on every quarter, andth
high ideas which we are apt to form of it fromth
description of the Spanifi historians, flould be co
fiderably moderated.

Little in. In consequence of this independence of feve
tercourfe states in New Spain upon the Mexican empir
among its
everal pro. there was not any considerable intercourse betwe
inces. its various provinces. Even in the iterior cou

try, not far distant from the capital, there feemt
have been no roads to facilitate the communicatio
of one diftrid with another; and when the S
niards first attempted to penetrate into it, theyh
to open their way through forests and marshes'
Cortes, in his adventurous march from Mexico
Honduras in 1r55, met with obltrutions, and
dured hardships, little inferior to thofc with whi
he must have flruggled in the most unciviliz
regions of America. In some places he coi
hardly force a passage through impervious wood
and plains overflowed with water. In others
found so little cultivation, that his troops were
quently in danger of perishing by famine. Su
facts correspond ill with the pompous defcripti

' lerrera, dec. . lil. x. c. i . 21. B. Diaz, c.

li crrcra, dcc. . lib. ii. c. 1o.
"I. Diiz, c. 66. C. 176.

hich the Spanish writers give of Mexican police o o K
Id inlduftry, and convey an idea of a country vii.
early similar to that possessed by the Indian tribes
[North-America. Here and there a trading or a
ar path, as they are called in North-America, led
om one settlement to another ', but generally there
peared no sign of any established communica-
on, few marks of industry, and fewer monuments
fart.
A proof of this imperfedion in their commer- Fartherproot
al intercourse no'lefs striking, is their want of ofthis,
loney, or some universal standard by which to efli-
ate the value of commodities. The discovery of
isis among the steps of greatest consequence in
e progress of nations. Until it has been made,
I their tranfadions must be so awkward, so ope-
fe, and so limited, that we may boldly pronounce
at they have advanced but a little way in their
reer. The invention of such a commercial stand-
d is of such high antiquity in our hemisphere,
l ries so far beyond the aera of authentic
ory, as to appear almofi coeval with the exist-
ce of society. The precious metals seem to have
en early employed for this purpose, and from
eir permanent value, their divisibility, and many
her qualities, they are better adapted to serve as
common flandard than any other substance of
hich nature has given us the command. But in
c New Vorld, where these metals abound most,
is use of them was not known. The exigencies

I-lerrcra, dec. . lib, vii. c. .

N ?

t o o l; of rude tribes,' or of monarchies imperfetly civi

vil. lized, did not call for it. All their commercialin

tercourfe was carried on by barter, and their igno
rance of any common standard by which to facil
tate that exchange of commodities which cont
butes so much towards the comfort of life, may
justly mentioned as an evidence of the infant fat
of their policy. But even in the New World th
inconvenience of wanting some general inflrume
of commerce began to be felt, and some effor
were made towards supplying that defed. Th
Mlexicans, among whom the number and greatne
of their cities gave rife to a more extended co
merce than in any part of America, had begun
employ a common itandard of value, which re
dered fnaller tranfations much more easy. A
chocolate was the favorite drink of persons
every rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao
of which it is composed, were of such univerf
consumption, that, in their stated markets, the
were willingly received in return for commoditi
of small price. Thus they came. to be confidere
as the intfrument of commerce, and the value
what one wished to dispose of, was estimated byth
number of nuts of the cacao, which he mighte
lpet in exchange for it. This seems to be theu
molf length which the Americans had advancedt
w.ards the diflovery of any expedient for fupplyin
the use of money. And if the want of it is to
held , on one hand , as a proof of their barbaritv
this expdlient for supplying that want, flould
;dmnitted, on the other, as an evidence no less fil

ing, of some progress which the Mexicans had B o o IK
ade in refinement and civilization, beyond the vi.
,vage tribes around them.
In stich a rude slate were many of the Mexican Doubts enn.

crning the

rovinces when first visited by their conquerors. flae of th,
ven their cities, extensive and populous as they citiei.
ere, seem more fit to be the habitation of men
It emerging from barbarity, than the residence
apolifhed people. The description of Tlafcala
arly resembles that of an Indian village. A
mber of low fIraggling huts, scattered about
egularly, according to the caprice of each pro-
ietor, built with turf and tone and thatched
ich reeds, without any light but what they re-
ived by a door, so low that it could not be
tered upright". In Mexico, though, from the
culiarity of its situation, the disposition of the
uses was more orderly, the ftrudure of the
eater part was equally mean. Nor does the
bric of their temples, and other public edifices, Temps,
pear to have been such as entitled them to the
gh praises beltowed upon them by many Spanifi
thors. As far as one can gather from their ob-
re and inaccurate descriptions, the great temple
Mexico, the most famous in New Spain, which
s been represented as a magnificent building,
ifcd to such a height, that the ascent to it was by
flair-cafe of a hundred and fourteen fleps, was a
lil mass of earth of a fluare form, faced partly
ith stone. Its base on each fide extended ninety

4"errera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 1z.

N

B o o feet, and decreasing gradually as it advanced

vii. height, it terminated in a quadrangle of abou

thirty feet, where were placed a shrine of the deit
and two altars on which the vidims were faci
siced ". All the other celebrated temples of Ne~
Spain exacly resembled that of Mexico ". Su
ftrudures convey no high idea of progress in
and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive th
a form more rude and simple could have occur
to a nation in its first efforts towards erecting a
great work.

and other Greater skill and ingenuity were displayed,
Puildings we may believe the Spanish historians , i

-houses of the emperor and in those of the princi
nobility. There, some elegance of design was
fible, and a commodious arrangement of the apa
nients was attended to. But if buildings co
fponding to such descriptions had eve': existed
the Mexican cities, it is probable that some
mains of them would still be visible. From
manner in which Cortes conduded the siege
Ilexico, we can indeed easily account for
total deftrudion of whatever had any appearance
splendor in that capital. But as only two ct
turies and a half have elapscd since the conquefl
New Spain, it seems altogether incredible that
a period so short, every vestige of this boai
elegance and grandeur should have difappeare
and that in the other cities, particularly in ilt

4' I rrcra, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 17.
4' Sec NOTE XXVIII.

hich did not susser by the defirudive hand of B o o H
e conquerors, there are any ruins, which can be vi.
nfidered as monuments of their ancient magnifi-

nce.
Even in a village of the rudest Indians there
e buildings of greater extent and elevation than
mmon dwelling-houfes. Such as are destined
r holding the council of the tribe, and in which
I assemble on occasions of public feflivity, may
called stately edifices, when compared with the
ft. As among the Mexicans the diftindcion of
nks was established, and property was unequally
ivided, the number of distinguished ftrudures in
eir towns would of course be greater than in
ther parts of America. But these seem not to
ave been either so solid or magnificent as to merit
e pompous epithets which ome Spanilh authors
mploy in describing them. It is probable that,
ough more ornamented, and built on a larger
ale, they were erected with the fame flight mate-
;ils which the Indians employed in their common
uildings 4', and Time, in a space much less than
vo hundred and fifty years, may have swept away
II remains of them '
From this enumeration of facls, it seems, upon
e whole, to be evident, that the state of society in
lexico was considerably advanced beyond that of
ie savage tribes which we have delineated. But it
no less manifcft, that with refped to many parti.
uli;ls, the Spanifl accounts of their progress

"See NOTE XXIX. '" See NOTE XXX.

N4

Bo o t appear to be highly embelliffied. There is not a more

Vit. frequent or a more fertile source of deception in de.

scribing the manners and arts of savage nations, or
of such as are imperfectly civilized , than that of ap.
plying to them the names and phrases appropriated
to the institutions and refinements of polished life,
WVhen the leader of a finall tribe, or the head o
a rude community, is dignified with the name o
king or emperor, the place of his residence can
receive no other name but that of his palace; and
wvhateverahis attendants may be, they must be called
his court. Under such appellations they acquire
in our estimation , an importance and dignity which
does not belong to them. The illusion spreads,
and giving a false color to every part of the nar.
rative, the imagination is so much carried away
with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to
discern objects as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they first touched on the Mexican coast,
were so much firuck with the appearance of attain.
ments in policy and in the arts of life, far superior
to those of the rude tribes with which they were
hitherto acquainted, that they fancied they had
at length difcovcred a civilized people in theNew
World. This comparison between the people of
Mexico and their uncultivated neighbours, they ap.
pear to have kept constantly in view, and observing
with admiration many things which marked the pre.
eminence of the former, they employ in defcribilg
their imperfect policy and infant arts, such terms
as arc applicable to the infitutions of men far be.
yond them in improvement. Both these circum.

ances concur in detracting from the credit due to n o
e descriptions of Mexican manners by the early vil.
panifh writers. By drawing a parallel between
hem and those of people so much less civilized,
ey raied their own ideas too high. Btheirheir mode
fdefcribing them, they conveyed ideas to others
olefs exalted above truth. Later writers have
dopted the style of the original historians, and im-
roved upon it. The colors with which De Solis
elineates the characder and describes the ations of
lontezuma, the splendor of his court, the laws
d policy of his empire, are the fame that he muff
ave employed in exhibiting to view the monarch
d institutions of a highly polilhed people.
But though we may admit, that the warm ima-
nation of the Spanih writers has added some
bellifhment to their descriptions, this will not
lify the decisive and peremptory tone, with
hich several authors pronounce all their accounts
the Mexican power, policy and laws, to be the
tions of men who wished to deceive, o who de-
hted in the marvellous. There are few hiflorical
Is that can be ascertained by evidence more un-
ceptionable, than may be produced in support
the material articles, in the description of the
exican constitution and manners. Eyc-witnieffc.
ate what they had beheld, men who had relidcd
ong the Mexicans, both before and after the
nlueft, <cfcribe institutions and cultoms which
re familiar to them, persons of such different
ofllions that objects mufi have prcfcnted them-
ves to their view under every various afpccd;

o o soldiers, priests, and lawyers, all concur in thei
vi1. testimony. Had Cortes ventured to impose upon

his sovereign, by exhibiting to him a picture of
imaginary manners, there wanted not enemies an
rivals who were qualified to detect his deceit, an
who would have rejoiced in exposing it. But a
cording to the jufremark of an author, whose in
genuity has illustrated, and whose eloquence ha
adorned, the history of America4", this fuppofitio
is in itself as improbable, as the attempt woul
have been audacious. Who among the deftroye
of this great empire was so enlightened by fcienc
or so attentive to the progress and operations
men in social life, as to frame a fidtitious system
policy so well combined and so consistent, as th
which they delineate, in their accounts of th
Mexican government? Where could they hay
borrowed the idea of many institutions in legil
tion and police, to which, at that period, the
was nothing parallel in the nations with which th
were acquainted ? There wasnot, at thebeginni
of the sixteenth century, a regular eftablifhmei
of polts for conveying intelligence to the foverei
of any kingdom in Europe. The fame obfervatio
will apply to what the Spaniards relate, with
sped to the ftrudture of the city of Mexico,
regulations concerning its police, and various lav
established for the administration of juflice, ors
curing the happiness of the community. Whoev
is accustomed to contemplate the progress

`A M. 'Abbó Raynal, Hifl. philof. & polit. &c. iii. l.l

nations, will often, at very early stages of it, discover R o o U
a premature and unexpeced dawn of those ideas, Vil.
which give rife to inflitutions that are the pride
and ornament of its most advanced period. Even
ina state as imperfectly polilhed as the Mexican
empire, the happy genius of some sagacious ob-
[erver, excited or aided by circumstances unknown
to us, may have introduced institutions which are
eldom found but in societies highly refined. But
it is almost ipoffible that the illiterate conquerors
of the New World should have formed in any one
inltance a conception of customs and laws, beyond
the fandard of improvement in their own age
nd country. Or if Cortes had been capable of
his, what inducement had those by whom he was
superseded to continue the deception ? Why should
orita, or Motolinea, or Acofta, have amused
heir sovereign or their fellow citizens with a tale
urely fabulous ?
In one particular, however, the guides whom Religion of
we must follow have represented the Mexicans to thelxi"
e more barbarous, perhaps, than they really were.
heir religious tenets, and the rites of their wor-
ip, are described by them as wild and cruel in
n extreme degree. Religions, which occupies no
oonfiderable place in the thoughts of a savage,
whose conceptions of any superior power are ob-
cure, and his sacred rites few as well as fimplc,
was formed, among the Mexicans, into a regular
yftem, with its complete train of priets, temples,
vidims, and fftivals. This, of itself, is a clear
proof that the fate of the Mexicans was very

B o o i different from that of the ruder American tribes,

VIl. But from the extravagance of their religious no.

tions, or the barbarity of their rites, no conclusion
can be drawn with certainty concerning the degree
of their civilization. For nations, long after their
ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners to refine,
adhere to systems of superstition founded on the
crude conceptions of early ages. From the genius
of the Mexican religion we may, however, form
a molt just conclusion with refped to its influence
upon the characer of the people. The afpe of
fuperition in Mexico was gloomy and atrocious,
Its divinities were clothed with terror, and de-
lighted in vengeance. They were exhibited to the
people under detetable forms, which created hor.
ror. The figures of serpents, of tigers, and of
other deftruCive animals, decorated their temples.
Fear was the only principle that inspired their vo.
taries. Fasts, mortifications, and penances, allri-
gid, and many of them excruciating to an ex.
treme degree, were the means employed to appease
the wrath of their gods, and the Mexicans never
approached their altars without sprinkling them
with blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of
all offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the
nmolt acceptable. This religious belief, mingling
with the implacable spirit of vengeance, andadding
new force to it, every captive taken in war was
brought to the temple, was devoted as a victim to
the deity, and sacrificed with rites no less solemn
than cruel . The heart and head were the portion

(' ort. Rclaz. ap. Ramus. iii. 240, &c. B. Diaz, c. 82,

onfecrated to the gods; the warrior, by whose B o o I
prowess the prisoner had been seized, carried off VII.
he body to feaRt upon it with his friends. Under
he impression of ideas so dreary and terrible, and
cclftomed daily to scenes of bloodshed rendered
wful by religion, the heart of man mufi harden,
nd be fleeled to every sentiment of humanity.
she spirit of the Mexicans was accordingly un-
eeling, and the genius of their religion so far
ounterbalanced the influence of policy and arts,
tht notwithstanding their progress in both, their
anners, instead of softening, became more fierce.
o what circumstances it was owing that super-
tiion assumed such a dreadful form among the
lexicans, we have notfufficient knowledge of their
history to determine. But its influence is visible,
id produced an effect that is singular in the history
f the human species. The manners of the people
n the New World who had made the greatest
rogrefs in the arts of policy, were the most
erocious, and the barbarity of some of theircuftoms
xceeded even those of the savage state.
The empire of Peru boasts of a higher anti- Prete.n,,nn
uity than that of Mexico. According to the tra- ofhprlIto

a high all,

itionary accounts collected by the Spaniards, it tiquity.
ad fbfifted four hundred years, under twelve
ucceflive monarchs. But the knowledge of their
ncient story, which the Peruvians could commu-
icate to their conquerors, muif have been both

cosa, lib. v. c. X , &c. Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. , &c.
oillra, Chron. c. o, &c. See NOTE XXXI.

B o O K impeifee und uncertain . Like the other Ame.

vli. rican nations, they were totally unacquainted with
uiicertain. the art of writing, and destitute of the only means

by which the memory of past tranfadions can be
preserved with any degree of accuracy. Even
among people to whom the use of letters is known,
the axra where the authenticity of history com
mences, is much posterior to the introducion o
writing. That noble invention continued ever
-wherc, to be long subservient to the commo
bufflefs and wants of life, before it was employed
in recording events, with a view of conveyin
information from one age to another. But i no
country did ever tradition alone carry down hi
torical knowledge, in any full continued stream,
during a period of half the length that the mo
narchy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

Defertsin The Quipos, or knots on cords of different c
their records lors, which are celebrated by authors fond of th

marvellous, as if they had been regular annalso
the empire, imperfectly supplied the place of wri
ing. According to the obscure description ofthe
by Acofta 2, which Garcilaffo de la Vega has adopte
with little variation and no improvement, the qui
pos seem to have been a device for renderingcal
culation more expeditious and accurate. By th
various colors different objecs were denoted, an
by each knot a diltindt number. Thus an accott
was taken, and a kind of register kept, of th
inhabitants in each proviJce, or of the fevera

s' Sec NOTE XXXII. s Hlil. lib. vi. c.

rodutions collected there for public use. But as by B o o
efe knots, however varied or combined, no moral vIT.
r abstract idea, no operation or quality of the
ind could be represented, they contributed little
owards preserving the memory of ancient events
nd inffitutions. By the Mexican paintings and
ymbols, rude as they were, more knowledge
f remote tranfations seems to have been con-
eyed, than the Peruvians could derive from their
afted quipos. Had the latter been even of more
xtenfive ufe,-and better adapted to supply the place
fwritten records, they perished so generally, to-
ether with other monuments of Peruvian inge-
uity, in the wreck occasioned by the Spanish con-
ueft, and the civil wars subsequent to it, that no
cceffion of light or knowledge comes from them.
ll the zeal of Garcilaffo de la Vega, for the ho-
or of that race of monarchs from whom he de-
cended, all the industry of his researches, and the
uperior advantages with which he carried them on,
pened no source of information unknown to the
panifl authors who wrote before him. I his Royal

rommntaries, he confines himself to illustrate what
hey had related concerning the atiquities and in-

uititions of Peru" ; and his illustrations, like their

ccounts, are derived entirely from the traditionary
ales current among his countrymen.
Very little credit then is due to the minute de-
ails which have been given of the exploits, the
'ttles , the conquests, and private charaider of the

Lib. i, c. o.

1 o o early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon nc

vii. thing in their ftorv, as authentic, but a few faCts,s(

interwoven in the system of their religion and po
licy, as preserved the memory of them from bei1
lolt; and upon the description of such cuftomsani
institutions as continued in force at the time oft
conquest, and fell under the immediate obfervatio
of the Spaniards. By attending carefully to thef
and endeavouring to separate them from whata
pears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority,
have l.lbored to form an idea of the Peruvia
government and manners.

Originof The people of Peru, as I have already o
theircvi. served ', had not advanced beyond the rude

form of savage life , when ilanco Capac, and hi
consort Nlama Ocollo, appeared to inftruc an
civilize them. Who these extraordinary pei
fonages were, whether they imported their fyfte
of legilation and knowledge of arts from fom
country more improved, or, if natives of Peru
how they acquired ideas so far superior to those o
the people wlom they addressed, are circumn
fiances with refped to which the Peruvian tr
dition conveys no information. Manco Cpac
and his consort, taking advantage of the pro.
pcnfity in the Peruvian to fiperftitionl, and( pal:
ticularly of their v c,cration for the Sun , pretended
to be children of that glorious luminary, and 0t
deliver their inlltructionis ill is name and iau
thority. The multitude lillened and believed

Book vi. p. o0, &c.

hliat

I'hat reformation in policy and manners the I o o
ervians ascribe to those founders of their VI1
npire, and how, from the precepts of the
nca and his consort, their anceflors gradually
cquired forne knowledge of those arts, and.
,me relial for that industry, which render fiub
tence fccure and life comfortable, hath been
rmerly related. Those bleflings were originally
oidined within narrow precindts; but, in procef.
stime, the successors of Manco Capac extended
eir dominion over all the regions that ftretclh
the weft of the Andes from Chili to Quito,
ablifhing in every province their peculiar policy
d religious inflitutions.
The most singular and ffriking circumftlnce in poltindeditl
e Peruvian government, is the influence of reli. religion.
on upon its genius and laws. Religious idea.s
ake such a feeble imprefflion on the tnind of a
vage, that their effec upon his feneiments and
anniers is hardly perceptible. Among the Mexi-
nq, religion, reduced into a regular fvftem, and
I(ling a considerable place in their public inftli
tions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in
iming the peculiar charader of that people.
it in Peru , the whole system of civil policy xas
ulded on religion. The Inca appeared inot only
a Icgifator , but as the messenger of Heaven.
is 'recepts were received not merely as the in.
nclions of a fperior, but as the mandates of thd
city. is race was held to be f;cred ; and in
'icr to preserve it (dlitindt, without being polluted
alny mixture of less noble blood, the sons of
VOL. 11I. 0

B O O K Manco Capac married their own fiflers, and no

ViI, person was ever admitted to the throne who could

not claim it by such a pure descent. To those
Children of the Sun, for that was the appellation
deflowed upon all the offspring of the first Inca
the people looked up with the reverence due to
beings of a superior order. They were deemed to
be under the immediate protedtion of the deity
from whom they issued, and by him every order
of the reigning Inca was supposed to be dic.
tated.
Two re. From those ideas two consequences refulte4

i'eoFi The authority of the Inca was unlimited and abf
this. lute, in the mo[t extensive meaning of the words

WVhenever the decrees of a prince are confidereda
the commands of the Divinity, it is not only anac
of rebellion , but of impiety, to ifpute or oppo

The abro. his will, Qbedience becomes a duty of religion
ofte pa;er and as it would be profane to control a monarc

under the guidance of Heaven, and prefumptuoi
to advise him, nothing remains but to fubnmit vit
implicit refped. This must necessarily by the e
fct of every government established on pretension
of intercourse with superior powers. Such accord
ingly was the blind fbmilfion whichl the Peruvian
yielded to their sovereigns. The persons of highe
rnink and greatest power in their dominions
linovwle(dged thec to be of a more xalted naturi
11(nd in tellimony of this , whcn admin ied into thei
prlfcnce , they entered with a blurden upon LlJ

otlo(ldcr5s, as as l tnciblen of Ltheir I lrvitud , al
w1illiniigfs to Lbca whatever the Inca wy; ple;lis

imnpofe. Atnong their fubjeds, force was not o o K
quifite to second their commands. Every officer VII.
tiufted with the execution of theni-was revered,
d, according to the account of an intelligent ob-
rer of Peruvian manners s, might proceed alone
m one extremity of the empire to another without
eetingoppofition ; for on producing a fringe from
royal Bor!a, an ornament of the head peculiar to
recigning Inca, the lives and fortunes of the
ople were at his disposal.
Another consequence of eflablifling govern- All crimne
nt in Peru on the foundation of religion was,

all crimes were punished capitally. They
re not confidered as tranfgreftions of human laws;
as insults offered to the Deity. Each, without
dirtindion between such as were flight arnd
as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and
1(l be expiated only by the blood of the offender.
nfonantly to the fame ideas, punishment follow-
the trespass with inevitable certainty, because
offence against Heaven was deemed such a
i enormity as could not be pardoned . Among
eople of corrupted morals, maxims of jurif-
dence so severe and unrelenting, by rendering
ferocious and desperate, would be more apt
ltiply crimes than to restrain them. But the
vinlls, of iimple manners and unufiuficious
, were held in fch awe by this rigid dilci-
c, that the number of offenders was extremely
1. Veneration for monarchs, enlightened and

Z Zarate, lib. i. G; I. (i VeRa, lib. ii. . 6

0 2

o o t direted, as they believed, by the divinity who
vil. they adored, prompted them to their duty; th

dread of punishment, which they were taught
confider as unavoidable vengeance inflided byo
fended Heaven, withheld them from evil.

Milndenius The system of superstition on which the Inc
ofrlirrc. ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority

was of a genius very different from that eftablilc
among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned th
veneration of his followers entirely towards natu
objects. The Sun, as the great source of light,
joy, and fertility in the creation, attracted th
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as
operating with him, were entitled to fecondaryh
nors. Wherever the propensity in the hum
mind to acknowledge and to adore some fuperi
power, takes this direcion, and is employed
contemplating the order and beneficence that real
exist in nature, the spirit of superstition is mil
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fan
and the fears of men, are supposed to preside
nature, and become the objeds of worship,
perdition always assumes a more severe and at
cious form. Of the latter we have an exam
among the Mexicans, of the former among
people of Peru. The Peruvians had not, i
deed, made such progress in obfcrvation or
quiry, as to have attained julf conceptions oft
Deity; nor was there in their langtage any p
per nane or appellation of the Supremne owe
which intimated, that they had formed any idea

Im as the Creator and Governor of the World '. B o o (
ut by directing their veneration to that glorious VII.
minary, which, by its universal and vivifying
ergy, is the test emblem of divine beneficence,
e rites and observances which they deemed ac-
ptable to him were innocent and humane. They
ercd to the Sun a part of those productions
hich his genial warmth had called forth from the
sorn of the earth, and reared to maturity. They
criiced, as an oblation of gratitude, some of the
imals who were indebted to his influence for
urifnment. They presented to him choice fpe-
mens of those works of ingenuity which his light
(I guided the hand of man in forming. But the
cas never stained his altars with human blood,
r could they conceive that their beneficent father
e Sun would be delighted with such horrid vic-

". Thus the Peruvians, unacquainted with

ofe barbarous rites which extinguish sensibility,
d suppress the feelings of nature at the fight of
man sufferings, were formed, by the spirit of
e superstition which they had adopted, to a na-
nal character, more gentle than that of any
opie in America.
The influence of this superstition operated in the Ttsinfluence
ne manner upon their civil institutions, and tended o"n ivilpo.
corred in them whatever was adverse to gentleness
characer. The dominion of the Incas, though
inoft absolute of all despotisms, was mitigated
its alliance with religion. The mind was not
" Acolta, lib. v. c. 3. ' Sec NOTE XXXIII.

0 3

i o o humbled and depressed by the idea of a force

vil. fubjedi.on to the will of a superior; obedience

paid to one who was believed to be clothed wit
divine authority, was willingly yielded, and
plied no degradation. The sovereign, confciou
that the fubmillive reverence of his people flower
from their belief of his heavenly descent, wasco
tinually reminded of a diftindion which prompt
him to imitate that beneficent power which I
was fippofed to represent. In consequence ofthol
imprelitons, there hardly occurs in the tradition
hilsory of Peru, any instance of rebellion again
the reigning prince, and, among twelve fucceffi
monarchs, there was not one tyrant.

and on their Even the wars in which the Incas engaged, ve
i[iltary carried on with a spirit very different from thi

of other American nations. 'lhey fought not, li
savages, to destroy and exterminate; or, likedt
Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities \vi
human sacrifices. They conquered, in c'rdert
reclaim and civilize the vanquished, and to diff
the knowledge of their own institutions al art
Prisoners seem not to have been exposed t th
insults and tortures, which were their lot in eve
other part of the New World. The Incas took t
people whom they subdued under their protecio
and admitted them to a participation of all th
advantages enjoyed by their original fubjeds. Thi
pratice , o repugnant to American ferocity, an
rcfembling the humanity of the molt polificd nation!
muff be ascribed, like other peculiarities which v
have obfcrved in the Peruvian manners, to ti

[enius of their religion. The Incas, confidering the n o o K
homage paid to any other object than to the VII.
lheavenly powers which they adored as impious,
vere fond of gaining proselytes to their favorite
fyflem. The idols of every conquered province
vere carried in triumph to the great temple at
Cuzco ', and placed there as trophies of the
superior power of the divinity who was the
protecor of the empire: The people were treated
with lenity, and inftrudted in the religious tenets
f their new masters , that the conqueror might
have the glory of having added to the number
f the votaries of his father the Sun.

The state of property in Peru was no refs Peculiar

ingular than that of religion, and contributed, flatt of pr"o
ikcwife, towards giving a mild turn of character P
o the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
vere divided into three shares. One was confe-
rated to the Sun, and the product of it was
pplied to the eredion of temples, and furnishing
hat was requisite towards celebrating the public
ites of religion. The second belonged to the
nca, and was set apart as the provision made by
the community for the support of government.
Ile third and largest flare was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
I.ircelled out. No person, however, or community,
1ad a right of cxclufivc property in the portion
fct apart for their use. They polcffed it only for a

llrrcra, dec. . lib. iv. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. i .
-lcrrcra, (ec. ,. lilt. iv, c, 8.

4

i o K year, at the expiration of which a new diviioo

vII. was made, in proportion to the rank, the number,

and exigencies of each family. All those lands were
cultivated by the joint industry of the community,
The people, summoned by a proper officer, re.
paired in a body to the fields, and performed their
common talk, while songs and musical instrument

EirenA of cheered them to their labor 6. By this finglar
this. difilibution of territory, as well as by the mode

of cultivating it, the idea of a common intere,
and of mutual subserviency, was continually incul
cated. Each individual felt his connexion with
those around him, and knew that he depended
ors their friendly aid for what increase he was to
reap. A slate thus constituted may be confidered
as one great family, in which the union of the
members was so complete, and the exchange o
good offices so perceptible, as to create trongel
attachment, and to bind man to man in closer
intercourse, than fubfifled under any form
society established in America. From this refuted
gentle manners, and mild virtues unknown in the
savage slate, and with which the Ilexicans wer
little acquainted.

Inequality But, though the institutions of the Incas were
franks. so framed as to strengthen the bonds of affetion

among their fubjedts, there was great inequality i"
their condition. The dillindion of ranks was fully
eft.blifhed in Peru. A great body of the inhabitants,
under the denomination of Tanaconas, were held

"' Herrera, (Iec. 5. lib. iv. c. a. Vega, lib . v. c

a state of servitude. Their garb and houses B o o
ere of a form different from those of freemen. VII.
ike the Tamemes of Mexico, they were employed
carrying burdens, and in performing every other
ork of drudgery". Next to them in rank, were
ch of the people as were free, but diftinguifled
y no official or hereditary honors. Above them
'ere raised, those whom the Spaniards call Orejones,
om the ornaments worn in their ears. They formed
hat may be denominated the order of nobles, and
peace as well as war held every office of power
trult i. At the head of all were the children of
e Sun, who, by their high descent, and peculiar
rivileges, were as much exalted above the Ore-
nes, as these were elevated above the people.
Such a form of society, from the union of its Stateofartc.
embers, as well as from the diftindion in their
anks, was favorable to progress in the arts. But

eSpaniards having been acquainted with the
proved state of various arts in Mexico, several
ears before they discovered Peru, were not so
uch truck with what they observed in the latter
nuntry, and describe the appearances of ingenuity
ere with less warmth of admiration. The Peru-
ian , nevertheless , had advanced far beyond
e Mexicans, both in the necessary arts of life,
nd in such as have some title to the name of
legant.
In Peru, agriculture, the art of primary necefity Improved

state of agri-
culture.

Hlerrcra, dec. . lib. iii. c. 4. lib. x. c. 8.
leHrrera dec . Ilb. iv. c. .

o o rc' in social life, was more extensive, and carried 0
vir. with greater skill than in any part of Americ

The Spaniards, in their progress through th
country, were so fully supplied with provision
of every kind, that in the relation of their adve
tures we meet with few of those dismal scene
of distress occasionod by famine, in which th
conquerors of Mexico were so often involve
The quantity of foil under cultivation was n
left to the discretion of individuals, but regulate
by public authority in proportion to the exigencit
of the community. Even the calamity of a
unfruitful season was but little felt; for the produ
of the lands consecrated to the Sun, as well
those set apart for the Incas, being deposited i
the Tambos, or public storehouses, it remaine
there as a stated provision for times of scarcity
As the extent of cultivation was determined wit
such provident attention to the demands of t
llate, the invention and industry of the Peruvia
were called forth to extraordinary exertions, b
certain defedts peculiar to their climate and foil
All the vast rivers that flow from the Andes tak
their course eastward to the Atlantic Ocean. PVe
is watered only by some fireams which rush doiv
from the mountains like torrents. A great part
the low country is sandy and barren, and neve
refreshcd with rain. In order to render such a
unpromiling region fertile, the ingenuity of t1
Peruvians had recourse to various expedients. B

* Zarate, lib. i. c. I4. Vega, lib. i. c. 8.

nens of artificial canals conducted, with much B o
atience and considerable art, from the torrents vi.
hat poured across their country, they conveyed a
egular supply of moisture to their fields". They
nriched the foil by manuring it with the dung
f sea-fowls, of which they found an inexhaustible
ore on all the islands scattered along their coasts ".
n describing the customs of any nation thoroughly
ivilized, such practices'would hardly draw atten-
ion, or be mentioned as in any degree remarkable;
tit in the history of the improvident race of men in
he New World, they are entitled to notice as
rngular proofs of industry and of art. The use
f the plough , indeed , was unknown to the
eruvians. They turned up the earth, with a kind
f mattock of hard wood 7. Nor was this labor
eemed so degrading as to be devolved wholly
pon the women. Both sexes joined in performing
his necessary work. Even the children of the Sun
et an example of industry, by cultivating a field
ear Cuzco with their hands, and they dignified
his fundion, by denominating it their triumph
ver the earth "

The fuiperior ingenuity of the Peruvians is Theirbuild.
bvious, likewise, in the construCtion of their isgh.
ouf[s and public buildings. In the cxtenfive plains
which stretch along the Pacific Ocean, where the
ky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,

' arate, lib. i. c. 4. Vega, lib. v. c. , & 24.
Acolta,lib. iv. c. 3-. Vega, lib. v. c. 3. Sec NOTE
VXl V. 'b. 7 Zarate, lib. i. 8
"' Vega, lib. v. c. 2.

o o r their houses were very properly of a fabric extre.
vil. mely flight. But in the higher regions, where rain

falls, where the vicissitude of seasons is known
and their rigor felt, houses were conftruced with
greater solidity. They were generally of a square
form, the walls about eight feet high, built with
bricks hardened in the fun, without any windows,
and the door low and strait. Simple as these ftruc
tures were, and rude as the materials may seem
to be, of which they were formed, they were
so durable, that many of them still fubfit in
different parts of Peru, long after every monument
that might have conveyed to us any idea of the
domestic state of the other American nations has
vanished from the face of the earth. But it was
in the temples consecrated to the Sun, and in
the buildings destined for the residence of their
monarchs, that the Peruvians displayed the utmof
extent of their art and contrivance. The defcrip.
tions of them by such of the Spanish writers as
had an opportunity of contemplating them, while,
in ome meafurc, entire, might have appeared
highly exaggerated, if the ruins which frill remain,
did not vouch the truth of their relations. These
ruins of sacred or royal buildings are found in
every province of the empire, and by their fre.
quency (lemonftrate that they are monuments of
a powerful people, who must have fubfited,
during a period of some extent, in a state of no
inconsiderable improvement. They appear to have
been edifices various in their dimensions. Some of
a moderate size, many of immense extent, all

emarkable for solidity, and resembling each other o o
n the style of architecture. The temple of Pacha- VII.
amac, together with a palace of the Inca, and a
rtrefs, were so connected together as to form
ne great ftrudure, above half a league in circuit.
n this prodigious pile, the fame singular taste in
nilding is conspicuous, as in other works of the
cruvians. As they were unacquainted with the
fe of the pulley, and.other mechanical powers,
nd could not elevate the large stones and bricks
hich they employed in building to any confider-
ble height, the walls of this edifice, in which they
em to have made their greatest effort towards
agnificence, did not rife above twelve feet from
he ground. Though they had not discovered the
fe of mortar or of any other cement in building,
he bricks or stones were joined with so much
icety, that the seams can hardly be discerned ".
he apartments, as far as the distribution of them
an be traced in the ruins, were ill-difpofed, and
forded little accommodation. There was not a
ngle window in any part of the building; and
s no light could enter but by the door, all the
partments of largest dimension must either have
een perfectly dark, or illuminated by some othet
eans. But with all these, and many other imper-
edions that might be mentioned in their art of
lildlng, the works of the Peruvians which still
remain, must be confidered as stupendous efforts
of a people unacquainted with the use of iron,

"See NOTE XXXV.

B o and convey to us a high idea of the powve

vil. possessed by their ancient monarchs.
Theirpublic These, however, were not the noblest or rmon
roads, useful works of the Incas. The two great roadl

from Cuzco to Quito, extending in an uninter
rupted stretch above fifteen hundred miles, are
entitled to ill higher- praise. The one was con
duded through the interior and mountainous
country, the other through the plains on the
sea-coast. From the language of admiration in
which some of the early writers express their
aftonifiment when they sirs viewed those roads,
and from the more pompous descriptions of later
writers, who labor to support some favorite theory
concerning America, one might be led to compare
this work of the Incas to the famous military ways
which remain as monuments of the Roman power.
But in a country where there was no tame animal
except the Llama, which was never used for
draught, and but little as a beast of burden, where
the high roads were seldom trod by 'any but a
human foot, no great degree of labor or art was
requisite in 'forming them. The Peruvian roads
were only fifteen feet in breadth ', and in many
places so slightly formed , that time has effaced
every veflige of the course in which they ran. In
the low country little more seens to have been
done, than to plant trees or to fix polls at certain
intervals, in order to mark the proper route to
travellers. To open a path through the mountain'

' Cieca, c, 60.

s country was a more arduous talk. Eminences B o o K
re levelled, and hollows filled up, and for the vii.
efervation of the road it was fenced with a bank
turf. At proper diflances, Tambos, or store-
uses, were erected for the accommodation of
e Inca and his attendants, in their progress
rough his dominions. From the manner in which
road was originally formed in this higher and
ore impervious region, it has proved more durable;
d though, from the inattention of the Spaniards
every objec but that of working their mines,
thing has been done towards keeping it in
air, its course may still be traced7'. Such was
e celebrated road of the Incas; and even from
is description, divested of every circumstance
manifest exaggeration, or of suspicious aspect,
mutt be confidered as a triking proof of an
traordinary progress in improvement and policy.
o the savage tribes of America, the idea of
ilitating communication with places at a distance
d never occurred. To the Mexicans it was
rdly known. Even in the most civilized countries
Europe, men had advanced far in refinement,
fore it became a regular object of national police
form fiuch roads as render intercourse commodi.
i. It was a capital object of Roman policy to
pen a communication with all the provinces of
eir cxtenfive empire, by means of those roads

71 Xerez, p . 89. 191., Zarate, lib. i. c. 13, 14. Vega,
ix. c. 1. ouguer, Voyag¢e p. loS. Ulloa, Entretenimicn.
1 P. 365.

s o o x which are juitly confidered as one of the nobl

viI. monuments both of their wisdom and their pow

But during the long reign of barbarifin, the Roma
roads were negleced or destroyed; and at t
time when the Spaniards entered Peru, no kingdo
in Europe could boast of any work of publ
utility that could be compared with the grt
roads formed by the Incas.
and bridges. The formation of those roads introduced anoth

improvement in Peru equally unknown over
the reft of America. In its course from south
north, the road of the Incas was interfeded by
the torrents which roll from the Andes towar
the WVeftern Ocean. From the rapidity of th
course, as well as from the frequency and violen
of their inundation, these were unnavigable. So
expedient, however, was to be found for pati
them. The Peruvians, from their unacquainta
with the use of arches, and their inability to wo
in wood, could not conftrud bridges either
stone or timber. But necessity, the parent
invention, suggested a device which supplied th
defeA. They formed cables of great strength,
twiling together some of the pliable withs
osiers, with which their country abounds; f
of these cables they stretched across the ftrea
parallel to one another, and made them faif
each fide. These they bound firmly together
interweaving smaller ropes so close, as to form
compact piece of net-work, which being covere
with branches of trees and earth, they passed alonl

it

twith tolerable security 7'. Proper persons were n o o
ppointed to attend at each bridge, to keep it in viI.
pair, and to affifl passengers . In the level
ountry, where the rivers became deep and broad
lnd fill, they are passed in Balzas, or floats; in
e collrudion, as well as navigation of which,
e ingenuity of the Peruvians appears to be far
iperior to that of any people in America. hefe
ad advanced no farther in naval skill than the use
the paddle, or oar; the Peruvians ventured to
ife a mafi, and spread a fail, by means of
hich their balzas not only went nimbly before
e wind, but could veer and tack with great
lerity '.
Nor were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians Moe of re.
nfine(l solely to objecs of essential utility. They fi1ingfilvcr
(d made some progrcfs in arts, which may be
led elegant. They possessed the precious metals
greater abundance than any people of America.
hey obtained gold in the fame manner with the
cxicans, by searching in the channels of rivers,
wafning the earth in which particles of it were
ntained. But in order to procure silver, they
erted no inconsiderable degree of skill and inven-
n. They had not, indeed, attained the art of
king a iaft into the bowels of the earth , and
netrating to the riches concealed there; but they
1lowed deep caverns on the banks of rivers and
" See NOTE XXXVI.

Salcho, ap. Ram. iii. 376, B. Zarate, lib. i. c. 14.
,lib. ii. . 7, 8. lerrera, dec. . lib. iv. c. ;, 4.

Ullo, Voy. i. 167, &:.
VOL. PII. P

o x the fides of mountains, and emptied such veins
vii. did not dip fddenly beyond their reach In othe

places, where the vein lay near the surface, they
dug pits to such a depth, that the person who
worked below could throw out the ore, or hand
it up in baskets". They had discovered the art
smelting and refining this, either by the simp
application of fire, or where the ore was ma
fubborn, and impregnated with foreign substance
by placing it in small ovens or furnaces, on hig
grounds, so artificially conftrudted, that the draugh
of air performed the function of a bellows, a
engine with which they were totally unacquainte
By this simple device, the purer ores were fmelte
with facility, and the quantity of silver in Per
was so considerable, that many of the utenfi
employed in the functions of common life we
made of it". Several of those vessels and trinke
are said to have merited no small degree of eim
tion, on account of the neatness of the workmanli
as well as the intrinsic value of the materials. B
as the conquerors of America were well acquaint
with the latter, but had scarcely any conception
the former, molt of the silver vessels and trinke
were melted down, and rated according to
weight and fineness of the metal in the division
the spoil.

Wortk of In other works of mere curiosity or ornaine,
clegance.

" Ramufio, iii. 414, A.
7 Acul;, lib. iv. c. 4, 5. Vega, p. . lib. viii. c. 2
Ullua, Entreten. 258.

their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Many n o o
specimens of those have been dug out of the vii.
Gicas , or mounds of earth, with which the
Peruvians covered the bodies of the dead. Among
these are mirrors of various dimensions, of hard
thiing stones highly polished; vessels of earthen
vaire of different forms; hatchets, and other
nftruments, some destined for war, and others
for labor. Some were of flint, some of copper,
ardened to such a degree by an unknown process,
s to supply the place of iron on several occasions.
lad the use of those tools formed of copper been
eneral, the progress of the Peruvians in the arts
night have been such, as to emulate that of more
ultivated nations. But either the metal was so
are, or the operation by which it was hardened,
o tedious, that their instruments of copper were
ew, and so extremely small, that they seem to
ave been employed only in flighter works. But
ven to such a circumscribed use of this imperfect
netal, the Peruvians were indebted for their
uperiority to the other people of America in
arious arts". The fame observation, however,
iay be applied to them, which I formerly made
ith refpec to the arts of the Mexicans. From
:veral specimens of Peruvian utensils and orna-
lents, which are deposited in the royal cabinet of
ladirid, and from some preserved in different
:lletions in other parts of Europe, I have reason
believe that the workmanship is more to be
,7 Ulloi;,Voy. om.. 3 &, &c. Id, Entreten. p. 69, gc,

Pt

o o i admired on account of the rude tools with whic8
vli. it was executed, than on account of its intrinsic

neatness and elegance; and that the Peruvians
though the most improved of all the Americans
were not advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

An imper- But notwithstanding so many particulars, which
fctciviJiza seem to indicate a high degree of improvemen
tion.

in Peru, other circumrtances occur that fugge
the idea of a society flill in the first scages of it
transition from barbarism to civilization. In all th

>octies but dominions of the Incas, Cuzco was the onl
Cuzco. place that had the appearance, or was entitled

the name of a city. Every where lrfe, the peopl
lived mostly in detached habitations, disperse
over the country, or, at the utmot , fettle
together in finall villages 7. But until men ar
brought to assemble in numerous bodies, an
incorporated in such close union, as to enjo
frequent intercourse, and to feel mutual depen
ence, they never imbibe perfectly the spirit,
assume the manners of social life. In a country
immense extent, with only one city, the progre
of manners, and the improvement either oft
necelfary or more refined arts, mufl have been
flow, and carried on under such difadvantag
that it is more surprising the Peruvians Thou
bave advanced so far in refinement, than th
they did not proceed farther,

No perfret In consequence of this lfate of imperfed unio
reparation of
r olro.s. the separation of professions in Peru was not

'7 Zarate, lib. i. c. 9. Hezrera, dec. 5, lib. vi.

complete as among the Mexicans. The less closely n B o

.

men associate, the more simple are their manners, vii.
nd the fewer their wants. The crafts of common
and most necessary tife in life do not, in such a
late, become so complex or difficult, as to render
t requisite that men flhould be trained to them
y any particular course of education. All the
arts, accordingly, which were of daily and
indispensable utility , were exercised by every
'eruvian indiscriminately. None but the artists,
employed in works of mere curiosity or ornament,
conltituted a separate order of men, or were
diftinguifled from other citizens".

From the want of cities in Peru, another Little corn.
consequence followed. There was little commercial ercil in.

tecourfre

ntercourfe among the inhabitants of that great
mpire. The activity of commerce is coeval with
he foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in
considerable numbers in one place, its operations
ecome vigorous. The citizen muff depend for
ubfiftence on the labor of those who cultivate
he ground. They, in return, muff receive some
quivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is established,
nd the productions of art are regularly exchanged
or the fruits of agriculture. In the towns of the
lexican empire, stated markets were held, and
whatever could supply any want or desire of man
as an object of commerce. But in Peru, from

7 Acofta, lib. vi. c. ;. Vega, lib. v. c. 9. Herrera,
dee. . lib. iv. c. 4.

Pa

o o the singular mode of dividing property, and the
viI. manner in which the people were fettled, there

was hardly any species of commerce carried on
between different provinces ', and the community
was less acquainted with that active intercourse,
which is at once a bond of union, and an incen.
tive to improvement.

Unwarlike But the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was
pilriofhe the most remarkable, as well as most fatal defetin
Peruvians.

their character " The greater part of the rude
nations of America opposed their invaders wit
undaunted ferocity, though with little conduct or
success. The Mlexicans maintained the struggle in
defence of their liberties, with such perfeverin
fortitude, that it was with difficulty the Spaniard
triumphed over them. Peru was subdued at once,
and almolt without resistance; and the most favor
able opportunities of regaining their freedom, an
of crushing their oppressors, were loft through th
timidity of the people. Though the traditiona
history of the Peruvians represents all the Incas a
warlike princes, fiequently at the head of armies
which they led to victory and conquest; few fymp
toms of such a martial spirit appear in any of thei
operations subsequent to the invasion of the Spa
niards. The influence, perhaps, of those inltitution
which rendered their manners gentle, gave thei
minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the conftan

'° Vega, lib. vi. c. .
9' Xerez, 19o. Sancho, Ram. iii. 72, C. Herrera
dec. S. lib. i. c. 3.

serenity and mildness of the climate may have n o
enervated the vigor of their frame; perhaps, some vil.
principle in their government, unknown to us, was
the occasion of this political debility. Whatever
may have been the cause, the fad is certain, and
there is not an instance in history of any people so
little advanced in refinement, so totally destitute of
military enterprise. This charadter hath descended
to their posterity. The Indians of Peru are now
more tame and depressed than any people of Ame-
rica. Their feeble spirits, relaxed in lifeless in-
adion, seem hardly capable of any bold or manly
exertion.

But, besides those capital defecs in the poli-
tical state of Peru, some detached circumstances
and fads occur in the Spanilh writers, which dif-
cover a considerable remainder of barbarity in their
manners. A cruel custom, that prevailed in some of
tie molt savage tribes, subsisted among the Peru-
vians. On the death of the Incas, and of other emi-
nent perfors, a considerable number of their at-
tendants was put to death, and interred around their
Guacas, that they might appear in the next world
with their former dignity, and be served with the
fame refped. On the death of Huana-Capac, the
noft powerful of their monarchs, above a thousand
vicims were doomed to accompany him to the
tomb". In one particular, their manners appear
to have been more barbarous than those of moRt
rutde tribes. Though acquainted with the use of

At cosa, lib. v. c. 7.

P4

o o ic fire in preparing maize, and other vegetables fox
vil. food ; they devoured both flesh and filh perfectly

raw, and aftonifled the Spaniards, with a pracice
repugnant to the ideas of ll civilized people ".

Other do. But though Ilexico and Peru are the possessions
,iii ions of Spain in the New WTorld, which , on account
America. both of their ancient and present state, have at.

traded the greatell attention; her other dominion
there are far from being inconsiderable, either
extent or value. The greater part of them was re
duced to fubjedion during the first part of the fix
teenth century, by private adventurers, who fitte
out their small armaments either in Hispaniola or
Old Spain; and were we to follow each leader i
his progress, we flhould discover the fame darin
courage, the fame persevering ardor, the fame r
pacious desire of wealth, and the fame capacity
enduring and surmounting every thing in order t
attain it, which diftinguilied the operations of th
Spaniards in their greater American conquests. But
instead of entering into a detail ,,which, from th
similarity of the tranfadions, would appear almost
a brefftr, repetition of what has been already related, I ha

ey otm satisfy mvfelf with such a view of those provinces

the Spanish empire in America, which have no
hitherto been mentioned, as may convey to m
leaders an adequate idea of its greatness, fertilit
and opulence.

Such as are 1 begin with the countries contiguous to thetw
adjacent to

' Xerez, p. 190. Sancho, Ram. iii. 372, C. Herrer
dec. ;. lib. i. c. .

eat monarchies, of whose history and institutions B o 0 K
iave given some account, and flall then briefly vir.
scribe the other diftrics ofSpanilf America. The the empire

ri

VT r- *of Mexico,

riflidion of the viceroy of New Spain extends
er several provinces, which were not fbjec to
dominion of the Mexicans. The countries of Cinaloaand
naloa and Sonora, that stretch along the east fide
the Vermilion sea, or gulf of California, as well
the immense kingdoms of New Navarre and
ewv Mexico, which bend towards the weft and
rh, did not acknowledge the sovereignty of
ontezuma, or his predecessors. T1hese regions, not
ferior in magnitude to all the Mexican empire, are
duced some to a greater, others to a less degree
fubjedion to the Spanifl yoke. They extend
rough the most delightful part of the temperate
ne; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
d all their produdions, whether animal or vege-
bIc, are molt perfect in their kind. They have
a communication either with the Pacific Ocean,
with the Gulph of Mexico, and are watered by
ers which not only enrich them, but may become
bfervicnt to commerce. The number of Spa-
rds fettled in those vast countries, is indeed ex-
mcly small. They may be said to have sub-
ed, rather than to have occupied them. But if
population in their ancient elablifhments in
Melica shall continue to increase, they may gra-
rally fprcad over those provinces, of which, how-
'r inviting, they have not hitherto been able to
ie full ponfffion.
One circumltance may contribute to the speedy Richmies.

s a Oa population of some diftrids. Very rich mines bo

VIL of gold and ilver have been discovered in many

the regions which I have mentioned. Wherev
these are opened, and worked with success, a mi
titude of people resort. In order to supply the
with the necessaries of life, cultivation mult
increased, artisans of various kinds mufl aembli
and industry as well as wealth will be graduall
diffused. Many examples of this have occurred
different parts of America since they fell under tl
dominion of the Spaniards. Populous villages a
large towns have suddenly arisen amidst unin
bited wilds and mountains; and the working
mines, though far from being the most proper o
jed towards which the attention of an infant focie
should be turned, may become the means both
promoting useful activity, and of augmenting

A recent number of people. A recent and singular infta
and remark.

ibldetit . of this has happened, which, as it is but li
very. known in Europe, and may be productive ofgr

effects, merits attention. he Spaniards fettled
the provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been
disturbed by the depredations of some fierce tri
of Indians. In the year 1765, the incursions
those savages became so frequent, and so defir
tive, that the Spanish inhabitants, in despair,
plied to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexi
for such a body of troops as might enable them
drive those formidable invaders from their pl
of retreat in the mountains. But the treasury
IVexico was so much exhaufled by the va fu
drawn from it, in order to support the late

aini Great Britain, that the viceroy could afford B o K
m no aid. The refpet due to his virtues, ac- VI.
plifhed what his official power could not effect.
prevailed with the merchants of New Spain to
vance about two hundred thousand pesos for
raying the expense of the expedition. The war
s conducted by an officer of abilities; and after
ing protracted for three years, chiefly by the dif-
ulty ofpurfuing the fugitives over mountains and
rough defiles which were almost impassable, it

inated, in the year 1771, in the final fubmiflion
the tribes, which had been so long the object of
ror to the two provinces. In the course of this
ice, the Spaniards marched through countries
owhich they seem not to have penetrated before
attime, and discovered mines offuch value, as was
onihing even to men acquainted with the riches
ntained in the mountains of the New World. At
eguilla, in the province of Sonora, they entered
ain of fourteen leagues in extent, in which, at
depth of only sixteen inches, they found gold in
ins of such a size, that some of them weighed
marks, and in such quantities, that in a fiort
e, with a few laborers, they collected a thousand
rksof gold in grains, even without taking time to
) the earth that had been dug, which appeared
befo rich, that persons of skill computed that it
glt yield what would be equal in value to a
Iion of pesos. Before the end of the year ^.771, Probable
Dve two thousand persons were fettled in Cine. this. o
ilia, under the government of proper magistrates,
i the ifpedCion of several occlefiaftics. As several

B o o other mines, not inferior in richness to that

vil. Cineguilla, have been discovered, both in Sonor

and Cinaloa ", it is probable that these neglecd
and thinly inhabited provinces, may soon becom
as populous and valuable as any part of the Spani
empire in America.

California, The peninsula of California, on the other fide
its at, the Vermilion sea, seems to have been less knox

to the ancient Mexicans, than the provinces whi
I have mentioned. It was discovered by Cortes
the year 1536 ". During a long period it continu
to be so little frequented, that even its form w
unknown, and in most charts it was represented
an island, not as a peninsula '. Though the
mate of this country, if we may judge from
situation, muf be very desirable; the Spania
have made small progress in peopling it. Towa
the close of the last century, the Jesuits, who
great merit in exploring this neglected provin
and in civilizing its rude inhabitants, impercepti
acquired a dominion over it as complete as
which they possessed in their missions in Paragu
and they labored to introduce into it the fame
licy, and to govern the natives by the fame maxi
In order to prevent the court of Spain from c
ceiving any jealousy of their designs and operati
they seem fludioufly to have depreciated the c
try, by representing the climate as so disagree
and unwholesome, and the foil as so barren,

" Seo NOTE XXXVII.
" Book v. vol. ii. p. 8x. " See NOTE XXX

thing but a zealous desire of converting the I o o K
tives, could have induced them to fettle there ". vI.
veral public- spirited citizens endeavoured to
deceive their sovereigns, and to give them a
tter view of California; but in vain. At length, andproba.
the expulsion of the Jesuits from the Spanilh bilityof'it
minions, the court of Madrid, as prone at that
nture to fufped the purity of the Order's in-
ntions, as formerly to confide in them with im-
icit trust, appointed Don Joseph Galvez, whose
ilities have since raised him to the high rank of
nifter for the Indies, to visit that peninsula. His
count of the country was favorable; he found
pearl fishery on its coasts to be valuable, and
discovered mines of gold of a very promising
pearance ". From its vicinity to Cinaloa and So.
a, it is probable, that if the population of these
vinces shall increase in the manner which I have
posed, California may, by degrees, receive from
m such a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no
nger reckoned among the desolate and useless
Rrifts of the Spanish empire.
On the east of Mexico, Yucatan and Honduras Yucatan
comprehended in the government of New andHoo
ain, though anciently they can hardly be said to
ve formed a part of the Mexican empire. These
ge provinces, firetching from the Bay of Cam-
chy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, like
other territories of Spain in the New World,

Venegas, His. of California, i. a6.
"Lorenzano,, 349, 3 o.

9 o o n derive their value either from the fertility of th

viiL foil. or the richness of their mines; but they p

duce in greater abundance, than any part of. A
rica, the logwood-tree, which, in dying fomeo
lors, is so far preferable to any other matern
that the consumption of it in Europe is confi
able, and it has become an article in cornmer
great value. During a long period , no Europ
nation intruded upon the Spaniards in those
vinces, or attempted to obtain any share in
branch of trade. But after the conquest of
maica by the nglih , it soon appeared whataf
ridable rival was now feated in the neighbourk
of the Spanish territories. One of the first obi
which tempted the Englifb fettled in that island,
the great profit arising from the logwood trade,
the facility of wresting some portion of it from
Treirde- Spaniards. Some adventurers from Jamaica nu

li' the first attempt at Cape Catoche, the south-east

montory of Yucatan, and by cutting logwood tb
cared on a gainful traffic. \When most of the '
near the coast in that place were felled, they
moved to the island of Trift, in the Bay of C2
peachy; and in later times, their principal ftatioc
been in the Bay of Honduras. The Spaniards, al
ed at this encroachment, endeavoured by negd
tion , remonstrances, and open force, to prev-
the English from obtaining any footing on
part of the American continent. But after R:'
gling aoainft it for more than a centurv , the (
ters of the last war extorted from the Court of M.1'
a reluctant consent to tolerate this fettleme;a:

r,;er. in the heart of its territories". The pain B o o R
::h this humbling conceflion occasioned , seems vii.
'-3\e prompted the Spaniards to devise a me-
:, of rendering it of little consequence, more es-
.,.: than all the efforts of negociation or vio-
:. The logwood produced on the weft coast
Yucatan , where the foil is drier, is in quality
frperior to that which grows on the marshy
:jnds where the English are fettled. By en- and rvivaL
=rzing the cutting of this, and permitting the
:.--:aion of it into Spain without paying any

", such vigor has been given to this branch
:'-nmerce, and the logwood which the English
_z to market has funk so much in value, that
:rade to the Bay of Honduras has gradually
:.ed " since it obtained a legal fandion; and,
: probable, will soon be finally abandoned. In

event, Yucatan and Honduras will become
r:lons of considerable importance to Spain.
S:il farther east than Honduras lie the two cos Rica
.."ces of Cofla Rica and Veragua, which like. .and Vr
n belong to the vice royalty of New Spain; but uL
have been so much negleced by the Spaniards,
-re apparently of such small value, that they
no particular attention.
The nmot important province depending on the chi .
, royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas had
^:.hed their dominion in some of its orthern

Treaty of Paris, Art. xviii
KRea Cediula, Cmrormaiis, i. 145.
Set NOTE Xx.\\.

,B o o K diftricds; but in the greater part of the countr

VII. its gallant and high spirited inhabitants maintain

their independence. The Spaniards, allured
the fame of its opulence , early attempted the cc
quest of it under Diego Almagro; and after]
death , Pedro de Valdivia relumed the defig
Both met with fierce oppofiion. The former
linquifhcd the enterprise in the manner whicl
have mentioned `. The latter, after having giv
many displays, both of courage and military lki
was cut off, together with a considerable body
troops under his command. Francisco de Villag
Valdivia's lieutenant, by his spirited condu
checked the natives in their career, and favedt
remainder of the Spaniards from deftrudion.
degrees, all the champaign country along t
coast was fubjeSed to the Spanish dominion. T
mountainous country is still pomfeffed by the Pu
ches, Araucos, and other tribes of its original
habitants, formidable neighbours to the Spaniar
with whom, during the course of two centuri
they have been obliged to maintain almost per
tual hostility, suspendcd only by a few intervals
insecure peace.

Excellence That part of Chili then, which may prope
otfits cli. be deemed a Spanish province, is a narrow diltri
mate and
foil. extending along the coalt from the desert of

camas to the illand of Chiloe, above nine hund
miles. Its climate is the mo(t delicious in
New World, and is hardly equalled by that of

' Book vi. p. 7, &c.

regio

region on the face of the earth. Though border, n o r
in, on the Torrid Zone, it never feels the extre- VI.
ity of heat, being screened on the east by the
tAdes, and refreshed from the wcft by cooling sea-
reezes. The temperature of the air is so mild
nd equable , that the Spaniards give it the pre.
erence to that of the southern provinces in their
:tive country. The fertility of the foil corre.
ponds with the benignity of the climate, and is
0nderfully accomlmodated to utriropean produce
ioa. The most valuable of there, corn, wine,
nd oil, abound in. Chili , as if they had been na.
ixe to the country. All the fruits imported fromn
urope attain to full maturity there. T'he animals
four hcmifphere not only iultiply , but improve
this delightful. region. 'rThe horned cattle are
If arcr size than tofe of Spain. Its breed of
orfes surpasses, both in. beauty aird( in spirit, the
mous Andalnfiarr race, from vthich they sprung.
5or has Nature exhausted her bounty on the fur-
ce of the earth; fne h;as red' its bowels with
ches. Valuable miins of ^, of silver, of cop-
r, and of lead,, have beeni discovered nl various,
rts of it.
A country distinguished by so many befltings, eaure or its
inmay be apt to conclude, would early become ect'^ t.t,
fvorite iftation of the Spatniards, and mufi have Spaniarnis.
en cultivated with peculiar predilecdion and care.
ead of this, a great part of it remains noccu-
ed. In all this extent of countrv, there are not
ove eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about
ec times hat number of negroes and people ol
VOL, III. Q

aBo o a mixed race. The most fertile foil in America

VIL lies uncultivated, and some of its mot promising

mines remain unwrought. Strange as this neglec
of the Spaniards to avail themselves of advantages,
which seemed to court their acceptance , may ap
pear, the causes of it can be traced. The onl
intercourse of Spain with its colonies in the South
Sea, was carried on during two centuries by th
annual fleet to Porto-bello. All the produce
these colonies were flipped in the ports of Callao
or Arica in Peru, for Panama, and carried fro
thence across the isthmus. All the commoditi
which they received from the mother-country, we
conveyed from Panama to the fame harbou
Thus both the exports and imports of Chili pass
through the hands of merchants fettled in Per
These had of course a profit on each; and in bo
tranfa.dions the Chilefe felt their own fubordin
tion; and having no dired intercourse with t
parent state, they depended upon another provin
for the disposal of thae produions, as well as
the supply of their iffts. Under such difcoura
ments, population could not increase, and indu

Prnfpectof was defitute of one chief incitement. But n
its improve that Spain, from motives which I hall ment

hereafter, has adopted a new system, and car
on her commerce with the colonies in the Sou
Sea, by ships which go round Cape Horn, a
rcdt intercourse is opened between Chili and
Vlother-country. The gold, the silver, and
other commodities of the province will be
changed in its own harbours for the manusad

of Europe. Chili may speedily rife into that im- o o '
portance among te Spanifl settlements to which vii.
it is entitled by its natural advantages. It may
become the granary of Peru, and the other pro-
vinces along the Pacific Ocean ; it may supply
them with wine, with cattle, with horses , with
hemp, and many other articles for which they now
depend upon Europe. Though the new fyflem
has been efltablifhed only a few years, those effects
of it begin already to be observed ". If it shall be
adhered to with any steadiness for half a century,
one may venture to foretel , that population, in-
dutry, and opulence will advance in this province
with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Tu- Provincec of
uman and Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, and Tucuman

d Rio dla

ike it were dependent on the Vice-royalty of Peru. Plata.
hefe regions of immense extent stretch in length
om north to south above thirteen hundred miles,
ad in breadth more than a thousand. This coun- Northern
ry, which is larger than mofl Furopean kingdoms, dvlirother
aturally forms itself into two great divisions, one
n the north , and the other on the south of Rio de
Plata. The former comprehends Paraguay, the
:mous missions of the Jesuits, and fveral other
iRricls. But as dipntes have long fibfifted be-
iween the courts of Spain and Portugal, concern-
nl its boundaries, which, it is probable, will be
ooti finally afcertainc , either amicably, or by the
kcifron of the sword, I chufc to refcrve my

Campomanes, ii. 157.

Q z

B o o account of tlis northern division, until I enter upun

vii. the history of Portuguese America, with which

it is intimately connetel; and, in relating it, I
ilall be able from authentic mat'erials , supplicd
both by Spain and Portugal , to give a full and
accurate defcripion of the operations and views of
the Jcfuits, in rearing that iingular fabric of po.
licy in America, which has drawn so much atten.
tion, and has been so imperfectly underltood. The
latter division of the province contains the govern.
ments of Tucuman and Buenos-Ayres, and to theft
I f iall at present confine my observations.

Viewofthe The Spaniards entered this part of America by
latter. the river De la Plata; and though a succession of,

cruel disasters besel them in their early attempts to
establish their dominion in it, they were encouraged
to persist in the design , at first by the hopes of dif
covering mines in the interior cotntry, and after,
wards by the necessity of occupying it, in order to
prevent any other nation from fettling there, and
penetrating by this route into their rich poffcllioin
in Peru. But except at Buenos-Ayres, tecy hve
made no settlement of any consequence in all the
vast space which I have mentioned. There are
indeed , scattered over it, a few places on which
they have belowed the name of towns , and t
which they have endeavoured to add some dignityl
by ercdting them into bifloprics; but they are no
better than paltry villages, each with two or thre
hundred inhabitants. One circumfnance , how
cver , which was not originally foreseen, has co
tribeted to render this dillri , though thini

peopled, of considerable importance. Tle pro- Bn 0 r;
vince of Tucuman , together with the country to VIX.
the south of the Plata , instead of being covered
with wood like other parts of America, forms one
vast open plain , almolt without a tree. The foil
ii a deep fertile mould , watered by many fireams
descending from the Andes, and clothed in per-
pCtual verdure. In this rich pafltrage, the horses
and cattle imported by the Spaniards fr-om Europe
have multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds
belief. This has enabled the inhabitants not only
to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by supplying
t wvith cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry on
commerce no less beneficial, by the exportation
fhides to Europe. From both, the colony'has ,
erived great advantages. But its commodious
uation for carrying on contraband trade, has
en the chief source of its prosperity. Whiie the
ourt of Madrid adhered to its ancient fyfte , with
esped to its communication with America, the
iver De la Plata lay so much out of the course of
panifli navigation, that interlopers, almost with-
ut any rifque of bcing either observed' or ob-
ruided, could pour in European manufacures in
ucl quantities , thalt they not only f)pplied tlh
ants of the colony , but were conveyed into all
he ealtern diflrids of Peru. When the Pbrtu-
nefe in Brasil, extended their settlements to the
nks of Rio de la Plata, a new channel'was
pened, by which prohibited commodities flowed
to the Spanish territories, with flill more facility,
din greater abundance. This illegal trafic,

32

B o however detrimental to the parent late, contri

vlI. buted to the increase of the settlement, which had

the immediate benefit of it , and Buenos-Ayre!
became gradually a populous and opulent town,
AWhat may be the effedt of the alteration lately
made in the government of this colony, the nature
of which fl.ill be dcfcribed in the subsequent Book,
cannot hithcrto be known.

ther terri. All the other territories of Spain in the New
tories of World, the islands excepted, of whose discovery

and redution I have formerly given an account,
are comprehended under two great divisions; th
former denominated the kingdom of Tierra Firme,
the provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to thi
mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New King
dom of Granada, situated in the interior country
With a short view of there I shall close this part
my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province fu

jet to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus
Darien. Darien. Though it was in this part of the co

tinent that the Spaniards first began to plant c
lonies, they have made no considerable progrefsi
peopling it. As the country is extremely mou
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains
mines of great value, the Spaniards would pr
bably have abandoned it altogether, if they
not been allured to continue by the excellence
the harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and th
of Panama on the other. These ;ave been call

the keys to the communication between the north B o o
and south-sea, between Spain and her most valuable viz.
colonies. In consequence of this advantage, Pa.
nama has become a considerable and thriving town.
The peculiar noxiousness of its climate has pre-
vented Porto-bello from increasing in the fame pro-
portion. As the intercourse with the settlements
in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bello and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourished
and enriched by that commerce to which they
were indebted for their prosperity, and even their
existence.

The provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha Carthagena
fretch to the eastward of the ithmus of Darien. a"d Santa

.hlartha.

The country still continues mountainous, but its
rallies begin to expand, are well watered, and
extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjeded this
part of America to the crown of Spain, about the
year 1532. It is thinly peopled, and of course ill
cultivated. It produces, however, a variety of
valuable drugs, and some precious stones, parti-
cularly emeralds. But its chief importance is de-
rived from the harbour of Carthagena, the safest
and best fortified of any in the American dominions
of Spain. In a situation so favorable, commerce
soon began to flourish. As carly as the year 1544,
it seems to have been a town of some note. But
whecn Carthagena was chosen as the port in which
the aleons fliould ir-ft begin to trade on their ar-
rival from Europe, and to whicl they were di.
recled to return, in order to prepare for their

24

o o however detrimental to the parent state, contri.
vI. buted to the increase of the settlement, which had

the immediate benefit of it , and Buenos-Ayres
became gradually a populous and opulent town,
AWhat may be the effedt of the alteration lately
made in the government of this colony, the nature
of which flull be dfcribed in the subsequent Book
cannot hitherto be known.

Other terri. All the other territories of Spain in the New
tories of World, the islands exce ted , of whose discovery
Spaln.

and reduction I have formerly given an account,
are comprehended under two great divisions; tb
former denominated the kingdom of Tierra Firme
the provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to t
Ir mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New Kin

dom of Granada, situated in the interior country
With a short view of there I shall close this part
my work.

To the east of Veragua, the last province fu

jet to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus
Darien. Darien. Though it was in this part of the co

tinent that the Spaniards first began to plant c
lonies, they have made no considerable progrefsi
peopling it. As the country is extremely mou
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains
mines of great value, the Spaniards would pr
bably have abandoned it altogether, if they h
not been allured to continue by the excellence
the harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and th
of Panama on the other. These Lhve been call

the keys to the comrunication between the north B o o i
and south-sea, between Spain and her most valuable viI.
colonies. In consequence of this advantage, Pa-
nama has become a considerable and thriving town.
The peculiar noxiousness of its climate has pre-
vented Porto-bello from increasing in the fame pro-
portion. As the intercourse with the settlements
in the Pacific Ocean is now carried on by another
channel, it is probable that both Porto-bello and
Panama will decline, when no longer nourished
and enriched by that commerce to which they
were indebted for their prosperity, and even their
existence.

The provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha Carthagena
fretch to the eastward of the isthmus of Darien. and Santa

,m-~~~~

A.~ .~ .*~ ,i~ .*~ lartha.

The country still continues mountainous, but its
rallies begin to expand, are well watered, and
extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fubjeded this
part of America to the crown of Spain , about the
year 1532. It is thinly peopled, and of course ill
cultivated. It produces, however, a variety of
valuable drugs, and fore precious stones, parti-
cularly emeralds. But its chief importance is de-
rived( from the harbour of Carthagena, the safest
and belt fortified of any in the American dominions
of Spain. In a situation so favorable, commerce
soon began to flourish. As early as the year 1544,
itfeems to have been a town of some note. But
when Carthagena was chofeil as the port in which
the galeons should irft begin to trade on their ar-
rival from Europe , and to wlhicl they were di-
recced to return , in order to prepare for their

04

B o voyage homeward , the commerce of its inhabitants

vII. was so much favored by this arrangement , tha

it soon became one of the molt populous, opulent,
and beautiful cities in Acrica. There is, how.
ever, rcafon to apprehend, that it has reached its
highefc point of cxaltation , antd that it will be so
far affedted by the change in the Spanilih fyftcm of
trade with America, which has withdrawn from it
the desirable visits of the aleons, as to feel at least
a temporary decline. But the wealth now collected
there, will soon find or create employment for itself,
and may be turned with advantage into ome new
channel. Its harbour is so safe , and so conve.
niently situated for receiving commodities from
Europe, its merchants have been so long accuf
tomed to convey these into all the adjacent pro.
vinces, that' it is probable they will frill retain this
branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to be
city of great importance.
Vcnczula. The province contiguous to Santa Martha on

the east, was firfl visited by Alonfo de Ojeda , in
the year 1499 "'; and the Spaniards , on thei
landing there, having observed some huts in a
Indian village built upon piles, in order to raise
them above the flagnated water which covered tl
plain, were led to beflow upon it the name o
Venezuela, or Little Venice , by their utfual pro
penfity to find a lcfemblance, between what the
tifcovered in Amcerica , and tlie obects whicl) wer
familial to them i .l!nropc. 'lhey made soln

Book ii. vol. i. p. 176.

tetmpts to fettle there, but with little success. Thie o o t
n;ll reduction of the province was accomplifled vil.
vmeans very different from those to which Spain
as indebted for its other acquisitions in the New
'rolid. The arbition of Ch(1;:lcs V. often cn-
1C(d l im in oel:tions of fich variety and ex-
tt, th;t his revenues were not fuflicient to defray
c expcinf of carrying them into execution.
mong oth er cxpedients for fupplyitng the ({eficictcy
is ftunds , le had borrowed large films from
Ve \lfers of Augfi)urgh , the molt opulent
erc;ilnts at that time in urope. By w;y of
!ribution for tlefc , or in hopes , perhaps, of ob-
!ring a new loan, he beflowed upon them the
ovincc of Venezucla, to be held as a hereditary
ffron the crown of Caflile, on condition that
iii a limited time they fiould render them-
'es m:!flcrs of the country, and clftblill a co-
i:, there. Under the direction of such persons,
mniht have been expected, tlhat a fttlement
ould have beeln ecnublinfed on naxims very dif-
eat from those of the Spaniards, and better cal-
Itcd to encourage such utfful indu[lry, as mer-
ltile proprietors might l)ave known to be the

t certain source of prosperity and opulence.
t ufortunatcly they committed the execution
tlbeir plan to some of those soldiers of fortune
w liich Germany abounded in the fixtcenth
ttlry. These adventurers , impatient to amn;is
he, that they might seedily abandon a tinti
(1) tihey soon dif:(overd to be very unriom frt-
e, illtcad of planting a colony in order to cul-

o tivate and improve the country, wandered fro
vil. district to diftridC in search of mines , plunderi

the natives with unfeeling rapacity, or oppress
them by the imposition of intolerable tasks.
the course of a few years, their avarice and ex
tions, in comparison with which those oftheS
niards were moderate , desolated the province
completely, that it could hardly afford them fu
fiflence , and the Velfers rclinquifhed a prope
from which the inconsiderate conduct of th
agents left them no hope of ever deriving any
vantage . When the wretched remainder of
Germans deserted Venezuela , the Spaniards ag
took poffeflion of it; but, notwithfianding m
natural advantages , it is one of their most
guifling and unproducive settlements.

Caraccas and The provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are
tUnlana. last of the Spanish territories on this coast; bu

relating the origin and operations of the
cantile company , in which an exclusive ri
of trade with them has been veled , I hall h
after have occasion to confider their state and
ducdions.

\twTin'. The New Kingdom of Granada is entirely
('"I ": ;ra- inland country of great cxtent. This important

dition was made to the dominions of Spain a
tle year 536 , by Sehaflian de Benalcazar
Cn?,tlo Ximenes de Quefada, two of the bra
annd nmofl accomplifled officers employed in
conquflt of America. The former, who

" ivcdu y 3agnos, lift. de Venezuela, p. 11,

anded at that time in Quito, attacked it from n o
e south; the latter made his invasion from Santa vii.
artha on the north. As the original inhabitants
this region were farther advanced in improve-
ent, than any people in America but the Mlexi-
,s and Peruvians ", they defended themselves
ith great resolution and good conduct. The
l:itles and perseverance of Benalcazar and Que-
da urmounted all opposition, though not with-
t encountcring many dangers , and reduced the
untry into the form of a Spanih province.
The New Kingdom of Granada is so far ele-
ted above the level of the sea, that though it
proaches almost to the equator , the climate is
markably temperate. The fertility of its vallieS
not inferior to that of the richest diftrits in
erica, and its higher grounds yield gold and
ecious stones of various kinds. It is not by
ging into the bowels of the earth that this gold
found; it is mingled with the foil near the fur-
e, and separated from it by repeated wafling
ith water. This operation is carried on wholly
negro slaves; for though the chill fubtcrranean
I!as been discovered, by experience, to be so fatal
them, that they cannot be employed with advan-
ein the deep silver mines, they are more capable
performing the other fpccies of labor than In-
ns. As the natives in the New Kingdom of
ranada are exempt from that fervicc, which has
ftced their race so rapidly in other parts of America,

Book iv. vol. ii. p. x9, k&c.

B o the country is ill remarkably populous. Son

VII. diftridts yield gold with a prufufion no lefswonderf

than that in the vale of Cincguilla, which I 1ha
formerly mentioned, and it is often found in lr
pepitas , or grains, which manifest the abundal
in which it is produced. On a riling ground n
Pamplona, ingle laborers have colleced in
day what was equal in value to a thousand pesos
A late governor of Santa F brought with
to Spain a lump of pure gold, eimated to
worth seven hundred and forty pounds fterl
This , which is , perhaps , the largest and fin
specimen ever found in the New World, is n
deposited in the royal cabinet of Madrid.
without founding any calculation on what isr
and extraordinary , the value of the gold fua
colleted in this country., particularly in thep
vinces of Popayan and Choco, is of confidera
amount. Its towns are populous and flourifli
The number of inhabitants in almost every part
the country daily increases. Cultivation and
duttry of various kinds begin to be encourag
and to prosper. A considerable trade is carried
with Carthagena , the produce of the mines,
other commodities, being conveyed down theg
river of St. Magdalen to that city. On anot
quarter, the New Kingdom of Granada has a c
munication with the Atlantic by the river Orino
but the country which fitrctches along its ba
towards the east , is little known , and imperfe
occupied by the Spaniards.

' Picdrahita, HIift. del N. Reino, p. 48 . MS. pene

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

THE
HII STORY

F
M ERICA.

B oo OK VIII.

FTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards B o o
their discoveries and conquefs during more vlif
half a century, I have conducted them to view othe
period when their authority was eflablifled poicyan
ralnoft all the vast regions in the New WTorld Spanish co.
subject to their dominion. The effect of their lonies.
cments upon the countries of which they took
:!ion, the maxims which they adopted in
ig their new colonies, the interior ftrudure
policy of these, togetherwith the influence of
progressive improvement upon the parent
, and upon the commercial intercourse of
ns, are the objedts to which we now turn
atten tion.
he first visible consequence of the eablihi. DepopiiJa.
tsmade by the Spaniards in America, was the 'rio Of-h
nution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree firftiffet as
lly aftonihing and deplorable. I have already, them.
iffrcnt occasions, mentigned the disastrous
tnce under which the connexion of the Amc-

o o ic rican x with the people of our hemisphere co
viii. menced, both in the islands, and in several pa

of the continent, and have touchea upon varia
causes of their rapid consumption. Wherevert
inhabitants of America had resolution to ta
arms in defence of their liberty and rights, mal
perished in the unequal contest, and were cut
by their fierce invaders. But the greatest defl
tion followed after the sword was fleathed, a

Caures of the conquerors were fettled in tranquillity.
this in. te

. .....

slans, an. V was in the islands, and in those provinces of
fomepartscfcontinent which firetch from the Gulf of
he conti- nidad to the confines of Mexico, that the

eftects of the Spanish dominion were first and
sensibly felt. All these were occupied either
wandering tribes of hunters, or by such as
made but small progress in cultivation and
dufIry. When they were compelled by their
masters to take up a fixed reidlence, and to a
to regular labor; when talks were imposed
them disproportioned to their strength, and
exaded with unrelenting severity, they poss
not vigor either of mind or of body to sustain
unusual load of oppression. Dcjedtion and de
drove many to end their lives by violence. Fat
and famine defroyed more. In all those exten
regions, the original race of inhabitants w
away; in some it was totally extinguified.
Mexico, where a powerful and martial peopl
tinguiflcd their opposition to the Spaniards b
forts of courage worthy of a better fate, great n
hers fell in tlle field; and there, as well as in

greater numbers perished under the hardships B o K
attending the Spanifl armies in their various vIII.
editions and civil wars, worn out with the
efant toil of carrying their baggage, provisions
military stores.
ut neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa- In N'ew
rds were so deflrucive to the people of Mexico Spil and
dPeru, as the inconsiderate policy with which
y eftablifled their new settlements. The for-
rwere temporary calamities, fatal to individuals;
latter was a permanent evil, which, with gra-
al consumption, wafted the nation. When the
vinces of Mexico and Peru were divided among
conquerors, each was eager to obtain a dif-
d, from which he might expect an inltanta-
ous recompence for all his services. Soldiers,
ulomed to the carelessness and dissipation of a
itary life, had neither indufiry to carry on any
of regular cultivation, nor patience to wait
its flow, but certain returns. Instead of set-
gin the vallies occupied by the natives, where
fertility of the foil would have amply rewarded
diligence of the planter, they chore to fix their
tions in some of the mountainous regions, fre-
ent both in New Spain and in Peru. To search
mines of gold and silver, was the chief object
their activity. The profpecs which this opens,
the alluring hopes which it continually pre-
ts, correspond wonderfully with the firit of
terprife and adventure that animated the firll
igrants to America in every part of their con.
. In order to push forward those favorite

i o o projcds, so many hands were wanted, that the r

viI.' vice of the natives became indispensably requilit

The were accordingly compelled to abandon the
ancient habitations in the plains, and driven
crowds to the moinntains. This sudden tranlliti
from the ftry climate of the vallics, to the ,!;i
penetrating air peculiar to high lands in the torn
zone ; exorbitant labor, scanty or .unw\vhlolc
noulifhmen t, and the (defp)olldeicy occasioned by
species of oppreflion to which they were not
customed, and of which they saw no end, assel
them nearly as much as their less niduflrious cou
trymen in the islands. They funk under the unit
pressure of those calamities , and melted awayv i
almost equal rapidity'. In confcquence of thi
together wvith thc introdtr-ion of the small-pox
malady unknown in America, ad extremely ftal
the nati-ves, the'number of people both in Nc
Spain and Peru was so much reduced, that in a fe
years the accounts of their anccent populition
peared ahnoft incredible'.

Ntot the re. Such are the mofl coifiderable events and cau

ito t'y which, by their combined operation , contribut
,iicy; to depopulate America. \V ithout attending

these, nmany authors, aflonifiled at the fudlenn
of the desolation , have fcribed hi tinexanilf
event to a ylIem of policy no less profound th
attrocious. 'I he Spaniards, as they pretend, confcic

T or(uelniad.i, i. 6 .
' . I)iaz, c. 124. Ilerrera, dec. 2. li . x . 4.

4 Ull
Entreten. 206.

3 Torqucni. 6. 64;, 6. See NOTEjXL.

oJ

f their own inability to occupy the valt regions u o o
hlich th:y had discovered, and foreseeing the yin.
npoTfibility of maintaining their authority over
people infinitely superior to themselves in num-
er, in order to preserve the polfeffion of America,
solved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by con-
eting a great part of the country into a desert, en-
avoured to secure their ovn dominion over it'.
ut nations seldom extend their views to objects so
mote, or lay their plans so deep; and, for the
nor of humanity, we may observe, that no na-
on ever deliberately formed such an execrable
erne. The Spanish monarchs, far from acing
on ally such fyftern of deftrudtion, were uniformly
icitous for the preservation of their new fubjeds.
ith Isabella , zeal for propagating the clirifian
th, together with the desire of communicating
eknowledge of truth, and the consolations of
ilion to people destitute of spiritual light, were
rethan oflenfible motives for encouraging Co-
nbus to attempt his discoveries. Upon his fc-
, fle endeavoured to fulfil her pious purpose,
mnanifelted tle most tender concern to secure
olily religious inltruclion, but mild treatment,
tlat inoflenfive race of men fiibjedted to her
wn'. HIer fucceflbrs adopted the fame ideas;
,on many occasions, which I have mentioned,
r authority was intcrpofed in the molf vigorous
rtions, to protect the people of America from
opprellion of their Spaninfh fubjeds. Their

'See NOTE XLI. ' Sec NOTE XLII.
VrL. 1II. R

o o0 regulations for this purpose were numerous, an
vlln. often repeated. They were framed with wifdon

and dictated by humanity. After their pofeflionsi
the New World became so extensive, as might hav
excited some apprehensions of difficulty in retainin
their dominion over them, the spirit of their regi
lations was as mild as when their settlements wei
confined to the islands alone. Their solicitude t
proted the Indians seems rather to have augmente
as their acquisitions increased; and from ardort
accomplish this, they enacted, and endeavouredt
enforce the execution of laws, which excited a so
midable rebellion in one of their colonies, and fprea
alarm and difaffedion through all the reft. Bi
the avarice of individuals was too violent to be coi
trolled by the authority of laws. Rapacious al
daring adventurers, far removed from the feat
government, little accustomed to the restraints
military discipline while in service, and still
disposed to refpet the feeble jurifdidion of c
power in an infant colony, despised or eluded eve
regulation that set bounds to their exadions a
tyranny. The parent state, with persevering att
tion, ifrfed edids to prevent the oppression of
Indians; the colonists, regardless of these, or tr
ing to their diflance for impunity, continued
confider and treat them as slaves. The govern
themfelvcs, and other officers employed in the
lonics, several of whom were as indigent and
pacious as the adventurers over whom they prcfid
were too apt to adopt their contemptuous ides
the conquered people; and instead of checki

ncouraged or connived at their excesses. The defo. B o o
ation of the New World should not then be charged viii
nthe court of Spain, or be confidered as the effect
anly fyflem of policy adopted there. It ought to
e imputed wholly to the indigent and often un-
rincipled adventurers, whose fortune it was to bo
e conquerors and first planters of America, who,
y measures no less inconsiderate than unjift, coun.
raced the edits of their sovereign, and have
rought disgrace upon their country.
With still greater injustice, have many authors northeef.
ipefented the intolerating spirit of the Roman fectofr-
atholic religion, as the cause of exterminating the
mericans, and have accused the Spanilh ecclesias,
sos animating their countrymen to the flaughtei
that innocent people, as idolaters and enemies of
od. But the first mifionaries who visited Ame-
a, though weak and illiterate, were pious men.
hey early espoused the defence of the natives, and
indicated their character from the aspersions of
eir conquerors, who, defctibing them as inca.
ble of being formed to the offices of civil life,
of comprehending the doctrines of religion, con.
nded, that they were a subordinate race of men,
whom the hand of nature had set the mark of
rvitude. From the accounts Which I have given
the humane and persevering zeal of the Spanish
iflionaries, in protecting the helpless flock coma
itted to their charge, they apptir in a light Which
Heds lultre upon their function. They were mi-
Rers of peace, who endeavoured to wrest the rod
tm the hands of oppressors. To their powerful

K a

o o interposition, the Americans were indebted for ever
viII. regulation tending to mitigate the rigor of thei

fate. The clergy in the Spanish settlements, regt
lar as well as secular, are fill confidered by th
Indians as their natural guardians, to whom the
have recourse under the hardships and exaionstl
which they are too often exposed'.

The number But, notwithstanding the rapid depopulation
ofth In-r. America, a very considerable number of the na
maining. tive race frill remains both in Mexico and Peru

especially in those parts which were not expose
to the first fury of the Spanifli arms, or desolate
by the first efforts of their induflry, till more ru
nous. In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, andth
other delightful provinces of the Mexican empir
which stretch along the South-sea, the race of I
dians is still numerous. Their settlements in fl
places are so populous, as to merit the name of c
ties'. In the three audiences into which New Spa
is divided, there are at leafr two millions of I
dians; a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient p
pulation, but such as frill forms a body of peop
superior in number to thit of all the other inh
bitants of this extensive country '. In Peru fever
diftridts, particularly in the kingdom of Quito, a
occupied almost entirely by Indians. In other pr
pinces they are mingled with the Spaniards, andi
many of their settlements are almosl the only pe
sons who pradife the mechanic arts, and fill 0

' See NOTE XLIII.
? See NOTE XLIV. ' ee NOTE XLV.

the inferior stations in society. As the inhabit- n o o It
t both of MIexico and Peru were accustomed viir.
a fixed residence, and to a certain degree of
gular industry, less violence was requisite in
rnling them to some conformity with the Euro-
can modes of civil life. But wherever the Spa-
irds fettled among the savage tribes of America,
eir atternpts to incorporate with them have been
wavs fruitless, and often fatal to the natives. Im-
tLient of restraint, and disdaining labor as a mark
ffcrvility, they either abandoned their original
ats, and fought for independence in mountains
d forests inaccessible to their oppressors, or pe-
lied when reduced to a state repugnant to their
cient ideas and habits. In the diftrids adjacent
Carthagena, to Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres,
leefolation is more general than even in those
rts of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spa-
ards have taken most full pofTeflion.
But the eftabliflments of the Spaniards in the Genera)
ewv World, though fatal to its ancient inhabit- ideasofthe

s ee m e at a priod

w n tt my policy of

ts, were made at a period when that monarchy spainin its
as capable of forming them to best advantage. colonies.
the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
come a powerful state, equal to so great an un-
rtaking. Its monarchs, having extended their
rogative far beyond the limits which once cir-
mfcribed the regal power in every kingdom of
Urope, were hardly subjed to control, either in
nceting or in executing their measures. In
cry wide- extended empire, the form of govern-
clt nmuf be fimpic, and the sovereign authority

R3

o o such, that its resolutions may be taken with promn
vin. titude, and may pervade the whole with fufficien

force. Such was the power of the Spanifih mr
narchs, when they were called to deliberate concern
ing the mode of establishing their dominion ove
the most remote provinces, which had ever beei
fubjeded to any European state. In this deliber;
tion, they felt themselves under no constitution
restraint, and that, as independent masters of the
own resolves, they might issue the edicls requif
for modelling the government of the new colonie
by a mere a of prerogative.

Early inter. This early iterpofition of the Spanish crown,
position of
the regal order to regulate the policy and trade of its c
authority. lonies, is a peculiarity which distinguishes the

progress from that of the colonies of any oth
European nation. When the Portuguese, the En
lijh, and French, took possession of the regio
in America which they now occupy, the adva
tages which these promised to yield were so
note apd tuncertain, that their colonies were f
sered to firuggle rough a hard infapcy, aln
without gujdapce or protection from the pare
ftatc. tBut gold and iflver, the first produtions
the Spanifi settlements in the New World, we
more alluring, and immediately attraeted the att
tion of their molnarclhs. Though they had con
Puted little to tle difcovry, and alrnqft othi
to the conquest of the New World, they inftan
assume4 the fnOtion of its legil4atrs; and
ijg acquired a species of dominion formerly
kloQwn, tey fpraedl a pjn for eercifing it,

vhich nothing similar occurs, in the history of n o o x
uman affairs. -1Il.
The fundamental maxim of Spanill jtirifpru- All power
ence with refped to America, is to confider what aed nrpert
as been acquired there as veiled in the crown, crown.
ather than in the ate. By the bull of Alex-
nder VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
unded its right, all the regions that had been,
rflould be discovered, were befRowed as a free
ift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. They and their
cceffors were uniformly held to be the universal
roprietors of the vast territories, which the arms
of their fubjeds conquered in the New World.
tom them, all grants of land there flowed, and
othem they finally returned. The leaders who
conduded the various expeditions, the governors
ho presided over the different colonies, the off
cers ofjuftice, and the ministers of religion, were
ll appointed by their authority, and removable at
their pleasure. The people who composed infant
ttleinents were entitled to no privileges inde,
pendent of their sovereign, or that served as a bare
rier againlt the power of the crown. It is true,
that when towns were built, and formed into bo-
dies corporate, the citizens were permitted to eleCt
their own magistrates, who governed them by lawa
which the community enaded. Even in the most
despotic ates, this feeble spark of liberty is not ex,
tinguifhed. But in the cities of Spanifl America,
this jurifdidion is merely municipail, and is con-
ncld to the regulation of their own interior com-
mercc and police. In whatever relates to public

R 4

Do o Ir government, and the general interest, the will of the

vIIf. sovereign is law. No political power originates

from the people. All centres in the crown, and il
the officers of its nomination.

Althenew When the conquests of the Spaniards in Ame.
S.ii :ios f rica were completed , their monarchs, in forming
ek-d rotao the plan of internal policy for their new dominions,
vi.eroys. divided them into two immense governments, one

subje&t to the viceroy of New Spain , the other to
the viceroy of Peru. The jurifdidion of the for
mer extended over all the provinces belongingto
Spain in the northern division of the American
continent. Under that of the latter, was compre
hended whatever she possessed in Soutlh-America
Thisarrangement, which, from the beginning, wa
attended with many inconveniencies, became in.
tolerable when the remote provinces of each vice
royalty began to improve in industry and popula
tion. The people complained of their fubjedio
to a superior, whose place of residence was so
ditant, or so inaccelible, as almolt exclude
them from any intercourse with the feat of govern
ment. The authority of the viceroy over (diftridO
so far removed from his own eye and observation
was unavoidably both feeble and ill directed. A
a remedy for those evils, a third vicerovalty ha.
been eltablifled in the present century, at Santa F
de Bogota , the capital of the new kingdom of Gra
nada, the jurifdidtion of which extends over tlh

Their whole kingdom of Tierra Firme, and the province
]owcrs. of Quito'. Those viceroys not only represent th

'Vov. de Ullon, i. 23. 25.

elfon of their sovereign, but pofTefs his regal pre- n o o t
gatives within the precincts of their own govern- vill.
cats, in their utmost extent. Like him, they ex-
jife fLipreme authority in every department of go-
clment, civil, military, and criminal. They have
fule right of nominating the persons who hold
ny offices of the highest importance, and the oc-
ional privilege of supplying those which, when
e become vacant by death, are in the royal gift,
til the successor appointed by the king fnall ar-
e. The external pomp of their government is
ited to its real dignity and power. Their courts
eformed upon the model of that at NMadrid, with
feandfoot guards, a household regularly eltab-
ed , numerous attendants, and ensigns of
amand, displaying such magnificence, as hardly
ains the appearance of delegated authority'.
ut as the viceroys cannot discharge in person Courtof
fundions of a supreme magistrate in every part Audience.
their extenfivejurildidtion, they are aided in their
ernment by officers and tribunals similar to
fe in Spain. The conduCt of civil affairs in the
ious provinces and diftrids, into which the Spa-
dominions in America are divided, is com-
ed to magiflrates of various orders and deno-
ations ; some appointed by the king, others by
viceroy , but all fubjedl to the command of the
er, and amenable to his jurifdidion. The admi-
ration ofjuftice is vested in tribunals, known by
name of Audiences, and formed upon the model
'* Ulloa, Voy. i. 42. Gage, 6.

. o of the court of Chancery in Spain. These are l
Viii. ven in number, and dispense justice to as many d

tricls, into which the Spanish dominions in Am
rica are divided ". The number of judges in tl
court of Audience is various, according to tl
extent and importance of their jurifdition. TI
fiation is no less honorable than lucrative, and
commonly filled by persons of such abilities ar
merit as renders this tribunal extremely refpedabl
Both civil and criminal causes come under tht
cognizance, and for each peculiar judges are I

Their3urir. apart. Though it is only in the most defpoticg
diction. vernments, that the sovereign exercises in perfi

the formidable prerogative of administering jufli
to his fubjedcs, and in absolving, or condemnin
consults no law but what is deposited in his o
breast; though, in all the monarchies of Europ
judicial authority is committed to magistrates, wh
decisions are regulated by known laws and eft
lifhed forms, the Spanish viceroys have often
tempted to intrude themselves into the feat of
tice, and with an ambition which their difta
from the control of a superior rendered bold, h
aspired at a power which their master does not
ture to assume. In order to check an ufurpat
which muf have annihilated juflice and security
the Spanish colonies, by fubjeding the livesa
property of all to the will of a single man, the vi
roys have been prohibited, in the molt expl
terms, by repeated laws, from interfering in

"See NOTE XLVI.

idcial proceedings of the courts of Audience, or B 0 0
om delivering an opinion, or giving a voice with Vlll.
cfpe to any point litigated before them . In
me particular cafes, in which any question of ci-
ilright is involved, even the political regulations
the viceroy may be brought under the review
the court of Audience, which, in those in-
ances, may be deemed an intermediate power
aced between him and the people, as a confti-
tional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdidion.
ut as legal restraints on a person who represents
e sovereign, and is clothed with his authority, are
ttle suited to the genius of Spanish policy; the
efitation and reserve with which it confers this
ower on the courts of Audience are remarkable.
hey may advise, they may remonstrate; but, in
e event of a dire& collision between their opinion
d the will of the viceroy, what he determines
uft be carried into execution, and nothing re-
ains for them, but to lay the matter before the
ing and the council of the Indies". But to be
titled to remon(rate, and inform against a pert
n, before whom all others must be silent, and
mely submit to his decrees, is a privilege which
ds dignity to the courts of Audience, This is
rther augmented by another circurlnftace. Upon
e death of a viceroy, without any provision of
cceffor by the king, the supreme power is veiled

" Recop. lib. ii. tit. .

x . . 3. 8. 44. lib. iii. tit. iii.

16, 7.

" Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv. c. . n. 40, 41. ecop.
ii. tit xv. . 6.1ib. iii.tit.i. . 4 lib. v. tit. i. I. i.

B o o in the court of Audience resident in the capital 0o

vIIr. the viceroyalty, and the senior judge, assisted b

his brethren, exercises all the fundions of the vice
roy while the office continues vacant ". In matter!
which come under the cognizance of the Audi
ences, in the course of their ordinary jurifdition
as courts of justice, their sentences are final it
every litigation concerning property of less valu
than fix thousand pesos; but when the subjet i
dispute exceeds that fum, their decisions are fu
jed to review, and may be carried by appeal befor
the royal council of the Indies".

Councilof In this council, one of the molt considerable
the Indies. the monarchy for dignity and power, is vetied t

supreme government of all the Spanish dominio
in America. It was first established by Ferdinan
in the year 151 , and brought into a more perse
Is power. form by Charles V. in the year 1524. Its juri

didion extends to every department, ecclefiatica
civil, military, and commercial. All laws an
ordinances relative to the government and poli
of the colonies originate there, and muff be a
proved of by two-thirds of the members, befo
they are issued in the name of the king. All t
offices, of which the nomination is reserved to t
crown, are conferred in this council. To it ea
person employed in America, from the vicer
downwards, is accountable. It reviews their c
dud , rewards their services, and inflicts t

4 Recop. lib. ii. tit. xv. 1. 7, &c.
' Recop. lib. v. tit. xiii. 1. , &c.

uniflments due to theirmalverfations". Before it, n o K
laid whatever intelligence, either public or fe- viii.
et, is received from America, and every scheme
improving the adminiltration, the police, or the
ommerce of the colonies, is ubmitted to its con-
eration. From the first institution of the coun-
of the Indies, it has been the conflant object of
e catholic monarchs to maintain its authority,
d to make such additions from time to time,
oth to its power and its splendor, as might render
formidable to all their fubjeds in the New
orld. Whatever degree of public order and
irtue flill remains in that country, where so many
rcumftances conspire to relax the former, and to
rrupt the latter, may be ascribed in a great mea-
re to the wife regulations and vigilant infpedtion
this refpetdable tribunal 7.
As the king is supposed to be always present in carade
council of the Indies, its meetings are held in olntratR
place where he resides. Another tribunal has
n inffituted, in order to regulate such com-
rcial affairs as required the immediate and per.
nal infpedion of those appointed to superintend
em. This is called Casa de la Contratacion, or
house of trade, and was established in Seville,
whose port commerce with the New World was
nlined, as early as the year 150o. It may be itfun.
fidered both as a board of trade, and as a court tion"'
judicature. In the former capacity, it takes

Recop. lib. ii. tit. ii. 1. 1, , &C.
Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. iv, J. 12.

B o o cognizance of whatever relates to the intercou

vili. of Spain with America, it regulates what corn

dities should be exported thither, and has the
fpedion of such as are received in return. It
cides concerning the departure of the fleets for
Weft-Indies, the freight and burden of the fhi
their equipment and destination. In the latt
capacity, it judges with refped to every qu
tion, civil, commercial, or criminal, arising
consequence of the tranfations of Spain with A
rica; and in both these departments, its decifi
are exempted from the review of any court
that of the council of the Indies "

Such is the great outline of that system of

vernment, which Spain has established in
American colonies. To enumerate the vari
subordinate boards and officers employed in
administration of justice, in collecting the pu
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of
country; to describe their different functions; a
to inquire into the mode and effect of their ope
tions; would prove a detail no less intricate t
minute and uninteresting.

Firftobject, The first object of the Spanish monarchs was
to secure all secure the producions of the colonies to the par
exclusive
trade. tate, by an absolute prohibition of any intercou

with foreign nations. They took possession
America by right of conquest, and, conscious
only of the feebleness of their infant fettleme

"Rccop. lib. ix. tit. i. Veitia Norte de la Cntratac
lib. i. c. i.

ut aware of the difficulty in establishing their do- B 0 o K
inion over such vast regions, or in retaining so vII.
any reluctant nations under the yoke, they dread-
the intrusion of firangers; they even shunned
eir inspection, and endeavoured to keep them at
dilfince from their coasts. This spirit of jea-
ufy and exclusion, which at first was natural,
d perhaps necessary , augmented as their poses-
onsin America extended , and the value of them
me to be more fully underltood. In consequence
it, a system of colonizing was introduced, to which
ere had hitherto been nothing similar among man.
ind In the ancient world, it was not uncom-
on to fend forth colonies. But they were of two
nds only. They were either migrations, which
rvcd to disburden a late of its superfluous sub-
ds, when they multiplied too fast for the terri-
ry which they occupied: or they were military
tachments stationed, as garrisons, in a conquered
ovince. The colonies of some Greek republics,
d the swarms of northern barbarians which fettled
different parts of Europe, were of the first fpccies.
he Roman colonies were of the second. In the
rmer, the connexion with the mother-country
ickly ceased, and they became independent states.
the latter, as the disjunction was not complete,
e dependence continued. In their American Rcgnlatioil
tlrnents, the Spanifli monarchs took what was fortl'l"
culiar to each, and studied to unite them. By p
(ding colonies to regions so remote, by eltablilh,
gin each a form of interior policy and adminif-
101on, under diltindt govcrnol , and witli put;uiia

B o liar laws, they disjoined them from the mothe

Vii. country. By retaining in their own hands ti

rights of legislation, as well as that of impofil
taxes, together with the power of nominating [
persons who filled every department of executiveg(
vernment, civil or military, they secured tird
pendence upon the parent state. Happily for Spaii
the situation of her colonies was such, as rendered
possible to reduce this new idea into pradtice. A
most all the countries which file had discovered an
occupied, lay within the tropics. The produdior
of that large portion of the globe are different froi
those of Europe, even in its most southern province
The qualities of the climate and of the foil naturall
turn the industry of such as fettle there into new chai
nels. , When the Spaniards first took possession
their dominions in America, the precious rneta
which they yielded, were the only objcct thata
traded their attention. Even when their effor
began to take a better direction, they employ
themselves almolt wholly in rearing such peculi
produdions of the climate, as, from their rari
or value, were of chief demand in the mothl
country. Allured by vast profpeds of immedia
wealth, they disdained to wafle their induftryI
what was less lucrative, but of superior momel
In order to render it impotlible to corre tl
error, and to prevent them tfrom making any eftC
in indunry whicl might interfere with those
the mother - country , the feltalifllent of fve
fpecics of manufaAtures, and even the culture
the vine or olive, are prohibited in the Span

colonies

lonies ", under severe penalties M. They tuft n o o H
Ift entirely to the mother-country for the objeds viii.
primary neceflity. Their clothes, their furniture
eir inltruments of labor, their luxuries, and even
considerable part of the provisions which they
infume, were imported from Spain. During a
eat part of the sixteenth century, Spain, poffefling
extensive commerce and flourishing manufac-
rec, could supply with cafe the growing demands
her colonies, from her own llores. The pro
ceof their mines and plantations was given in
change for there. But all that the colonies re.
ivel, as well as all that they gave, was con^
ycd in Spanifl bottoms. No vessel belonging to
e colonies was ever permitted to carry the com-
odiies of America to Europe. Even the comr
rcial intercourse of one colony with another,
s either absolutely prohibited, or limited by
y jealous reftridions. All that America yields
ws into the ports of Spain; all that it consumes
t issue from them. No foreigner can enter its
lonics without express permillion; no vessel of
foreign nation is received into their harbours;
the pains of death, with confiscation of move-
le, are denounced against every inhabitant who
fumes to trade with them T. Thus the colonies
kept in a ftatc of perpetual pupilage ; and by
introdudtion of this commercial dependence, X

9 See NOTE XLVIT.

B. Ullo;, Retab. ds Manus. &c. p 206.
Rccopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvii. S.

. 4. 7, &c.
VOL. 1IL S

B o o refinement in policy of which Spain set the firlte

VIII. ample to the European nations , the supremacy

the parent state hath been maintained over renmo
colonies during two centuries and a half.

Slow pro. Such are the capital maxims to which the Sp
guersoo- nifh monarchs seem to have attended in formin
from Eu- their new settlements in America. But they cou]
rope. not plant with the fame rapidity that they had d

stroyed; and, from many concurring causes, the
progress was extremely flow, in filling up the ir
mense void which their devaflations had occafione
As soon as the rage for discovery and adventureb
gan to abate, the Spaniards opened their eyesi
dangers and distresses, which at first they did n
perceive, or had dcfpifed. The numerous har
fliips with which the members of infant coloni
have to firuggle , the diseases of unwholefomec
mates, fatal to the constitution of Europeans;
difficulty of bringing a country, covered with foref
into culture; the want of hands necessary for lab
in some provinces, and the flow reward of indulf
in all, unless where the accidental discovery of i
enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were cv
universally felt and magnified. Discouraged
the view of these, the spirit of migration was
much damped, that sixty years after the difcovi
of the New W'orld, the number of Spaniards in
its provinces is computed not to have exceec
fifteen thousand .

Dircouraged The mode in which property was diftributc(
by the ftdte
ifpropcrty,

" Se,. NOTE XVII 'Tlr

the Spanish colonies, and the regulations eftablilh- B o
d with refped to the transmission of it, whether vIn.
ydefcent or by sale, were extremely unfavorable
opopulation. In order to promote a rapid in-
reafe of people in any new settlement, property
n land ought to be divided into finall Ihares, and
he alienation of it should be rendered extremely
afy ". But the rapaciousness of the Spanifl con.
tueors of the New World paid no regard to this
undlamental maxim of policy; and, as they pof.
[fed power, which enabled them to gratify the
tmoft xtravagance of their wifes, many seized
ifricts of great extent, and held them as encomi.
'as. By degrees they obtained the privilege of
nverting a part of these into Mayorafqos, a
cies of fief, introduced into the Spaniih system
feudal jurisprudence , which can neither be
vidcd nor alienated. Thus a great portion of
nded property, under this rigid form of en-
il, is withheld from circulation, and descends
on father to son unimproved, and of little
lue either to the proprietor or to the commu-
ty. In the account which I have given of
reduction of Peru, various examples occur of
rmous trads of country occupied by some of
conquerors ". The excesses in other provinces
eie imnilar, for as the value of the lands which
ey acquired, was originally estimated according

Dr, Smith's Inquiry, ii. r66.
" ecop. lib. iv. tit. iii. 1. 24.
B 1ook vi. p. 13 .

B o o to the number of Indians which lived upon them

viII. America was in general so thinly peopled, thai

only diftrits of great extent could afford filch
number of laborers as might be employed in tht
mines with any profped of considerable gain. Tht
pernicious effets of those radical errors in the dif
tribution and nature of property in the Spanilh
settlements , are felt through every department ol
industry, and may be confidered as one great cause
of a progress in population so much flower thad
that which has taken place in better confRitute

colonies .

and the na. To this we may add, that the fpport of th
tcueitaftical enormous and expensive fabric of their ecclefiafli
policy. al establishment, has been a burden on the Spanil

colonies, which has greatly retarded the prore
of population and industry. The payment
tithes is a heavy tax on industry; and if thee
action of them be not regulated and circumscribe
by the wisdom of the civil magistrate, it becom
intolerable and ruinous. But, inflead of any
firaint on the claims of ecclesiastics, the incon
derate zeal of the Spanifl legislators admitted the
into America in their full extent, and at once ii
posed on their infant colonies a burden which is
no flight degree oppreflive to focicty, even in
mos improved slate. As early as the year 15s
the payment of tithes in the colonies was enjoine
and the mode of it regulated by law. Every
tide of primary neceflity, towards which tl

" See NOTE XLIX.

ttention of new settlers mufl naturally be turned, is Bi o o i

dbjeded to that grievous exadion ". Nor were the vil.

emands of the clergy confined to articles of simple
nd easy culture. Its more artificial and operose
rodutlons, such as sugar, indigo, and cochineal,
vere soon declared to be tithable '; and thus the
tluftry of the planter was taxed in every flage of
ts progress, from its rudest essay to its highet im-
rovement. To the weight of this legal impofi-
ion, the bigotry of the American Spaniards has
ade many voluntary additions. From their fond
elight in the external pomp and parade of reli-
ion, and from fuperflitious reverence for ecclefi-
stics of every denomination, they have bestowed
rofufe donatives on churches and monasteries, and
ave unprofitably wafted a large proportion of that
,ealth, which might have nourished and given
igor to productive labor in growing colonies.
But so fertile and inviting are the regions of Variouor.
merica which the Spaniards have occupied, ders fpo
lut, notwithstanding all the circumstances which coloics.
ave checked and retarded population, it has gra-
ually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain
ith citizens of various orders. Among these, the
paniards, who arrive from Europe, distinguished
y the name of Chapetones, are the first in rank and Chapeteoiin
ower. From the jealous attention of the Spanish thefirtt.
ourt to secure the dependence of the colonies on
lie parent slate, all departments of confequencc

Rccop..lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. 2.
1 lccop. lib. i. tit. xiv. 1. 3, and 4.

B o o K are filled by persons sent from Europe; and, in

vIIi. order to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being

employed, each must bring proof of a clear de.
scent from a family of Old Chri/iians , untainted with
any mixture of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and
never disgraced by any censure of the inquifition".ln
such pure hands, power is deemed to be safely
lodged, and almost every public fundCion, from
the viceroyalty downwards, is committed to them
alone. Every person, who by his birth, or re.
fidence in America, may be fufpeded of any at.
tachment or interest adverse to the mother-country,
is the object of distrust to such a degree, as amounts
nearly to an exclusion from all offices of confidence
or authority `. By this conspicuous predilecion
of the court, the Chapetones are raised to such
pre-eminence in America, that they look down
with disdain on every other order of men.

Creoles the The character and state of the Creoles, or de.
second. fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the

second class of fubjeds in the Spanifi colonies, have
enabled the Chapetones to acquire other advan
tages, hardly less considerable than those which
they derive from the partial favor of government
Though some of the Creolian race are defcende
from the conquerors of the New World; thoug
others can tiace up their pedigree to the noble
families in Spain; though many are pollffed Ct
ample fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence0

Recopil. lib. ix. tit. xxvi. 1. Ui, 16,
' See NOTE L.

sultry climate, by the rigor of a jealous govern- n o o
ent, and by their despair of attaining that diftinc- vill.
ion to which mankind naturally aspire, the vigor
f their minds is so entirely broken, that a great
art of them wafle life in luxurious indulgences,
ingled with an illiberal fuperfltion frill more de-
bsing. Languid and unenterprifing, the opera-
ions of an ative extended commerce would be to
hem so cumbersome and oppreflive, that in almost
very part of America they decline engaging in it.
he interior traffic of every colony, as well as its
rade with the neighbouring provinces, and with
pain itself, are carried on chiefly by the Chape-
ones"; who, as the recompence of their industry,
mass immense wealth, while the Creoles, funk in
oth, are satisfied with the revenues of their paternal
lates.
From this stated competition for power and Rivaiship
iealth between those two orders of citizens, and between

therfe.

he various passions excited by a rivalfhip so inte-
eding, their hatred is violent and implacable. On
very occasion, symptoms of this aversion break
ut, and the common appellations which each be-
ows on the other, are as contemptuous as those
vhich flow from the most deep-rooted national an-
ipthy"2. The court of Spain, from a refinement
(fiftruflful policy, cherishes those feeds of dif-
ord, and foments this mutual jealousy, which not
ly prevents the two most powerful classes of its

Voy. de Ulloa, i. 27. 2s;. Voy. de Frczicr, 227.
Gage's Survey, p. 9. Frczier, 226.

S 4

g o o : fubjeds in the New World from combining againfl

VIIx. the pati et state, but prompts each, with the mo

vigilant zec;i to observe the motions and to coun
terad the schemes of the other.

A mixed The third class of inhabitants in the Spanifi co
race forms
the third lonics is a mixed race, the offsprin either ofan
order of European and a ncgro, or of an European an
cittiren Indian, the former called M:lfittoes, the Litte

.MeJ/izos. As the court of Spain , solicitous to in
corporate its new vaTals with its ancient fubjedc
early encouraged the Spaniard, fettled in Americ
to marry the natives of that country, several alii
?nces of this kind were formed in their infant c
lonies ". But it has been more owing to licentiou
indulgence, than to compliance with this injun
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed ha
multiplied so greatly, as to constitute a confiderabl
part of the population in all the Spanish fettle
ments. The several stages of descent in this race
and the gradual variations of slade until the Afri
can black , or the copper color of America
brighten into an European complexion, are acc
rately marked by the Spaniards, and each dithi
guifbed by a peculiar name. Those of the fir
and second generations are confidered, and treat
as mere Indians and Negroes; but in the thil
dcfccnt, the chalai.teriflic hue of the former (dif;l
pears ; and in tile fifth, lie (ccper tint of the lae
is so entirely eIiaced, that they can no longer b

" Recopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. 2. I Icrera, dec. . lib. v. c,
Dec. 3. lib. vii. c. ,

iftineuifhcl from Europeans, and become entitled B o o t
oll their privileges . It is chiefly by this mixed viI.
,c, wliofe frame is remarkably robust and hardy,
;at the mechanic arts are carried on in the Spanish
ttlenments, and other adive functions in society are
ifcharged, which the two higher claffcs of citizens,
omn pride, or from indolence, disdain to exercise 't.
Ihe negroes hold the fourth rank anong the Negroes
habitants of the Spanish. colonies. T'he intro- formthe
uction of that unhappy part of the human species der.
to America, together with their services and sus-
rings there, flall be fully explained in another
ace; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
point out a peculiarity in their situation under
e Spanish dominion. In several of their fettle-
cnts, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
iefly employed in domestic service. They form
principal part in the train of luxury, and are
critied and carefTed by their superiors, to whose
nity and pleasures they are equally subservient.
heir dress and appearance are hardly less splendid
an that of their masters , whose manners they imi-
tc, and whose palions they imbibe ". Elevated by
i:d(iflinti on , they have assured such a tone of
pcriority over the Indians , and treat them with
cl ifolcnce and scorn, that the antipathy be.
rcci the two races has become implacable.
'en in Peru, where negroes seem to be more

Voy. dc Ulloa, i. p. 27.
"'o. de Ulloa, . 29. oy. de Bouguer, p. o4. Me-
de, 1'hefros Verdlideros, i. ; 4.

i(t ge, p. 6. Voy. de Ullod, i. 41.

n o o I numerous, and are employed in field-work as wvell
ViI,. as domestic service, they maintain their acendant

over the Indians, and the mutual hatred of oneto
the other subsists with equal violence. The laws
have industriously fomented this aversion, to which
accident gave rife; and, by most rigorous injunc.
tions, have endeavoured to prevent every inter
course that might form a bond of union between
the two races. Thus, by an artful policy, the
Spaniards derive ftrcngth from that circumfance
in population which is the weakness of other u.
ropean colonies, and have secured as associates and
defenders, those very persons who elsewhere are
objects of jealousy and terror

TheTndians The Indians form the last, and the mol de
fordehca"f pressed order of men in the country, which be.
tizcls. longed to their anceltors. I have already traced

the progress of the Spanish ideas with refpe t(
the condition and treatment of that people, ant
have mentioned the most important of their mon
early regulations, concerning a matter of so mud
consequence in the administration of their new do
minions. But since the period to which I hav
brought down the history of America, the inform
tion and experience acquired during two centuries
have enabled the court of Spain to make such in
provements in this part of its American system, th;
a short view of the present condition of the Indiar
may prove both curious and interefring.

' Recopil. lib. vii. tit. v. . 7. Hirrera, dec. 8. lib v
c. 12. Frezier, 244.

Bv the famous regulations of Charles V. in 542, n o o
hich have been so often mentioned, the high vin.
retcnfions of the conquerors of the New World, Th1ir pre-
ho confidered its inhabitants as slaves, to whose tion.
rvice they had acquired a full right of property,
ere finally abrogated. From that period, the
dians have been reputed freemen, and entitled
the privileges of fubjeds. When admitted into
is rank, it was deemed just, that they hould
tribute towards the fuipport and improvement
fthe society which had adopted them as mem-
ers. But as no considerable benefit could be ex-
cled from the voluntary efforts of men unac-
uainted with regular in-dufry, and averse to la-
r, the court of Spain found it necessary to fix
id secure, by proper regulations, what it thought
afonable to exadt from them. With this view, Tax impored
annual tax was imposed upon every male, from onthem.
c age of eighteen to fifty ; and at the fame time,
e nature as well as the extent of the services
hich they might be required to perform, were
certained with precision. This tribute varies in
ferent provinces; but if we take that paid in
xv Spain as a medium, its annual amount is
arly four flillings a head; no exorbitant fum in
tuntrics where, as at the source of wealth, the
luc of money is extremely low ". The right of
'ying this tribute likewise varies. In America,
rly Indian is either an immediate vassal of the

" See NOTE LI. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 42. Hack-
tVl v iii.
i . 46 .

o crown, or depends upon some subjet to whom tl
viii. diflriet in which he resides, has been granted for

limited time, under the denomination of an enco
mienda. In the former cafe, about three-fourths o
the tax is paid into the royal treasury ; il the lal
ter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the hold
of the grant. When Spain first took poffelfion
Aieri-ca, the greater part of it was parcelled 0
among its conquerors, or those who first fetti
there, and but a small portion reserved for
crown. As those grants which were made fort
lives only 9", reverted fucceflively to the fovereig
lie had it in his power either to diffuse his favors
grants to new proprietors, or to augment his o0
revenue by valuable annexations 0. Ofthefe,
latter has been frequently chosen; the number
Indians now depending immediately on the crow
is much greater than in the firIt age after the co
quest, and this branch of the royal revenue c
tiues to extend.

T'l, rerviceis The benefit arising from the services of the
demanlded. dians accrues either to the crown, or to the hol

of the en:omienda, according to the fame rule
served in the payment of tribute. Those
vices, however, which can now be legally exa
ed, are very different from the tasks originallyi
posed upon the Indians. The nature of the we
which they muff perform is defined, and an eq
table recompence is granted for their labor.

't Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. 48. Solorz. de Ind. Ji
lib. ii c. 6. '6 See NOiE L.

ated fcrvices demanded of the Indians, may be n o
ivided into two branches. They are either em- viIi.
loved in works of primary necelfit , without which
)ciety cannot fiibfif comfortably, or are com-
eled to labor in the mines, from which the
panifh colonies derive their chief value and im-
ortance. In consequence of the former, they are
bliged to allift in the culture of maize, and other
rain of necessary consumption ; in tending cattle;
ereding edifices of public utility; in building
ridges; and in forming high roads 4'; but. they
annot be constrained to labor in raising vines,
lives, and sugar-canes, or any species of culti-
ation, which has for its object the gratification
fluxury, or commercial profit". In consequence
fthe latter, the Indians are compelled to under-
ike the more unpleasant task, of extracting ore
om the bowels of the earth, and of refining it
'fulccellive processes, no less unwholefomc than
perofe '.
The mode of exading both these services is the The mode
me, and is under regulations framed with a view ofcx.iling
rendering it as little oppressive as possible to the
dians. They are called out fucceflively in divi-
)ns, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
'lied to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
crcalled out mut not exceed the seventh part of

4 1 ::nil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 19. Solort. de Ind. Jure, ii.
i c. 6, . 9.

hecopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. S. Solor7. lib. i. c. 7.
41. 6.c. ' See NOTE L1.

B o Io crown, or depends upon some fibjed to whomth

vill. diftrid in which he resides, has been granted for

limited time, under the denomination of an enc
mienda. In the former cafe, about three-fourths
the tax is paid into the royal treasury ; in the la
ter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the hold
of the grant. When Spain first took poifellion
America, the greater part of it was parcelled o
among its conquerors, or those who first fettl
there, and but a small portion reserved for
crown. As those grants which were made fort
lives only ", reverted fucceflively to the foverei
le had it in his power either to diffuse his favors
grants to new proprietors, or to augment his o
revenue by valuable annexations 0. Of these,
latter has been frequently chosen; the number
Indians now depending immediately on the crow
is much greater than in the firll age after the co
quest, and this branch of the royal revenue c
tinucs to extend.

Ti' rervices The benefit arising from the services of the
delnndtd. dians accrues either to the crown, or to the hol

of the encomienda, according to the fame rule
served in the payment of tribute. Those
vices, however, which can now be legally exa
ed, are very different from the talks originallyi
posed upon the Indians. The nature of the w
which they must perform is defined, and an eq
table recompence is granted for their labor.

" Recopil, lib. vi. tit. viii. 1. 4. Solorz. de Ind J
lib. ii c. 6. " See NO1E L.

:ated services demanded of the Indians, may be n o o
ivided into two branches. They are either cm- viI.
loved in works of primary neceflity, without which
)ciety cannot fbfift comfortably, or are com-
elled to labor in the mines, from which the
paifh colonies derive their chief value and im-
oitance. In confeqtencc of the former, they are
bligcd to allift in the culture of maize, :nd other
rain of necessary consumption; in tending cattle;
lereCing edifices of public utility; in building
ridges; and in forming high roads ; but. they
annot be constrained to labor in railing vines,
lives, and fgar-canes, or any species of culti-
ation, which has for its objec the gratification
{luxury, or commercial profit4. In consequence
fthe latter, the Indians are compelled to under.
ike the more unpleasant task, of extracting ore
om the bowels of the earth, and of refining it
yfuccellive processes, no less unwholesome than
perofe '.
The mode of exading both these services is the The mode
me, and is under regulations framed with a view ofrxating
rendering it as little oppressive as possible to the
dians. They are called out successively in divi-
ins, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
lled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
r called out muff not exceed the seventh part of

Rc (:npl. lib, vi. tit. xiii. 1. i9. Sulort. de Ind. Jure, ii.
* i^. ó, '. 9.

I{ecopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. 1. 8. Solor7. lib. i. c. 7.
41, &.c. "' See NOTE LIll.

o the inhabitants in any diltrid . In New Spain
Vlll. where the Indians are more numerous, it is fixe

at four in the hundred ". During what time th
labor of tlhoe Indians, who are employed in agr
culture, continues, I have not been able to learn"
But in Peru, each AMita, or division , defined f
the mines, remains there fix months; and whil
engaged in tis service, a laborer never receive
les than. two shillings a day, and often earns mor
than double that fnm . No Indian, relidingat
greater distance than thirty miles from a min
is included in the Mita, or division employed
working it '; nor are the inhabitants of the o
country exposed to certain deftrudion, by con
pelling them to remove from that warm c
mate, to the cold elevated regions where minera
abound '.

How go- The Indians who live in the principal towns
verned. are entirely fbjed to the Spanish laws and magi

trates; but in their own villages, they are g
verned by Caziques, some of whom are the d
fcendants of their ancient lords, omhrs are nam
by the Spanifl viceroys. These regulate the pet
affairs of the people under them, according
maxims of justice, transmitted to them by tr
dition from their ancestors. To the Indians, th
jurifdidion lodged in such friendly hands, affor

4 Recop. lib. vi. tit. xii. 1. 2r.
' Recopil. lib. vi. . 22. " See NOTE LIV.
*7 Ulloa, Entrcten. 2 6, 66.
" Rccopil. lib. vi. tit. xii. . ,.
' Ibid. 1. 29. and tit. i. 1. 13. See NOTE LV.

ome consolation; and so little formidable is this B o rz
ignity to their new masters, that they often allow ViI.
to descend by hereditary right ". For the farther
lief of men so much exposed to oppression, the
paninf court has appointed an officer in every
fricl, with the title of Protedor of the Indians.
is his fundion, as the name implies, to assert
e rights of the Indians; to appear as their de-
nder in the courts of justice; and, by the inter-
fition of his authority, to set bounds to the
ncroachments and exactions of his countrymen .
certain portion of the reserved fourth of the annual
ibute, is destined for the salary of the caziques
nd protecors; another is applied to the mainte-
ance of the clergy employed in the infirudion of
eIndians . Another part seems to be appro-
riated for the benefit of the Indians themselves,
d is applied for the payment of their tribute in
ars of famine, or when a particular diftric is as-
ded by any extraordinary local calamity . Be-
es this, provision is made by various laws, that
spitals hall be founded in every new settlement
the reception of Indians ". Such hospitals have
cordingly been erected, both for the indigent
d infirm, in Lima, in Cuzco, and in Mexico,
here the Indians are treated with tenderness and
ianity ".
' Solorz. de Jure Ind. lib. i.. 2 6. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vii.

Solorz. lib. i.c. 27. p. 201. Recop. lib. vi. tit.vi.
Recop. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. o. tit. xvi. 1. s1-15.
Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. t.
Ibid. lib. i. tit. iv. 1. i, &c.
Voy. d Ulloa, i. 429. o09. Churchill, iv. 496.

B o o R Such are the leading principles in the jurifpl

vili. dence and policy by which the Indians are no

governed in the provinces belonging to Spain.
those regulations of the Spanish monarchs, we di
cover no traces of that cruel system of extermin
tion, which they have been charged with aptib
and if we admit, that the neceflty of securings r
fiftence for their colonies, or tlhe advantage d
rived from working the mines, give them a ril
to avail themfevecs of the labor of the Indians,
must allow, that the attention with which the
regulate and recompen fe that labor, is provident an
fagacions. In no code of laws is greater folicitu
displayed, or precautions multiplied with more pr
dent concern for the preservation, the security, a
the happiness of the filbiect, than we difcovcr
the collection of the Spanish laws for the Indi
But those later regulations, like the more ear
edidts which have been already mentioned, ha
too often proved ineffedual remedies agiinl t
evils which they were intended to prevent. In eve
age, if the lfame caufcs continue to operate,
fame effedcs mnft follow. From the immense
tance between the power intrulted with the exec
tion of laws , and that by whose authority they
enated , the vigor even of the molt abfolutc g
vernmcnt mufl relax , and the drcad of a fperi
too remote to obfcrve with accuracy, or to pi
with ifpatch, mulf icnffibly abate. Notwillftlll
ing the numerous injundtions of the Spanifil in
narchs, the Indians frill sifter on many occasion
both from the avarice of individuals, and from t

exactions

exaions of the magifirates, who ought to have r- o o .
proteced them; unreasonable talks are imposed; VIII.
the term of their labor is prolonged beyond the
period fixed by law, and they groan under all the
ifults and wrongs wiich are the lot of 'a depend-
entpeople ". From some information on which I
can depend, fiich oppression abounds more in Peru,
than in any other colony. But it is not general. Ac-
cording to the accounts, even of those authorswho
are mot disposed to exaggerate the sufferings of thd
Idians, they, in several provinces, enjoy no'tonly
tafe, but affluence; they possess large farms; they
are maers of numerous herds and flocks; and:- by
he knowledge which they have acquired of Euro-
pean arts and industry, are supplied not only with
the necessaries, but with many luxuries of life '.
After explaining the form of civil government Ecciefiafti.
the Spanihf colonies, and the state of the various calConiti-

tution ofthe

ders of persons subjec to it, the peculiarities in colonie.
heir ecclesiastical constitution merit consideration.
otwithftanding the superstitious veneration with
hich the Spaniards are devoted to the Holy See,
he vigilant and jealous policy of Ferdinand early
rompted him to take precautions againll the intro.
"ution of the papal dominion into America. With
is view, he solicited Alexander VI. for a grant to Renraints on
he crown of the tithes in all-the newly-difcovered the papal

Jurifdition.
countries , which he obtained on condition of his

"See NOTE LV1.

G7(ages's Survey, p. 8. 90. To4. 19, &c.
B ulla Blcx. VI. A. D. ;oi, ap. Solorz. de Jure Intl. ii
* 49;.

VOL. III. T

a o o K making provision for the religious inftrudion o

vYII. the natives. Soon after Julius lI. conferred on hi

and his successors, the right of patronage, a
absolute disposal of all ecclesiastical benefices there"
Both these pontiffs, unacquainted with the valu
of what he demanded, bestowed those donation
with an inconsiderate liberality, which their fucce
fors have often lamented, and wished to recal.
consequence of hose grants, the Spanish monarc
have become in effect the heads of the Americ
church. In them the administration of its revenu
is vested. Their nomination of persons to fupp
vacant benefices is instantly confirmed by the pop
Thus, in all Spaniflh America, authority of eve
species centres in the Crown. There no collifi
is known between spiritual and temporal jurifdi
tion. The king is the only superior, his nam
alone is heard of, and no dependence upon an
foreign power has been introduced. Papal bu
cannot be admitted into America, nor are they
any force there, until they have been previous
examined, and approved of by the royal coun
of the Indies "; and if any bull should be furre
titioufly introduced, and circulated in Ameri
vithout obtaining that approbation, ecclefiafti
arc required not only to prevent it from taki
effect , but to seize all the copies of it, a
transmit them to the council of the Indies ".

Bulla Julii, ii. o8, ap. Solorz. de Jure Ind. ii. q
Recopil. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. 2. and Autos del Cons
de las Indias, clxi. " Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. 1.

his limitation of the papal jurifdiclion, equally B o o !
ineular, whether we confider the age and nation, vIII.
which it was devised, or the jealous attention
ith which Ferdinand, and his fucceifors, have
udied to maintain it in full force ', Spain is
idebted, in a great mcafure, for the uniform
ranquillity which has reigned in her American
ominions.
The hierarchy is established in America in the Formand
me form as in Spain, with its full train of endowment5

of the church

chbilhops, bilhops, deans, and other dignitaries. in the Spa.
he inferior clergy are divided into three classes, nistho''iu'".
ndcr the denomination of Curas, Doirincros, and
liune os. The first are parifh-priefts in those parts
the country where the Spaniards have fettled.
ie second have the charge of such diftrids as
inhabited by Indians fubjedted to the Spanih
vernment, and living under its protedtion. The
ird are employed in inftruding and converting
ofe fiercer tribes, which disdain submission to the
anifh yoke, and live in remote or inaccessible
ions, to which the Spanifi arms have not
netrated. So numerous are the ecclesiastics of all
ofe various orders, and such the profuse liberality,
ith which many of them are endowed, that the
venues of the church in America are mmeneLfe.
he Romish superstition appears with its utmost
Imp in the New World. Churches and convents
ere are magnificent, and richly adorned; and on
i festivals, the display of gold and silver, and

Rccop. lib, . tit. vii 1. . palim.

Ta

A O O precious flones, is such as exceeds the conceptio

viii. of an European . An ecclefiaflical eflablilhmen

so splendid and expensive, is unfavorable, as ha
been formerly observed, to the progress of rifi
colonies; but in countries where riches aboun
and the people are so delighted with parade
that religion must assume it, in order to attri
their veneration, this propensity to oftentati

- - has been indulged, and becomes less pernicious.

.Pernicious The early inffitution of monasteries in th
xntltt in- Spanifl colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal
'fituons. multiplying themn, have been attended with co

quences more fatal. In every new fetdement, ti
first object is to encourage population, and(
incite every citizen to ontribute towards augme
ing the number and flrength of the communit
During the youth and vigor of society, whi
there is room td spread, and sustenance is procur
with facility, mankind increase with amazi
rapidity. But the Spaniards had hardly tak
poffeflion of America, when, with a most prep
tetous policy, they began to eredt convents, whe
perfohs of both sexes were fliut up, under a vo
to defeat the purpose of nature, and to' counter
the first of her laws. Influenced by a mifguid
piety,/which acribes transcendent merit to a a
of'-celibacy, or allured by the profped of th
listless ease, which, in sultry climates, is deem
supreme felicity, numbers crowd into those n
(ions of sloth and superstition , and are loll

Voy. d Ullua, i. 430.

ciety. As none but persons of Spanish extract B o o K
re admitted into the monasteries of the New VII.
orld, the evil is more sensibly felt, and every
olok or nun may be confidered as an active
:rfon withdrawn from civil life. The impropriety
filch foundations in any situation where the
tent of territory requires additional hands to
prove it, is so obvious, that some catholic
ates have exprefly prohibited any person in their
onies from taking the monafic vows" . Even
e Spanilh monarchs, on some occasions, seem
have been alarmed with the spreading of a
rit so adverse to the increase and prosperity of
eir colonies, that they have endeavoured to
eck it". But the Spaniards in America, more
oroughly under the influence of superstition
an their countrymen in Europe, and directed
ecclesiastics more bigotted and illiterate, have
iceived such a high opinion of monastic fanc-
, that no regulations can restrain their zeal,
d, by the excess of their ill-judged bounty,
ligious houses have multiplied to a degree no
amazing than pernicious to society ".
In viewing the ate of colonies, where not Charanerof
ly the number but influence of cclefiaftics is eccciiafli
great, the characer of this powerful body is Aerl
objec that merits particular attention. A
fi(lerable part of the secular clergy in lexico

Voy. dc Ulloa, ii. 24.
Ilcrrra, dec. v. lib. ix. c. , 2. Recop. lib. . tit. iii
,2. tit. iv. C. ii. Sol rz. lil,. iii. c. 2 .

"Sec NOTE LVII.

T 3

,

B o o and Peru are natives of Spain. As persons on

vII. accustomed, by their education, to the retiremen

and indolence of academic life, are more incapabi
of active entcrprife, and less disposed to itrik
into new paths, than any order of men, th
ecclesiastical adventurers by whom the America
church is recruited, are commonly such as, fro
merit or rank in life, have little profpet of fucce

orthe fecu. in their own country. Accordingly, the fecul
Jars; priests in the New World are frill less diftinguif

than their brethren in Spain, for literary acco
pliflmrents of any species; and though, by t
ample provision which has been made for t
American church, many of its members enjoy t
ease and independence which are favorable to t
cultivation of science, the body of secular cler
has hardly , during two centuries and a hal
produced one author whose works convey fu
;useful information, or possess such a degree
merit, as to be ranked among those which attra
oftheregu. the attention of enlightened nations. But thegreat

ar'. part of the ecclesiastics in the Spanish fettleme

are regulars. On the discovery of America, a ne
field opened to the pious zeal of the mona
orders; and, with a becoming alacrity, th
immediately fcnt forth mifionaries to labor
it. The firlt attempt to ilftrudt and convert
Americans, was made by monks; and, as so
as the conquest of any province was complete
and its ccclefiaftical eftahliflment began to afi
some form, the popes permitted the mifnionar
of the four mendicant ordcrs, as a reward for tb

services, to accept of parochial charges in America, B o it
to perform all spiritual fundions, and to receive vIIr.
the tithes, and other emoluments of the benefice,
without depending on the jurifdidtion of the bishop
of the diocese, or being subjed to his censures.
n consequence of this, a new career of usefulness,
as well as new objects of ambition presented
themselves. Whenever a call is made for a frelh
fpply of missionaries, men of the most ardent
and aspiring minds, impatient under the restraint
of a cloister, weary of its insipid uniformity, and
fatigued with the irksome repetition of its frivolous
funcions, offer their service with eagerness, and
repair to the New World in quest of liberty and
difRindion. Nor do they pursue diflindion without
success. The highest ecclesiastical honors, as well
as the most lucrative preferments in Mexico and
Peru, are often in the hands of regulars; and it is
chiefly to the monastic orders that the Americans
are indebted for any portion of science which is
cultivated among them. They are almost the only
Spanish ecclesiastics, from whom we have received
any accounts, either of the civil or natural history
of the various provinces in America. Some of
them, though deeply tinged with the indelible
fuperflition of their profelfion, have publishcd
books which give a favorable idea of their abili-
ties. The natural and moral history of the New
rorl , by the Jesuit Acofta, contains more
accurate obfcrvations, perhaps, and more fiond
science, than are to be found in any dcfcription

T4

B o o of remote countries published in the sixteenth

VIII. century.
Difolute But the fame ifgufi with monastic life, to
.'".nlrs of which America is indebted for some infirudors of
Come of
henm. worth and abilities, filled it with others of a very

different character. The giddy, the profligate,
the avaricious, to whom the poverty and rigid
discipline of a convent are intolerable, confider a
mission to America as a release from mortification
and bondage. There they soon obtain some
parochial charge, and far removed , by their
situation, from the infpetion of their monastic
superiors, and exempt, by their character, from
the jurifdidtion of their diocesan "7, they are
hardly subject to any control. According to the
testimony of the most zealous catholics, many of
the regular clergy in the Spanifi settlements are
not only destitute of the virtues becoming their
profession, but regardless of that external decorum
and refped for the opinion of mankind, which
preserve a semblance of worth, where the reality
is wanting. Secure of impunity, some regulars, in
contempt of their vow of poverty, engage openly
in commerce; and are so rapaciously eager in
amafling wealth, that they become the molt
grievous oppressors of the Indians, whom it was
their duty to have protcded. Others, with no
less flagrant violation of their vow of chastity,
indulge with little disguise in lhec most diflblutc
licentiousness".

Avendano, Thef. Indic. ii. zH 3.
" See NOTE LVIIL

Various schemes have been proposed for redref- n o o K
ig enormities so manifest and so offensive. Several vil1.
rfons, no less eminent for piety than discernment,
ve contended, that the regulars, in conformity
the canons of the church, ought to be confined
ithin the walls of their cloiflers, and should no
nger be permitted to encroach on the functions
the secular clergy. Some public-fpirited magif-
tes, from conviction of its being necessary to
prive the regulars of a privilege bellowed at
twith good intention, but of which time and
perience had discovered the pernicious effedcs,
enly countenanced the secular clergy in their
tempts to assert their own rights. The prince ,16~.
Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Philip 1II.
ok measures so decisive and effecual for circum-
bing the regulars within their proper sphere, as
uck them with general consternation". They had
ourfe to their usual arts. They alarmed the super-
tius, by representing the proceedings of the vice-
as innovations fatal to religion. They employed
the refinements of intrigue, in order to gain persons
power; and seconded by the powerful influence
tbeJefuits, who claimed and enjoyed all the pri-
eges which belonged to the Mendicant orders in
ncrica, they made a deep impreflion on a bigotted
nce, nd a weak miniflry. The ancient practice
tolerated. The arbufe which it occasioned con-
ied to increase, and the corruption of monks,
")pt from the reftiaints of discipline, and the

Sece NOTE LIX.

B o o IO infpedion of any superior, became a disgrace

vIII. religion. At last, as the veneration of the Spaniar

for the monastic orders began to abate, and t
power of the Jesuits was on the decline, Ferd
June 22. nand VI. ventured to apply the only effedu

177* remedy by issuing an edid, prohibiting Regula

of every denomination from taking the charge
any parish with the cure of fouls; and declari
that on the demise of the present incumbents, no
but secular priests, fubjedt to the jurifdiion
their,diocefans, ihall be presented to vacant ben
sices '. If this regulation is carried into execut
with steadiness in any degree proportional to
wisdom with which it is framed, a very confidera
reformation may take place in the ecclesiastical I
of Spanish America, and the secular clergy m
gradually become a respectable body of men. T
deportment of many ecclesiastics, even at prese
seems to be decent and exemplary, otherwise
can hardly suppose that they would be held
such high estimation, and possess such a wonder
ascendant over the minds of their countryw
throughout all the Spanish settlements.

Small pro. But whatever merit the Spanish eccleCiaftics
gestin ton- America may possess, the success, of their end
vCrting the
inadiiis to vours in communicating the knowledge of t
chritianity religion to the Indians, has been more imper

than might have been expected, either from
degree of their zeal, or from the dominion wh
they had acquired over that people. For thi

Real Cedula, MS. penes me.

arious reasons may be assigned. The firfi mission- o o rK
ries, in their ardor to make proselytes, admitted viII.
le people of America into the christian church,
ithout previous inftrudtion in the dotrines of
eligion, and even before they themselves had
cquired such knowledge of the Indian language,
to be able to explain to the natives the myfte-
ies of faith, or the precepts of duty. Refiing
pon a subtile diftindion in scholastic theology,
etween that degree of assent which is founded
11 a complete knowledge and convidtion of duty,
d that which may be yielded when both these
e imperfect, they adopted this strange practice,
o less inconsistent with the spirit of a religion
vhich addresses itself to the underfanding of men,
han repugnant to the dictates of reason. As soon
any body of people, overawed by dread of the
panifh power, moved by the example of their
wn chiefs, incited by levity, or yielding from
ere ignorance, expressed the slightest desire of
mbracing the religion of their conquerors, they
ere instantly baptized. While this rage of conver-
on continued, a single clergyman baptized in one
ay above five thousand Mexicans, and did not
efift until he was so exhausted by fatigue, that
ewas unable to lift his hands"'. In the couife
fa few years, after the reduction of the Mexican
lpire, the sacrament of baptism was administered
more than four millions7'. Proselytes adopted
Z P Torribio, MS. Torquemi. Mund. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6.

i'. Torribio. MS. Torqueni. lib. xvi. c. 8.

B O K with such inconsiderate haste, and who were
viii. neither inftruded in the nature of the tenets to

which it was supposed they had given assent, nor
taught the absurdity of those which they were
required to relinquish, retained their veneration
for their ancient superstitions in full force, or
mingled an attachment to its doctrines and rites
with that slender knowledge of Christianity which
they had acquired. These sentiments the new
converts transmitted to their posterity, into whose
minds they have funk so deep, that the Spanili
ecclesiastics, with all their industry, have not been
able to eradicate them. The religious institutions
of their ancestors are frill remembered , and held
in honor by many of the Indians, both in
Mexico and Peru; and whenever they think them.
selves out of reach of inspection by the Spaniards,
they assemble and celebrate their idolatrous rites'.

But this is not the most unsurmountable obstacle

to the progress of Christianity among the Indians.
The powers of their uncultivated understandings
are so limited, their observations and reflections
reach so little beyond the mere objects of sense,
that they fecm hardly to have the capacity of
forming abltract ideas, and possess not language to
exprcfs theim. To such men, the sublime and
ipiritual doctrines of Christianity must be, in a
gicat meafur-c, incomprehensible. The numerous
and fplcndid ceremonies of the popilh worflip

7 ¥'oy. de Ullon, i. 341. Tor(luie . lib. xv. c, ^3. lib
xvi. c. 28. (C;ge, 171.

catch the eye, please and interest them; but when B o o K
their instructors attempt to explain the articles of VII.
sith, with which those external observances are
connecded , though the Indians may liften with
patience, they so little conceive the meaning of
what they hear, that their acquiescence does not
merit the name of belief. Their indifference is
Rill greater than their incapacity. Attentive only
to the present moment, and ingroffed by the
objecs before them, the Indians so seldom reflect
upon what is past, or take thought for what is
to come, that neither the promises, nor threats
of religion, make much impreflion upon themn;
and while their foresight rarely extends so far as
the next day, it is almost impossible to inspire
them with solicitude about the concerns of a
future world. Astonished equally at their slowness
of comprehension , and at their insensibility, some
of the early missionaries pronounced them a race
of men so brutish, as to be incapable of understand-
ing the first principles of religion. A council held
at Lima decreed, that, on account of this inca-
acity, they ought to be excluded from the
crament of the Eucharist '. Though Paul III.
y his famous bull, issued in the year 1537
eclared them to be rational creatures, entitled
o all the privileges of Christians "; yet, after
lie lapse of two centuries, during which they
ave been members of the church , so imperfed

Torquem. lib. xvi. c. o.
7' Torqucen. lib. xvi. c. 25. Garcia, origen. 3 z.

B o o are their attainments in knowledge, that ver

VIII. few possess such a portion of spiritual difcernmen

as to be deemed worthy of being admitted to th
holy communion ". From this idea of their incapa
city and imperfeet knowledge of religion, whe
the zeal of Philip II. established the inquisition i
America in the year 1570 , the Indians wer
exempted from the jurifdidtion of that severe trib
nal 7, and still continue under the infpetion o
their diocesans. Even after the most perfec inltru
tion, their faith is held to be feeble and dubious
and though some of them have been taught th
learned languages, and have gone through the ord
nary course of academic education with applause
their frailty is still so much fufpeded, that n
Indian is either ordained a priest, or received int
any religious order.

Produalons From this brief survey, some idea may be forme
ofthe Spa of the interior state of the Spanish colonies. Tb
nish colonies.

various productions with which they supply an
enrich the mother-country, and the fyflem of cor
mercial intercourse between them, come next
order to be explained. If the dominions of Spai
in the New World had been of such moderat
extent, as bore a due proportion to the paren
state, the progress of her colonizing might hav
been attended with the fame benefit as that
other nations. But when, in less than half a centur

7 Voy. de Ulloa, i. .
77 lecop. lib. vi. tit, i. 1. 3.
" Torqucm. lib. xvii. c. 13. Secc NOTE LX.

er inconsiderate rapacity had seized on countries B o
arger than all Europe, her inability to fill such IIL.
as regions with a number of inhabitants sufficient
or the cultivation of them, was so obvious, as
ogive a wrong direction to all the efforts of the
olonifs. They did not form compact settlements,
here industry, circumscribed within proper limits,
th in its views and operations, is conducted
ith that fober persevering spirit, which gradually
nverts whatever is in its possession to a proper
f, and derives thence the greatest advantage.
nltead of this, the Spaniards, seduced by the
oundlefs profped which opened to them, divided
eir possessions in America into governments of
at extent. As their number was too small to
ttempt the regular culture of the immense provin-
es, which they occupied rather than peopled, they
ent their attention to a few objedts, that allured
em with hopes of sudden and exorbitant gain,
nd turned away with contempt from the humbler
aths of industry, which lead more slowly, but
ith greater certainty, to wealth and increase o
ational strength.
Of all the methods by which riches may be From theit
cquired, th'at of searching for the precious metals mi.es-
one of the most inviting to men, who are either
accustomed to the regular assiduity with which
e culture of the earth and the operations of
ommerce muff be carried on, or who are so enter-
riGng and rapacious as not to be satisfied with

gradual returns of profit which they yicld.
ccordingly, as soon as the several countries in

B O o R America were fubjeded to the dominion of Spai

viil. this was alinoft the only method of acquirin

wealth which occurred to the adventurers, b
whom they were conquered. Such provinces
the continent as did not allure them to fettle, b
the profped of their affording gold and silver, we
totally negleced. Those in which they met wi
a disappointment of the sanguine expectations th
had formed, were abandoned. Even the value
the islands, the first.fruits of their discoveries, a
the first objcct of their attention, funk o mu
in their estimation, when the mines which
been opened in them were exhausted, that th
were deserted by many of the planters, and le
to be occupied by more industrious possessors.
crowded to Mexico and Peru, where the quan
ties of gold and silver found among the nativ
who searched for them with little industry and I
skill, promised an unexhaufted store, as the reca
pence of more intelligent and persevering effort

nircoveryof During several years, the ardor of their
thorfe f . Searches was kept up by hope, rather than fucce
toil ;tnd S*
»tsecas. At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Per

were accidentally discovered in the year 1545
by an Indian, as he was clambering up the mo
tain, in pursuit of a Llama which had strayed fr
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas,
New Spain, little inferior to the other in valu
were opened. From that time, fuccellive dif
vcries have been made in both colonies, and si1

7' Fcrn;adiiez, p. i. lib. xi. c. il.

nlillc

hines are now so numerous, that the working of o o It
then, and of some few mines of gold in the pro- viii.
vinces of Tierra Firme, and the new kingdom of
Granada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a fyflem no les
complicated than interefling. To describe the na-
ture of the various ores, the mode of cxtracting
hem from the bowels of the earth, and to explain
he several processes by which the metals are fepa-
ted from the substances with which they are
ingled, either by the ation of fire, or the at-
adive powers of mercury, is the province of the
tural philosopher or chymift, rather than of the
iftorian.
The exuberant profusion with which the moun- Riches
ains of the New World poured forth their treasures which they
tonilhed mankind, who had been accustomed hi-
herto to receive a penurious supply of the precious
etals, from the more scanty frores contained in the
ines of the ancient hemisphere. According to
rnciples of computation, which appear to be
xremely moderate, the quantity of gold and fiver
at has been regularly entered in the ports of
ain, is equal in value to four millions flerling
nually, reckoning from the year 1492, in which
merica was discovered, to the present time.
his, in two hundred and eighty-three years,
ounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two millions.
mense as this fum is, the Spanish writers contend,
at as much more ought to be added to it, in con-
eration of treasure which has been extradted from
mines, and imported fraudulently into Spain,
VoL. III. V

B o o without paying duty to the king. By this account,

vJIl. Spain has drawn from the New World a supply of

wealth, amounting at least to two thousand millions
of pounds sterling .

Spiritto The mines, which have yielded this amazin
Whith this quantity of treafilre, are not worked at the expenf
gives rife.

of the crown, or of the public. In order to encou
rage private adventurers, the person who discover
and works a new vein ;is entitled to the property ofit
Upon laying his claim to such a discovery before th
governor of the province, a certain extent of land i
measured off, and a certain number of Indians allo
ted him, under the obligation of his opening the min
within a limited time, and of his paying the cu
tomary duty to the king, for what it shall produc
Invited by the facility with which such grantsar
obtained, and encouraged by some striking e
amples of success in this line of adventure; n
only the sanguine and the bold, but the timid an
diffident enter upon it with astonishing ardo
With vast objects always in view, fed continual
with hope, and expecting every moment that so
tune will unveil her secret stores, and give up
wealth which they contain to their wishes, theydee
every other occupation insipid and uninteretin
The charms of this pursuit, like the rage for de
play, are so bewitching, and take such full poffeffi
of the mind , as even to give a new bent to the natur
temper. Under its influence, the cautious beco

'° Ullari7, Theor. y Pradt. de Commercio, c. 3. Hlerr
dec. viii. lib. xi. c. IS. See N(OT. LXI.

nterprifing, and the covetous profuse. Powerful o o
s this charm naturally is, its force is augmented by vii.
he arts of an order of men known in Peru by the
ant lname of searchers. These are commonly per-
ons of desperate fortunes , who, availing thcm-
dhes of some skill in mineralogy, accompanied
ith the insinuating manner, and confident pre-
nfions peculiar to projectors, address the wealthy
nd the credulous. By plausible descriptions of
he appearances which they have discovered of rich
eins hitherto unexplored; by producing, when re-
uifite, specimens of promising ore; by affirming,
th an imposing assurance, that success is certain,
d that the expense muff be trifling, they seldom
il to persuade. An association is formed; a small
m is advanced by each copartner; the 'mine iS
pened; the Jearcher is intrusted with the sole
redion of every operation; unforeseen difficulties
cur; new demands of money are made; but,
idft a fucceflion of disappointments and delays,
pe is never extinguished , and the ardor of ex-
cdation hardly abates. For it is observed, that
any person once enter this seducing path, it is
most impoflible to return; his ideas alter, lie
ems to be possessed with another spirit , visions
imaginary wealth are continually before his
es, and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams of
thing cfe ".
Such is the spirit that mulf be formed, wherever Fataleffel
e ative exertions of any society are ciiefly ofit

Ulloa, Entrcten. p, a=t.

Vr

t o o employed in working mines of gold and silver. N(

vill. spirit is more adverse to such improvement in agri

culture and commerce, as render a nation reall)
opulent. If the system of administration in the
Spanilh colonies had been founded upon principle
of found policy, the power and ingenuity of th(
legislature would have been exerted with as much
ardor, in restraining its fubjets from such pern
cious industry, as is now employed in allurin
them towards it. " Projets of mining" (fays
good judge of the political conduct of nations
'( infead of replacing the capital employed
" them, together with the ordinary profit of fock
"commonly absorb both capital and profit. The
"are the projects, therefore, to which, of
" others, a prudent lawgiver, who desired to
" crease the capital of his nation, would le
' chufe to give any extraordinary encouragemen
"or to turn towards them a greater share of th

capital than would go to them of its own
' cord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confiden
" which all men have in their own good fortun
" that wherever there is the least probability
" ficcefs, too great a hare of it is apt to go
" them of its own accord '." But in the Span
colonies, government is studious to cherifi a fpi
which it should have labored to depress, and,
the fandion of its approbation, augments thati
considerate credulity, which has turned the adi
industry of Mexico and Peru into such an improp

lDr.' Smith's Inquiry, &c. ii. is .

annel. To this may be imputed the fender a o it
rogrefs which Spanish America has made during viii,
wo centuries and a half, either in useful manu-
adures, or in those lucrative branches of cultiva-
on, which furnilh the colonies of other nations
ith their staple commodities. In comparison
ith the precious metals, every bounty of nature
so much despised, that this extravagant idea of
eir value has mingled with the idiom of lan-
uage in America, and the Spaniards fettled there
nominate a country, rich, not from the fertility
its foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exu-
crance of its pastures, but on account of the
inerals which its mountains contain. In quell of
efe, they abandon the delightful plains of Peru
nd Mexico, and resort to barren and uncomfort.
ble regions, where they have built some of tho
rgeft towns which they possess in the New World.
the activity and enterprise of the Spaniards ori-
ially took this direction, it is now so difficult to
end them a different way, that although, from
rious causes, the gain of working mines is much
ecreafed; the fascination continues, and almost
cry person, who takes any ative part in the
mmerce of New Spain or Peru, is fill engaged
some adventure of this kind".
But though mines are the chief object of the Other con
paniards, and the precious metals which these yield, 'odiies of
'rm the principal article in their commerce with colonies.
merica; the fertile countries which they possess
" See NOTE LXIL

V3

B o o K there, abound with other commodities of such

Vll. value or scarcity, as to attradt a considerable de.

gree of attention. Cochineal is a production al.
inofl peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, and it
yields such profit, as amply rewards the labo
and care en.ployed in rearing the curious infeCtso
which this valuable drug is composed, and pre
paring it for the market. Quinquina, or Jesuit
B3.irk, the mos salutary simple, perhaps, and o
noft reflorative virtue, that Providence, in corn
passion for human infirmity, has made known unt
man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords
lucrative branch of commerce. The Indigo o
Guatimala is superior in quality to that of any pro
vince in America, and cultivated to a confiderabl
extent. Cacao, though not peculiar to the Sp
nilh colonies, attains to its highest state of perse
tion there, and from the great confumptiono
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is
valuable commodity. The Tobacco of Cuba, o
more exquisite flavor than any.brought from th
New World; the sugar raised in that island, i
Hispaniola, and in New Spain, together vit
drugs of various kinds, may be mentioned amon
the natural produdtions of America, which enri
the Spanish commerce. To these must be added
an article of no inconsiderable account , the c
portation of hides; for which , as well as for man
of those which I have enumerated, the Spaniar
are more indebted to the wonlderful fertility oftl
country than to their own forcfight and indufr

The domeflic animals of Europe, particularly B o o ir
horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World vii.
with a rapidity which almost exceeds belief. A
f\v years after the Spaniards fettled there, the
herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned dhem by thousands '.
Less attention being paid to them, as they con-
tinued to increase, they were suffered to run wild,
and spreading over a country of boundless extent,
under a mild climate, and covered with rich pas-
tlre, their number became immense. They range
over the vast plains which extend from Buenos
Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of thirty or
orty thousand; and the unlucky traveller who
nce falls in among them, may proceed several
ays before he can disentangle himself from among
he crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
ems to have no, end. They are hardly less nu-
crous in New Spain, and in several other pro-
inces: they are killed merely for the fake of their
ides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is so
reat, that the flench of the carcases, which are
eft in the field , would insed the air, if large
ncks of wild dogs, and vast flocks of nallina2os,
rAmerican vultures, the molf voracious of all
lie feathered kind, did not instantly devour them.
lie number of those hides exported in every fleet
"Kuro)e is very great, and is a lucrative branch
f commerce .

" Oviclo, aip. Rlu. iii. tor, 1i I{acliluyt, iii. 466.
I.

' Acolhi, lib. iii. c. 33. Ovallo, lift. of Chili. Church.

V 4

B o o Almost all these may be confidered as staple

vill. commodities peculiar to America, and different,

if we except that last mentionedl, from the pro.
dutions of the mother-country.

Advantages WVhen the importation into Spain of those va
which Spain rious articles from her colonies, first became aive
derived from
her colonies. and considerable, her interior induftly and manu

fadcures were in a Iate so prosperous, that witl
the produc of these fle was able both to purcha
the commodities of the New World, and to an
fwer its growing demands. Under the reigns
Ferdinand and Isabella, and Charles V. Spain wa
one of the molt industrious countries in Europe
Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk
were so extensive, as not only to furnish what wa
sufficient for her own consumption, but to affr
a surplus for exportation. When a market so
them, formerly unknown, and to which fe alon
had access , opened in America, fie had recour
to her domestic store, and found there an abunda
supply ". This new employment must natural
have added vivacity to the spirit of induftr
Nourished and invigorated by it, the manufa
tures, the population, and wealth of Spain mig
have gone on increasing in the fame proportion wit
the growth of her colonies. Nor was the state
the Spanini marine at this period less flourifhi
than that of its manufactures. In the beginni:
of the fixtcenth century, Spain is said to ha

Collect. iii. 47. fcp. Ibid. v. p. 68o. 692. Lettrcs Edif. xi
235. Feuill, i. 249. See NOTE LXIII.

possessed above a thousand merchant ships,', a B o O It
number probably far superior to that of any nation VIII.
in urope in that age. By the aid which foreign
trlde and domestic industry give reciprocally to
each other in their progress, the augmentation of
both muff have been rapid and extensive, and
Spain might have received the fame acceflion of
opulence and vigor from her acquisitions in the
New World, that other powers have derived from
their colonies there.
But various causes prevented this. The fame Why.she
thing happens to nations as to individuals. Wealth, "doe not

now derive

which flows in gradually, and with moderate in. the fame.
crease, feeds and nourifies that activity which is
friendly to commerce, and calls it forth into vigor-
ous and well-conduded exertions; but when
opulence pours in suddenly, and with too full a
fiream , it overturns all fober plans of induifry, and
brings along with it a taste for what is wild and
xtravagant, and daring in business or in aion.
Such was the great and sudden augmentation
of power and revenue, that the possession of
America brought into Spain, and some symptoms
of its pernicious influence upon the political opera-
tions of that monarchy soon began to appear. For
iconfiderable time, however, the supply of trea-
fre from the New World was scanty and preca-
rinus, and the genius of Charles V. conducted
public measures with such prudence, that the effedts
of this influence were little perceived. But when

Campomanes, ii. 14o.

w o o it Philip II ascended the Spanish throne, with talents

viii. far inferior to those of his father, and remittances

from the colonies became a regular and confider.
able branch of revenue, the fatal operation of this
rapid change in the lrate of the kingdom, both on
the monarch and his people, was at once confpi.
cuous. Philip, poffelling that spirit of unceasing
atfiduitv, which often charaterizes the ambition of
men of moderate talents, entertained such a high
opinion of his own resources, that he thought no.
thing too arduous for him to undertake. Shut up
himself in the olitude of the Escurial, he troubled
and annoyed all the nations around him. He
waged open war with the Dutch and English; he
encouraged and aided a rebellious faction in
France; he conquered Portugal, and maintained
armies and garrisons in Italy, Africa, and both
the Indies. By filch a multiplicity of great and
complicated opeiations, pursued with ardor during
the course of a long reign, Spain was drained
both of men and money. Under the weak
administration of his fcceffor, Philip III. th
vigor of the nation continued to decrease, and
A. u.,'ix. funk into the lowest decline , when the inconfide

rate bigotry of that monarch expelled at onc
near a million of his mot indu(trtious fubjeds, a
the very time when the exhaufled tate of th
kingdom reqired sone extraordinary exertion o
political wifldon to augment its numbers, and t
revive its lftrcigth. Early in the cvcnteenth cen
turLy, Spain felt fch a dillinurtitii in the numbcl
ol her people , tat from iablility to recruit i

armies, she was obliged to contrad her operations. B o o KT
Her flourishing manufatures were fallen into de- vII.
cay. Her fleets, which had been the terror of all
Europe, were ruined. Her extensive foreign com-
merce was loft. The trade between different parts
of her own dominions was interrupted, and the
;lips which attempted to carry it on, were taken
and plundered by enemies whom [he once de-
spifed. Even agriculture, the primary objed of
indflry in every prosperous state, was neglected,
and one of the most fertile countries in Europe
hardly raised what was sufficient for the support of
its own inhabitants.
In proportion as the population and manufac- Rapil de.
tures of the parent state declined, the demands of clineofits
her colonies continued to increase. The Spaniards, trde
like their monarchs, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, deserted the
paths of industry, to which they had been accuf-
tomed, and repaired with eagerness to those
regions from which this opulence issued. By this
rage of emigration , another drain was opened, and
the flrength of the colonies augmented by exhaust-
ing that of the mother-country. All those emi-
grants, as well as the adventurers who had at first
lettled in America , depended absolutely upon Spain
for almost every article of necessary confuimptioll.

ti'aed in more alluring and lucrative purliits,
orprevcnted by refiraints which government im.
p0cdl, they could not turn their own attention to-
Wlrds clfblifhing the manufadtures requifitc for
inloi talc fLubli llclcc. They received (as I have

o o observed in another place) their clothing, their
viI. furniture, whatever ministers to the ease or luxury

of life, and even their instruments of labor, from
Europe. Spain, thinned of people, and void of
industry, was unable to supply their increasing
demands. She had recourse to her neighbours. 'lhe
rnanufadures of the Low Countries, of England,
of France, and of Italy, which her wants called
into existence, or animated with new vivacity, fur.
nifhed in abundance whatever The required. In
vain did the fundamental law, concerning the ex.
clufion of foreigners from trade with America,
oppose this innovation. Neceflity, more powerful
than any statute, defeated its operations, an
constrained the Spaniards themselves to concu
in eluding it. The English, the French, an
Dutch, relying on the fidelity and honor of Sp
nilh merchants, who lend their names to cover th
deceit, fend out their manufactures to America
and receive the exorbitant price for which the
are fold there, either in specie, or in the rich corn
modities of the New World. Neither the dread o
danger, nor the allurement of profit, ever indu
ced a Spanish fador to betray or defraud the perfo
who confided in him" ; and that probity, whichi
the pride and diftindion of the nation, contribute
to its ruin. In a short time, not above a twentiet
part of the commodities exported to America w
of Spanish growth or fabric ". All the reft w

Zavala, Reprefentacion, p. 226.
' ampomanes, ii. 138.

the property offoreign merchants, though entered B o o x
in the name of Spaniards. The treasure of the viII.
New World may be said henceforward not to have
belonged to Spain. Before it reached Europe, it
was anticipated as the price of goods purchased
from foreigners. That wealth which, by an in-
ternal circulation, would have spread through each
vein of induflry, and have conveyed life and move-
ment to every branch of manufacture, flowed out
of the kingdom with such a rapid course, as neither
enriched nor animated it. On the other hand, the
artisans of rival nations, encouraged by this quick
sale of their commodities, improved so much in.
Ikill and industry, as to be able to afford them at
arate so low, that the manufactures of Spain,
which could not vie with theirs, either in quality
or cheapness of work, were till farther depressed.
This deftrudive commerce drained off the riches
of the nation faster and more completely, than
even the extravagant schemes of ambition carried
on by its monarchs. Spain was so much astonish-
ed and distressed, at beholding her American trea-
fures vanish almost as soon as they were imported,
that Philip III. unable to supply what was requisite
in circulation, issued an edidt, by which he endea-
voured to raise copper money to a value in cur-
rency nearly equal to that of silver ' ; and the lord
of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was reduced
to a wretched expedient, which is the last resource
of petty impoverilhed states.

Uitari, c. xo4.

E o o Thus the poffeflions of Spain in America have

viII. not proved a source of population and of wealth

to her, in the fame manner as those of other na.
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the fpi.
rit of industry subsists in full vigor, every per.
son fettled in filch colonies as are similar in their
situation to those of Spain is fippofed to give em-
ployment to three or four at home in supplying
his wants 9'. But wherever the mother-country can-
not afford this supply, every emigrant may be con-
fidered as a citizen loft to the community, and
strangers must reap all the benefit of answering his
demands.

increaredy Such has been the internal slate of Spain from
themodeof the close of the sixteenth century , and such her
regulating its
intercourse inability to supply the growing wants of her colo-
withAme- nies. The fatal effects of this disproportion be.

rca. tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-

ing them, have been much increased by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the in-
tercourfe between the mother country and the co-
lonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing the
trade with America, and debarring her fubjets
there from any communication with foreigners, that
all her jealous and systematic arrangements have
arifcn. I lefC are so singular in their nature and
confequcnces as to merit a particular explanation.
In order to secure the monopoly at which he aimed,
Spain did not vect the trade with her colonies in an
exclusive company, a plan which has been adopted

Child, on trade and culonics.,

by nations more commercial, and at a period when B o o E
mercantile policy was an objedt of greater attcn- Vill
tion, and ought to have been better underltood.
The Dutch gave up the whole trade with their
colonies, both in the East and Weft- Indies, to
exclifive companies. The English, the French, the
Danes, have imitated their example with refpecQ
to the Eat-Indian commerce; and the two former
have laid a imilar restraint upon some branches
of their trade with the New World. The wit of
nan cannot, perhaps, devise a method for check-
ng the progress of industry and population in a
new colony more effectual than this. The interest
fthe colony, and of the exclusive company, must
in every point be diametrically opposite; and as
he latter possesses such advantages in this unequal
onteft, that it can prescribe at pleasure the terms
fintercourfe, the former muf; not only buy dear
nd fell cheap, but must fffer the mortification of
avinlg the increase of its surplus stock discouraged
vthofe very persons to whom alone it can dispose
fits productions '.
Spain , it is probable, was preserved from fall- Thtscon
nginto this error in policy, by the high ideas finedtoone
hich fle early formed concerning the riches of Spati
le New World. Gold and silver were commo.
ities of too high value to vcft a monopoly of
hem in private hands. The crown wished to retain
he diredtion of a commerce so inviting; and, in
rdcr to secure that, ordained the cargo of every

9 Smith's Inquiry, ii. 7x.

B o o It flhip fitted out for America, to be infpeded by tie

YIII. otficers of the Casa de Contratacion in Seville, be.

fore it could receive a licence to make the voyage;
and that on its return , a report of the commoditie
which it brought should be made to the fame bdard
before it could be permitted to land them. In con
fcqucnce of this regulation, all the trade of Spai
.with the New World centred originally in the por
of Seville, and was gradually brought into a for
in which it has been conducEed, with little variation
from the middle of the sixteenth century almost t
our own times. For the greater security of th
valuable cargoes sent to America, as well as forth
more easy prevention of fiaud, the commerce
Spain, with its colonies, is carried on by fleets whic
fail under strong convoys. These fleets confiftin
of two squadrons, one difinguified by the nam
of the Ga'eons, the other by that of the Flota, a
equipped annually. Formerly they took their d
parture from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz h
been found more commodious, they have faile
from it since the year 1720.

Carried on The Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firm
ythe Ga. and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almo
leolls,

every article of luxury, or necessary confumptio
that an opulent people can demand, touch fir
at Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To t
former, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caracc
the New Kingdom of Granada, and several oth
provinces, retort. The latter is the great mart f
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the seas
when the Galeons are expected, the produc of

the

ie mines in these two kingdoms, together with their B o o t
other valuable commodities, is transported by sea viii.
o l'ana. From thence, as soon as the appear-
nce of the fleet from Europe is announced, they
re conveyed across the isthmus, partly on mules,
i partly down the river Chagre to Porto-bello.
'his paltry village, the climate of which, fiom the
ernicious union of excessive heat, continual moif-
re, and the putrid exhalations arising from a rank
il, is more fatal to life than aliy perhaps in the
owwn world, is immediately filled with people.
rom being the residence of a few negroes and mu-
toes, and of a miserable garrison relieved every
iee months, Porto-bello assumes suddenly a very
iffrent afpedi, and its streets are crowded with
ulent merchants from every corner of Peru, and
eadjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the wealth
America is exchanged for the manufacdures of
rope ; and , during its prescribed term of forty
ys, the richelt tratic on the face of the earth is
gun and finished, with that simplicity of tranf-
on and unbounded confidence, which accoin.
ny extenlive commerce' . 1'he lota holds its and Flota.
urfe to Vera Cruz. 'l'he treasures and commo-
Cs of New Spanl, ad( the depending provinces,
icli were depofted at Puebla de los \Angeles in
pedation of its arrival, ae carried tllither, and
coinmercial opera.tions of Vera Cruz, condudled
the ;iinm1 aninecr with those of l'orto bello, are
cnur to them only in iportaicc a;nd value.

" See NOTE LX1V.
VOL. IIl. X

n o o K Both fleets, as soon as they have completed theii

vIII. cargoes from America, rendez-vous at the Havanna,

and return in company to Europe.

Bfadeffeas The trade of Spain with her colonies, whil
rangement. thus fettered and reltrided, came necessarily to b

conducted with the fame spirit, and upon the far
principle, as that of an exclusive company. B
ing confined to a single port, it was of cour
thrown into a few hands, and almoff the whole
it was gradually engrossed by a small number
wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now
Cadiz. These by combinations, which they c
:afily form, may altogether prevent that comp
tition which preserves commodities at their natur
price; and by adting in concert, to which they a
prompted by their mutual interest, they may ra
or lower the value of them at pleasure. In con
quence of this, the price of European goods
America is always high, and often exorbitant.
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundr
per cent. are profits not uncommon in the co
rnerce of Spain with her colonies". From t
fame engrolfing spirit it frequently happens,
traders of the second order, whose warehouses
not contain a complete assortment of commodit
for the American market, cannot purchase fr
the more opulent merchants such goods as t|
want, at a lower price than that for which t
are fold in the colonies. With the fame vigil
jealousy that an exclusive company guards ngal

"' . Ulloa, Kctablill. part ii. p. 91.

the intrusion of the free trader, those overgrown i o o
monopolists endeavour to check the progress of VII.
every one whose encroachments they dread ". This
refraint of the American commerce to one port,
not only affecs its domeflic Rate, but limits its
oreign operations. A monopolist may acquire
ore, and certainly will hazard less, by a confined
rade which yields exorbitant profit, than by an
:xenfive commerce in which he receives only a
oderate return of gain. It is often his interest
otto enlarge, but to circumscribe the sphere of
is activity; and, instead of calling forth more
igorous exertions of commercial industry, it may
ethe object of his attention to check and set
0onds to them. By some such maxim, the mer-
ntile policy of Spain seems to have regulated its
tercourfe with America. Instead of furnishing
e colonies with European goods in such quantity
might render both the price and the profit mo-
rate; the merchants of Seville and Cadiz seem
have supplied them with a sparing hand, that
e agernefs of competition amongst customers
bliged to purchase in a scanty market, might en-
le the Spanilh fators to dispose of their cargoes
ith exorbitant gain. About the middle of the last
ntury, when the exclurfve trade to America from
'ille was in its molt flourishing state, the burden
the two united squadrons of the Ga'eons and
ta, did not exceed twenty-feven thousand five

Smith's Inquiry, ii. 71. Capu.manes, Educ. Popul.

+38.3X

X t

a o hundred tons". The supply which such a fleet coul
vIII. carry, muff have been very inadequate to the de

mands of those populous and extensive colonies
which depended upon it for all the luxuries, an
many of the necessaries of life.

Remedies Spain early became sensible of her declenfio
)ropoied. from her former prosperity, and many refpedab!

and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts i
devising methods for reviving the decaying i
duftry and commerce of their country. Fromth
violence of the remedies proposed, we may judg
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared
Some, confounding a violation of police with cri
minality against the Rate, contended , that in 0
der to check illicit commerce, every person con
vited of carrying it on, flould be punifled wit
death, and confiscation of all his effeds . Other
forgetting the diflindion between civil offences an
ads of impiety, infited, that contraband trad
fiould be ranked among the crimes reserved so
the cognizance of the Inquisition; that fuclh
were guilty of it might be tried and puninfed, a
cording to the fecrct and summary form in whic
that dreadful tribunal exercifcs its jurifdidtioii
Others, unillrutied by observing the pernicio
cfteds of monopolies in evcry country where the
have been cftablifhed, have proposed to vest tl
trade with America i exclufivc companies, whic

Canlipolnanes, lEduc. Popul. i. 4 . ii. 10o.

97 M. dei Santa Cruz, ComilcrcioStiulto, p. 14z.
' Molincada;, Reftauracion politicu de Eflipna, . 4

nterefl would render the mol vigilant guardians of B o oa
ie Spanifl commerce against the encroachment of vnr.
he interlopers ".
Beides these wild projeds , many schemes, bet-
er digested and more beneficial, were suggested.
ut under the feeble monarchs , with whom the
eign of the Austrian line in Spain closed, inca-
acity and in.decision are conspicuous in every de-
artment of goveriment. Instead of taking for
heir model the acive administration of Charles V.
hey affeced to imitate the cautious procrastinating
ifdom of Philip II. and destitute of hi's talents,
hey deliberated perpetually, but determined no-
hing. No remedy was applied to the evils under
hich the national commerce, domestic as well as
oreign, languished. These evils continued to in-
refe, and Spain, with dominions more extensive
nd more opulent than any European state, pof-
fsed neither vigor, nor money '°, nor industry.
t length, the violence of a great national con-
iifion roused the slumbering genius of Spain.
lie efforts of the two contending parties in the
iil war, kindled by the dispute concerning the
cceffion of the crown at the beginning of this
enCtury, called forth, in some degree, the ancient
;iit and vigor of the nation. \hile men were
Ihu forming, capable of adopting sentiments more
ihral than those which had in fluenced the coun-
ils of the monarchy during the course of a

Zavr;lla y Augnon, Reprcrentacion, &o. p. 19o.
Sec NOTE LXV.

X

n o o K century, Spain derived from an unexpected fourcet

vlll. means of availing itself of their talents. The va

rious powers who favored the pretensions eith
of the Austrian or Bourbon candidate for the Sp
nifh throne, sent formidable fleets and armies
their support; France, England, and Holland re
ritted immense fums to Spain. These we
spent in the provinces which became the theat
of war. Part of the American treasure, of whit
foreigners had drained the kingdom, flowed bac
thither. From this era, one of the most inteli
gent Spanish authors dates the revival of the mn
narchy; and, however humiliating the truth ra
be, he acknowledges, that it is to her enemiesh
country is indebted for the acquisition of a fun
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate
the exigencies of the public ''

Step towards As soon as the Bourbons obtained quiet pofle
ntimpve- sion of the throne, they discerned this change
meit by the
Bonrbon the spirit of the people, and in the state of the n
monarilS, tion , and took advantage of it; for although tha

family has not given monarchs to Spain remar
able for superiority of genius, they have all bee
beneficent princes, attentive to the happiness
their fubjedts, and solicitous to promote it.
was, accordingly, the first object of Philip V.
suppress an innovation which had crept in durin
the course of the war, and had overturned th
whole system of the Spanish commerce with Am

byexciutling rica. The Englifn and Dutch, by their sup
foreigners

'' Campomanes, i. 4o.

riority in naval power, having acquired such corn- E o
mand of the sea, as to cut off all intercourse be. viri.
tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to from trade
flrnifh her fubjeds in America those necessaries of with Peru
life, without which they could not exist, and as
the only means of receiving from thence any part
of their treasure, departed so far from the usual
ligor of its maxims as to open the trade with
Peru to her allies the French. The merchants of
St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted the pri.
vilege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in 'it
with vigor, and carried it on upon principles very
different from those of the Spaniards. They sup-
plied Peru with European commodities at a mode-
rate price, and not in stinted quantity. The goods
which they imported were conveyed to every pro-
vince of Spanish America, in such abundance as
had never been known in any former period. If
this intercourse had been continued, the exportation
of European commodities from Spain muff have 't3a
ceased , and the dependence of the colonies on the
mother-country have been at an end. The most
peremptory injunctions were therefore issued, pro-
hibiting the admission of foreign vessels into any
port of Peru or Chili 0"', and a Spanilh squadron
was employed to clear the South-Sea of intruders,
whose aid was no longer necessary.
But though, on the cessation of the war, which hycehri,,i
Was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht, Spain cottabi.d

trade,

'° Frezier, Voy. 26. B.Ulloa, R. etab. ii. to4, &c.Alcedo
-lerrera, Avifo, &c. 236.

X4

n o. o obtained relief from one encroachment on her

viil. commercial system, he was exposed to another,

which ihe deemed hardly less pernicious. As an
inducement that might prevail with Queen Anne
to conclude a peace, which rance and Spain de.
fired. with equal ardor, Philip V. not only con.

particularly veyed to Great Britain the /fficnto, or contrad for
of the ElS- fLipplying the Spanish colonies with negroes, which
lish Afli'nto
J,;,,ua,,ly. hadformerly been enjoyed by France , but granted

itthe more extraordinary privilege of fending an.
nually to the fair of Porto-bello, a hip of five
hundred tons , laden with European commodities
In consequence of this, British facdories were eftab.
1i.fre at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz:, Bue
nos Ayres, and other Spanish settlements. Th
veil with which Spain had hitherto covered th
slate and tranfadions of her colonies was removed
rThe agents of a rival nation, residing in the town
of molt extensive trade, and of chief resort, ha
the belt opportunities of becoming acquainted wit
the interior condition of the American provinces
of observing their flated and occasional wants,an
of knowing what commodities might be importe
into them with the greatest advantage. In colfe
quence of information so authentic and expedi
tious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other Eng
lifh colonies who traded to the Spanifb main, wer
enabled to assort and proportion their cargoes
exatly to the demands of the market, that th
contraband commerce was carried on with a faci
lity, and to an extent unknown in any former pc
riod. '1 his, however, was not the most fatal cons

tlence of the Affiento to the trade of Spain. The n o
Ietls of the 'Britif South-Sea company, under vm.
over of the.importation which they were autho-
zed to make by the fiip sent annually to Porto-
clo, poured in their commodities on the Spanish
ntinent, without limitation or rcftraint. Instead
a flip of five hundred tons, as itipulated in the
eaty, they usually employed one which exceeded
ine hundred tons in burden. She was accom-
anied by two or three smaller effels, which;
ooring in some neighbouring creek, supplied her
andeflinely with fresh bales of goods, to replace
,:h as were fold. The infpedtors of the fair, and
iicers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant pre-
nts, connived at the fraud '". Thus, partly by
e operations of the company, and partly by the
ivity of private interlopers, almost the whole
ade of Spanish America was engrossed by ' so
igners. The immense commerce of the G-
ons, formerly the pride of Spain, and the envy
otlher nations, funk to nothing, and the fqua- 13.
ron itself reduced from fifteen thousand to two
oofand tons '°', served hardly any purpose but to
ch home the royal revenue arising from the fifth
silver.
\While Spain observed those encroachments, and Gitarda Cot-
It so sensibly their pernicious effedts, it was tas employ

for this pur
pollible not to make some effort to restrain poe.

in Her first expedient was to station ships of

'' See NOTE LXVI.
°' Alcedo y Herrera, . 39. Campomanes, i. t46.

o e x force, under the appellation of Guarda Coflas, upo
vlrI. the coasts of those provinces, to which interloper

most frequently resorted. As private interest co
curred with the duty which they owed to the pu
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded th
vessels vigilant and ative, some check was give
to the progress of the contraband trade, though i
dominions so extensive, and so accessible by sea, n
number of cruisers was sufficient to guard again
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption
an intercourse, which had been carried on with
much facility, that the merchants in the Brit
colonies were accustomed to confider it almost
an allowed branch of commerce, excited murmu
and complaints. These authorized, in fomemeafu
and rendered more interesting, by several unju
fiable ads of violence committed by the captai
of the Spanilh Guarda Costas, precipitated Gre
Britain into a war with Spain; in consequence
-which the latter obtained a final release from
1739· Afliento, and was left at liberty to regulate

commerce of her colonies, without being refrain
by any engagement with a foreign power.

The ire f As the formidable encroachments of the E
tegi.erhips lifl on their American trade , had discovered
introduced.

the Spaniards the vast consumption of Europe
goods in their colonies, and taught them the
vantage of accommodating their importations
the occasional demand of the various provinc
they perceived the necessity of dcvifing some
thod of fpplying their colonies, different fr
their ancient one, of fending thither periodi

feets. That mode of communication had been n o o t
found not only to be uncertain, as the departure vin.
of the Galeons and Flota was sometimes re-
tarded by various accidents, and often prevented
by the wars vwhich raged in Europe; but long
experience had hown it to be ill adapted to afford
America a regular and timely supply of what it
vanted. The scarcity of European goods in the
panimf settlements frequently became excefive;
heir price rose to an enormous height; the vigi-
nt eye of mercantile attention did not fail to ob-
rve this favorable opportunity, an ample supply
as poured in by interlopers from the English, the
rench, and Dutch islands; and when the Galeons
tlength arrived, they found the marketsfo glut.
id by this illicit commerce, that there was no
emand for the commodities with which they were
oaded. In order to remedy this, Spain has per-
itted a considerable part of her commerce with
merica, to be carried on by regflerr ships. These
refitted out, during the intervals between the stated
afons when the Galeons and Flota fail, by mer.
hants in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence
om the council of the Indies, for which they pay
very high premium, and are deffined for those
orts in America where any extraordinary demand
foreseen or expected. By this expedient, fich
regular supply of the commodities, for which there
the greatefl demand, is conveyed to the American
arket, that the interloper is no longer allured by
he fame profped of excessive gain, or the people
the colonies urged by the fame necessity to engage
I the hazardous adventures of contraband trade.

n 0o K In proportion as experience manifefled the ad

viii. vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the

Tlhe Galeons number of register Lhips increased, and at lengt
bolished. in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having beer

employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
laid aside. From that period there has been noin
tercourfe with Chili and Peru but by single hips,
dispatched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expect a profitable market
will open. These sips fail round Cape Horn, and
convey diredly to the ports in the South-Sea the pro.
duftions and manufactures of Europe, for which the
people, fettled in those countries, were formerly
obliged to repair to Porto-b1llo or Panama. These
towns, as has been formerly observed, must gradually
decline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their prosperity. This disadvantage how
ever is more than compensated ; for the whole conti
nent ofSouth-America receives supplies of European
commodities, with so much regularity, and in fuc
abundance, as must not only contribute greatly tothe
happiness, but increase the population of all theco
lonies fettled there. But as all the register ships del
tined for the SouthSeas, muff still take their de
parture from Cadiz, and are obliged to retun
thither ', this branch of the American commerce
even in its new and improved form, continues subjei
to the reitraints of a species of monopoly, and feel
those pernicious effects of it, which I have alread
described.

.' Campomanes, i. 44. 440.

Nor has the attention of Spain been confined to n o o c
regulating the trade with its more flourishing colo- vili.
nics, it has extended likewise to the reviving corn- Schemes for
mferce in those settlements where it was negleded , co,'Iece,
or had decayed. Among the new taftes which
the people of Europe have acquired, in confe-
quence of importing the productions of those coun-
tries which they conquered in America, that for
chocolate is one of the most universal. The us of
this liquor made with a panfe, formed of the nut,
or almond of the cacao-tree, compounded with
various ingredients, the Spaniards first learned
from the Mexicans; and it has appeared to them,
and to the other European nations, so palatable,
o nourihing, and so wholesome, that it has be-
ome a commercial article of considerable import-
ance. he cacao tree grows spontaneously in fe-
eral parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the
et quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the
outh-Sea, are produced in the rich plains of
,araccas, a province of Tierra Firme. In confe-
ieince of this acknowledged superiority in the
uality of tacao in that province, and its commu-
ication with the Atlantic, which facilitates the
on:0cyance to Europe, the culture of the cacao
here is more extensive than in any dlifrid of Ame-
ic;. But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their
tlecments in the finall iflinds of Curazoa and
uen-Ayre, to the coast of Caraccas , gradually
grolfcd the greatcet part of the cacao trade.
he trallic with the mother-country for this va-
able commodity eased almof etircly; and such

o o c was the supine negligence of the Spaniards, or the
vii. defecds of their commercial arrangements, that

they were obliged to receive from the hands ol
foreigners this produdion of their own colonies, at

by ealish- an exorbitant price. In order to remedy an evil
in, tyh c no less disgraceful, than pernicious to his fubjeds
r.ccas. Philip V, in the year 1728, granted to a body o

merchants, an excluive right to the commerc
with Caraccas and Cumana, on condition of the
employing, at their own expense, a fufficien
number of armed veftels to clear the coast of in
terlopers. This society, distinguished sometime
by the name of the Company of Guipufcoa, fro
the province of Spain in which it is eftablifled
and sometimes by that of the Company of Cara
cas, from the diftrid of America to which it trades
has carried on its operations with such vigor an
success, that Spain has recovered an importan
branch of commerce, which she had suffered
be wrefled from her, and is plentifully fupplie
with an article of extensive consumption at a m
derate price. Not only the parent state, but t
colony of Caraccas, has derived great advantag
from this intfitution; for although, at the fir
asped, it may appear to be one of those monop
lies, whose tendency is to check the spirit of i
dultry, itltead of calling it forth to new exertion
it has been prevented from operating in this ma
ner, by several salutary regulations framed iup
foresight of such bad ffccts, and of purpose
obviate them. The planters in the Caraccas a
not left to depend entirely on the company, eith

r the importation of European commodities, or n o o K
he faleof their own productions. The inhabit- vIi.
,ts of the Canary islands have the privilege of
nding thither annually a regiflter flip of confider.
ble burden; and from Vera Cruz in New Spain,
Iree trade is permitted in every port compre.
ended in the charter of the company. In confe-
uence of this, there is such a competition, that
oth with refped to what the colonies purchase,
nd what they fell, the price seems to be fixed at
ts natural and equitable rate. The company has
ot the power of raising the former, or of degrading
he latter at pleasure; and accordingly, since it
as eftablifled, the increase of culture, of popu-
tion, and of live flock, in the province of Carac-
as, has been very considerable'.
But as it is slowly that nations relinquish any Enlarge-
vsem which time has rendered venerable, and as it mentof

commercial

Itill more slowly that commerce can be diverted ideas in
rm the channel in which it has long been accufllom- Spain.
d to flow ; Philip V. in his new regulations con-
erning the American trade, paid such deference to
eancient maxim of Spain, concerningthe limita-
on of all importation from the New World to one
arbour, as to oblige both the regilter ships which
turned from Peru, and those of the Gnipufcoan
ompany from Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes
the port of Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments
ore liberal and enlarged begin to spread in Spain.
he spirit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the

'" See NOTE LXVIT.

B o glory of the present age to have turned from fr

vll. volous or abstruse fpcculations, to the business an

affairs of men, has extended its influence beyoni
the Pyrenees. In the researches of ingeiou
authors, concerning the police or commerce o
nations, the errors and defects of the Spanil
system with rcfpect to both met every eye, an
have not only been exposed with severity, but ar
held up as a warning to other flates. The Sp
niards, flung with the reproaches of there author
or convinced by their arguments, and adinonihe
by several enlightened writers of their own cou
try, seem at length to have discovered the d
ftrudive tendency of those narrow maxims, whic
by cramping commerce in all its operations , ha
so long retarded its progress. It is to the monarc
now on the throne, that Spain is indebted for
first public regulation formed in confequcnce
such enlarged ideas.

Elablish- While Spain adhered with rigor to her a
mentofre. cicnt maxims concerning her commerce wi
gular acket.
boets. America, fie was so much afraid of opening'an

channel , by which an illicit trade might find a
milion into the colonies, that ile almolt shut
self out from any intercourse with them, but th
which was carried on by her annual fleets. The
was no eflablilhinent for a regular commlnicatK
of either public or private intelligence, bctwe
the mother-country and its American fettlcmcn
From tle want of this ineceflhiy illitution,
operations of the state, as well as the bfincf
individuals, were retarded or condutctd unliilfull

and

and Spain often received from foreigners her o o It
hrlt information with refped to very interefling VIII
events in her own colonies. But though this de-
sec i police was sensibly felt, and the remedy for
it w.i obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanilh monarchs guarded the exclusive trade, re-
rtrained them from applying it. At length
Charles 11. frmounted those considerations which
had deterred his predecessors, and in the year 1764
appointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the
lrft day of each month , from Corugna to the
Havanna or Porto-Kico. From thence letters are
conveyed in fmallcr vessels to Vcra Cruz and
Porto-bello, and tanfnitted by poll through the
kingdoms of Tierra Firme, Granada , Peru, and
New Spain. With no less regularity packet- boats
il once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the
ccommodation of the provinces to the east of the
ndes. T'hus provision is made for a speedy and
ertain circulation of intelligence throughout the
aft dominions of Spain, from which equal advan.
Iges mut redound to the political and mercantile

cntreft of the kingdom `o7. With this new arrange-
ent, a scheme of extending commerce has been
ore immediately conneted. Each of the packet-
oats, which are vessels of some considerable bur-
en, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
ommodities as are the product of Spain , and moRt

ldemand in the ports whither they are bound.
n return for these they may bring home ta

'7 Pont, Viage de Efpagna, vi. Prol. p, q,
VOL. III. Y

u o o i Corugna an equal quantity of American produfi.

VIII. ons '". This may be confidered as tie first relaxations

of those rigid laws, which confined the trade with
the New World to a single port, and the fir-t attempt
to admit the reft of the kingdom to some tiare
in it.

Free trale It was loon followed by one more decisive. In
pernittld to the year 7 65 , Charles III. laid open the tradelo
several pro-
vinces. the windward islands, Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto.

Rico, Mlargarita, and Trinidad, to his fubjedsin
every province of Spain. He permitted them to
lil from certain ports in each province, which are
specified in the edicd, at any season, and with what.
ever cargo they deemed most proper, without any
other warrant than a simple clearance from the
custom-house of the place whence they took their
departure. He released them from the numerou
and oppreflive duties imposed on goods exportel
to America, and in place of the whole, fubftitutec
a moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the cor
modities sent from Spain. He allowed them t
return either to the fame port, or to any othe
.where they might hope for a more advantageou
market, and there to enter the homeward cargo
on payment of the usual duties. This ample pri
vilege, whlich at once broke through all the fence
which the jealous policy of Spain had been laboring
for two centuries and a half, to throw round i
commercial intercourse with the New World, w

Append. ii. a la Educ. Pop. p. 3 1.

soon after extended to Iouifiana, and to the pro- o o rn
vinces of Yucatan and Campeachy '. v1T;

The propriety of this innovation, which may Bcic:i i

be confidered as the most liberal effort of Spanifil eC;sotit:
legifltion , has appeared from its effdts. Prior to
the edic: in f.vor of the free trade , Spain derived
hardly any benefit from its negledted colonies in
Hispaniola , Porto-Rico , Margarita, and Trinidad.
lt commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable, and
thit of Yucatan and Campeachy was engrossed al-
most entirely by interlopers. But as soon as a ge-
ner1l liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
coiirfe with those provinces revived, and has gone
onwith a rapidity of progression , of which there
are few examples in the hifiory of nations. In less
thiin ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more
than tripled. Even in those fetrlements where,
om the languilhing state of industry , greater
fforts were requisite to restore its activity their
ommerce has been doubled. It is computed,
i;a fch a number of ships is already employed in
he free trade, that the tonnage of them far exceeds
bat of the Galeons and Flota , at the molt flourifli-
ng xcra of their commerce. The benefits of this
rrangement are not confined to a few merchants,
ftblifled in a favorite port. They are diffuscd
rmugh every province of the kingdom; and by
~peling a new market for their various produe-
OIn anl manufadittes, mnuflt encourage and add
'ivacity to the induflry of the farmer and artificcr,

Append. ii. a la Edc. Pop.
o 7. 54. 91.

Y.

o o K Nor does the kingdom profit only by what it ex.
vili. ports, it derives advantage likewise from what it

receives in return , and has the prospect of being
soon able to supply itfeif with several commodities
of extensive consumption, for which it formerly
depended on foreigners. The consumption o
sugar in Spain is perhaps as great in proportion to
the number of its inhabitants, as th.t of any Eu.
ropean kingdom. But though possessed of coun.
tries in the New World, whose foil and climatear
most proper for rearing the sugar -cane ; thoug
the domestic culture of that valuable plant in th
kingdom of Granada was once considerable; fuc
has been the fatal tendency of ill-judged inftit
tions in America, and such the pressure of impr
per taxes in Europe, that Spain has loft almo
entirely this branch of industry, which has enriche
other nations. This commodity, which has no
become an article of primary necessity in Europe
the Spaniards were obliged to purchase of foreig
ers, and had the mortification to fee their cou
try drained annually of great fums on that a
count '". But if that spirit, which the permilfi
of free trade has put in motion, hall persevere
its efforts with the fame vigor, the cultivation
sugar in Cuba and Porto- Rico may increase
much, that in a few years, it is probable, t
their growth of sugars may be equal to the dena
of the kingdom.

Vire trade Spain has been induced, by her experience oft
Jermittt

' Ulatiz, c. 94,

beneficial consequences resulting from having re- o o K
laxed somewhat of the rigor of her ancient laws viiT.
with refped to the commerce of the mother-coun- beween the

colnies.

try with the colonies, to permit a more liberal in-c
tercourfe of one colony with another. By one of
the jealous maxims of the old system , all the pro-
vinces situated on the South-Seas were prohibited,
under the most severe penalties, from holding any
communication with one another. Though each
of these yield peculiar productions, the reciprocal
xchange of which might have added to the happi-
ess of their refpedivc inhabitants, or have facili-
ted their progress in indufiry, so solicitous was
e Council of the Indies, to prevent their receiving
ny supply of their wants, but by the periodical
eets from Europe, that in order to guard against
his, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in
e southern provinces of New Spain, in Guatimala,
nd the New Kingdom of Granada, from such a
orrefpondence with their fellow-fubjeds, as tended
anifeftly to their mutual prosperity. Of all the nu-
erous reftridions devised by Spain for securing the
xclufve trade with her American settlements, none
erhaps was more illiberal, none seems to have been
ore fenribly felt, or to have produced more hurt-
effects. This grievance, coeval with the fettle-
ents of Spain in the countries situated on the Pacific
cean, is at last rcdrefed. In the year 1774,
arles III. published an edicd, granting to the four
provinces which I have mentioned, the privilege

Y3

n o o.a of a free trade with each other 't. WThat may be the
vIII. cfeds of opening this communication between oun.

tries dcflined b.y their situation for reciprocal inter.
course, cannot yet be determined by experience.
They can hardly fail of being beneficial and extensive,
The motives for granting this permiflion are mani.
feftly no less laudable, than the principle on whichit
is founded is liberal; and both discover the progrc
of a fpirlt in Spain, far elevated above the narrow
prejudices and maxims on which her fyltem for re
gulating the trade, and conducding the govern
ment of her colonies, was originally founded.

New regu- At the fame time that Spain has been inten
lations con. on introducing regulations, suggested by more en
cerningthe government larged views of policy, into her fyflem of Ame
otthecolo. rican commerce, flie has not been inattentivet
lesC. the interior government of her colonies. Hereto

there was much room for reformation and improve
pent, and Don Joeph Galvez, who has nowth
diredion of the department for Indian affairs
Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities, not on
of obfcrving the defects and corruption in the p
litical frame of the colonies, but of difcoverill
the sources of those evils. After being employe
seven years in the New World on an extraordina
miflon , and with very extensive powers, as
fpedor-general of New Spain; after visiting
person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonor
and California, and making several importa

' Real Cedula penes me. Ponz, Viage, de Efpagna,
Prologo. p. 2. NOTE LXVIII.

alterations in the Rate of their police and revenue; n o o
le began his ministry with a general reformation vriI.
of the tribunals of justice in America. In confe- Reforiation
quence of the progress of population and wealth o
in the colonies, the bufmnefs of the Courts of Au-
dience has increased o much, that the number of
judges of which they were originally composed, has
been found inadequate to the ;growing labors and
duties of the office, and the salaries fettled upon them
have been deemed inferiorto the dignity of the
flation. As a remedy for-both, he obtained a royal
edict, establishing an additional number ofjudges in
each court of Audience, with higher titles, and more
ample appointments "'

To the fame intelligent minister Spain is in- Newdifri.
debted for a new distribution of government in its bution of

govern-

American provinces. Even since the eftablifi- ments.
ment of a third viceroyalty in the New Kingdom
of Granada , so great is the extent of the Spanish
dominions in the New World, that several places
subjed to the jurifdicion of each viceroy, were at
such an enormous distance from the capitals in
which they resided, that neither their attention, nor
their authority, could reach so far. Some pro-
vinces subordinate to the viceroy of New Spain,
lay above two thousand miles from Mexico. There
were countries subjed to the viceroy of Peru, Itill
farther from Lima. The people in tbofe remote
diftridts could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit of
civil government. The opprefflon and ifolence

" Gazeta de Madrid, i9th March, 776.

Y4

a o o of its inferior miniflers they often feel, and rather

vill. submit to these in silence, than involve themselves

in the expense and trouble of resorting to the dif.
tant capitals , where alone they can find redress.

New vice. As a remedy for this, 'a fourth viceroyalty has
r^yalty, been erected, to the juriflidion of which are ub.
Au1. 9,
on Riodei jecded the provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos.

Ayres, Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta Cruz de
la Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza
and St. Juan. By this well-judged arrangement, two
advantages are gained. All the inconveniencies occa.
sioned by the remote situation of those provinces,
which had been long felt, and long complained of,
are, in a great measure, removed. The countries
molt distant from Lima are separated from the vice.
royalty of Peru, and united under a superior, whose
feat of government at Buenos-Ayres, will be com.
modious and accessible. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive,
as muff have put a final stop to the exportation of
commodities from Spain to her southern colonies,
may be checked more thoroughly, and with greater
facility, when the supreme magistrate, by his vi-
cinity to the places in which it is carried on, can
view its progress and effects with his own eyes.
Don Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised to this
new dignity, with appointments equal to those of
the other viceroys, is well acquainted both with
the state and the interest of the countries over
which he is to preside, having served in them long,
and with diftindion. By this dismemberment,
succeeding that which took place at the erection of

he viceroyalty of the New Kingdom of Granada, n o o c
Imolt two-third parts of the territories originally VIII.
nbjed to the viceroys of Peru , are now lopped off
roml their jurifdidion.

The limits of the viceroyalty of New Spain have Newgovern-
kewife been considerably circumscribed, and with ment'" pro-

- vinces of So-

o less propriety and discernment. Four of its nora,&c.
oft remote provinces , Sonora, Cinaloa, Califor-
r, and New Navarre, have been formed into a
parate government. The Chevalier de Croix, who
intrusted with this command, is not dignified with
e title of viceroy, nor does he enjoy the appoint-
ents belonging to that rank, but his jurifdidion
altogether independent on the viceroyalty of New
ain. ' he erection of this last government seems
have been figgefted, not only by the consideration
the remote situation of those provinces from Mex-
; but by attention to the late discoveries made
ere, which I have mentioned '". Countries con-
inig the richest mines of gold that have hitherto
en discovered in the New World, and which
obably may arise into such importance, required
:immediate infpedcion of a governor, to whom
eyfhould be specially committed. As every con-
er;ation of duty, ofintereft, and of vanity, mulf
ocur in prompting those new governors to encot-
efuch exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and
fperity through the provinces committed to their
arge, the beneficial effeds ofthis arrangement
y be considerable. Many diftrids in America,
"' Book vii. p. 28.

n o o K long depressed by the languor and feebleness natura

vIIi. to provinces which compose the extremities of ar

overgrown empire, may be animated with vigo
and acivity, when brought so near the feat ofpowe
as to feel its invigorating influence.

Attempts to Such , since the accession of the princes of th
reform do- House of Bourbon to the throne of Spain, has bee
licy. the progress of their regulations, and the gradu

expansion of their views with refped to the co
merce and government of their American colonie
Nor has their attention been so entirely engross
by what related to the more remote parts of the
dominions, as to render them negletful of what v
fill more important, the reformation of domed
errors and defects in policy. Fully sensible of
causes to which the declension of Spain, from h
former prosperity, ought to be imputed; they h
made it a great object of their policy, to reviv
spirit of industry among their fubjets, and to gi
such extent and perfection to their manufadur
that they may be able to supply the demands
America from their own stock, and to exclude
reigners from a branch of commerce which has b
so fatal to the kingdom. This they have end
voured to accomplish, by a variety of edicts if
since the peace of Utrecht. They have gran
bounties for the encouragement of some branc
of industry; they have lowered the taxes on othe
they have either entirely prohibited, or have loa
with additional duties, such foreign manusad
as come in competition with their own ; they i
inflituted societics for the improvement of tr

and agriculture; they have planted colonies of hus- R o o
bandmen in some uncultivated dillrids of Spain, viII.
and divided among them the waste fields; they
have had recourse to every expedientc, devised by
colnmercial wisdom, or commercial jealousy, for
reviving their own industry, and difcountenancing
that of other nations. These, however, it is not
my province to explain, or to inquire into their pro-
priety and effects. There is no effort of legislation
more arduous , no experiment in policy more un-
certain, than an attempt to revive the fpjrit of
indulfry where it has declined, or to introduce it
where it is unknown. Nations , already possessed
of extcnfive commerce, enter into competition with
ftuch advantages, derived from the large capitals
and extensive credit of their merchants, the dexte-
rity of their manufacurers, the alertness acquired
by habit in every department of business, that the
hate which aims at rivalling, or supplanting them,
must expedt to struggle with many difficulties, and
be content to advance slowly. If the quantity of
productive indufftry, now in Spain, be compared
with that of the kingdom under the lafl listless
monarchs of the Austrian line, its progress muff
appear considerable and is fufficent to alarm the
ieloufy, and to call forth the mofl vigorous es-
orts, of the nations now in possession of the lucra-
tive trade which the Spaniards aim at wrefling from
hemi. One circumfiance may render those exer-
oils of Spain an object of more serious attention
te other European powers. They are not to be
fribed wholly to the influence of the crown and

B o o i its mininters. The sentiments and spirit of the

vill. people seem to second the provident care of their

monarchs, and to give it greater effect. The na.
tion has adopted more liberal ideas, not only with
refped to commerce, but domestic policy. In all
the later Spanish writers, defects in the arrange.
mnents of their country concerning both are ac.
knowledged, and remedies proposed, which igno.
rance rendered their ancestors incapable of discern.
ing, and pride would not have allowed them to
confess "+. But after all that the Spaniards have
done, much remains to do. Many pernicious inlti
tutions and abuses, deeply incorporated with the
system of internal policy and taxation , which has
been long established in Spain, mutf be abolished,
before industry and manufactures can recover an
extensive activity.

Contraband Still, however, the commercial regulations o
trade. Spain with refpef to her colonies, are too rigi

and systematical to be carried into complete exe
cution. The legislature that loads trade with im
positions too heavy, or fetters it by reftridions to
severe, defeats its own intention; and is only mul
tiplying the inducements to violate its statutes
and proposing a high premium to encourag
illicit traffic. The Spaniards, both in Europ
and America, being circumscribed in their mutua
intercourse by the jealousy of the crown , o
oppressed by its exadions, have their inventiol
Continually on the stretch how to elude its edids

'" See NOTE LXIX.

The vigilance and ingenuity of private interell dif- n o o K
cover means of effeding this, which public wis- VII.
dom cannot foresee, nor public authority prevent.
This spirit , counteracting that of the laws, per-
vades the commerce of Spain with America in all
itsbranches; and from the highest departments in
government, descends to the lowest. The very of-
icers appointed to check contraband trade, are
often employed as instruments in carrying it on;
and the boards instituted to restrain and pnilh it,
are the channels through which it flows. The
king is supposed, by the molt intelligent Spanish
writers, to be defrauded by various artifices, of
more than one half of the revenue which he ought
to receive from America "'; and as long as itis the
interest of so many persons to screen these artifices
rom detetion, the knowledge of them will never
reach the throne. " How many ordinances, fays
Corita, how many infirudions, how many let-
ters from our sovereign, are sent in order to cor-
'red abuses, and how little are they observed,
and what small advantage is derived from them !
To me the old observation appears just, that
where there are many physicians , and many
medicines, there is a want of health; where there
are many laws, and many judges, there is want
of justice. We have viceroys, presidents , go-
vernors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thou-
; sands of alguazils abound every where; but not-
'withstanding all these, public abuses continue to

Solorn, de Ind. Jure, ii. lib. .

Bs o o I " multiply "'." Time has increased the evils which
viGI. he lamented as early as the reign of Philip II. A

spirit of corruption has infected all the colonies of
Spain in America. Men far removed from the
feat of government ; impatient to acquire wealth,
that they may return speedily from wh,:t they are
apt to confider as a Rate of exile in a remote un.
healthful country; allured by opportunities too
tempting to be refilled , and seduced by the ex.
ample of those around them; find their sentiments
of honor and of duty gradually relax. In private
life, they give themselves up to a dissolute luxury,
while in their public condudt they become unmind
ful of what they owe to their sovereign and to thei
country.

Trade be. Before I close this account of the Spanish trad
tween New .
Spain an in America, there remains one detached, but im
the Philip- portant branch of it, to be mentioned. Soon afte
P"I"l. his acceflion to the throne, Philipp II. formed

scheme of planting a colony in the Philippin
islands, which had been negleted since the time0
their discovery; and he accomplished it by mean
is64. of an armament fitted out from New Spain ". Al

nila, in the island of l.uconia, was the ftatio
chosen for the capital of this new eftablilhmen
From it an active commercial intercourse bega
with the Chinese, and a confideral)le number
that indultrious people, allured by the prospect
gain, fettled in the Philippine illands under th

"T iuS. penes iic.

Torquem. i. lib. v. c. 14.

'panih proteeion. They supplied the colony so B o o K
nply with all the valuable productions and manu. Vll.
aures of the East, as enabled it to open a trade
ith America, bya course of navigation, the longest
on hind to land on our globe. In the infancy
f this trade, it was carried on with Callao, on
he coast of Peru ; but experience having disco-
ered the impropriety of fixing upon that as the
ort of communication with Manila, the staple
fthe commerce between the east and weft was
moving from Callao to Acapulco, on the coast
New Spain.
After various arrangements, it has been brought
to a regular form. One or two hips depart an.
tally from Acapulco, which are permitted to carry
it silver to the amount of five hundred thousand
cos'", but they have hardly any thing else of value
board; in return for which, they bring back
ces, drugs, china, and japan wares, calicoes,
iintz, muslins, silks, and every precious article,
ith which the benignity of the climate, or the
genuity of its people, has enabled the East to sup.
y the reft of the world. For some time the mer-
hints of Peru were admitted to participate in this
afic, and might sent annually a flip to Acapulco,
wait the arrival of the vessels from Manila, and
ceive a proportional hare of the commodities
hich they imported. At length, the Peruvians
ere excluded from this trade by most rigorous

Recop. lib. ix. c. 4;. 1. 6.

B o edicts, and all the commodities from the Eat r
VIII. served solely for the consumption of New Spain.

In consequence of this indulgence, the inhabi

ants of that country enjoy advantages unknow
in the other Spaniff colonies. The manufature
of the East are not only more suited to a wart
climate, and more filowy than those of Europq
but can be fold at a lower price; while, at the fam
time, the profits upon them are so considerable,
to enrich all those who are employed, either
bringing them from Manila, or vending them
New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer a
feller concurred in favoring this branch of co
merce, it has continued to extend in spite of reg
lations, concerted with the mot anxious jealousy
circumscribe it. Under cover of what the la
permit to be imported, great quantities of Ind
goods are poured into the markets of New Spain'
and when the flota arrives at Vera Cruz fro
Europe , it often finds the wants of the peo
already supplied by cheaper and more accepta
commodities.

There is not, in the commercial arrangeme

of Spain, any circumstance more inexplicableth
the permillion of this trade between New Sp
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its ft
damental maxim of holding the colonies in per
tual dependence on the mother-country, by p
hibiting any commercial intercourse that mi

"' See NOTE LXX.

fugge

geR to them the idea of receiving a supply of a o o e
ir wants from any other quarter. This permif. VII.

must appear till more extraordinary, from

nfidering that Spain herself carries on no diret
de with her settlements in the Philippines, and
nts a privilege. to one of her American colonies,
ich he.denies to her fuibjeds in Europe. It is
obable, that the colonists Who originrally took
felion of the Philippines, having been sent out
m New Spain, begun; .ttis intercourse with a
untry which they confidered,; in some meafuret
their parent state, befote the court of IYadrid
aware of its consequences or could eablifi
ulations in order to prevent, it. Mlany remonr
nces have been 'presented agai.ni this trade, .as
rimental to Spain, by .divetinlg into another
nnel, a large portion: .of that treasure which
ht to flow into the kingdom, as tending-,to
rife to a fpititof independence. in the colonies-,
to encourage innumerable frauds, against which
impoffibte to guard, in tranfadions so far
oved from the infpecion of government. But
trequires no light effort of political wifdor
vigor to abolifli any pradice which numbers
interested in fiupporting, and to which time has
ed the fandion of its authority, the commerce
een New Spain and Manila seems to be as con-
rable as ever, and may be confidered as one
f cause of the elegance and splendor confpi.
sin this part of the Spanifi dominions.
ut notwithfRanding this general corruption in Pbl, re.
colonies of Spain, and the diminution of the velituefrom
VOL. III. Amrica.

Z

o o it income belonging to the public, occasioned byth
VIII. illicit importations made by foreigners, as well;

by the various frauds of which the colonists then
selves are guilty in their commerce with .the parer
Rate, the Spanish monarchs receive a very conl
derable revenue from their American dominionl
This arises from taxes of various"kinds, whicl
may be divided into three capital branches. T
Iirit contains what is paid to the king, as so
reign, or fuper.iori rord of the New World: to t
class belongs the duy :on the gold and silver rai
from lthe mines, arid the tribute exated from
Indian;, the former is termed by the Spaniards
rf.Aht.'f signory, .the latter is the duty of.vajfala
Therifond branch comprehends the numerousd
ties upon commerce, which accompany and oppr
it -in: every ftep of its ppogrefs, frorm the great
t-raitfions of the wholesale merchant, to the pet
traffic of the vender by retail. The 'third inclu
what accrues to the king,. as head of the churc
and administrator of ecclesiastical funds in the N
World. In consequence of this he receives thefi
fruits, annates, spoils, and other:fpiritual revenu
levied by the apostolic chamber in Europe; an
entitled, likewise, to the profit arising from the
of the bull of Cruzado. This bull, which is p
lifhfd every two years, contains, an absolution fr
past oflences by the pope, and, among other io
nities, a permillion to eat several kinds of prohibi
food, during Lent, and on meagre days. The mio
employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their
tue's with all the fervor of interestcd eloquell

lie people, ignorant and credulous, liften with im- B o o It
plicit affenc; and every person in the Spanilh co- VIii.
loilies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, pur.
chafes a bull, which is deemed essential to his fal-
ration, at the rate set upon it by government ".

What may be the amount of those various funds, Its amount.
it is almost impossible to determine with precision.
The extent of the Spanifl dominions in America,
the jealousy of government, which renders them
inaccessible to foreigners, the mysterious silence
which the Spaniards are accuflomed to observe
with refpec to the interior slate of their colonies,
combine in covering this subjed with a veil
which it is not easy to remove. But an account,
apparently no less accurate than it is curious,
has lately been publilled of the royal revenue
in New Spain , from which we may form fomen
idea with refped to what is collected in the other
provinces. According to that account, the crown
does not receive from all the departments of
taxation in New Spain above a million of our
money, from which one half mufl be deduced
as the expense of the provincial etablinlmeit ".
Peru, it is probable , yields a fum not inferior to
this; and if we fppofe that all the other regions
of America, illcluding the islands, furnifl a third
0lire of equal value, we liall not perhaps be far
wide from the truth , if we conclude, that the net
public revenue of Spain , railcd in America , does
not exceed a millionI and a half flerling. This

11' See NOTE LXXI, 'at See NOTE LXXII

Z

t b o ic falls far short of the immense fums to which sup.

vYii, positions, founded upon conjedure, have raised

the Spaninl revenue in America ". It is remark.
able, however, upon one account. Spain and Por.
tugal are the only European powers, who derive
a dired revenue from their colonies. All the ad.
vantage that accrues to other nations, from their
American dominions, arises from the exclusive
enjoyment of their trade; but beside this, Spain
has brought her colonies to contribute towards
increasing the power of the slate; and in return
for protection, to bear a proportional fliare of the
common burden.

Accordingly, the fum which I have computed

to be the amount of the Spanisfi revenue from
America, arises wholly from the taxes collcded
there, and is far from being the whole of what ac.
crues to the king from his dominions in the New
World. The heavy duties imposed on the com-
modities exported from Spain to America ', as well
as what is paid by those which he fends home in
return; the tax upon the negroe-flaves, with which
Africa supplies the New World, together with fe-
veral smaller branches of finance, bring large fums
into the treasury, the precise extent of which I can-
not pretend to ascertain.

Iv ptnre of But if the revenue which Spain draws from
adnlillltra- America be great, the expense of adminifration

in her colonies bears proportion to it. In every

';' See NOTE LXXIIT.
"' See NOTE LXXIV.

department, even of her domeflic police and 1 o o *
inances. Spain has dopted a system more corn- viI.
ex , and more encumbered with a variety of tri-
unals, and a multitude of officers, than that of
av European nation, in which the sovereign pof-
fescs filch extensive power. From the jealous'fpirit
ith which Spain watches over her American fettle-
rlts, and her endeavours to guard against fraud
i provinces so remote from infpecon; boards
id officers have been multiplied there with fill
ore anxious attention. In a country where the
expense of living is great, the salaries allotted to
every person in public office must be high, and
uft load the revenue with an immense burden.
he Parade of government greatly augments the
eight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
he New kingdom of Granada, as representatives
the king's person, among people fond of often-
tion, maintain all the state and dignity of royalty.
heir courts are formed upon the model of that
t Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a houfec
old regularly established, numerous attendants,
nd ensigns of power, displaying such pomp, as
rdly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
ty. All the expense incurred by supporting the
xternal and permanent order of government is
erayed by the crown. The viceroys have betides
eculiar appointments suited to their exalted fta-
on. The salaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
eMely moderate; that of the viceroy of Peru is
nly thirty thousand ducats; and that of the viceroy

Z3

n o i of Mexico,twenty thousand ducats ". Of late, they

Vill. have been raised to forty thousand.

These salaries, however, constitute but a fmal

part of the revenue enjoyed by the viceroys. The
exercise of an absolute authority extending to every
department of government, and the power of dif.
posing of many lucrative offices, afford them innu.
merable opportunities of accumulating wealth. T
these, which may be confidered as legal and allowe
emoluments, large films are often added by e
adions, which in countries so far removed fro
the feat of government, it is not easy to discover
and impossible to restrain. By monopolizing for
branches of commerce, by a lucrative concern
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchant
a viceroy may raise such an annual revenue, asn
subjed of any European monarch enjoys "'. Fro
the single article of presents made to him on t
anniversary of his Name-day (which is always o
served as a high festival ), I am informed that
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thoufa
pesos. According to a Spaniflh faying, the le
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profi
depend upon his opportunities and his confcicnc
Scnfible of this, the kings of Spain , as I ha
formerly obfcrvc , grant a cominflion to t(
xviceroys only for a few years. This circumftan
however, rendecrs them often more rapacious,
ad(ds to the iingenuinty and ardor wherewith tb

t' ccop. l. iii. tit. iii. c. 72.
' See NOTE1 LXXV.

abor to improve every moment of power which B 0 0 li
hey know is hastening fast to a period; and hort VIII.
its duration is, it usually affords sufficient time
r repairing a shattered fortune, or for creating a
ew one. But even in situations so trying to hu-
an frailty, there are instances of virtue that re-
ains unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis
e Croix finilhed the term of his viceroyalty in
ew Spain with unfufpeded integrity; and in-
ead of bringing home exorbitant wealth , returned
vith the admiration and applause of a grate-
ul people, whom his government had rendered
appy.

Z4

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

AND
ILL US T R A TI O NS.

NOTE I. p. .

IN tracing the progress of the Spanilh arms in New
Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our most
certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain a
minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his ownr
exploits. Our information with refped to them, and other
tranfadions in Peru, is derived however from contemporary
and refpedable authors.

The molt early account of Pizarro's tranfadions in
Peru, was published by Francisco de Xerez, his secretary.
It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down no far-
ther than the death of Atahualpa, in i5; : for the author
returned to Spain in 4, and oon after he landed,
printed at Seville his hort History of the Conquest of
Peru, addressed to the emperor.

Don Pedro Sancho, an officer who served under Pizarro,
drew up an account of his expedition, which was translated
into Italian by Ramuio, and inserted in his valuable
colledtion, but has never been published in its original
language. Sancho returned to Spain at the fame time
With Xerez. Great credit is due to what both there authors
relate concerning the progress and operations of Pizarro;
but the residence of the Spaniards in Peru had been so short,
h the time when they left it, 4nd their intercourse with

the natives so slender, that their knowledge of the Peruvian
manners and cuflons is very imperfet.

The next contemporary historian is Pedro Cieza de

Leon, who published his Chronica del Peru, at Seville, in
I i 3. If he had finished all that he proposes in the
general division of his work, it would have been the mofi
complete history which had been published of any region
in the New \X'orld. He was well qualified to execute it,
having served during seventeen years in America, and
having visited in person molt of the provinces concerning
which he had occasion to write. But only the first part
of his Chronicle has been printed. It contains a description
of Peru, and several of the adjacent provinces, with an
account of the institutions and customs of the natives, and
is written with so little art, and such an apparent regard
for truth, that one must regret the loss of the other parts
of his work.

This los is amply supplied by Don Augustine Zarate,

who publifled, in ix S , his Hiftoria del Defcubrimiento
y Conquifta de la Provincia del Peru. Zarate was a man
of rank and education, and employed in Peru as comp-
troller-general of the public revenue. His history, whether
we attend to its matter or composition, is a book o
considerable merit; as he had opportunity to be well in.
formed, and seems to have been inquisitive with refpe to
the manners and tranfations of the Peruvians, great credit
is due to his testimony.

Don Diego Fernandez publifled his Hiftoria del Peru,

in 71. His sole object is to relate the difenfions and
civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As he served
in a public fiation in Peru, and was well acquainted bot
with the country, and with the principal actors in thof
singular scenes which he dccribes, as he possessed foun
undcrltanding, and great impartiality, his work may b
rankled amnong those of the historians most diftinguiflied so
their induflry in research , or their capacity in judging wit
refped to the events which they relate.

The lalt author who can be reckoned among the con

temporary historians of the conquest of Peru, is Garcilaffo
de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part of his work,
entitled, Commnen;tarios Reales del Origenz de los Incas
feyes del Peru, was not published sooner than the year
1609, feventy-fix years after the death of Atahualpa the
last emperor, yet as he was born in Peru , and was the
son of an officer ofdiftintion among the Spanilh conquerors,
b a Coya, or lady of the royal race, on account of
which he always took the name of Inca as he was matter
of the language spoken by the Incas, and acquainted with
the traditions of his countrymen, his authority is rated very
high, and often placed above that of all the other historians.
His work, however, is little more than a commentary
upon the Spanish writers of the Peruvain story, and
composed of quotations taken from the authors whom I have
mentioned. This is the idea which he himself gives of it,
Lib. i. c. . Nor is it in the account of facts only that
he follows them servilely. Even in explaining the institutions
and rites of his ancestors, his information seems not to
be more perfec than theirs. His explanation of the Quipos
is almost the fame with that of Acofta He produces no
specimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one which
he borrows from Bias Valera, an early missionary, whose
memoirs have never been published. Lib. ii. c. . As
for composition, arrangement, br a capacity of diftinguilhing
bets'een what is fabulous , what is probable, and what is
true, one searches for them in vain in the commentaries
of the Inca. His work , however, notwithstanding its
great defeds, is not altogether destitute of use. Some
traditions which he received from his countrymen are
preserved in it. His knowledge of the Peruvian language
has enabled him to corredt ome errors of the Spanish
writets, and he has inserted in it ome curious facts, taken
f"iiis authors whose works were never published, and are
now loft.

NOTE I. p. 7.

O NE may form an idea both of the hardships which
they endured, and of the sickliness of the regions which
they visited , from the extraordinary mortality that
prevailed among them. Pizarro carried out 112 men,
Almagro 70. In less than nine months ilo of these died,
Few fell by the sword; most of them were cut off by
difcafes. Xerez, p. 18o.

NOTE II p. e.

T HIS island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfort-
able by the unwholefomenefs of its climate, its impenetrable
woods, its rugged mountains, and the multitude of infecb
and reptile', that it is seldom any softer epithet than
that of ifrnal is employed in describing it. The fun
is almost never seen there, and throughout the year i
hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. . lib. x. c. . Dampier
touched at this illand in the year 68 ; and his accoun
of the climate is not more favorable. Vol. i. p172.
lie, during his cruise on the coast , visited most o
the places where Pizarro landed, and his description o
them throws light on the narrations of the early Spanil
historians.

, OTE IV. p. 27.

3Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spani

settlements on the continent. When Cortes began hi
expedition in the year si 8, though his armament wa
more considerable than that of Pizarro, and composed o
persons superior in rank to tho'e who invaded Peru, h
could procure no more than sixteen hprfes.

i

NOTE V. p. 28.

N the year 1740, D. Ant. liloa, and D. George Juan,
,elledl from Guayquil to Motupe, by the tfme roure
hich Pizarro took. From the de'cription of their journey,
e may form an idea of the difficulty of his march. Thle
ndv plains between St. Michael e l'ieura and Motupe
stend go miles, without water, without a tree, a plant,
rany green tiing, on a dreary stretch of burning sand.
oyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

NOTE VI. p. 34.

HIS extravagant and unseasonable discourse of Valverde
been censured by all historians, and with justice. But
ugh he seems to have been an illiterate and bigotted
nlk, notnife resembling the good Olmedo, who accom-
nied Cortes; the absurdity of his address to Atahualpa must
ut be charged wholly upon him. His harangue is
idently a translation, or paraphrase of that form,
ncerted by a junto of Spanish divines and lawyers in the
ar 109, for explaining the right of their king to the
reignty of the New World, and for directing the
cers employed in America how they should take posses-
in of any new country. See Vol. i. Note xxiii. The
atiments contained in Valverde's harangue nuft not then
imputed to the bigotted imbecility of a particular man,
t to that of the age. But Gomara and Benzoni relate
circunftance concerning Valverde, which, if authen-
renders him an object, not of contempt only, but
horror. They atert, that during the whole aion,
dverde continued to excite the soldiers to laughter,
tling to them to strike the enemy, not with the edge,
twith the points of their swords. Gom. Chron. c. X i;.
n. liftor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c ;. Such behaviour
vecry different from that of the Roman Catholic clergy

in other parts of America, where they uniformly exerte
their influence to protect the Indians, and to modera
the ferocity of their countrymen.

NOTE VII. p. 35.

T WO different fyftcms have been formed concernin
the condua of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers, in orde
to justify the violence of their countrymen, contend, tha
all the Inca's profellions of fiiendfhip were feigned; an
that his intention in agreeing to an interview with Pizarn
at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and his followers at on
blow ; that for this purpose he advanced with such
numerous body of attendants, who had arms concealec
under their garments to execute this scheme. This is th
account given by Xerez and Zarate, and adopted b]
Herrera. But if it had been the plan of the Inca to dero
the Spaniards, one can hardly imagine that he woul
have permitted them to march unmolested through th
desert of Motupe, or have neglected to defend the pass
in the mountains, where they might have been attacke
with so much advantage. If the Peruvians marched t
Caxamalca with an intention to fall upon the Spaniards
it is incunceivable, that of so great a body of men
prepared for ation, not one flould attempt to mak
resistance, but all tamely susser themselves to be butchere
hy an enemy whom they were armed to attack. Atahualia
node of advancing to the interview , has the aspect of ape
ceable procellion, not of a military enterprise. He himfclfan
his followers we.re, in their habits of ceremony, preceded,
on days of solemnity , by unarmed harbingers. Though u
nations are frequently cunning ad falle , yet, if a fchen
of deception and treachery mull be inputed either to
monarch, that had no grect reason to be alarmed at a vil
from firangers who solicited admiflion into his prceence
friends, or to an adventurer so daring, and so litt
fcrupulouus s P izarro, one cannot helitate in detclinill

where to fix the prefuiption of guilt. Even amidst the
endeavours of the Spanish writers to palliate the proceedings
of Pizarro, one plainly perceives, that it was his intention,
as well as his interest, to seize the Inca, and that he
had taken measures for that purpose previous to any suspicion
of that monarch's designs.

Garcilaffo de la Vega, extremely solicitous to vindicate

his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the crime of having
concerted the destruCtion of Pizarro and his followers, and
no less afraid to charge the Spaniards with improper
conduct towards the Inca, has framed another system. He
relaces, that a man of majestic form, with a long heard,
and garments reaching to the ground, having appeared in
rilion to Viracocha, the eighth Inca , and declared, that he
was a child of the Sun, that monarch built a temple in
honor of this person, and ereced an image of him,
resembling as nearly as poflible the singular form in which
he had exhibited himself to his view. In this temple, divine
honors were paid to him, by the name of Viracocha. P. i.
lib. iv. c. 21. lib. v. c. 2. 'When the Spaniards firit
appeared in Peru, the length of their beards, and the
dress they wore, struck every perfun so much with their
likeness to the image of Viracocha, that they supposed then
to be children of the Sun, who had descended from heaven
to earth. All concluded, that the fatal period of the
Peruvian empire was now approaching, and that the throne
would be occupied by new pofeffors. Atahualpa himself,
confidering the Spaniards as messengers from heaven, was
so far from entertaining any thoughts of reiflting them,
that he determined to yield implicit obedience to their
comnmnds. From those sentiments flowed his profefions
of love and refpedt. To those were owing the cordial
reception of Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro in his camp, and
the fubmiflive reverence with which he himself advanced
to vilit the Spanish general in his quarters; but from the
gr(s ignorance of Philipillo, the interpreter , the declaration
ol the Spaniards, and his answer to it. were so ill explained,
that by their mutual inability to comprchend ca;i other's

intentions, the fatal rencounter at Caxamalca, with all its
dreadful consequences, was occasioned.

It is remarkable, that no traces of this superstitious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be
found either in Xerez, or Sancho or Zarate, previous
to the interview at Caxanialta; and yet the two former
served under Pizarro at that time, and the latter visited
Peru soon fter the conquest. If either the Inca himself,
or his mefrengers, had addressed the Spaniards in the
words which Garcilaffo puts in their mouths, they mut
have been struck with such submissive declarations and
they would certainly have availed themselves of them to
accomplifl their own deligns with greater facility. Gar.
cilaffo himself, though his narrative of the intercourse
between the Inca and Spaniards, preceding the rencounter
at Caxamalca , is founded on the fuppolition of his
believing them to be Viracochas, or divine beings, P. ii.
lib. i. c. 17 , &c. yet with his usual inattention and
inaccuracy he admits, in another place, that the Peruvians
did not recollect the resemblance between them and the
god Viracocha, until the fatal difaficers fubfcqucnt to the
defeat at Caxamaica , and then only began to call them
Viracochas P. i. lib. v. c 2r. This is confirmed by
Herrera, dec. . lib. ii. c. 12. In many different parts
of America, if we may believe the Spanihl writers, their
countrymen were considered as divine beings who had|
descended from Heaven. But in this infiince , as in many
wh;ch occur in the intercourle between nations whore
progress in refinement is very unequal, the ideas of those
who used the exprellion were different friom the ideas of
those who heard it. For such is the idiom of the Indian
languages, or such is the implicity of thole who speak
them, that when they fee any thing with which they were
formerly unacquainted, and of which they do not know
the origin; they ay, that it came down from Heaven.
Nugnez. Rai. iii. 27, C.

The account which I have given of the entiments and
proceedings of the Peruvians, appears tu be mure inatural

and

and consistent than either of the two preceding, and is
better upported by the fads related by the contemporary
hiforians.

According to Xerez, p. 0oo, two tlioufand Peruvians
were killed. Sancho makles the number of the fain fix
or sien thoufind. Ram. iii. 274, D. By Garcilab'o.
account, five thousand weremaffacred. P. ii. lib. i. c. 2.
The nunmber which 1 have mentioned, being the medium
b crt.en the extremes , may probably be nearelt the
truth.

NOTE VIII. p. 37.

N OTHING can be a more striking proof of this, than
that three Spaniards travelled froin Caxamalca to Cuzco.
Ihe dilbince betveen them is fix hundred miles. In every
phcc throughout this great extent of country, they wvere
treated with all the honors which the Peruvians paid to
their fovercigns, and even to their divinities. Under
hrcxt of ailing what was wanting for the ranrom of
te Inca, they denlanded the pl:ttes of gold with which
:le walls of the Temple of the Sun in Cuzco were adornedl;
!id though the priests were unwilling to alienate thole
crcd ornaments , and the pople refured to violate the
;rire of their God , the three Spaniards, with their own
.nds, robbed the Temple us parc of this valuable treafurc;
1,d such was the reverence of the natives fir their
criins, that though they beheld this act of sacrilege

lth iftoniflhmrent, they did not attempt to prevent or
:lltrb the commiilTion of it. Zarat, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho,
. ,Linus. iii. 37( , D.

NOTE IX. p. 49.

CCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cu7co, after
tttlli, apart the king's ji'thj, was divideld aInong 480

VOL. Ill. A a

persons. Each redeived 4000 pesos. This amounts to
1,920,000 pesos. Dec. . lib. vi. c. 3. But as the
general, and other officers, were entitled to a share far
greater than that of the private men, the fum total muff
have risen much beyond what I have mentioned. Gomara,
c. 2. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy thenlfelves with
asserting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco was of
greater value than the ransom of Atahualpa.

NOTE X. p. 5i.

N o expedition in the New World was conducted with
more persevering courage than that of Alvarado, and in
none were greater hardships endured. Many of the persons
engaged in it were, like their leader, veterans who had
served under Cortes, inured to all the rigor of American
war. Such of my readers as have not an opportunity of
perusing the triking description of their sufferings by Zarate
or Herrera, may form rome idea of the nature of their
march from the sea-coast to Quito, by consulting the
account which D. Ant. Ulloa gives of his own journey in
i7;6, nearly in the fame route. Voy. tom. i. p. 178,
&c. or that of M. Bouguer, who proceeded from Puerto
Viejo, to Quito, by the fame road which Alvarado took.
He compares his own journey with that of the Spanish
leader, and by the comparison, gives a most striking idea
of the boldness and patience of Alvarado, in forcing hi!
way through so many obtacles. Voyage du Perou, P
28, &c.

NOTE XI. p. 2.

A 'CORDING to -lerrera, there was entered on accoun
ot the king, i gold, 55,3o0 pesos, and 5400 marl;
(each 8 ounces) of Ailver, belides fvcral venflls an

ornaments ome of gold, and others of silver; on account
of private persons, in gold 499,000 pesos, and 44,ooo
marks of ilver. Dec. . lib. vi. c. 13.

NOTE XI. p. 6.

T HE Peruvians not only imitated the military arts of the
Spaniards, but had recourse to devices of their own. As
the cavalry were the chief object of their terror, they
endeavoured to render them incapable of ating, by means
of a long thong with a stone falened to each end. This,
ihcn thrown by a kilful hand, twitted about the horse
and its rider, and entangled them so as to obftrut their
motions. Herrera mentions this as an invention of their
Lwn. Dec. . lib. viii. c. 4. But as I. have observed,
rol. ii .

p . '6, this weapon is common among several

barbarous tribes towards the extremity of South-America;
and it is more probable, that the Peruvians had observed
the dexterity with which they used it in hunting, and on
this occasion adopted it themselves. The Spaniards ere
cnliderably annoyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another instance
of the ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention. By
turning a river out of its channel, they overflowed a valley,
in which a body of the enemy was poRted, so suddenly,
that it was with the utmost difficulty the Spaniards made
their escape. Herrera, dec. . lib. viii. c. .

NOTE XIII. p. 8r.

HF.IRRER\'S account of Orellana's voyage is the most
minute, and apparently the molet accurate. It was probably
t;I;cn froln the journal o Orellana himself But the dates
arc not diltintly marlcid. lis navigation down the Coca,
tIr N;ip , begun early in February is 4 ; and he arrived
t the mnouth of the river on the 26th of ugult, having
l';et near fieven. months in the voage. Al. de la

Aa 2

Gondamine , in the year 1743 , failed from Cuenqa to
Para, a settlement of the Portuguese at the mouth of the
river, a navigation much longer than that of Orellana, in
less than four months. Voyage, p. 179. But the two
adventurers were very differently proviled for the voyage.
This hazardous undertr:king, to which ambition prompted
Orellana , and to wh;ch the love of cience led fl1. de la
Condamine, was undertaken in the year 69 , by Madame
Godin des Odonais , from conjugal affction. I he narrative
of the hardships which she suffered, of the dangers to
which nle was exposed, and of the disasters which besel
her, is one of the most singular and affecting stories in any
language, exhibiting in her condud a friking picture of
the fortitude which diftinguithes the one sex , mingled with
the sensibility and tenderness peculiar to the other. Lettre
de M. Godin, M. de la Condamine.

NOTE XIV. p. 8.

FRRERA gives a striking pi(ture of their indigence.

Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers of diltintion
under magro, lodged in the fame house, and having but
one cloak among them, it was worn alternately by him
who had occasion to appear in public, while the relt,
from the want of a decent drcfs, were obliged to keep
within doors. Their former friends and companions were so
much afraid of giving offence to Pizarro, that they durit
not entertain or even converfr with them. One may
conceive what was the condition, and what the indignation
of men once accustomed to power and opulence, when
they felt thenieflves poor and defifeed , without a rots
under which to shelter their heads, while they beheld
others, whore merit and services were not cqual to theirs,
living with fplcndor in ti'mnptuuus cditiccs. Dec. 6. lib.
viii. c. 6.

NOTE XV. p. 97,

JIERRERA, whose accuracy entitles him to great credit,
aflerts, that Gonzalo Pizarro pofTeffed domains in the
neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la Plata, which yielded
him an annual revenue greater than that of the archbishop
of Toledo, the best endowed fee in Europe. Dec. 7. lib.
vi. c. 3,

NOTE XVI. p. Ir.

ALL the Spanish writer describe his march, and the
distresses of both parties, very minutely. Zarate observes;
that hardly any parallel to it occurs in history either with
respect to the length of the retreat or the ardor of the
pursuit. Pizarro, according to his computation, followed
the viceroy upwards of three thousand miles. Lib. v. c.
i6. 26.

NOTE XVII. p. 127.

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the beld informed
hiltorian of that period, to one million four hundred
thoulland pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

NOTE XVIII. p. 1;8.

CARVLIJAL, from the beginning, had been an advocate
fir an accomlniodation with (afca. Finding Pizarro
iincup:ihle of' holding that bold crfe which he originally
fugiellted, he reconmmended to him a timely fubmillion to
his loverignl as the fhffelt icalre. 'When the prclident's
'lcrs v.ere irfl conimunicated to (arvaj.al, " By our Lady
(iiid he, in that train of' bultboncry which was fmiliar to

A a1

him ) the priest issues gracious bulls. He gives them both
good and cheap, let us rot only accept them, but wear
them as relics about our necks. " Fernandez , lib. ii. c.
63.

NOTE XIX. p. 134.

D UR ING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, even hundred
men were killed in battle, and three hundred and eighty
were hanged or beheaded. Herrera, dec. . lib iv. c. 4.
Above three hundred of these were cut off by Carvajal.
Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 9. Zarate makes the number of
those put to a violent death five hundred. Lib. vii.
c. 1.

NOTE XX. p. 143.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of
the Mexicans, I have received much information from
a large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Gorita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the year
i 5 , Philip. I1. in order to discover the mode of levying
tribute from his Indian subjeCts, that would be most
beneficial to the crown, and least oppressive to them,
addressed a mandate to all the Courts of Audience in
America, enjoining them to answer certain queries which
he proposed to them, concerning the ancient form of
government established among the various nations of Indians,
and the mode in which they had been accustomed to pay
taxes to their kings or chiefs. In obedience to this mandate,
Corita, who had relided nineteen years in America, four-
teen of which he pafled in New Spain, conlpolcd the
work of which I have a copy. He acquaints his sovereign,
that he had made it an objecL during his refidcnce in
America, and in all its provinces which he had vilited, to
inquire diligently into the manners and cutloms of the

initives, that he had conversed for this purpose with many
aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted several of the
Spanish ecclesiastics, who understood the Indian languages
moll perfectly, particularly some of those who landed in
New Spain oon after the conquest. Corita appears to
be a man of some learning, and to have carried on his
inquiries with the diligence and accuracy to which he
pretends. Greater credit is due to his testimony from
one circumstance. His work was not composed with a
view to publication, or in support of any particular theory,
but contains simple, though full answers to queries pro-
poled to him officially. Though Herrera does not mention
him among the authors whom he had followed as guides
in his hifrory, I fiould suppose, from several sacs of which he
takes notice, as well as from several expreflions which he uses,
that this memorial of Corita was not unknown to him.

NOTE XXI. p. ig.

THE early Spanifl writers were so haRy and inaccurate
in etimating the numbers of people in the provinces and
towns of America , that it is impoflible to ascertain that of
\lexico itself with any degree of precision. Cortes describes
the extent and populousness of Mexico in general terms,
ihich imply that it was not inferior to the greatest cities
in urope. Gomara is more explicit, and affirms, that
there were 60,00ooo houses or families in Mlexico. Chron.
c. 78. Hcrrera adopts his opinion Dec. 2. lib. vii. c. i ;
*aid the generality of writers follow them implicitly without
snquiry or scruple. According to this account, the
inhabitants of Mexico mult have been about oo,ooo.
Iorlucmada, with his usual propenity to the marvellous,
allets, that there were a hundred and twenty thousand
lhItLs or families in Mexico, and confequencly about
lix hundred thoulind inhabitants. Lib. iii. c. 2;. But in
t Very judicious account of the Mexican empire, by one
Of Crtcs's officers, the population is fixed at 60,000.

Aa 4

people. Ramcfio, iii. 309, A. Even by this account,
which probably is much nearer the truth than any of the
foregoing, \lexico was a great city.

NOTE XXII. p. 58.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente , that I am indebted
for this curious observation. Palafox, bishop of Ciudad
de a Puebla Los Angeles, confirms and illustrates it more
fully. The Mexican (fays he) is the only language in
which a termination indicating refpedt, fylabas reverenciales
, de corte/Ia, may be affixed to every word. By adding
the final tlllable 2in or aain to any word, it becomes a
proper expreflfion of veneration in the mouth of an inferior.
If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father is to be
used, it is Ttil, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One priest
speaking to another, calls him Teopi.xqze; a person of
inferior rank calls him Teolixcatzin. The name of the
emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico, was
Aion:te2ztima, but his vassals, from reverence, pronounced
it Ionztezulmaii. Torribio, AIS. Palaf. Virtudes dl
Indio, p. 6. The Mexicans had not only reverential
nouns, but reverential verbs. The manner in which there
are formed from the verbs in common use, is explained
by I). Jot. Aug. Aldema y Guevara in his Mexican Grammar,
No. 188.

NOTE XXII1. p. 64.

e ROM comparing several pailTgcs in Corita and llerrera,

one may collet with tbme degree of accuracy, the various
modes in which the Mlexicans contributed towards the
flpport of government. Some persons of the first order
eemn to have been cxcmpted from the payment of n"Y
tribute, and as their only duty to the public, were bound
to personal firvice in war, and to follow the banner of

c sovereign with their vafTals. 2. The immediate vafTals
tle crown were bound only to personal military fcrvice,
:t paid a certain proportion of the produce of their lands
n kin. i. Those who held offices of honor or trull,
,d a certain hnare of what they received in consequence
I holiin these. 4. Each CaIzdlle , or afuciation,
uki;vtcd ome part of the commo field allotted to it,
r the behoof of the crown, and deposited the produce
the royal granaries. S. Some part of whatever was
rouht to the public markets, whether fruits of the earth,
tr e various productions of their artists and manufacurers,
as demanded for the public use, and the merchants who
aid this were exempted from every other tax. 6. The
Iequer, or andJfiipti glebe, were bound to cultivate
ertin diftrids in every province, which may be confidered
i crow - lands, and brought the increase into public
rehouses. Thus the overeign received ome part of
hatever was useful or valuable in the country, whether
was the natural production of the foil, or acquired by
he industry of the people. What each contributed towards
e support of government, seems to have been inconfi-
erable. Corita, in answer to one of the queries put to
e Audience of Mexico by Philip II. endeavours to estimate
money the value of what each citizen might be supposed
pas, and does not reckon it at more than three or
ur reals, about eighteen pence or two flillings a head.

NOTE XXIV. p. 1r6.

ORTES, who seems to have been as much afloniflcd
ith this , as with any inflance of Mexican ingenuity, gives
particular description of it. Along one of the causeways,
)s lhe, by which they enter the city, are conducted two
lnluits , comipoLfd of clay tempered with mortar , about
( aces in breadth , and rifed about fix feet. In one of
i1e' is conveyed a ftrcam of excellent water, as large as the
(ly of a man , into the centre of the city , and it supplies

all the inhabitants plentifully. The other is empty, thpt whet
it is necefliry to clean, or repair the former , the slream o
water may be turned into it. As this conduit passes along tw
of the bridges , where there are breaches in the causeway
through which the fait - water of the lake flows , it is con
veyed over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox, the
carried from the conduit to the remote quarters of the cityh
canoes, and fuld to the inhabitants. Kelaz ap. Ramus z4x,A,

NOTE XXV. p. 166.

IN the armory of the royal palace of Madrid, are show
suits of atmor , which are called Ilontezuma's. They ar
tompofed of thin lacquered copper-plates. In the opiniol
of very intelligent judges they are evidently eastern. Th
forms of the lilver ornaments upon them, representing dr
gons , &c. may be conlidered as a confirmation of this. The
are infinitely superior in point of workmanflhip to any effo
of American art The Spaniards probably received them fror
the Philippine islands. he only unquestionable fpeciment
llcxican art that I know of in Great Britain , is a cup
very fine gold , which is fid to have belonged to Montezum
It weighs oz. 1 z dwt. Three drawings of it were exhibite
to the Society of Antiquaries , June o , 1765. A man
head is reprefehted on this cup. On one fide the full face
on the other the profile, on the third the back parts ofth
head. The relievo is said to have been produced by punchir
the inside of the cup, so as to make the representation of
face on the outlfie. The fe,,tures arc rude , but very tolerable
and certainly too rude for Spanish worlmanfhip. This ct
eras purch:lfed by Edward earl of Orford , while he lay
the harbour of Cadiz with the fleet unter his commant
and is Inow in the pollcilion of his grandson, Lord Arche
I am indebted for this information to my refpecttble at
ingenious friend 1Alr, larington.

NOTE XXVI. p. 173.

HE learned reader will perceive how much I have been
debted, in this part of my work, to the guidance of the
ilop of Gloucester, who has traced the fucceflive steps, by
hich the human mind advanced in this line of its progress,
ith much erudition, and greater ingenuity. He is the sirs ,
far as I know, who formed a rational and confiitent theory
ncerning the various modes of writing pratifed by nations,
cording to the various degrees of their improvement. Div.
egation of ftofes , iii. 69 , &c. Some important obferva-
ons have been added by M. le Prelident de Broles , the
arned and intelligent author of the Traite de la Formation
echanique des Langues, tom. i. 29 , &c.
As the Mexican paintings are the most curious monuments
tantof the earliest mode of writing, it will not be improper
give some account of the means by which they were pre-
ved from the general wreck of every work of art in America,
d communicated to the Public. For the most early
d complete collection of there published by Purchas, we
eindebted to the attention of that curious inquirer, Hakluyt.
on Antonio Mendoza , viceroy of New Spain , having
emed those paintings a proper present for Charles V. the
ip in which they were ent to Spain , was taken by a
ench cruizer, and they camhe into the po{feflion of Thevet,
king's geographer, who having travelled himfclf into the
ew World , and described one of its provinces , was a
rious observer of whatever tended to illustrate the manners
the Americans. On his death , they were purchased by
akluyt, at that time chaplain of the Englilh ambalrador to
Ierench court; and, being left by himn to Purchas,'were
blifed at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir Henry
chllan. Purchas. iii. io6 .
THE second fpecinlen of Mexican picture-writing, was
Ililhed by Dr. Francis Gemlli Carreri , in two copper-

it. The first is a m;p , or representation of the progref&
the anciJet Mexicans on their firlt arrival in the country,

and of the various flations in which they fettled, before the
founded the capital of their empire in the lake of Mexico
The second is a Chronological VWheel, or Cirele , reprefen
ing the manner in which they computed and marked thei
c¢cle of fifty two years. The former was given to him b
Dr. Critioval de Guadalajora , in.the city of Puebla de
Angeles; the latter he received from Don Carlos de Siguenz
y Congorra. But as it seems now to be a received opinio
( founded I know not on what evidence ) that Carreri w
never out of Italy, and that his famous Giro del Monl
is an account of a fiditious voyage, I have not mentione
these paintings in the text. They have, however, manifefi
the appearance of being Mexican productions, and are allo
ed to be so by Boturini, who was well qualified to determin
whether they were genuine or supposititious. The style
painting in the former is considerably more perfect than an
other specimen of Mexican design ; but as the original
said to have been much defaced by time, I fufpeit that
has been improved by ome touches from the hand of
European artist. Carreri , Churchill, iv. p. 4.-. The chr
nological wheel is a just delineation of the Mexican mode
computing time , as described by Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2,
seems to resemble one which that learned Jesuit had seen
and if it be admitted as a genuine monument, it proves th
the lMexicans had artificial , or arbitrary characters, whi
represented several things belides numbers. Each month
there represented by a symbol expreflive of some work
rite peculiar to it.

Tllr: third specimen of Mexican painting was discover

by another Italian. In 736, Lorenzo Boturini Benaduci
out for New Spain , and was led by several incidents
flu ly the language of the lexicans , and to collec t
remains of their hiiforical monuments. He prfilled nine yea
in his researches , with the entlhulilfil of a projector, a
the patience of an antiquary. In 1746 , he published
Madrid , Idea de rlna Nevi HiJlorial General de la A'eri
Septentriolnal, containing an account of the result of his inq
rics; and he added to it a catalogue of his American lliltorln

ufeum, arranged under thirty-fix different heads. His idea
a New History appears to me the work of a whimsical
edulous nian. But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings,
ibute-olls, calendars , &c. is much larger than one could
ve expected. Unfortunately a ship, in which he had ent
considerable part of them to Europe , was taken by an
nglilh privateer during the war between Great Britain and
ain which commenced in the year 1719 ; and it is pro-
able that they perished by flling into the hands of ignorant
aptors. Boturini himself incurred the displeasure of the
anifh court, and died in a hospital at Madrid. The history,
which the Idea , &c. was only a ,rooJec7ts , was never
blifhed. The remainder of his ufeum eems to have
eendifperfed. Some part of it came into the poifeflion of
e present archbishop of Toledo, when he was primate of
ewSpain, and he published from it that curious tribute-
I1 which I have mentioned.
The only other collection of Mexican paintings, as far as
can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna. By order
ftheir Imperial Majesties, I have obtained such a specimen
:these as I desired, in eight paintings, made with so much
elity , that 1 am informed the copies could hardly be
iiinguifhed from the originals. According to a note in this
o.ex Mexicanis , it appears to have been a present from
nmanuel King of Portugal to Pope Clement VII. who died
DD. i13. \fter pairing through the hands of several
ftrious proprietors , it fell into those of the cardinal of
xe -.ifenach , who presented it to the emperor Leopold.
iefe paintings are manifestly Mexican , but they are in a
le very different from any of the former. An engraving
i been made of one of them , in order to gratify such
fny readers, as may deem this an object worthy of their
tention. Were it an object of fulficient importance, it
igbt, perhips, be polible , by recourse to the plates of
archas, and the archbiflop of Toledo, as a key, to frnn
lufilhle conjectures concerning the meaning of this pidcure.
lany of the figures are evidently flinilar. A A. are targets

la tirts , alhllft i ths fiale form with thlof publiflhed by

Purchas, p. o0o, o7 , &c. B. B. are figures of temples
nearly resembling those in Purchas, p. o9 and 11 , a
in orenzana , Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotta
clothes, the figure of which occurs in almost every plate
Purchas and Lorenzana. E. E. E. seem to be Mexican captai
in their war dres , the fantaflic ornaments of which refe
ble the figures in Furchas, p. I I o, 1 1 I , 1t. I houl
suppose this piture to be a tribute- roll , as their mode
noting numbers occurs frequently. D. D. D &c. Accordin
to Boturini , the mode of computation by the number
knots , was known to the Mexicans as well as to the Per
vians, p. 8. and the manner in which the number of uni
is represented in the Mexican paintings in my poflfi,)n
seems to confirm this opinion. They plainly resemble a trin
of knots on a cord or slender rope.

Since 1 publiflled the former Edition, Mr. Waddilove

who is till pleated to continue his friendly attention to procu
me information, has discovered, in the Library of the Efcuria
a volume in folio , confiting of forty sheets of a kind
pasteboard, each the size of a common sheet of writi
paper, with great variety of uncouth and whimsical figur
of Mexican painting, in very fresh colors , and with
explanation in Spanish to most of them. The first twen
two sheets are the signs of the months, days , &c. Abo
the middle of each sheet are two or more large figures
the month, surroundea by the signs of the days. The
eighteen sheets are not so filled with figures. They feemn
be signs of Deities, and images of various objects. Accordi
to this Calendar in the Escurial , the Mexican year contain
286 days, divided into 2z months of days. Each day
rcprefented by a differcnt sign, taken from omen natu
oh jet, a serpent , a dog, a lizard, a reed, a house, &
The igns of days in the Calendar of the Escurial are pr
cic(ly the ftnie with those mentioned by Boturini, Idea,&
p. 4 . But , if we may give credit to that Author, t
Mexican year contained ;6o days, divided into 8 mont
of 20 days. The order of days in every month was colni
ed, according to him , first by what he calls a trildetennl

rogrefilo of days from one to thirteen, in the fme manner
in the Calendar of the Escurial, and then by aptenary
rogrefion of days from one to seven, making in all twenty.
this Calendar, not oly the igns which distinguish each
ay, but the qualities supposed to be peculiar to each month,
emarked. There are certain weaknesses which seem to
company the human mind through every stage of its progress
ob(ervation and science. Slender as was the knowledge of
e Mexicans in Astronomy, it appears to have been already
onneded with judicial Atrology. The fortune and character
persons born in each month are supposed to be decided
some superior influence predominant at the time of nativity.
nce it is foretold in the Calendar, that all who are born
one month will be rich , in another warlike , in a third
xurious , &c. The pasteboard , or whatever ubftance it
v be on which the Calendar in the Escurial is painted ,
ms, by Mr. \Waddilove's description of it , to resemble
early that in the Imperial Library at Vienna. In several
aticulars', the figures bear some likeness to those in the
late which 1 have published. The figures marked D. whlch
duced me to conjecture, that this painting might be a
ibute-roll similar to those published by Purchas and the
chbifhop of Toledo, Mr. Waddilove supposes to be signs
days; and I have such confidence in the accuracy of his
servations, as to conclude his opinion to be well founded.
appears, from the charaders in which the explanations of
e figures are written , that this curious monument of
lexican art has been obtained, soon after the conquci of

Empire. It is ingular that it should never have been
ctioned by any Spanish Author.

NOTE XXVII. . 174.

HIE firfl was called, the Prince of the deathful Lance;

ie 'ccond, the Divider of Alcn; the third, the Shedder
Blood; the fourth, thy Lord i' the )Drk-hlufl. Alta,
I vi. c. 2 .

NOTE XXVIII. p. 82.

T HE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more lol
than any in New Spain, was likewise the moit considerable
But it was nothing more than a mount of solid eart
According to Torquemada , it was above a quarter of
league in circuit at the base, and rose to the height
forty fathom. Ilun. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19. Even l
Clavigero acknowledges that all the Alexican temples wer
solid fiructures, or earthern mounts, and of confequenc
cannot be confidered as any evidence of their having mad
any conliderable progress in the art of building. Claig
II. 207.

From infpeting various figures of temples in th

paintings engraved by Purchas, there fecms to be fn
reason for ufpcding that all their temples were co
ftructed in the fame manner. See Vol. iii. p. io9
110. I113.

NOTE XXIX. p. 18;.

N OT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even
Mlexico itself, the houses of the people were mere hut
built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees. The
were extremely low , and light , and without an
furniture but a few earthen vessels. Like the rudest In
dians , several families resided under the fame roof
without having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. 2
lib. vii. c. 1 . lib. x. c. 22. Dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17
Torquem. lib. iii. c. 23.

NOTE XXX. p. 18;.

I AM informed by a perfin who resided long in Nc
Spain, and vilited alnolt every pruvince ol it, that thr

is not, in all the extent of that vast empire, any mo-
nument, or veffige of any building more ancient than the
tonquect, nor of any bridge or highway, except ome
remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe to that gate of
Mexico by which Cortes entered the city. MS. penes me.
The author of another account in manuscript observes,
" That at this day there does not remain even the fialleft
reftige of the existence of any ancient Indian building,
piLblic or private, either in Mexico or in any province of
New Spain. I have travelled, fays he, through all the
countries adjacent to them, viz. New Galicia, New
1ifcay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa, the New Kingdom
of Leon, and New Santandero, without having observed
any monument worth notice, except the ruins near an
ancient village in the valley de Cadas Grandes, in lat. N.
go. 46'. longit. 28. 24'. from the island of Teneriffe,
or 460 leagues N. N. W. from Mexico. He describes this
minutely, and it appears to have been a paltry building of
urtfand stone, plastered over with white earth or lime. A
"llionary informed that gentleman, that he had discovered
the ruins of another settlement imilar to the former, about
a hundred leagues towards N.W. on the banks of the
River St. Pedro. MIS. penes me.

Those testimonies derive great credit from one cir-
cunftance, that they were not given in support of any parti-
cular fvftem or theory, but as simple answers' to queries
which I had proposed. It is probible, however, that
when these gentlemen aflert, that no ruins or monuments
of any ancient work whatever are now to be discovered in
the Mexican Empire, they meant that there were no such
ruins or monuments as conveyed any idea of grandeur or
magnificence, in the works of its ancient inhabitants. For
it appears from the testimony of several Spanish authors,
thait in Otumba , Tlafcal;a, Cholula, (&c some vestiges of
ancien buildings are still visible. Villa Segnor, Theatro
Amer p 41.. t1o. 1 . D. Fran. Ant lorenzana,
,rmnerlv archbiflop of Mlexico, and now of Toledo, in his
intrlthiction to that edition of the Cartas de Kelcion of

VOL. 11. B b

Cortes, which he published at Mexico, mentions some
ruins which arc Itill vilible in several of the towns through
which Cortes paflcd in his way to the capital, p. 4, &c.
Vut neither of there authors give any description of them,
end they feemi to be to very inconliderable, as to show
only that some buiildings had once been there. The large
mount of earth at Cholula, which the Spaniards digniied
with the n.oe of temp)le, still remains , but without any
fleps by which to ascend, or any .facing of ifone. It
appears now like a natural mount, covered with grass and
lhrubs, and poflibly it was never any thing more.
Torquerm. lib. iii. c. 19. 1 have received a minute
description of the remains of a temple near Cuernavaca,
-on the road fr(om Alexico to Acapulco. It is compoed of
large ltones , fitted to each other as nicely as those in the
buildings of the Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned.
At the foundation it forms a square of zs yards; but as it
rites in height, it diminishes in extent, not gradually, buti
by being contracted suddenly at regular distances, so that
it must have resembled the figure B in the plate. It
terminated, it is said, in a spire.

NOTE XXXI. p. 89.

H E exaggeration of the Spanifl historians, with refpe&

to the number of human victims sacrificed in Mexico,l
appears to be very great. According to Gomara, there!
was no year in which twenty thousand human victims were?
not otlfred to the Mexican Divinities, and in some years,
they amounted to fifty thousand, Chron. c. 229. The'
skulls of those unhappy persons were ranged in order in
a building erected for that purpose, and two of Curtes's
officers who had counted them, informled onmara that their1
number was a hundred and thirty-fix thoufiuld. Ibid. c. 82.
Herrera's account is tIill more incredible, that the number
of victims was ft great, that five thousand have been
sacrificed in one day, nay, on ofme occafiors, no less than

twenty thousand. Dec. iii. lib; ii. c. ix6 Torquemada
goes beyond both in extravagance, for he asserts, that
tweity thouiand children , exclusive of other vidtimss
were laughtered annually. Mun. Irid. lib. vii. c. 2r The
moit respectable authority in favor of fich high nunibers is
that of Zumurraga, the first bililop of Mexico, who in a
letter to rhe chapter general of his order, ,5. D. 6 ,
asserts thtnt the Mexicans sacrificed ar:llillv twenty thoullnd
victims. D;lvila, Teatro cclef. 126. In opposition to all these
accounts, B1 de las Casas obServes, thiat if the're had been
such an annual waste of the human species, the couitry
could never have arrived at that degree of populuf;efs,
for which it vas remarkable when the Spaniards fitIt landed
there. This reasoning is jult If the number of vidtim
in all the provinces of New Spain had been so great, not
only mulf population have been prevented from increasing
but the human race mutl have been exterminated in a
short time. For betides the walte of the species by such
numerous sacrifices, it is observable that wherever the fate
of captives taken in war, is either certain death or perpetual
lavery. as men can gain nothing by ubmitting speedily to
an eem , they always rcfift to the uttermot, and war
becomes bloody and deftrutive to the lall degree. Las
C3fas positively afterts, that the Mexicans never sacrificed
more than fifty or a hundred persons in a year. See his
difpiue with Sepulveda, subjoined to hi's Bievifliina
Relacion, p. oq. Cortes does not specify what number
of victims was sacrificed annually, but B. Dial del Caftello
relates, that an inquiry having been made, with refped
to this, by the Franciscan Monks, who were sent into
New :Spiin immediately after the conquest, it was found
that about two thousand five hundred were sacrificed every
year in Mexico. C 207.

lBb

NOTE XXXII. p. 90.

IT is hardly necessary to observe, that the Peruvian
Chronology is not only obscure, but repugnant to conclusions
deduced from the mos accurate and extenlive observations,
concerning the time that'elapfes during each reign, in
any given fucceflion of princes. The medium has been
found not to exceed twenty years. According to Acofta
and Garcilatfo de la Vega, Huana Capac, who died about
the year 1g27, was the twelfth Inca. According to this
rule of computing the duration of the Peruvian monarchy
ought not to have been reckoned above two hundred and
forty years; but they affirm that it had fubfifRed four
hundred years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. r9. Vega, lib. i.
c. 9- By this account each reign is extended at a mediun
to thirty-three years, instead of twenty, the number
ascertained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but so
imperfec were the Peruvian traditions, that though the
total is boldly marked, the number of years in each reign,
is unknown,

NOTE XXXIII. p. 197.

M ANY of the early Spanish writers assert, that thj
Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xeres, p. 190. Zarate
lib. i. c. Ix. Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But Garcilaffo de
Vega contends , that though this barbarous pratic
prevailed among their uncivilized ancestors, it was totall
abolished by the Incas, and that no human vidim wa
ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This allbrtion
and the plausible reasons with which he confirms it, ar
sufficient to refute the Spanifl writers, whose account
seem to be founded entirely upon report, not upon wha
they themselves had observed. Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. 1
one of their festivals, the Peruvians offered cakes of brea
moistened with blood drawn from the iarms, the e)

brows, and noses of their children. Id. lib. vii c. 6. This
rite may have been derived from their ancient pradtice, in
their uncivilized ate, of sacrificing human vidcims.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 203.

1 HE Spaniards have adopted both those customs of the
ancient Peruvians. They have preserved some of the
aqueducts or canals, made in the days of the Incas, and
have made new ones, by which they water every field
that they cultivate. Ulloa, Voyage, tom. i. 422, 477.
They likewise continue to use guano, or the dung of sea-
fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a description of the almost
incredible quantity of it in the small islands near the coast.
Ibid. 481.

NOTE XXXV. p. 2o5.

THE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at
Callo in the plain of Lacatunga, and that of Atun-Cannar,
are described by Ulloa, torn. i. 26, &c. who infpeded
them with great care. M. de Condamine published a
curious memoir concerning the ruins of Atun-Cannar. Mem.
de 'Acadenmie de Berlin, A. D. 1746, p. 45. Acofta
deScribes the ruins of Cuzco, which he had examined.
Lib. vi. c. I4. Garcilaflb, in his usual style, gives
pompous and confued descriptions of several temples, and
other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. 21. lib. vi. c. 4.
Don -- Zapata, in a large treatise concerning Peru,
xihich has not hitherto been publihed, communicates some
infbrmation with respect to fevcral monuments of the ancient
Peruvianls, which have not been mentioned by other authors.
IlS. rener me, Articulo xx. Ulloa describes some of the
ancient Peruvian fortifications, which were likewise works
f great extent and solidity. Tom. i. 9 . Three
iricumfilnccs truclk all those observers: the vast fi7.e of

Bb }

the flones which the Peruvians employed in some of their
buildings. Acoft mcafured one, which was thirty feet
long, eighteen broad , and fix in thiclnefs; and yet, he
adds, that in the fortress at Cuzco, there were sones
cofiderably larger. It is difficult to conceive how the
Peruvians could move these, and raise them to the height
even of twelve feet. The second circuniftance is, the
imperfedion of the Peruvian art, when applied to working
in timber. By the patience and perseverance natural to
Americans, stones may be formed into any shape, merely
by rubbing one againlt another, or by the use of hatchets
or other instruments made of stone; but with such rude
tools, little progress can be made in carpentry. The
Peruvians could not mortize two beams together, or give
any degree f union, or flability to any work composed of
timber. As they could not form a centre, they were
totally unacquainted with the use of arches in building,
nor can the Spanish authors conceive how they were
able to frame a roof for those ample ftrudures which they
raised.

The third circuinfmance is a friking proof, which all

the monuments of the Peruvians furnish, of their want of
ingenuity and invention, accompanied with patience no
jess astonishing None of the stones employed in those
works were formed into any particular or uniform shape,
which could render them fit for being compadced together
in building. The Indians took them as they fell from the
mountains, or were raised out of the quarries. Some
were lquare, bonle t iangular, foime convex, some concave.
Their art and indufiry were employed in joining them
together, by forming such hollows in the one, as perfedtl
correlpondcd to the projections or risings in the other.
This tedious operation, which might have been o eafil
abridged, by adapting the surface of the stones to each!
other, either by rubbing, or by their hatchets of coppcr;
would be deemed incredible, if it were not put beyondl
doubt by inpedting the remains of those buildings. I1
gives them a very singular appearance to an European

eve. There is no regular layer or stratum of building
and no one flone refenbles another in dimensions or form.
At the fame time, by the persevering, but ill-direded
indlftry of the Indians, are all joined with that minute
nicety which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this observation
cocerning the form of the stones in the fortress of Sltun-
Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pineto gives a similar description
of the fortress of Cuzco, the most perfed of all the
Peruvian works. Zapata, MS. penes me. According to
M. de la Condamine, there were singular strata of building
hi tome parts of Atun - Cannar , which he remarks as
singular , and as a proof of some progress in improve-
ment.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 209.

THE appearance of those bridges, which bend with
their own weight, wave with the wind, and are considerably
aitated by the motion of every person who pases along
them, is very frightful at first. But the Spaniards have
found them to be the easiest mode of palling the torrents
ii Peru, over which it would be difficult to throw more
lolid ftrucdures either of stone or timber. They form those
hanging bridges so strong and broad, that loaded mules
pars along them. All the trade of Cuzco is carried on
by means of such a bridge over the river Apurimac. Ulloa,
tom. i. 58. A more simple contrivance was employed
in pafling smaller streams: A basket, in which the
traveller was placed, being suspended from a firong rope
f:retcled across the stream, it was pushed or drawn from
one fide to the other. Ibid.

Bb 4

NOTE XXXVII. p. 20.

M Y information with refped to those events is taken
from Noticia breve de la expedicion militar de Sonora y
Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eftado , en que pot
confequencia de ello, fe han puefto ambas provincias,
published at Mexico, June 17th, 1771 , in order to satisfy
the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnished the
viceroy with money for defraying the expense of the
armament. The copies of this Noticia are very rare in
IMladrid; but I have obtained one, which has enabled me
to communicate there curious fads to the Public. Accord.
ing to this account, there was found in the mine Yecorato
in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two carats, which
weighed ixteen marks four ounces four ochavas; this was
tent to Spain as a present fit for the king, and is now de.
polited in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

NO T E XXXVIII. p. 220.

TlHE uncertainty of geographers with refpet to this
point is remarkable, for Cortes seems to have surveyed its
coasts with great accuracy. The archbishop of Toledo has
published, from the original, in the poffefion of the
Mlarquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a map draw
in 4, by the pilot Domingo Cafitilo, in which Californi
is laid down as a peninsula , firetching out nearl
in the fame diredion which is now given to it in th
belt maps, and the point where Rio Cotorado enters the
gulf is marked with precilion. Hilt. de la Nueva Efpagna,
327.

.4

NOTE XXXIX. p. 22;.

I A^ indebted for this fat to M. I'Abbe Raynal, tom.
ii. 10o. and upon consulting an intelligent person, long:
ieJtlcl on the iMolquito hore, and who has been engaged in the
,rood trade, I find that ingenious author has been welt
in(rmeni. The logwood , cut near tle town of S. Francis
f Campeachy, is of much better quality than that on the
other ide of Yucatan, and the Englilh trade in the Bay of
ionduras is almost at an end.

NOTE XL. p. 240.

. Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enumerated
m causes of the rapid depopulation of Alexico, to which
e gives the name of the Ten Plagues. Many of these
rnot peculiar to that province. i. The introduction of
e fall-pox. This disease was first brought into New
ain in the year 1 20, by a negroe- slave who attended
lrvaez in his expedition against Cortes. Torribio affirms,
at one half of the people in the provinces, visited
th this ditemper, died. To this mortality occaftoaed
the small-pox, Torquemada adds the deftrudive effects
itwo contagious distempers which raged in the years I 54
id 176. In the former 8oo,ooo; in the latter, above
millions perished, according to an exact account taken
order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 642. The finall-
M was not introduced into Peru for several years after

invasion of the Spaniards, but there too that distemper
oved very fatal to the natives. Garcia, Origen, p. 88.
The numbers who were killed or died of famine in
eir war with the Spaniards, particularly during the siege
Mexico. ;. The great famine that followed after the
educdioln of Mexico, as all the people engaged, either on
c sidle or other, had neglected the cultivation of their
ds. Something similar to this happened in all the other

countries conquered by the Spaniards. 4. The grievous
tasks imposed by the Spaniards upon the people belonging
to their Repartimientos. ¢. The opprellive burden of
taxes which they were unable to pay, and from which
they could hope for no exemption. 6. The numbers
employed in collecting the gold, carried down by the torrents
from the mountains, who where forced from their own
habitations, without any provilion made for their subsistence
and subjected to all the rigor of cold in those elevate
regions. 7. The immense labor of rebuilding Mexico
which Cortes urged on with such precipitate ardor
as destroyed an incredible number of people. 8. Th
number of people condemned to servitude, under variou
pretexts, and employed in working the silver - mines
These, marked by each proprietor with a hot iron, lik
his cattle, were driven in herds to the mountains. Th
nature of the labor to which they were fubjeded there
the noxious vapors of the mines, the coldness of th
climate, and scarcity of food, were so fatal, tha
Torribio affirms, the country round several of tho
mines, particularly near Guaxago. was covered wit
dead bodies , the air corrupted with their stench, an
so many vultures, and other voracious birds, hovere
about for their prey, that the fun was darkened with thei
flight. xo. The Spaniards, in the different expeditio
which they undertook, and by the civil wars which the
carried on, destroyed many of the natives, whom the
compelled to serve them as Tamnemes, or carriers of burden
This last mode of oppre(fion was particularly ruinous to th
Peruvians. From the number of Indians who perilhed
Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the countries to the ea
of the Andes, one may form rome idea of what th
fufrered in similar services, and how fal they were was
by them. Torribio, MS. Corita in his Breve y Sumar
Relacion, illustrates and confirms several of Torribi
observations, to which he refers. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLI. p. 241.

VEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii. c. Ig.
ut the pallion of that great man for fyflem, fonetimes
ndered him inattentive to research; and from his capacity
refine, he was apt, in some instances, to overlook
bvious and jufl causes.'

NOTE XLII. p. 24r.

A STIRONG proof of this occurs in the testament of
ibella, where she discovers the most tender concern for
e hunane and mild usage of the Indians. Those laudable
timents of the queen have been adopted into the public
w of Spain, and serve as the introduction to the regulations
:itained under the title of the good treatment of the Indians.
lcopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE XLIII. p. 244.

N the eventh Title of the firit hook of the Recopilaciot,
hich contains the laws concerning the powers and
nations of archbishops and bifflops, almost a third part
them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as
urdians of the Indians, and points out the vatious me-
lds in which it is their duty to interpose, in order to
efend them from oppreflion, either with refpedt to their
trlbns or property. Not only do the laws commit to
ihen this honorable and humane office, but the eccleliaftics
f America atually exercise it.

Innumerable proofs of this might be produced from
panilh authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as he was
Ot difjiofed to ascribe any merit to the popish clergy , to
hich they were not fully entitled. Survey, p. 142. 192,
c. Henry Hawks, an English merchant, who resided

five years in New Spain, previous to the year 172, give
the fame favorable account of the popiflh clergy. Hakluyt
iii. 466. By a law of Charles V. not only bishops, b
other eccleliaftics, are impowered to inform and admori
the civil magifirates, if any Indian is deprived of his ju
liberty and rights: Recopilac. lib. vi. tit. vi. ley 4
and thus were constituted legal protectors of the Indians
Some of the Spanish ecclesiastics refused to gran
absolution to such of their countrymen as possessed Encomni
endasr, and confidered the Indians as slaves, or employe
them in working their mines. Gonz. Davil. Teatro Eccle
i. 157.

NOTE XL1V. p. 244.

A CCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains 400
families, and he mentions it only as one of the large
Indian towns in America, p. o14.

NOTE XLV. p. 244.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of th
'state of population in those kingdoms of Furope where th
police is molt perfect, and where science has made t
greatest progress. In Spanish America, where knowled
is ill in its infancy, and few men have leisure to enga
in researches merely speculative, little attention has bee
paid to this curious inquiry. But in the year 741, Phil
V. enjoined the viceroys and governors of the fever
provinces in America , to make an actual survey of t
people under their jurisdiction, and to transmit a repo
concerning their number and occupations. In confequen
of this order, the Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of N
Spain, appointed D. Jos. Antonio d Villa Segnor y Sanche
to execute that commillion in New Spain. From the repor
of the magillrates in the several diftridts, as well as fro
his own obfcrvations, and long acquaintance with molt

e provinces, Villa Segnor published the result of his
quiries in his Theatro Americano. His report, however,
imperfeCt. Of the nine dioceses, into which the Mexican
npire has been divided, he has published an account of
ie only, viz. the archbishopric of Mexico, the bishoprics
Puebla de los Angeles, Mechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nueva
alicia. The bishoprics of Yucatan , Verapaz, Chiapa,
nd Guatimala, are entirely omitted, though the two latter
omprehend countries, in which the Indian race is more
numerous than in any part of New Spain. In his survey
the extensive diocese of Nueva Galicia, the ituation of
different Indian villages is described, but he specifies
e number of'people only in a small part of it. The In-
ans of that extensive province, in which the Spanish
ninion is imperfectly etabliihed, are not registered with
e fame accuracy as in other parts of New Spain. Ac-
rding to Villa Segnor, the aual state of population in
e five dioceses above mentioned is of Spaniards, negroes,
lattoes, and meltizos, in the dioceses of

Families,

Mexico - 10,o20
Los Angeles - - - - ,600
Mcchoacan 30,840
Oaxaca -7,2 96
Nueva Galicia 16,770

190,708

At the rate of five to a family, the total number is 9 s,40

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico 19, 1 1
Los Angeles - - - - 88,2
Alechoacan - - - 3 6, 96

axaca - -- - 44,222
Nueva Galicia 6,222

294,391

At the rate of five to a family, the total number i:
X.47 1,9sq . We may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken from
the llatricit a, or register, according to which the tributf
paid by them is collected. As four diocefcs of nine arc
totally omitted ,and in that of Nueva Galicia the numbers are
imperfedly recorded, we may conclude, that the number o
Indians in the Mexican empire exceeds two millions.

The account of the number of Spaniards , &c. seems no

to be equally complete. Of many places, Villa Segnor o
serves in general terms, that several Spaniards, negroes, an
people of a mixed race, reside there, without specifying thei
number. If , therefore, we make allowance for these, an
for all who reside in the four dioceses omitted the numbe
of Spaniards , and of those of a mixed race, may probabl
amount to a million and a half. In foine places, Villa Segn
diltinguiihes between Spaniards and the three inferior rac
of negroes, mulattoes, and meitizos, and marks their numb
separately. But he generally blends them together. Butfro
the proportion observable in those places, where the numb
of each is marked, as well as from the account of the fta
of population in New Spain by other authors, it is manife
thar the number of negroes and persons of a mixed race
exceeds that of Spaniards. Perhaps the latter ought not to b
reckoned above oo,ooo to a million of the former.

Defective as this account may be, I have not been ab

to procure such intelligence concerning the number of peop
in Peru, as might enable me to form any conjecture equal
satisfying with rcfpect to the deg- of its population. I ha
been informed. that in the ear 176 , the procetor oft
Indians in the viceroyalty of Peru computed that 612,7S
paid tribute to the king. As all females, and pcrfons und
age, are exempted fiom this tax in Peru, the total numb
of Indians ought, by that account , to be 2,449,12°.
pener fie.

I shall mention another nlode by which one

compute, or at leall form a guels , concerning the itate
population in New Spain and Peru. According to an accou

wrhich I have reason to confider as accurate, the number
of copies of the bull of' Cruzada, exported to Peru on each
newpublication, is , , 9 ; t New Spain 2,649,326.
an informed , that but fw Indians purchase bulls , and
that they are fold chiefly to the Spanish inhabitants , and
those of mixed race, so that the number of Spaniards, and
ieople of a mixed race, will amount by this mode of com-
putation to at least three millions.

The number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spanish America , may give us some idea of the extent of
population, and correct the inaccurate, but popular notion
ntertained in Great Britain, concerning the weak and desolate
late of their colonies. The city of Mexico contains at. least
io,ooo people. It is remarkable that Torquemada , who
rote his Alonarquzia Izdlianza about the year 16 2, reckons
he inhabitants of Mlexico at that time to be only 7ooo
Spaniards and ooo Indians. Lib. iii. c. 26. Puebla de los
ngeles contains above 60,000 Spaniards, and people of a
mixed race. Villa Segnor , p. 247. Guadalaxara contains
bove 30,000 , exclusive of Indians. Id. ii. 206. Lima
contains 4,oo0. D. Cosine ueno, Defcr. de Peru, 1764.
arthagena contains 2,ooo0. Potofi contains 25,ooo.
!ueno , 1767. Popayan contains above 20,000. Ulloa, i.
287. Towns of a second class are till more numerous. The
ities in the most thriving settlements of other European
rations in America cannot be compared with these.
Such are the detached accounts of the number of people
several towns, which I found scattered in authors whom
thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained an enume-
ation of the inhabitants of the towns in the province of Quito,
the accuracy of which I can rely; and I communicate it
the Public, both to gratify curiosity, and to rectify the
ilaken notion which I have mentioned. St. Francisco de
uito contains between o and 60,000 people of all the
iffercnt races. Betides the city , there are in the Corregi.
ieto 29 curar or parishes established in the principal
illages, each of which has smaller hamlets depending upon
The inhabitants of these are mostly Indians and Mestizos.

St. Juan de Pasto has between 6 and 800o inhabitants
betides 27 dependent villages. St. Mliguel de Ibarra 700
citizens, and ten villages. The diftridt of Havala between l
and ao,ooo people. The diltrid of Tacunna between
and ,ooo. The diftrid of Ambato between 8 and o,oo0
besides 6 depending villages. The city of Riobamba betwee
I6 and o2, ooo inhabitants , and 9 depending villages
The diftric' of Chimbo between 6 and ooo. The city o
Guyaquil from 6 to 20, ooo inhabitants and 14 dependin
villages. The diltrid of Atuafi between q and 6000 , a
4 depending villages. The city of Cuenza between 2 an
3o, ooo inhabitants , and 9 populous depending villages
The town of Laxa from 8 to o, ooo inhabitants, and i
depending villages. This degree of population , though flende
if we confider the vast extent of the country, is far beyon
what is commonly supposed. I have omitted to mention, i
its proper place, that Quito is the only province in Spani
America that can be denominated a manufacturing country
hats, cotton stuffs , and coarse woollen cloths, are mad
there in such quantities, as to be sufficient not only for t
consumption of the province, but to furnish a confiderabl
article for exportation into other parts of Spanish Americ
I know not whether the uncommon industry of this provinc
should be confidered as the cau'e or the effet of its pop
loufnefs. But among the oentatious inhabitants of the Ne
World, the paflion for every thing that comes from Euru
is so violent, that I am informed the manufactures of Qui
are o much undervalued, as to be on the decline.

NOTE XLVI. p. 20o.

T HESE are eftabliflled at the following places. St. Domin
in the illand of Hifipaniola, /llexico in New Spain, Lima
Peru, Panama in Tierra Firuon , St. Iago in Guatimal
Guadalaxara in New Galicia, Santa F in the New Klingd
of Granada , La Plata in the country of Los Charcas,
Francisco de (Quito , St. Jago de Chili , Buenos Ayrcs.
each of theli are fubjedted liveral large provilces , and io

so far removed from the cities where the courts are fixed,
that they can derive little benefit fiom their jurifdilion.
The Spanifl writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of
Audience, but they include that of Manila in the Philippine
Illn ds.

NOTE XLVII. p. 2 7.

ON account of the distance of Peru and Chili fiom Spain,
and the difficulty of carrying commodities of' fich bulk as
oine and oil across the ifihmus of Panama, the Spaniards in
those provinces have been permitted to plant vines and olives.
But they are strictly prohibited from exporting wine or oil
to any of the provinces on the Pacific Ocean, which are in
such a situation as to receive them from Spain. Recop. lib. i.
tit. xvii. 1. 15 - 18.

NOTE XLVIII. p. -,8.

TIIIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D. i<o,
hiii - eight years after the discovery of America. Hist. Novi
Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2r. But as Benzoni wrote ith the spirit
of a malecontent, disposed to detract from the Spaniards in
every particular, it is probable that his calculation is too low.

NOTE XLIX. p. 260.

M Y information, with refpea to the division and tranf-
million of pioperty in the Spanish colonies , is iperfed.
The Spanish authors d not explain this fully, and have not
perhaps attended ffficiently to the eftedts of their own
inltitutions and laws. Solorzano de Jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. ii.

16. explains in roine meaure the introdutiion of the tenure
ol MaiyoraJo , and mentions fclme of' its elVlcts. Villa Segnor
takes notice of con ce

of
t li la' it lie obfcrvcs ,

VO0L. III. C c

that in some of the bes situations in the city of Mexico, a
good deal of ground is unoccupied , or covered only with
the ruins of the houses once ereCted upon it; and adds, that
as this ground is held by right of layorafgo , and cannot
be alienated, that desolation and those ruins become perpetual
Theatr. Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

NOTE L. p. 267.

T HERE is no law that excludes Creoles from offices eith
civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there are many Cediela
which recommend the conferring places of trut indifcrimi
nately on the natives of Spain and America. Betancourt
Figueroa, Derecho, &c. p. , 6. But notwithstanding fuc
repeated recommendations , preferment in almost every lin
is conferred on native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of thi
is produced by the author last quoted. From the discovery o
America to the year I6 7 , three hundred and sixty - nin
bishops, or archbishops, have been appointed to the differ
ent dioceses in that country , and of all that number onl
twelve were Creoles, p. 40. This predilection for Europea
seems still to continue. By a royal mandate, issued in 1776
the chapter of the Cathedral of Mexico is directed to nomi
nate European ecclesiastics of known merit and abilities, tha
the King may appoint them to supply vacant benefie
IS. penes mie.

NOTE LI. p. 267.

M ODERATE as this tribute may appear , such is th
extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces of America
that the exacing of it is intolerably oppreflive. Pegna, Itine
por Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

NOTE LII. p. 268,

1[ New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit and
services of the first conquerors, as well as the small revenue
arising from the country previous to the discovery of the
mines of Sac.tecas , the encomiendas were granted for three,
and sometimes for four lives. Kecopil lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 4, &c.

NOTE LIII. p. 269.

D. Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in mines is not
noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, that many
)lelHizos and Indians, who do not belong to any Reparti-
mirnto , voluntarily hire themselves as miners; and several
of te Indians, when the legal term of their service
expires, continue to work in the mines of choice. Entreten.
p. 265. But his opinion concerning the wholefomnefs of
this occupation is contrary to the experience of all ages;
and wherever men are allured by high wages, they will
engage in any species of labor, however fatiguing or
pernicious it may be. D. Hern. Carillo Altemirano relates
a curious fad incompatible with this opinion. Wherever
mines are wrought, fays he., the number of Indians
decreases; but in the province of Campeachy, where there
are no mines, the number of Indians has increased more
thin a third since the conquest of Amnerica, though neither
the foil nor climate be so fvorable as in Peru or Mexico.
Clhert, Colledi. In another memorial presented to Philip
111. in the year 609, Captain Juan Gonzalez de Azevedo
afltrts, that in every diltridt of Peru, where the Indians
arc compelled to labor in the mines, their numbers were
redluccd to the half, and in ome places to the third, of
wh:it it was under the viceroyalty of Don. Fran. Toledo in
I181. Colb. Collce.

Cc 2

NOTE LIV. p. 270.

AS labor of this kind cannot be prescribed with legal
accuracy, the tasks seem to be in a great measure arbitrary,
and like the service. exadted by feudal superiors, in viile,
prato utt rzeJje, from their vafTals, are extremely burden.
ifome, and often wantonly oppressive. Pegna, Itiner. por
Parochos de lndios.

NOTE LV. p. 270.

HE turn of service known in Peru by the name o

Iita , is called Tanda in New Spain. There it continue
no longer than a week at a time. No person is called t
serve at a greater distance from his habitation than 2
miles. This arrangement is less oppreflive to the Indian
than that established in Peru. IMemorial of Hern. Carili
Altamirano. Colbert, Colled.

NOTE LVI. p. 273.

T HE strongest proof of this may be deduced from th
laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of regulation
to prevent abuses, e may form an idea of the numbe
of abules that prevail. Though the laws have, wifely
provided that no Indian fiall be obliged to serve in an
mine at a greater distance from his place of relidcnce tha
thirty miles; we are informed in a memorial of ). Herna
Carillo Altamirano presented to the king, that the Indian
of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines at th
dillance of a hundred , a hundred and ifty, and even tw
hundred leagues from their habitation. Colbert, Colled
Mlany mines are situated in parts of the country , so ba
ren, and b diltant from the ordinary lhabitations of th
Indians, that the nccellity of procuring laborers to wr

there, has obliged the Spanish monarchs to dispense with
their own regulations in several instances; and to permit
their viceroys- to compel the people of more remote pro.
vinces to resort to those mines. Efcalona, Gazophyl.
'eruv. lib. i c. 6. But in jullice to them it should be
obferred, that they have been studious to alleviate this
oppression as much as possible, by enjoining the viceroys
to employ every method, in order to induce the Indians
to fettle in some part of the country adjacent to the mines.
LI. Ibid.

NOTE LVII. p. 277.

TORQUEMADA, after a long enumeration, which has
the appearance of accuracy, concludes the number of
inonafteries in New Spain to be four hundred. Mon. Ind.
ib. xix. c. 32. The number of monasteries in the city
of lMexico alone was, in the year 74, fifty-five. Villa-
Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 4. Ulloa reckons up forty
convents in Lima; and mentioning those for nuns, he fays,
that a small town might be peopled out of them, the
number of persons shut up there is so great. Voy. i. 429.
Philip. III. in a letter to the viceroy of Peru, A. D. 1620,
oh!crvcs, that the number of convents in Lima was so
gret, that they covered more ground than all the reft of
:'c city. Solorz. lib. iii. c. 2 . n. 7 Lib. iii. c. 6.
Torqucm. lib. xv. c. 3. The first monastery in New Spain
,as fi)unded A. . i 1;2 , four years only after the conquest.
"rqt . lib. xv. c. 16.

According to Cil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

:!l)jlifmnent of the American church in all the Spanish
.trlemcnts was , in the year 649, x patriarch, 6 arch-
iih11ps, bifflops, 346 prebends , 2 abbots, royal
li;1aziills, 84o convents. Theatro Ecclefiaftico de las
ll. ()ccident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jesuits
'as xpelled roin a1ll the Spanifil dominions, the colleges,
'',:,j'ii houiis , and rclidencics, which it pofrlled in the

Cc ;

province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito sixteen, in
the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in Peru fevern
teen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen; in all a
hundred and twelve Colleccion General de Providencias
hatfa acqui tomadas fobre el eftranamiento, &c. de la Corn.
pagnia, part i. p. 19. The number of Jesuits, priess
and novices in all these, amounted to 224j. A1S.
penes mne.

In the year 644, the city of Mexico presented a peti.

tion to the king, praying that no new monastery might
be founded, and that the revenues of those already eftab.
lifhed might be circumnfcribed, otherwise the religious
houses would soon acquire the property of the whole coun-
try. The petitioners request likewise, that the bishop
might be laid under restrictions in conferring holy orders
as there were at that time in New Spain above fix thoufan
clergymen without any living. Id. p. 6. These abufc
must have been enornous indeed, when the fuperftitio
of American Spaniards was shocked, and induced to re
monftrate against them.

NOTE LVII. p. 280o.

T HIS description of the manners of the Spanish lergy
I flould not have ventured to give, upon the testimony o
protestant authlrs alone, as they may be fufpeced of pre
judice or exaggeration. Gage, in particular, who ha
a better opportunity than any protestant , to view th
interior state of Spanish America, dcfcribes the corruptio
of the church which he had forfilken, with lb much of th
acrimony of a new convert, that I should have diltrufte
his evidence, though it communicates ome very curiou
and t(riking facts. But llenzoni mentions the profligacy
ecclelialtics in Amncrica at a very early period after their fe
tlemcnt there. Hist. lib. ii. c. 19, 2o. M. Frezier, a
intelligent observer, and 'i.ealous for his own religion
paints the dilfolute manners of the Spanilh eccleliafiics

Peru, particularly the regulars, in stronger colors than I
have employed. Voy. p. 5 . 21 , &c. M. Gentil confirms
this account, Voy. i. 34. Correal concurs with both, and
adds many remarkable circumstances. Voy. i. 6 r. ir5 . 161.
I have good reason to believe, that the manners of the
regular clergy, particularly in Peru, are still extremely in.
decent. Acofta himself acknowledges that great corruption
of manners had been the consequence of permitting monks
to forsake the retirement and discipline of the cloister, and
to mingle again with the world, by undertaking the charge
of the Indian parishes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv.
c, 1 , &c. He mentions particularly those vices, of which
I have taken notice, and confiders the temptations to them
as so formidable, that he leans to the opinion of those who
hold that the regular clergy should not be employed as
parifl priefis. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for
the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among the monks of different orders, when set
free from the reitraint of monastic discipline; and from
the tone of their defence , one may conclude that the
charge brought against them was not destitute of truth.
In the French colonies , the state of the regular clergy is
nearly the fame as in the Spanish settlements, and the
fame consequences have followed. M. Biet, superior of
the secular priests in Cayenne, inquires with no less
appearance of piety than of candor, into the causes of
this corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemption
of regiulars from the jurifdition and censures of their
diocclfns; to the temptations to which they are exposed;
and to their engaging in commerce. Voy. p. 320. It is
rmci;arkble that all the authors, who cnfure the licen-
tioufncfs of the Spanish regulars with the greatest severity,
concur in vindicating the conduct of the Jefuirs. Formed
under a discipline more perfcet than that of the other
Ilnaftic orders, or animated by that concern for the honor
(tf the society, which takes uch full polfeflion of, every
member of the order , the Jcfuits, both in Mexico and
Peru, it is allowed, maintained a molt irreproachable decency

Cc 4

of manners. Fre7er, :tn. Gentil, i. 14. The fame
praise is likewise lue to the biflops and moit of the dignified
clergy. Frez. ibid.

A volume of the Gazeta de Mlexico for the ears i2;p,

1729, 17r0, having been communicated to me, I find
there a triking confirmation of hat 1 have advanced cor.
cerning the spirit of low illiberal superstition prevalent in
Spanilhi America. From the newfpapclrs of any nation,
one mav learn what are the objects which chiefly engrof
its attention, and appear to it most intercfting. The Ga-
zette of 1ile'ico is filled almost entirely with accounts of
religious funiions, with descriptions of proceilions , confc.
cr.:tions of churches, beatifications of faints, festivals,
autos de f , &c. Civil or commercial affairs, and even
the transactions of Europe, occupy but a fniall corner in
this magazine of monthly intelliclcce. From the titles of
new books , which are regularly inserted in this Gazette. it
appears that two.thirds of them are treatises of scholastic
thcology, or of nonkifh devotion.

NOTE LIX .

p. 81.

SOLORZ\NO, after mentioning the corrupt morals o
some of the regular clergy, with that cautious reserve,
which became a Spaniif layman , in touching on a subjea
fb delicate; gives his opinion very explicitly, and with
much firmness, against committing parochial charges to monks.
lie produces the teltimony of several relirecable authors o
his county , both divines and lawyers, in confirmation o
his opinion. De lure Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. x6. A firiling
proof of the alarm excited by the attempt of the Prince
d'lt.fuilclch to exclude the regulars from parochial cures,
is contained in the Clbcrt collection of papers. Severa
memorials were prcfented to the king by the procurators
for the monadtic orders, and replies were made to there in
name of the secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous,
spirit is maniietll on both lides, in the conduct f this difijute

NOTE LX. p. 286.

N OT only the native Indians, but the .iefli2zos, or
chilldren of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally excluded
froil the priellhood, and reftied admiflion into any religious
order. But by a law ifued Sept. 28th, 88, Philip I1.
required the prelates of America to ordain such mestizos
born in lawful wedlock, as they should find to be properly
qualified, and to permit them to take the vows in any
monaltery where they had gone through a regular noviciate.
Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1. 7. Some regard seems to have
been paid to this law in New Spain; but none in Peru.
Upon a representation of this to Charles 1[. in the year 1697.
he issued a new edict enforcing the observation of it, and
profelling his delire to have all his fubjeds, Indians and
meltizos as well as Spaniards, admitted to the enjoyment
of the fame privileges. Such, however, was the aversion
of the Spaniards in America to the Indians, and their race,
tlat this seems to have produced little effect; for, in the
!ear 172 , Philip V. was obliged to renew the injunction
in a more peremptory tone. But so unsurmountable are the
hatred and contempt of the Indians among the Peruvian
Spaniards, that the present king has been constraincd to
enforce the former edics anew by a law, published Sep-
tember , 1774. Real Cedula, MS. pnes me.

Al. Clavigero has contradited what I have related concern-

ing the cccleiaflical Ifate of the Indians, particularly their
exclulion from the facranent of the Eucharill, and from
hily orders, either as Seculars or Regulars, in such a manner
is cannot fail to make a deep imprellion. He, fiom his own
know(ledge, anlerts, " that in New Spain not only are Indians
permitted to partake of' the sacrament of the altar, but that
Indian pricfis are so numerous that they may be counted by
hundreds; and among thcfe have been many hundreds (of
rectors, canons, and docors, and, as report goes, even a very
learned bilhop. At prcficnt, there are many prielts, and
not a fw rectors, among whom there have been three or
four our own pupils. " Vol. II. 348, &c. 1 owe it thcrc-

fore as a duty to the public, as well as to myself, to
confider each of there points with care, and to explain the
reafors which induced me to adopt the opinion which I
have published.

I knew that in the Chrillian church there is no diftindion

of perlbns, but that men of every nation who embrace the
religion of.Jefus, are equally entitled to every Christian
privilege which they are qualified to receive. I knew, like.
wife, that an opinion prevailed not only among most of the
Spanifi laity fettled in America, but among " many eccle.
fi;iltics, (I use the words ofHerrera, Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 1i.)
that the Indians were not perfec or rational men, and
were not pofllefed of such capacity as qualified them to
partake of the sacrament of the altar, or of any other benefit
of our religion. " It was against this opinion that Las Casas
contended with the laudable zeal which I have described in
Books 111. and VI. But as the Bishop of Darien, Doctor
Sepulvida, and other refpeftable cclefiaftics, vigoroufy
supported the common opinion concerning the incapacity o
the Indians i became necefary , in order to determine the
point, that the authority of the Holy See should be inter
poscd ; and accordingly Paul 11I. iffhcd a bull A. D. 15t7
in which, as tr condemning the opinion of those who hel
that the Indians, as being on a level with brute beasts
should be reduced to servitude, he declares that they wer
really men, and as such were capable of embracing th
Chriltian religin , and participating of all its bleflings. M
account of' this bull, notwithllanding the cavils of Al. Clavi
qero , must appear jult to every person who takes the troub
of peruling it; and my account is the fame with that adopte
hy Tor(lquem;da, lib). xvi. c. 2z. and by Garcia, Orig. p. i11
I;ut even aser this decilion , so low did the Spaniards refid
ingl in America rate the capacity of the natives , that the fir
:,'ucil of Lima ( I call it by that name on the authority
the bl:t Spanilil auithors ) difcountenancec the admifion n
lndi;ans to the holy commiunion. Torqucm. lib. xvi. c. 20
In New Spain, the exclulion of Indians from the fcrinier
WVts iill more L.r icit. Ibid. After two centuries hav

elapsed, and notwithstanding all the Improvement that the
Indians may be supposed to have derived from their inter-
course with the Spaniards during that period, we are inform-
ed by D- Ant. Ulloa, that in Peru, where, as will appear
in the sequel of this note, they are supposed to be better
inflruted than in New Spain, their ignorance is so prodi-
gious that very few are permitted to communicate, as being
altogether destitute of the requisite capacity. Voy. I. 34r,
&c. Solorz. Polit. Ind. I. 20o.

With refped to the exclusion of Indians from the

priesthood, either as Seculars or Regulars, we may observe,
that while it continued to be the common opinion that the
natives of America, on account of their incapacity, should
not be permitted to partake of the holy sacrament, we can-
not suppose that they would be clothed with that sacred
character which entitled to consecrate and to dispense it.
When Torqueniada composed his Monarquia Indiana, it
was almost a century after the conquest of New Spain;
and yet in his time, it was still the general practice to
exclude Indians frem holy orders. Of this we have the
most satisfying evidence. Torquemada having celebrated
the virtues and graces of the Indians at great length, and
with all the complacency of a missionary, he farts as an
objecion to what he had asserted, " If the Indians really
pos'ess all the excellent qualities which you have described,
lhy are they not permitted to afume the religious habit ?
Why are they not ordained priers and bishops, as the
Jewish and Gentile converts were in the primitive church,
especially as they might be employed with uch fhperior
advantage to other persons in the infirud'ion of their coun-
trymen ? " Lib. xvii. c. 1;.

In answer to this objection, which eflialifhes, in the

most unequivocal manner, what was the gneral pradtice
at that period, Torqcuenada obfcrvcs, that although by
their natural dispositions the Indians are well fitted for a
filbordinate lituation , they are dcRfitute of all the qualities
reqifite in any fation of dignity and authority; and that
lley are in general so addicted to drunennefs, that, upon

the slightest temptation, one cannot promise on their be.
h.iving with the decency suitable to the clerical character.
The propriety of excluding them from it, on these ac.
counts, was, he observed, so well jultified by experience,
that when a foreigner of great erudition, who came from
Spain , cundemned the practice of the Mexican church,
he was convinced of his miliake in a public disputation
with the learned and molt religious Father ). Juan de
Gaona, and his retractation is still extant. Torquemada,
indeed , acknowledges , as M. Clavigero observes with
a degree of exultation , that, in his time, some Indians
liad been admitted into monasteries; but, with the art of
a disputant, he forgets to mention tlat Torquetnada fpe.
cifics only two examples of this, and takes notice that in
both inIlances those Indians had been admitted by miital.
Relying upon the authority of Torquemada with regard to
New Spain, and of Ulloa with regard to Peru, and con.
fidering the humiliating depreflion of the Indians in all the
Sp:'nifh settlements, I concluded that they were not ad.
mitted into the ecclesiastical order , which is held in the
liigheft veneration all over the New WXorld.

But when . Clavigero, upon his own knowledge, aferted

facVs so repugnant to the conclusion I had formed, I began
to di(truft it, and to wifl for farther information. In order
to obtain this , 1 applied to a Spanish nobleman , high in
oftice, and eminent for his abilities, who, on different occa-
sions , has permitted me to have the honor and benefit of
corresponding with him ; and I requelted my respectable friend
I\r. Lilton, the 3Bitilh \linifter at the court of Madrid , to
mnlie what inquiries he judged proper with relipcct to this
point. Fron the former , I have been favored with the
following anfver. " 'What you have written concerning the
acini!lion of Indians into holy orders , or into monalterics,
in Rook VII . cccially as it is explained and limited ir
'utc I,XXXVIII, of the quarto edition, is in general accurate
and cnlsormable to the authorities which you quote. An'
although the congregation of the council rclflved and declared
Feb. 13, A. 1). 68 , that the circumllancc of bcing a

Indian, a mulatto, or mestizo, did not disqualify any pcirfi:
from being admitted into holy orders, if he was poll'lllc of
what is required by the canons to entitle him to that privilege;
this only proves such ordinations to be legal and valid,( of whiic
Solorzano , and the Spanifhl lawyers and hillorians quoted
by him , Pol. Ind. lib. ii. c. 29.. were pcrfuaded ) , but it
neither proves the propriety of admitting Indians into holy
orders , nor what was then the common practice , with
reflect to this; but , on the contrary , it shows that there
was sone doubt concerning the ordaining of Indians , and
fonme repugnance to it.

"' Since that time, there have been onme examples of

admitting Indians into holy orders. We have now at lMadrid
an aged priest , a native of Tlafcala. Ilis name is D. Juan
Cerilo de Cafiilla Aquihual Catchutle , descended of a Cazique
converted to Chrillianity soon after the conquest. He ludied
the ecclesiastical ciences in a seminary of Puebla de los
Angeles. Het was a candidate , nevertheless, for ten years,
;ind it required much intcreft before Bishop Abren would
content to ordain him. This eccleliaftic is a mal of unex-
ceptionable charader , modest , felf-denied , and v'ith a
competent knowledge of what relates to his clerical functions.
lie came to Madril above thirty- four years ago , with the
sole view of soliciting admillion for the Indians into the
colleges and seminaries in New Spain , that if , after being
tell innfrudted and tried, they Ihould find an inclination to
enter into the eccleli;iflical Itate , they might embrace it ,
;ind perform its functions with the greateli benefit to their
countrynmen, whom they could addrels in their native tongue.
lie h;,s obtained various regulations fvorable to his chemen,
;articularly that the firlt college which becanic vacnnt in
consequence of the exclulion of the Jeluits , floulld e et
apa:rt fbr this purpose. liut neitber thell regulations , nor
nwilny linilar ones infelted in the laws of the Indies, has

ldlucced any ell'ect, on accotunt1 1

o bhj tions and reprefen-

titions from the greater part tof person of chief colildratioll
t'llmloed in New Spain. Whetcher their oppolition be well
lbunldcd or not, i a problem difficult to resolve, and tovwar;lrt

the solution of which, several diftinAions and modifications
are requilite.

" According to the accounts of this ecclesiastic, and the

information of other persons who have resided in the Spanish
dominions in America , you may reft assured that in the
kingdom of Tierra Firnim no such thing is known as either
an Indian secular priest or monk ; and that in New Spain
there arc very few eccilfiatics of Indian race. In Peru,
perhaps , the number may be greater , as in that country
there are more Indians who polfefs the means of acquiring
such a learned education as is necefflry for persons who aspire
to the clerical character. "

From Mr. Liston, owing to some incidents which it is

tinnecefTary to specify , I have not yet received an answer
to my queries. If the intelligence which, from my experience
of his obliging attention , I certainly expec , hall differ
materially from that which I have already received, I will
not fail to communicate it to the public, and will, without
hesitation or reluctance, make whatever alterations may be
necessary in my narrative. Meanwhile , in Vol. II. p. 286.
1. is. instead of no Indian is either ordained a pries ,
it will be more proper to read , very few Indians are
ordained priejr.

NOTE LXI. p. 290.

U STARIZ , an accurate and cautious calculator , feemn
to admit , that the quantity of ilver which does not pay
duty may be tated thus high. According to Herrera , there
was not above a third of what was extracted from Potofi that
paid the ing's fifth. Dec. viii. lib. ii. c. . Solorzano aerts
liliewife , that the quantity of silver which is fraudulently
circulated, is far greater than that which is regularly tlamped
after paying the fifth. De Ind. Jure, vol. ii i. ib. v.p. 846.

NOTE LXII. p. 293.

TY HEN the mines of Potofi were discovered in the year
I(45, the veins were so near the surface, that the ore was efily
extraded, and so rich that it was refined with little trouble
and at small expense , merely by the ation of fire. This
simple mode of refining by fusion alone continued until the
year 74 , when the use of mercury in refining silver, as
well as gold , was discovered. Those mines having been
wrought without interruption for two centuries, the veins are
now funk so deep , that the expense of extracting the ore
is greatly increased. Betides this , the richness of the ore,
contrary to what happens in most other mines , has become
ess, as the vein continued to dip. The vein has likewise
diminished to such a degree , that one is amazed that the
paniards hould persist in working it. Other rich mines have
een fuccefively discovered, but in general the value of the
res has decreased so much, while the expense of extracting
hem has augmented, that the court of Spain , in the year
1736 , reduced the duty payable to the king from a fifth

a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Peru , is extracted
om the famous mine of Guancabelica , discovered in the
ear is63. The crown has reserved the property of this
line to itself; and the persons who purchase the quicksilver
ay not only the price of it, but likewise a fifth, as a duty
othe king. But, in the yrar 176 , this duty on quicksilver
as abolished , on account of the increase of expense in
orking mines. Ulloa, Entretenimientos, xii.-xv. Voyage,
p o. 5z5. . In consequence of this abolition of theifth ,
nd foie subsequent abatements of price , which became
eceffary on account of the increasing expense of working
ines, quicksilver, which was formerly fold at eighty pesos
e quintal, is now delivered by the king at the rate of sixty
sos. Campomanes, Educ. Popul. ii. 2, Note. Tle duty
gold is reduced to a tentieth , or five per cent. Any
my readers, who arc desirous of being acquainted with
e mode in which the Spaniards ondut the working Qs

their mines , and the refinement of the ore , will find an
accurate description of the ancient method by Acofta. Lib,
iv. c. - xI. And of their more recent improvements in
the metallurgic art, by Gamboa, Comment. a las ordenanz
de minas, c. 22.

NOTE LXIII. p. 296.

M ANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced [ate
of industry in Spain, at the beginning of the sixteenth century,
The number of cities in Spain was conliderable , and they
were peopled far beyond the proportion that was common
in other parts of Europe. The causes of this I have explained
Hilt. of Cha. V. i. i 8. Wherever cities are populous,thai
species of industry which is peculiar to them increases, arti
ficers and manufacturers abound. The effect of the Americar
trade in giving activity to these is nlanifef, from a fingula
fact. In the year IS 4 , while Spain continued to depenc
on its own industry, for the supply of its colonies, o mud
work was bespoke from the manufacturers, that it was fuppofel
they could hardly finish it in less than fix years. Campom
i. 406. Such a demand must have put much indufry i
motion, and have excited extraordinary efforts. Accordinly
we are informed , that in the beginning of Philip 11's reiPn
the city of Seville alone , here the trade with Anicric
centred , gave employment to no fetrer than x6,ooo loo
in silk or woollen work , and that above go,ooo perfor
had occupation in carrying on there manufactures. Campon
ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious was the operation
the causes which I hall enumerate, that before Philip II
ended his reign, the looms in Seville were reduced to 4o,
Ultariz , c. 7.

Since the publication of the first edition , I have tl

fttisfition to find my ideas concerning the early comlmere
intercourli between Spain and her colonies contirmed ai
illuhltatec by D. iBernardo Ward , ofl the Junta de Comer(
at ladrid, in his P'roy(Sto Economico, 'Part ii. c. 1." *L

the reigns of Charles V. and Philip II. " Lays he, C< the
nianufaltures of Spain and of the Low Countries subject to
her duminion were in a most flourishing slate. Those of
France and :ngland were in their infancy. The republic of
the United Provinces did rlot then exist. No European power
but Spain had colonies of any value in the New World.
Spain could supply her settlements there with the productions
of her own foil , the fabrics wrought by the hands of her
own artisans, and all she received in return for these belonged
to herself alone. Then the exclusion of foreign manufadures
was proper , because it might be rendered effectual. hen
Spain might lay heavy duties upon goods exported to America,
or imported from it, and might impose what restraints he
deemed proper upon a commerce entirely in her own hands.
But when time and successive revolutions had occasioned an
alteration in all those circumttances, when the manufadures
of Snain began to decline, and the demands of America were
pplied by foreign fabrics , the original maxims and regu-
ations of Spain should have been accommodated to the change
in her situation. The policy that was wife at one period,
became absurd in the other. "

NOTE LXIV. p. 306.

0 bale of goods is ever opened, no chest of treasure

s xamined. Both are received on the credit of the
erbns to whom they belong; and only one instance of
raud is recorded, during the long period in which trade
'as carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
oined ilver which was brought from Peru to Porto-bello
the year 1654, was found to be adulterated, and to be
ingled with a fifth part of base metal. The Spanish
lcrchants, with sentiments suitable to their uual inte-
rity, fultained the whole loss, and indemnified the so-
igners, by whom they were employed. The fraud was
etctrd , and the treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the

VOL. I. D d

author of it, was publicly burnt. B. Ulloa, Retablif. des
Mlanuf. &c. liv. ii .
p. 02.

NOTE XV. p. 309.

M ANY flriking proofs occur of the scarcity of money
in Spain. Of all the immense fumns which have been
imported from America, the amount of which I shall
afterwards have occasion to mention, Moncada aflerts that
there did not remain in Spain, in 1619, above two
hundred millions of peJor, one half in coined money, the
other in plate and jewels. Reftaur. de fpagna, Difr. iii.
c. i. Uftariz, who published his valuable work in 1724,
contends, that in money, plate, and jewels, there did
not remain a hundred million. Theor. &c. c. 3. Campo.
manes, on the authority of a remonstrance from the
community of merchants in Toledo to Philip III. relates,
as a certain proof how scarce cash had become, that
persons who lent money, received a third pait of the fum
which they advanced as interest and premium. Educ.
PopuL i. 417.

NOTE LXVI. p. ;l.

T HE account of the mode in which the factors of the
South-Sea-Company condudted the trade in the fair of
Porto-bello, which was opened to them by the Affiento,
I have taken from Don Dion. Alcedo y Herrera, president
of the court of Audience in Quito, and governor of that
province. Don Dionylio was a pcrfon of such a refpcctahle
character for probity andt dilccrnment, that his tcllimony
in any point, would be of much weight; but greate
crelit is due to it in this cafe, as he was an eye-witncfi
of the transaCtions which he relates, and was often employed
in detecting and authenticating the frauds which hE
cideCribes, It is probable, however, that his representation

being composed at the commencement of the war which
broi:e out between Great Britain and Spain, in the year
7; 9 , may, in some instances, discover a portion of the
acrimonious spirit, natural at that juncture. His detail of
facis is curious; and even English authors confirm it in
some degree, by admitting both tilat various frauds were
pracifed in the tranfaitions of the annual hip , and that
the contraband trade from Jamaica, and other British
crlonics, was become enormously great. But for the credit
of the Engliflh nation it may be observed , that those
lriu:lulent operations are not to be confidered as deeds of
the company, but as the dishonorable arts of their faitors
aind agents. The company itself sustained a considerable
loss by the Aliento trade. Many of its servants acquired
inlmcnfe fortunes. Anderson, Chronol. deduct. ii. 388.

NOTE LXVI. p. 319.

SEVERAL fa.is with refped to the inlfitution, the
progrcfs , and the effeCts, of this company, are curious,
;md but little known to Englifl readers. Though the
proince of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four hundred
miles along the coalt, and is one of the most fertile in
Anmerica ; it was so much neglccted by the Spaniards,
tht during the twenty years prior to the eltablifhlment of
the company, only five flips failed from Spain to that
province; and during r6 years, fromr 1706 to 1722,
not a lingle lhip arrived from the Caraccas in Spain. Noticias
dclla leal Comp:giia de Caraccas, p. 2 8. During this period
Siin mull have been supplied alinoft entirely with the
large quantity of cacao , which it consumes, by foreigners.
liclorc the erection of the company, neither tobacco nor
hides were imported floni Caralccas into Spain. d1. . 11 7.
S'ince the commercial operations of the company began in
the year 7 , the importation of cacao into Spain has
ilicca;led aazin!gly. I)ouingt thitry ears iifblcquent to
17ol , the number of of'
,i- ' of caicai (e;ach ;i hundred

Ddz

and ten pounds) imported from Caraccas, was 64X,21 .
During eighteen years subsequent to 171 , the number of
',lueeas imported was 869,247; and if we suppose the
itmiport.tion to be continued in the Ilme proportion during
the remainder of thirty years, it will amount to 1,448,746
Fanegas , which is an increase of 8os, Ftiiegas. Id.
p. 148. During eight years subsequent to 756 , there has
been imported into Spain by the Company, 88,482 arrobar
(each twenty-five pounds) of tobacco; and hides to the
number of 177,154. Id. 161. Since the publication of
the Noticias de Campania, in i.6 , its trade seems to
be on the increase. During five years subsequent to 1769,
it has imported I-9,T 6 Fanegas of cacao into Spain,
36,o08 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496 hides, and 221,432
pesos in specie. Canpomanes, ii. 62. The last article
is a proof of the growing wealth of the colony. It receives
cash from Mexico in return fbr the cacao, with which it
supplies that province, and this it remits to Spain, or lays
out in purchasing European goods. But, betides this, the
molt explicit evidence is produced, that the quantity of cacao
raised in the province is double to what it yielded in 1711;
the number of its live-flock is more than treble , and its
inhabitants much augmented. The revenue of the bishop,
which arifrs wholly from tithes, has increased from eight
to twenty thousand pefbs. Notic. p. 69. In consequence
of the augmentation of the quantity of cacao imported into
Spain, its price has decreased from eighty pesos for
the fanega to firtv. Id. 6r. Since the publication of the
firlt edition , I have learned that Guyana , including all
the extenive provinces situated on the banks of the Orinoco,
the islands of Trinidad and Mlargarita are added to the
countries with which the company of Caraccas hAd liberty
of trade by the;r former charters. Real Cedula, Nov. 19.
1776. But I have likewise been informed, that the
institution of this companv has not been attended with all
the beneficial effects which I have ascribed to it. In many
of its operations the illiberal and oppreflive spirit of mono-
poly is conspicuous. But in order to explain this, i

would be necessary to enter into minute details, which are
not suited to the nature of this work.

NOTE LXVIII. p. 326.

T-HIS first experiment made by Spain of opening a free
trade with any of her colonies, has produced effeds so
remarkable, as to merit some farther illufration. The towns
to which this liberty has been granted, are Cadiz and
Seville, for the province of Andalusia; Alicant and Carta.
gena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barcelona , for Catalonia
and Arragon; Santander, for Castile; Corugna, for
Galicia; and Gijon , for Asturias. Append. ii. a la Educ.
Popul. p. 4r. These are either the ports of chief trade
in their refpedtive difirids , or those most conveniently
1ituated for the exportation of their refpedive productions.
The following fads give a view of the increase of trade in
the settlements to which the new regulations extend. Prior
to the allowance of free trade, the duties colleced in ihe
custom-house at the Havanmah were computed to be
I04,2og pesos annually. During the five years preceding
1774, they rose at a medium to og8,ooo pesos a year.
In Yucatan, the duties have risen from 8,ooo to ir,ooo.
In Hispaniola, from 2,oo0 to ;,6oo. In Porto-Rico,
from ,2o0 to 7,000. The total value of goods imported
fiom Cuba into Spain, was reckoned, in 774 , to be
1,oo,000o pesos. Educ. Popul .
i. 4 , &c.

NOTE LXIX. p. 332.

TI E two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Calupomanes,
FiJifal del real confjio y Supremo (an office in rank and
power nearly imilar to that of Attorney General in England),
and Diredor of the Royal Academy of JHiftory, the one
entitled Difcurfo fobre cl Fomento de la Indultria Popular;
the other, Di'curfo fobre la Educacion Popular de lot

Dd

Artefanos y fu Fomento; the former puh!ifled in 1774,
and the latter in 177 , afford a itriking, proof of this,
Almolt every point of importance with respect to interiot
police, taxation, agriculture , ninut'atures , and trade,
donmetic as well as forcign, is examined in the course of
there works; and there are not many authors, even in
the nations molt eminent for commercial knowledge who
have carried on their inquiries with a more thorough
knowledge of those various fubjedts, and a more perect
freedom from vulgar and national prejudices, or who
have united more happily the calm researches of philosophy,
with the ardent zeal of a public-fpirited citizen. These
books are in high estimation among the Spaniards, and it i|
a decisive evidence of the progress of their own ideas,
that they are capable of relishing an author whose senti.
ments arc so liberal.

NOTE LXX. p. 336.

T HE galeon employed in that trade, initead of the fir
hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop. lib.
xlv. 1. r;. is commonly from twelve hundred to two
thousand tons burden. The hip from Acapulco, taken
by Lord Anfbn, instead of te oo,ooo pesos permitted
by law, had on board 1,3 1,843 pesos, besides uncoincd
silver equal in value to 43,61I pesos more. Anlun's
Voyage, 384.

NOTE LXXI. p. 339.

T HS price paid for the bull varies according to the
rank of diflircnt perions. Thofi in the lowest order,
who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plata, or one
shilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals, and those in
public office, or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals.
Solorz. de ure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According

to Chilton, an English merchant who resided long in the
Spanish settlements, the bull of Cruzado bore a higher
price in the year 7o, being then fold for four reals at
the lowest. Hackluyt, iii. 461. The price seems to have
varied at different periods. That exacted for the bulls
ifi;cd in the-lafQ Predicacion . will appear from the ensuing
table, which will give some idea of the proportional num-
bers of the different clafTes of citizens in New Spain and
Peru.

There were issued for New Spain,
Bulls at o pesos each - - - 4

at 2 pesos each - 2 ,60o
at I peso each - - I64,220
at z reals each - 2,462,0oo

2,649,32

For Peru,

at 6 pesos 4 reals each -
at 3 pesos 3 reals each - - 14,202
at I peso 5- reals - - 78,822
at 4 reals - - 4Io0, 3
at 3 reals - - - 668,60o

7 I7,9S.

NOTE LXXII p. p 9.

AS Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this 'i-
iorni tion contained in his Theatro Americano, publifhled
in Mexico , A. D. 1746, was acconiptant-gcncral in one of
the nlolt considerable departments of the royal revenue,
ndcl by that means had access to proper information, his
teftiniony with rcfpcdt to this point merits great credit. No
lic:h aiccurat detail of the Spanish revenues in any part of
linicrica, has hitherto been publifled in the English language,

D t 4.

and the particulars of it may appear curious and interesting
to some of my readers.

From the bull of Cruzada, published every two years,
there aifes an annual revenue in pesos ° o,ooo

From the duty on ilver - - 700,000
From the duty on gold - 6o,ooo
From tax on cards - - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Indians - - - - - 16,ooo

From tax on stamped paper - - 41,000
From ditto on ice - - - ,22
From ditto on leather - 2,00
From ditto on gunpowder - 71,0
From ditto on fait - - 32,000
From ditto on copper of Mechocan - ,ooo0
From ditto on alum - - - 6,oo
From ditto on Juego de los gallos - 21 ,oo
From the half of ecclesiastical annats - 49,000
From royal ninth of bishoprics, &c. 68,8oo
From the tribute of Idians - 6o,ooo
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods 72r,875
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house 37:,t:
From the mint - - - - ,oo

3,5 52,68o

This fum amounts to 819,16i 1. Sterling; and if ve

add to it the profit accruing fiomn the file of ooo quintals
of quicksilver imported from the mines of Alnaden, in
Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues from the
Averia, and some other taxes which Villa Scgnor does not
estimate, the public revenue in New Spain may well be
reckoned above a million pounds sterling money. Theat.
Mex. vol. i.p. ; 3 , &c. According to Villa Segnor,
the total produce of the Miexican mines, amounts at a
medium to eight millions of pesos in silver annually, and
to 592 marks of gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of

the revenue have been explained in the course of the hiflorv;
fune, which there was no occasion of mentioning, require
a particular illuflration. The right to the tithics in the New
W'orld, is veted in the crown of Spain , by a bull of
Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be applied in
the following manner: One fourth is allotted to the bishop
of the diocese , another fourth to the deun and chapter
and other officers of the cathedral. The remaining half is
divided into nine equal parts. Two of these, under the
denomination of los dos Novenns realcs, are paid to the
crown , and constitute a branch of the royal revenue. The
other seven parts are applied to the maintenance of the
parochial clergy, the building and support of churches, and
other pious uses. lRecopil. lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c.
Avendano, Thefaur. Indic. vol. i. p. 184.

The Alcavala is a duty levied by an excise on the fle
of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In America,
to four per cent. Solorzano, Polit. Indiana, lib. vi. c. 8.
Avendano, vol. i. ir6.

The Alrlajlooifajgo, or custom paid in America on goods

imported and exported, may amount on an average to fifteen
per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. . Avendano,
vol. i. i8gC.

Tihe Averia, or tax paid on account of convoys to guard
the ships failing to and from America, was first imposed
wdlen Sir Francis Drake filled the New \World with terror
by his expedition to the South-Sea. It amounts to two per
cent. on the value of goods. Avendano, vol. i. p. 189.
Hecopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley. 4, 44.

I have not been able to procure any accurate detail of

the several branches of revenue in Peru , later than the
yecar 1614. From a curious manuscript, containing a
state of that vice-royalty in all its departments, presented
to the Malrquis of lontes-Claros, by Franc. Lopez Ca-
raintes , accomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it
"Ppears, that the public revenue, as nearly as I can
cotmpute the value of the money in which Caravantes

states his accounts, amounted in ducats at
4 s. d., to -2,317,769

Expenses of government - - 1,24,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in sterling money - L, 83;,o
Expenses of government - - 30o,68

Net free revenue 277,7 3

But several articles appear to be omitted in this compu.

tation, uch as the duty on flamped paper, leather, eccle.
fialtical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru may be well
supposed equal to that of Mexico.

In computing the expense of government in New Spain,

I may take that of Peru as a standard. There the annual
eftahlifhment for defraying the charge of administration,
exceeds one half of the revenue collected, and there is no
reason for supposing it to be less in New Spain.

I have obtained a calculation of the total amount of the

public revenue of Spain from America and the Philippines,
which, as the reader will perceive from the two lalt articles,
is more recent than any of the furmer.

Alcavalas ( Excise ) and Aduanas ( Cuf-

toms ) , &c. in pcl's fuertes - 2, 00,000

Duties on gold and ilver - 3,ooo,oo000
Bull of Cruzada - - 1,ooo,ooo

Tribute of the Indians - ,ooo,ooo
By fiale of quicklilver - - 3 00,000

Paper exported on the king's account

and fold in the royal warehouses - 00,000
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other small

duties - ,000,000
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one

real de la Plata for each mark * 300,000

From the trade of Acapulco, and the coa.l-

ing trade from province to province, - oo,ooo

Aliento of' negroes - - - 200,000
From the trade of Mattb , or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized bythe
Jcfuits - - - - 00oo00
From other revenues formerly belonging

to that order - 400,000

Total I ,ooo,ooo

Total in sterling money L. 2,700,0oo
Deduct half, as the expense of adminif-

tration, and there remains net free
'evenue - - - . .to50,00o

NOTE LXXII. p. 340.

AN author , long conversant in commercial speculation ,
has computed , that from the mines of New Spain alone,
the king receives annually , as his fifth , the fum of two
millions of our money. flarris, Collectt. of Voy. ii. p. 164.
According to this calculation, the total produce of the mines
nuft be ten millions ftcrling ; a fum to exorbitant, and so
lirtle corresponding with all accounts of the annual importa-
tion from America, that the information on which ic is
founded must evidently be erroneous. According to Campo-
mni;cs , the total product of the American mines may be
computed at thirty millions of pesos, which , at four shillings
and lix pence a pcfo , amounts to 7,42, ooo 1. iterling, the
in!'s fifth of which ( if that were regularly paid ) would be
1,48l,ooo 1. But from this fum the cxpcrfe of adminiftra-
tion is to be dcdutced , which is very conliderable, as ap-
pelars from the preceding note. Educ. popular , vol. ii. p. 3 1.
1o0te.

NOTE LXXI. p. 340.

ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulla , all foreign goods ex-
ported from Spain to America pay duties of various kinds,
amounting in all to m:ire than 2s per cent. As mofl of the
goods with which Spain supplies her colonies are foreign;
such a tax upon a trade so extensive must yield a considerable
revenue. Retab. des Manus. & du Commerce d'Efp. p. iso.
He computes the value of goods exported annually from Spain
to America , to be about two millions and a half sterling,
p. 97.

NOTE LXXV. p. 342.

T HE Marquis de Serralvo , according to Gage, by
monopoly of salt , and by embarking deeply in the Manila
trade as well as in that to Spain, gained annually a million
of ducats. In one year he remitted a million of ducats to
Spain, in order to purchase from the Conde Olivares, and
his creatures , a prolongation of his government, p. 61. He
was successful in his suit, and continued in office from 1624
to 635, double the usual time.

,-1
/ * _1 '

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Page.

A
A BTSS7'NI , an embafry sent to that country by

John II. king of Portugal , i. 67.

Acapiulco, the nature of the trade carried on from thence

to 1ilanila, iii. 33 F. Amount of the treasure on board
the lhip taken by Lord nfon , 406.
AcoJia, his method of accounting for the different degrees

of heat, in the old and new continents, ii. 38j.
Adair, his account of the revengeful temper of the native

Americans, ii. 420.
Alljbn , his justification of Hanno's account of the Afri-

can eas, i. 294.
Africa, the weltern coast of, firRt explored by order of

John I. king of Portugal, i. 49. Is discovered from
C,tpe Non, to Bojador , o. Cape Bojador doubled, ,
The countries southward of the River Senegal discovered,
62. Cape of Good Hope fcen by Bartholomew Dias, 66.
Ignorance of the ancient astronomers concerning, g29.
Causes of the extreme heat of the climate there, ii. 9.
Agricitlture , the Itate of, among the native Americans

ii. 99. Two principal causes of the defects of, o13.
AgIrado is sent to Hiljaniola, as a commiflioner to infpe&(

the condud of Columbus, i. i .
A4g/ti, , Jerom de, is relieved from a long captivity

anlong the Indians at Cozuinel, by Fernando Cortes,
ii. 2o.

Allbuquerqze, Rodrigo, his barbarous treatment of the In-
diuns of Hispaniola , i. 24.

A!'n:ala , in the Spaniflh customs, the term explained,

iii. 409.
Alexander the Great , his political character , i. 17. Iis

motive in founding the city of lexandria, ib. His dis
coveries in India, ig. 19.
Allcxandler VI. Pope, grants to Ferdinand and Isabella of

Caltile, the right f all thleir western discoverics, i. 134.
Sends miflionaries wi th Columbus on his second voyage, 13 .
Ali;,:ro, Diego de , his birch and character, iii. 4. Afb.

ciates with Pizarro and de Luquc, in a voyage of disco.
very, ibid. His unsuccessful attempts, 6. Is neglecied
by Pizarro in his Spanifi negociation, i . Is reconciled
to him, 16. Brings reinforcements to Pizarro at Peru, 7.
Beginning of dilenlfions between him and Pi7arro, 5.
Invades Chili, s6. Is created governor of Chili, and
marches to Cuzco, 62. Seizes Cuzco, out of the hands
of Pizarro, 63. Defeats Alvarado , and takes him pri.
soner, 6 . Is deceived by the artful negociations of
Francis Pizarro, 67. Is defeated by the Pizarros, 70.
Is taken prisoner, 7. Is tried and condemned, 7.
Is put to death, 74.
Almagro, the {on, aflords refuge to his father's followers

at Lima, iii. 84.. His character, ibid. Hleads a con.
fpiracy against Francis Pizarro, 8 s. P'izarro afallinated, i.
Is acknowledged as his fuccclTor, 7. His precarioii
situation, 8. Is defeated by Vaca de Castro, 91. li
betrayed and executed, 92.
Alh;iijo-rij'fgo, in the Spanish American customs, the amnouti;

of, iii. 409.
Alvarado , Alonzo, is ent fiomn Lima, by Francis Pizarro,

with a body of Spaniuds to relieve his brothers at Cuzco,
iii. 64. Is taken prisoner by AlInmaro, 6 . 1lis clcape, 67.
Alvarado , Pedro de , is left by Cortes to command at

AlIexico, whilc he marched againll Narvaez, ii. 30o.
1-le is belieged by the Mexicans, 0o9. Hlis imprudenl
conduct 3 o0. ilis expedition to Quito in Peru, iii. o
Amazons, a community of, said to cxilt in South-America

by Francis Orellaina, iii. Si.

dierica, the continent of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 164. How it obtained this name , 178. Ser-
dinand of Caflile nominates two governments in, 226.
The propositions offered to the natives, 227. 111 recep-
tion of Ojeda and Nicuefa among them, 228. The
South -Sea discovered by Balboa, 242. Rio de Plata
discovered, 252. The natives of, injuriously treated by
the Spaniards, 277. The vafl extent of, ii. 2. The
grand objets it presented to vie:,', 3. The circumfrances
of, favorable for commerce and civilization, 4. The
climates of, 6, 7. Various causes of the peculiarity of
its climates, 8. Its rude and uncultivated Rate when
fiiit discovered, 3. Its animals, 1x. Its inftcds and
reptiles, 17. Birds, I8. General account of its foil, o.
I'.quiry into the firit pcpulation of, 22. Could not be
peopled by civilized nations, 29. The northern extremity
of, contiguous to Asia , 32. Probably peopled by
Atiatics, 40. Condition and character of the native in-
h.ibitants inquired into, 42. Were more rude than the
natives of any other known parts of the earth, 44. The
Peruvians and Mexicans excepted, 45. The sirs dill
coverers incapable of a judicious speculative examination, 46.
The various systems of philosophers refipeling the natives,
48. Nlethod observed in the present review of their bodily
c(unfitution and circumstances, o. The venereal disease
derived from this part of the world, "t. Why so
thinly inhabited, Io9. The country depopulated by con-
tinual wars, 145. Cause of the extreme coldness toward
tle outhern extremity of, 389. The natural uncultivated
flIte of the country describcd , 391. Bones of large
extiJict Ifpcies of animals discovered under ground near
the banks of the Ohio, 392.. Whly European animals
d(egenerate there, 39 . Supposed to have undergone a
convullive separation fiom Alia, 396. The vicinity of
the two continents of Alia and A \merica clearly acertained,
39X-402. Causes of the depopulation of, traced, iii. 2 8.
This depopulation not the reliilt of any intentional fylem
ol policy, 240. Nor the rclult of religion, 243. Nber

of Indian natives still remaining in Alexico and Peru, 244,
All the Spanifi doniinions there , subjected to two vice.
roys, 48. Its third vicerovalty lately eftablifled, ib.
See M.xi:o , Peru, Cortes, Pizarro , &c.
Americans , native , in Spanish America, their bodily con.

ititution and complexion, ii. s i. Their strength and
abilities, 3. Their infenlibility with regard to their
women, s . No deformities in their frame, 60. This
circumtance accounted for, 62. Uniformity of their
color, 6. A peculiar race of, described, 66. The
Efquimaux, 68. Patagonians , ibid. The exiltenc of
Patagonian giants yet remaining to be decided, 70. Their
diseases, 71. The venereal disease peculiarly theirs, 1.
The powers and qualities of their minds, 74. Are only
flicitous to supply immediate wants, 76. The art of
computation, scarcely known to them, 77. Have no
abftra't ideas, 8. The North-Americans much more
intelligent than those of the South, i8i. Their averilon
to labor, S2. Their social tate, 8 . Domestic union, S6.
The women, 87. Their women not prolific, go. Their
parental affedtion and filial duty, 92. Their modes of
fubliltence, 94. Filhing, 9. Hunting, 96. Agricul-
ture, 99. The various objects of their culture, ioo0
Two principal causes of the defects oftheir agriculture, ol,
Their want of tame animals, ibid. Their want of useful
metals, o16. Their political institutions, lo8. Were
divided into finall independent communities, ibid. Un-
acquainted with the idea of property, Ilo. Their high
sense of equality and independence, I12. Their ideas
of subordination imperfe6t, IT. To what tribes there
descriptions apply, i . Some exceptions i 6. Flo
rida, 11 7. The N;atc-ez , il8. The illands, g11.
In Bogota, ibid. Inquiry into the caul(s of thcfe ir-
regularitics , 121. Their art of war, 124. Their mo-
tives to hollility, 2 z. Caucfs of their ferocity, i26.
Perpetuity o their animolitics, 28. Their modes of
condudting war, 129. Are not destitute of courage and
fortitude, it . Incapable of nilitary discipline, 31.

Their treatment of prisoners, 1 4. Their fortitude under
torture, i 36. Never eat human flesh but to gratify
tevenge I39. How the South-\inercans treated their
prisoners, 140. Their military education, 14i. Strange
method of chufing a captain, among the Indians on the
banks of the Orinoco, 142. Their numbers wafted by
continual wars, 4. . Their tribes now recruit their
numbers by adopting prisoners, 146. Ate never for-
midable in war, to more polished nations, 147. Their
arts, drcfs, and ornamnents, 14g, 149. Their habit-
ations , 1 2. Their arms , i . Their domeftitd
utensils, 6. Conitruedion of their canoes, t7. The
liftleffilefs with which they apply to labor, 8. Their
religion, i6o. Some tribes altogether destitute o any,
i6;. Remarkable diverlity in their religious notions, 167.
Their ideas of the immortality of the foul, 170. Theif
modes of burial, 172. Why their Physicians pretend to
be conjurers, 174. Their love of dancing, 177. Theit
immoderate paflion for gaming, 8 . Are extrenmely
addicted to drunkenners, I82. Put their aged and in-
curable to death , 86. General eltimate of their
character, 187. Their intelletuial powers, i1. Theit
political talents, 89. Powers of affeCtion, 19t. 1lard-
nes of heart, 92. Their ienfibility, )19. Taci-
turnity, 95. Their cunning, i96. Their virtues, 98.
Their spirit of independence, ibid. Fortitude, ibid.
Attachment to their community, 199. Thei' ratisfactiort
with their own condition, oo. General caution with
rerpecc to this inquiry, 20o. ,two diflinguiflable claTes
of, 205. Exceptions as to tleir character, 206. Their
chraCteriftic features described, 403. InRfances of tleir
persevering tpeed, ibid. An antipatly iidiufti6ilufy en-
coutraged between them and the negroes in America, by
tle Spaniards, iii. 266. Their preerint condition, 267.
Illw taxed, ib. Stated ferviccs dnianded fiom them, z68.
Mtlde of exacing there fervicas, 269. low govern:d,
270. Protector of the Indians, his function, 27 1. Reafl1o
hylv so finall a progres is made in their convcrfion, z8.

,L II. i e

Anerigo Vespucci publishes the first written account of the

New World, and henoc gave name to America, i. 1i
His claim as a discoverer examined, 1 is.
Anacoana, a, female cazique of Hifpaniota, her base and

cruel usage by the Spaniards, i. 213.
Andes , stupendous height and extent of that range ot

mountains, ii. 3. Their height compared with other
mountains, 383- Gonzalo Pizarro's remarkable expe.
dition over, iii. 78.
Animals, large, very few found in America at its firl dii.

covery , ii. 17.
Ancients , cause of the imperfetion of the art of navigatin

among them, i. . Their geographical knowledge ex
tremely contined, 294-298.

Arabians peculiarly attached to the fludy of geography,
i. 32.
Argonauts , the expedition of, why so fsamous among th.

Greeks , i. 14.
Arithmetic, or computation, the art of, hardly known C

the native Americans, ii. 77.
Afcoli;o,, father, his extraordinary mission to the prince o

the Tartars, i. 38.

AJfatic discoveries made by the Ruffians , ii. 2.
Ajjeiito trade, the nature of, explained, iii. 32. Tb

frauds in, and how put an end to, 313.
Atthunlpa , is left by his fatther Huafcar his fuccefTir i

the kingdom of Ouito, iii. 23. Defeats his brothe
lluafcar, and usurps the empire of Peru, 4. Snd
prcfcnts to Pizarro , 2z. Vilits Pizarro , 3 . Is peril
dioufly seized by him, 34. Agrees with Pizarro on
ranorn , 3s. Is refilted his liberty, 40. Hlis behaiou
during his confinement, 42. A tbrm of trial elowei
on him, 43. Is put to death, 4. Coiiiparifon of an
thoritics relatin!: to his tranfiCtions ith , and treatme
by , Pizarro , co.
tAudienlce of New Spain , board of, efnibliifhd by the 1.
peror Charles V. ii. 3So. Courts o, their juriflicdi:
Iii. 249.

/ie)./i,t a Spaniih tax for convoy to and from America,

when fir!t imposed, iii. . Its rate,
,4o)er , those ilands discovered by the Portugiefe, i. 60.

B
ialiboa, Vasco Nugnez de, fettles a colony at Santa Maria,

in the gulph of Darien, i. 250. Receives intelligence
of the rich country of Peru , 2 7. His character, 39.
larches across the isthmus, 240. Discovers the Southern
Ocean, 242. Returns, 243. Is superseded in his
command by the appointment of Pedearias Davila, 24;.
Is fined by Pedrarias for former tranfadions, 246. Is
appointed lieutenant-governor of the countries 'on the
South-Sea, and marries Pedrarias's daughter, 249. Is
arrested and put to death by Pedrarias, 2so.

Bark, Jesuits, a production peculiar to Peru, iii. 294.
L.,irre, his description of the conftrutiofi of Indian houfcss

ii. 428.
L',/im;l , Martin , the honor of having discovered America

falsely ascribed to him by some German authors, i. 303.
Account of him and his family, 0o9.
,,lriug and Tfchirikow , Ruffian navigators , thought to
h]ave discovered the north-west cxtremity of America from
tle eastward , ii. 3 . Uncertainty of their accounts, 9z.
Be;iilcazar, governor of St. Michael, reduces the kingdom

of Quito, iii. 49. Is deprived of his command by Pi,
zarro , 7 .

riju;ini, the Jew ofTudela, his extraordinary travels, i. 7.
Iieraldlerr, inflance of the bravery of the Caribbecs nlen-

tioned by him, ii. 44.
?'t/'ecourt, John de, a Norman baron, conqueTs and pof-

fCllcs the Canary Iflnds , i. 4.

l;r.lr, the flight of, often ftrctch to an imrnenfe distance

Ironl land, i, 0o. An account of thole natural to
Amlcrica , ii. 18.
l,,,t.l in America , some nccounit ns the inhabitant

Ec 2

of, ii. T2o. Causes of tleir tame fubmiftlon to the
Spaniards, 22. Their religious doctrines and rites, 168.
Eo;tulor, cape, the first discovery of, i. So. Is doubled

by the Portuguese discoverers; sg.

Boy'l, his account of the American war-fong, ii. 421.
B'oadiila , Francis de, is ent to Hispaniola to inquire into

the conduct of Columbus, i. 8 3. Sends Columbus
home in irons, 8s. Is degraded, 87 . 192.

Bougainvi//le, his defence of the Periplus of Hanno, i. 294.
Bougzter, M. his characer of the native Peruvians, ii. 408.
EraJi., the coast of, discovered by Alvarez Cabral, i. i8o.

Remarks on the climate of, ii. 387.

nridges, Peruvian, dcfcribed, iii. 375.
Butenos Ayres , in South-America, ome account of thai

province, iii. 28.
Bulls, papal, of no force in Spanish America, before exa.

mined and approved by the royal council of the Indies,
iii. 274. See Cruzado.
Burial of the dead, American mode of, ii. 72.

C
Cabral, Alvarez, a Portuguese commander, discovers the

coast of Brail, i. 180o.
Cacoa, the belt in quality, produced in the Spanish Ame.

rican colonies, iii. 294. The preparation of chocolate
from, derived from the Mexicans, 3 7.
Cadi2, the galeons and flota, removed thither from Seville,

iii. o4.
Califurnia, the pcninfula of, discovered by Fernando Cor.

tes, ii. 81. The true state of this country long Un.
known, iii. 220. Why depreciated by the .lefuits, ibid
Favorable account of, given by Don Joleph Galvez, 22

Californians , the charadter of, by P. Venegas, ii. 411.
Campeachy , discovered by Cordova, who is repulsed by the

natives, i. 284.
Canipoianss , Don, Pedro Rodriguez , character of hi

political and commercial writings, iii. 40. His account
of the produce of the Spanish American mines, 4 .
Canary ilanlds erected into a kingdom by pope Clement VI.

i. 4. Are conquered by John de Bethencourt, ibid,
Cannibals , no people ever found to eat human fleli for

fublitlence, though often for revenge, ii. 13 8. 424.

Canoes, American, the conftructionof, described, ii. 1x7.
Caraccas, eftablifllment of the company trading to that

coast, iii. 18. Growth of the trade, 400.
Caribbee islands, discovered by Columbus in his second

voyage, i. 36.
Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, ii. 207. Their

characer by M. de Chanvalon, 410. Probable conjedture
as to the distinction in charater between them and the
natives of the larger islands, 4 .
Carpini, his extraordinary milfion to the prince of the

Tlartars, i. 8.

Cartbagena, the harbour of, the safest and best fortified

of any in all the Spanish American dominions, iii. 2 r.
Carthaginians, tate of commerce and navigation among,

i. 9. The famous voyages of Hanno and Himilco, i r.
Carvajal, Francisco de, contributes to Vaca de Castro's

victory over young Almagro, iii. 91. Encourages Gonzalo
Pi'7arro to assume the government of Peru, og9. Ad-
vises Pizarro to assume the sovereignty of the country, 4.
Is seized by Gafca and executed, i;o.
Cajiillo, Bernal Diaz del, character of his Hiftoria Verda-

dera de la Conquifa de la Nueva Efpagna, ii. 47.
Certeno , Diego , revolts from Gonzalo Pizarro to the

viceroy of Peru, iii. i i r. Is defeated by Carvajal, and
fecrctes hinifelf in a cave, i i. Sallies out and seizes
Cuzco, x12. Is reduced byPizarro, 127. Is employed
by Gafca to make discoveries in the regions about the
river Plata, i 3 6.

Cw',ivalolz, M. de, his charaer of the native Caribbees,

ii. 410.

Cttl)etoites, in the Spanifli American colonies', who thus
diltinguifhed, iii. 261.

Ee

Charles III. king of Spain, eftablifhcs packet-boats between

Spain and the colonies, iii. 21 . Allows free trade
the windward ilidnds, 2 . Grants the colonies a free
trade x\ith each other, ; z^.
Cl)rles V. emperor, fends oderli de Figueroa to llif.

paniola, as chief judge, to regulate the treatmlent of the
Indians, i. 266. Causes this ubject to be debated before
him , 27; Equips a squadron at the iblicitation of
Ferdinand ll1agellan, ii. ;6;. Resigns his claim on the
Noluccas to the Portuguese , ;68. Appoints Cortes
governor of New Spain, 71. Rewards him on coning
home, 379. Etlablifhes a board called the Audience of
New Spain, 1So. His consultations on American affairs,
iii. 9. Eftablifles new regulations, 97.
Chili, is invaded by Almagro, iii. 6. How fubjecred b.

the Spaniards, 224. Excellence of its climate and foil,
ibid. Cause of its being negledted, 225. Profpec of
its improvement, 226.
Cbiqzitos, political state Qs that people, from Fernandez,

ii. 420.

Choco!ate, the use of, derived from the Mexicans, iii. 3 ?.
Chollifi, in MIexico, arrival of Cortes there, with Come

account of the town, ii. 2 6 3. A conspiracy againt
Cortes discovered, and the inhabitants destroyed, 266.

Cicero, infiance of his ignorance in geography, i. 298.
Cina 'oa, pnlitical state of the people there, ii. 419. Their

mode of living, 427. Are deflitute of all religion, 4r
Extraordinary large grain of gold found there, iii. 76.
Cinerguiain, in the province of Sonora, late discoveries o

rich mines made there by the Spaniards, iii. 219. Pr°
bable eflccs of these discoveries , zo,

Claziro, 1l. fevcral of his objections answered, iii. 39
(l:.;;lnt \V. pope , erc(ts the Canary islands into a kini

d(jm , i. 4S.
Clirtes, influenced by a variety of caufcs, ii. 7. Tlhei

opecration on mankind, 201. Inquiry into the cause 0
the (llrcrenat degrees of heat in, 385-

t(/iizeal, an important productio , almolt peculiar t.

New Spain, iii. 294.
C'dl,, extraordinary predominance of, in the climate of

America, ii. 7. CauIts of this peculiarity, 9.
f'oo;lies, Spanih American, view of the policy and trade

t, iii. 3 7. Depopulation the firrf effect of them, ibid.
CLufLes of this depopulation, 23 8. The smallpox very
lital to , 240. General idea of the Spanish policy in, 245.
Jflulv interpolition of the regal authority in, 246. An
crclufive trade the first objec in, 254. Compared with
thliFe of ancient Greece and Rome, 25. The great
iclti-ricions thcy are fubjcCt to, 2 7. Slow progress of
their population from Europe, 258. Are discouraged by
die Icate of property there, 259. And by the nature of
their eccleialtical policy, 261. The various classes of
people in, ibid. Ecclefialtical conititution of, 273.
Form and endowments of the church there, 275. Per-
nicious effects of monastic institutions there, 276.
Character of the ecclesiastics there, 278. Produdions
ot, 26. The mines, 287. Those of Potofi and Saco-
recas, 88. The spirit with which they are worked, 290.
Fatal effeds of this ardor, 292. Other commodities
i-at compole the commerce of, g29. Amazing increase
,i' horned cattle there, z9S. Advantages which Spain
formerly derived from them, 96. Why the fame ad-
v;n[;igcs are not still received , 297. Guarda Collas
e:nploycd to check the contraband trade in, 313. The
use of regifler ships introduced, ibid. And galeons laid
;lde, 3 6. Company of the Caraccas inffituted, 3 8.
l',iblif-lment of regular packet-boats to, 320. Free
tralc Ierlmitted between themn, 325. New regulations
in the government of, ;26. Reformation of the courts
(i Jltice, 327. New dilribution of governments, ibid.
A I:)u-th viceroyalty ltiablifhcd , 28. Attempts to

'turni domeltic policy, 3o. Their trade ith the
l'hi!iPlpne ilimcls , 3 4. Revenue derived from, by

0':' i, 3 7. Expenflc of adnililration there, 34a.

E 4

State of population in, 3 8 i. The number of monasterics
there, 389. See AMexico, Pert , &c.
Colutmbu , Bartholomew, is sent by his brother Christopher

to negociace with Henry VII. king of England, i. 81,
The misfortunes of his voyage, 87. Follows his brother to
}lifpaniola, 146. Is vcfted with the administration of
affairs there by his brother on his return to Spain, 6.
Founds the town of St. Domingo, 66.
folimbuszt, Christopher, birth and education of, i. 70.

His early voyages, 71. Marries and fettles at Lisbon, 72.
His geographical reflections, 7s. Conceives the idea of
making discoveries to the westward, 77. Offers his
services to the Genoese senate, 80. Cause of his overtures
being rejected in Portugal, 82. Applies to the courts
of Castile and England, ib. 8;. His proposal, how
treated by the Spanifl geographers, 84. Is patronised by
Juan Perez, 87. His proposals again rejected, 89. Is
invited by Isabella , and engaged in the Spanish service, 9g.
Preparations for his voyage, 9. The amount of his
equipment, 96. Sails from Spain, 97. His vigilant
attention to all circumrtances during his voyage , 99
Apprehensions of his crew, oo. His address in quieting
their cabals, 104. Indications of their approaching
land, o6. An island discovered , 107. He lands, og.
His interview with the natives, 1og. Names the island
San Salvador, to. Prosecutes his discoveries south.
ward, I i. Dircovers , and lands on , the island of
Cuba , X 2. Discovers Hispaniola , 1 14. Suffers
shipwreck , but is saved by the Indians, i x, Builds
a fort, 12x. Returns to Europe, 124. His expedient
to preserve the mcniory of his discoveries during
itorlmn, 126. Arrives at the Aores, ibid. Arrives t
Lisbon, 1z7. His reception inSpain, 129. His audienc
\With Ferdinand and Ifisbclla, o. I-s equipment for;
second voyage, i 3 . Discovers the Caribbee illands, 1 6
Finds his colony on Hispaniola destroyed, 137. Builds;
city, which he calls Ifahella, 19. Visits the interioi
parts of the ountry, 4 r. His men discontented am

facetious, r4.. Discovers the island of Jamaica, 14.
Meets his brother Bartholomew at Iabella, I46. The
natives ill used by his men , and begin to be alarmed,
147, 148. He defeats the Indians, i1 . Exacs tribute
from them, i ;2. Returns to Spain to justify his con-
ducd, 6. Is furnished with a more regular plan for
colonization, 8. His third voyage, 62. Discovers
the island of Trinidad, 6;. Discovers the continent of
America, 164. State of Hispaniola on his arrival, i66.
Composes the mutiny of Roldan and his adherents, 169.
Is diflrefed by the factious behaviour of his men, igl.
Complaints carried to Spain againit him, I82. Is sent
home in irons , 8's. Clears his conduct, but is not
reffored to his authority , 187. His solicitations
neglected, 92. Forms new schemes of discovery, 9t.
Engages in a fourth voyage, 195. His treatment at
Hispaniola, 96. Searches after a passage to the Indian
ocean, 197. Is shipwrecked on the coast of.Jamaica, 199.
His artifice to secure the friendship of the Indians, 202.
Is delivered, and arrives at Hispaniola, o26. Returns
to Spain, o07. His death, 208. His right to the
original discovery of America defended , 307.
Columblus , Don Diego , sues out his claims to his father's

privileges, i. 222. Marries and goes over to Hispaniola,
223. Establishes a pearl fiflery at Cubagua , 22. Projedts
the conquest of Cuba , 22. His measures thwarted by
Ferdinand, 1. Returns to Spain, ib.
Commerce, the ra from which its commencement is to be

dated, i. 2. Motives to an intercourse among distant
nations, 4. Still flourished in the eastern empire after
the subversion of the western , 3i. Revival of , in
Europe, 3 .
Cornlrnfs , mariner's, navigation extended more by the in-

vention of, than by all the efforts of preceding ages ,
i. 42. By whom invented, 4.
Conzdanii7e , M. his account of the country at the foot of

the Andes, in South-America, ii. 391. His remarks on
the character of the native Americans, 409. 410.

Congo , the kingdom of, discovered by the Portuguese,

i. 6.
Co-nflantinople, the consequence of removing the feat of the

Roman empire to, i. 29. Continued a commercial city
after the extinction of the western empire, 3 . Became
the chief mart of ftaly , 34.
Cordoza , Francisco Hernandez , discovers Yucatan , i. 283.

Is repulsed at Campeachy, and returns to Cuba, 285.
Corita , Alon7o , his observations on the contraband trade

of the Spaniih colonies, iii. 3 ;. CharaCter of his American
memoirs , .
Corter , Fernando , his birth , education , and character,

ii. 2I. Is by Velasquez appointed commander of the
armament fitted out by him against New Spain, 212.
Velasquez becomes jealous of him, 2 . Velasquez fends
orders to deprive him of his commilion , and lay him
under an arret , 216. Is protected by his troops, 17i.
The amount of his forces, 2 8. Reduces the Indians at
Tabasco, 220. Arrives at St. Juan de Ulua, 22 . His
interview with two Nlexican commanders, 2. Sends
preltets to lontczuma, 226. Receives others in return,
227. His fchlies , 233 . Eitablilhes a form of civil
government , 2 6. Religns his commillion under Velaf-
qucz , and allilnes the command in the king's name, 2 9.
His fiiendfhip courted by the Znipoallans, 2,1. Builds
a fort , 243. Concludes a fornal alliance with several
ca7iques, 244. Discovers a conspiracy among his men,
and dettroys his flips, 247. Advances into the country,
2'o. Is ppolcd by the Tlafcalans, 253. Concludes a
peace with them , 29. I]is rafl zeal, 261. Proceeds
to Cholula , 26;. Dl)fcovers a conspiracy ag.inlt him
here , and deltroys the inhabitants , 66. Approlachcs
in ight of the capital city of Mlexico , 267. His first
int.:rview with lMontezuma , 269. Ilis anxiety at his
fit'ia'ion in the city of Mexico, 276. Seizes Alontezu-
1, , 280. Orders him to be fettered , 28. Reatlns
of his conduct , ihiid. Prevails on lontczuma to own
himself a vassal to the Spanish crown, Z87. Amount and
divilion of his trcafurc , 289. Enrages the Mexicans by

hiis imprudent zeal , 292. An armament sent by Velaf-
quez to supersede him , 9 7. H-is deliberations on this
event, o00. Advances to meet Narvaez , o3. Defeats
Narvaez, and takes him prisoner, 307. Gains over the
Spanirh soldiers to hisinterelt, ;op. Returns to Mexico,
3 1. Hlis improper coniduct on his arrival , 312. Is
resolutely attacked by the Mexicans , 3 r . Attacks them
in return without success, 3 14. Death of' Mlontezuma, 3 5.
His extraordinary escape from death , 3 t8. Abandons
the city ofl exico, 19. Is attacked by the Mexicans,
320. His great loffTs in the encounter, 321. Difficulties
of his retreat, ;3 . Battle of Otumba , ; z;. Defeats
the Mexicans, 26. Mutinous fiirit of his troops, 329.
Reduces the Tepeacans , 3 . Is strengthened by several
reinforcements, 3. Returns to Mlexico, 334. Eftab-
lifhes his head - quarters a Tezeuco , 336. Reduces or
conciliates the surrounding country, 338. Cabals among
iis troops, 3 9. His prudence in fipprefing them, 40.
builds and launches a fleet of brigantines on the lake,
344. Besieges Mlexico, 35. laikcs a grand alault to
take the city by storm , but is repulfle, 3;o. Evades
the Mexican prophecy , 3 3. 'Takes Guatimozin prisoner,
3 7. Gains poflellion of the city , 3s8. And of the
uhlule empire, 360. D)eleats another attempt to super-
cedc him in his command , 370. Is appointed governor
ot New Spain , 37 . Ilis chemes and arrangements,
, 2. Cruel treatment of the natives, 3 7 . Iis conduct
fihiedCed to inquiry , 377. leturns to Spain to jultify
linl'lf , 378. Is rewarded by the emperor Charles V.
38o. (oes back to Mexico with limited powers, ibid.
Diicovers California, 3;8. Returns to Spain and dies,
182. Inquiry into the nature of his ltters to the emperor
Charles V. 436. Authors who wrote of his conquelt of
New Spain, 47. 438.

('ocl. l;/, of the Indies, its pover, iii. 252.
('ro/'!' , in the Spanifil American colonies , character of,

iii. 262.
(,o;,,i: , colonel George , his account of the discovery of

the bones of a large extinct species of animals in North.
America, ii. 92.
CrtzJkude , to the Holy Land, the great political advantages

derived from, by the European nations, i. as. 6.
Cruzado, bulls of, publifled regularly every two years in

the Spanish colonies, iii. ; 38. Prices of, and amount
of the sale at the last publication, 406.
Cuba, the island of, discovered by Christopher Columbus,

i. ri2. Is failed round by Ocampo, 222. The con.
quest of, undertaken by Diego Velasquez , 232. Cruel
treatment of the cazique Hatuey , and his repartee to a
friar, 233. Columbus's enthusiastic description of a
harbour in , 304. The tobacco produced there , the
finest in all America, iii. 294.

Cubagzna, a pearl fishery established there , i. 22g.
Ctmnana, the natives of, revenge their ill treatment by the

Spaniards, i. 277. The country desolated by Diego
Ocampo, 279.
Cizco , the capital of the Peruvian empire, founded by

Mlanco Capac, iii. 1. Is seized by Pizarro , 49. Is be-
fieged by the Peruvians, s9. Is fuprifed by Almagro,
64. Is recovered and pillaged by the Pizarros, 72.
Was the only city in all Peru, 212.

D
Dancing, the love of, a favorite passion among the Ame-

ricans, ii. I77.
Darien,. the ithmus of, defctibed, i. 213. The increase

of settlement there, obstructed by the noxiousness of the
climate, iii. 20.

De Solir, his unfortunate expedition up the river Plata, i. 2 s.
De So/is, Antonio, charater of his I-liforia de la Conquifta

de Mlexico, ii. 438.
D',fquilacbe, prince, viceroy of Peru , his vigorous mea-

fures for reitraining the excclTes of the regular clergy
there, iii. 281. Rendered ineffectual, 282.

Dias, Bartholomew, discovers the Cape of Good Hope,

i. 66.
Difcoverier, the difference between those made by land,

and those by sea, stated, i. 297.
Dodwell, his objetions to the Periplus of Hanno exploded,

i. 293.
Donmingo, St. on the island of Hispaniola , founded by

Bartholomew Columbus, i. 166.
Dominiicatr , those in Hispaniola publicly remonstrate

against the cruel treatment of the Indians, i. 25. See
Las Cafir.
Drtun(enneJ , strong propensity of the Americans to in.

dulge in, ii. 182.

E
Eartb, the globe of, how divided into zones by the an.

cients, i. 27.
Egyptians, ancient, fate of commerce and navigation

among them, i. .
El Dorado, wonderful reports of a country so called, made

by Francis Orellana, iii. 8 .

Elephant, that animal peculiar to the torrid zone, ii. 92.
Efjatrial, curious calendar discovered in the Library there

by Mr. Waddilove, iii. 66. Description of that valuable
monument of Mexican art, 67.
Efquiiiattux Indians, resemblance between them and their

neighbours the Greenlanders , ii. 39. Some account
of, 68. 7. 429.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the Portuguese an exclusive

right to all the countries they should discover, from
Cape Non to the continent of India, i. s8.
EIrope, how asseted by the dismemberment of the Roman

Empire by the barbarous nations , i. o. Revival of
commerce and navigation in, 3j. Political, advantages
derived from the crusades, 36.

F

'er;tizlnd kilg of Castile. See Co/rztilbint and Ifabeia,

Turns his attention at length to the regulation of American
affairs, i. 1 7. Don Diego de Columbus sues out
his father's claims against him, 222. Erects to
governments on the continent of America, 226. Sends
a fleet to )arien , and fuperfeces Balboa, 24g. Appoints
Balboa lieutenant-governor of the countries on the South-
Sea, 248. Sends Dias de Solis to discover a weften
pafTige to the MIoluccas, 25 . Thwarts the measures of
Diego Columbus, z; . His decree concerning the
treatment of the Indians, 2 6.
Fei;zanizii , Don Diego, character of his iltoria del Peru,

iii. 46.
Fernandez, P. his description of the political state of the

Chiquitus, ii. 420.
Figuc;oa, Roderigo de , is appointed chief judge of His-

paniola, ith a commillion to examine into the treat-
ment of the Indian natives, i. 66. Makes an experiment
to determine the capacity of the Indians, 78.
Florida, discovered by Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 234. The

chiefs there hereditary, ii. ilr. Account of from Al-
varo Nugnez Cabcca de Vaca , ii. 414.

Flota, Spanish, some account of, iii. o30.

.Forfeca , bishop of Badaijos, miniftetr tr Indian afteir;'.
oblIructs the plans of colonization and discovery formed
by Columbus, i. I . 6z. Patronizes the expedition
of Alonzo dc Ojcda, 176.
Galcons, Spalliflh, the nature and luipll('e of thefc vcfilcl,

iii. 304. Arrangement of their ).voyage, o.
GaIr3, Don Joseph, sent to difcovcr the true flatc

Calilfornic, iii. p

o.
G',inn, \'Ml~: ic, lis voyage o)r dil ov'c:'y , i. 172. Cou

bles the Cape of Good Hope, 7;. Anchors before the
city of Melinda, ibid. Arrives at Calecut in iMalabar, 74.

CGaiing, strange propensity of the Americans to, ii. 8 r.
G;ULies, erroneous ideas of the ancients as to the olition

of that river, i. 297.
GcJla, Pedro de la, sent to Peru as prefSdent of the Court

of Audience in Lima; iii. I 8. -lis character and
moderation, 19. The powers he was veeled with, x2o.
Arrives at Panama, 1z . Acquires pofl'elion of Panama
with the fleet and forces there, r23. AIdvanccs towards
Cuzco , 28. Pizano's troops desert to hin, I3o. His
moerate ue of the victory, ibid. Devilcs employment
for his soldiers, 136. His division of the country among
his followers , I 7. The discontents it occasions, 8.
Restores order and government, ibid. lis reception at
his return to Spain, 139.

Gcminizts , inflance of his ignorance in geography, i. 299.
G'eograpty, the knowledge of, extremely confined among

the ancients, i. 26. Became a favorite tludy among
the Arabians, 2.
Giants, the accounts of, in our early travellers , uncon-

firmed by recent discoverics, i. 42. ii. 4o0 , 406.

(Gioia, Flavio, the inventor of the mariner's conlpafs, i. 43.
(;/('e, its division into zones by the ancients, i. 27.
(;o./, why the firll metal with which man was acquainted,

iii 22 . Extraordinary large grain of, found in the mines
at Cinaloa, 76.
Co;mnara, charater of his Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna,

ii. 4 -7.
(,'.),,I Hope, Cape of, discovered by Bartholomew Diaz,

i. 66.
('u;rvinient , no vilible form of, among the native Ame-

ic;Is, ii. 114. Exceptions, i 17.
(h;,ru Chao , account of the method of making war amnont

the natives of, from Lo.;alio , ii. 42 r.
(,'rmiiii , new kingdom of, in America , by wlhon re-

duced to the Spanifl dominion , iii. 2 4. Its climare
and produc , 23. A viceroy lately cltaiblilhld the!-
248.

INDEX-
Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation and discovery among

them, i. . Their commercial intercourse with other
nations very limited, , 16.

Creenla.nd, its vicinity to North-America, ii. 8.
Grijatlva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba on a voyage of

discovery, i. 286. Discovers and gives name to New
Spain, 287. His reasons for not planting a colony in
his newly discovered lands, 289.
Guarda Coltas employed by Spain to check illicit trade in

the American colonies, iii. 1 3.
titatiniala, the indigo there superior to any in America,

iii. 294.
Guatinozin, nephew and fon-in-law of Montezuma , fuc-

ceeds Quetlavaca in the kingdom of Mexico, ii. 336.
Repulses the attacks of the Spaniards, in storming the
city of Mexico, 3 o. Is taken prisoner by Cortes, 3 ;7.
Is tortured to discover his treasure, q9. Is hanged,
374.
Gitiana, Dutch, cause of the excessive fertility of the foil

there, ii. 39S.
Hanno, his Periplus defended, with an account of his

voyage, i. 293.
JHatuey, a cazique of Cuba, his cruel treatment, and

memorable repartee to a Franciscan friar, i. 2 33.
Ha-rkef-rorth's voyages, account of New Holland, and the

inhabitants from, ii. 416.
Heat , the different degrees of, in the old and new con-

tinents, accounted for, ii. 38;. Estimated, 94.
Henry Prince of Portugal, his character and fludies, i. t.

Expeditions formed by his order, 3. Applies for a
papal grant of his new discoveries, S8. His death, 60.
Herrada, Juan de, aitaliinates Francis Pizarro, iii. 86.

Dies, 90.
Herrera , the best historian of the conquest of New

Spain, ii. 49. Hlis account of Orellana's voyage,
iii. 5i.

fijsastio/a,

HifiJa;iola , the island of, discovered by Christopher Co,

lunibus, i. 1 14. His tranfations with tle natives, x l.
A colony left there by Columbus, 122. The colony
delroyed, 137. Columbus builds a city called Isabella,
139. The natives ill-ufeld, and begin to be alarnmed, 147.
Are defeated by the Spaniards, ixi. Tribute exacted
from them, 1x2. They' scheme to flarve the Spaniards,
i;3. St. Domingo founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
i66. Columbus sent home in irons by Bovadilla, 8S.
Nicholas de Ovando appointed governor, 188. Sum-
mary view of the conduct of the Spaniards towards the
natives of, 212. Unhappy slate of Anacoana, 2 1.
Great produce from the mines there, 21i. The inha.
bitants diminifl , 218. The Spaniards recruit them by
trepann:ng the natives of the Lucayos , 220. ilrrival of
Don Diego de Columbus, 224. The natives of, almost
extirpated by slavery, 2 i. 2 4. Controversy concerning
the treatment of them, ib. Columbus's account of the
humane treatment he received from the natives of, 304.
Curious instance of fuperltition, in the Spanish planters
there, ii. 94.
Hlo/giin , Pedro Alvarez, erects the royal standard in Peru,

in oppolition to the younger Almagro, iii. 90. Vaca de
Caliro arrives and .asSumes the command, 91.
Homer, his account of the navigation of the ancient Greeks,

i. 14.
HoizlLrs, the value of that country, owing to its pro-

duction of the logwood ree, iii. 223.
lluozei cattle, amazing, increase of them in Spanifl Ame.

rica, iii. 29g.
Ilojrs, aftonilhmecnt and miltakes of the ATlexicans at the

tirlt light of them, ii. 444. Expedient of the Peruvians
to rendtr them incapable of action, iii. 35S.
Ilfntm Capac, Inca of Peru, his character and faimily,

iii. 23.
IltJir Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes his brother Ata-

hluaip;a's fuccellion to Quito, iii. 24. Is dfeated and

VoL. 1in. f

taken prisoner by Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits the afliitance
of Pizarro against his brother , 26. Is put to death by
order of Atahualpa, 37.

1

Jamaica , discovered by Christopher Columbus, i. x4.
Jerome, St. three monks of that order sent by cardinii

Ximenes to Hispaniola, to regulate the treatment of the
Indians, i. 261. Their conduct under this commiflion,
26t. Are recalled , 266.
JeJuits, acquire an absolute dominion over California,

iii. 220. Their motives for depreciating the country,
ibid.
Jevrs, ancient fRate of commerce and navigation among

them, i. 8.
Incas of Peru, received origin of their empire, iii. 2z.

192. Their empire founded both in religion and policy.
193, See Peru.
Jindi, , the motives of Alexander the Great, in his expedi.

tion to, i. 7. The commerce with how carried on in
ancient times, 23. And when arts began to revive in
Europe, 4. The first voyage made round the Cape of
Good Hlope, 172.

indians in Spanish America. See Americans.
Indies, Welt, why Columbus's discoveries were so named,

i. 132.
Innocent IV. pope, his extraordinry miflion to the prince

(of the Tartars, i. 8 .
IiqniJiio , cuurt of, when and by liwho first introducec

into PIortual , i. o01.
li/j,,ils and reptilce, why rs numlerous and noxious in An2-i

rica, ii. 17.
,Joh;t 1. lIng ol Portugal, te lirlt who fnt lhipls to explo

the wcficrn coalts of Africi, i. 48.' Ils lin prilic
Ilcenry engages in there attempts, 1.

Ji'Jn I. ling of Portugal, patronises all attempts towards

discoveries, i. 6;. Sends an embafly to Abyflinia , 67.
His ungenerous treatment of Columbus , 8a.
lioz, the reason why savage nations were unacquainted with

this metal, ii. o6.
lJ;ibellta, queen of Caffile, is applied to by Juan Perez in

behalf of Christopher Columbus, i. 7. Is again applied
to by Quintanilla and Santangel, 91. Is prevailed on
to equip him, 92. Dies, 207. Her real motives for
encouraging discoveries in America, iii. 241.
IJfar!'.'., the city of, in Hispaniola, built by Chriflopher

Columbus, i. x39.
Ia:ly, the first country in Europe, where civilization and

arts revived after the overthrow of the Roman Empire,
. t4. The commercial spirit of, ative and enterprif-
i,lg, 3,.

L
L,.irone islands, discovered by Ferdinand Iagellan. ii.

166.

Lakes, amain fi7e of those in North-America, ii. 4.
L.r C'as , H artholoinew, returns fiom Hlifpainiola to fjlicit

the cause of the cnflaved Indians at the court of Spain,
i. 259. Is sent back with powers by cardinal Ximenes,
z6I. Returns diflhtisfied, 262. 265. Procures a new
comminifon to be sent over on this subjed,. 267.
Recommends the scheme of supplying the colonies with
ilncroes, 269. Undertalkes a new colony, 270. His
,olnftrence with the bishop of Darien before the emperor
Liarles V. 74. Goes to America to carry his schemes
into execution , 276. Circumfianccs unftvorable t)
hiiin, 2'8. lis final milcarriage, 279. Revives his
r(cllcfcnta;tions in fvor of the Indians, ;t the desire
.,1 the emperor, iii. 9. Comlpooes a trcatifc on tle
',!,:lrultitn of Amncrica, 96.

L-'t' 1

LeoIz, Pedro Cieza tie, character of his Chronica del Peru,

iii. 346.
Ley3, his description of the courage and ferocity of the

Toupinambos, ii. 424.

Lima , the city of, in Peru, founded by Pizarro, iii. S.
LiJon , ilr. the British miniifer at Madrid, his anfiier to

several interelting inquiries relating to the admilfion of
Indians into holy orders, iii. 397.
Log-nood, the commlity that gives importance to the

provinces of Honduras and Yucatan, iii. 222. Policy of
the Spaniards to defeat the Englifli trade in, 223.
Louis, St. I;ing of France, his embafly to the chan of

the Tartars, i. 39.
Lozano, his account of the method of making ar among

the natives of Gran Chaco, ii. 421.
Luque , Hernandot de, a priest, affiociates with Pizarro in

his Peruvian expedition, iii. 4.

M

Ma(leira, the island of, first discovered, i. 4.
MIIitoc, prince of North-WCales, story of his voyage and

discovery of North-America examined, i. 1 o.
IMagellan, Ferdinand, his account of the gigantic size of

Fatagonians, ii. 69. The existence of this giganti,:
race yet to be decided, o. 4o,. 46. His intro-
dudtion to the court of Cafile , 362. Is equippei
with a fuadron for a voyage of dilcovery, 363. Sil'
through the famous fitait that bears his name, 36.
l)ilcovcrs the Ladrone and Philippine illands, 366. Is
killed, ibid.
Aligujert , its property of attradting iron known to the an-

cients, but not its polar inclination, i. . Extraordinar
advantages resulting from this discovery, 43.
Ma/o, St. account of its commerce with Sp;uafh America.

iii. 311.

lIanJzco Capac, founder of the Peruvian empire, account of,

iii. 21. 22. 193.
ilanzdeville, Sir John, his eastern travels, with a character

of his writings, i. 4 1.
rMalzil/a, the colony of, eablifhed by Philip II. of Spain

iii. 34. Trade between, and South-America, 3; .
Mlulnzkinzd, their difpolition, and manners formed by their

tituation, ii. 2 . lence resemblances to be traced in
very difflnt places without communication, 26. Have
uniformly attained the greatest perfedtion of their nature
in temperate regions, 404.
Jlarco Polo, the Venetian, his extraordinary travels in the

East, i. 40.
Mares, Gabriel, his account of the country between the

Illinois and Mlachilinmakinac, ii. 4r7.
fl.ani;la , Donna, a Alexican slave, her history, ii. 222.
Martins, Tyrius, his erroneous position of China , i. o02.
Martyr, , Peter, his sentiments on the first discovery of

America, i. 313.
f[/tizos, in the Spanish - American colonies, diftindion
between them and Mulattoes, iii. 364.
Mfetals, useful, the original natives of lAmerica totally un-

acquainted with, ii. it6.
exiczs, their account of their own origin, compared
with laterc discoveries, ii. 41. Their paintings few in
number, and of ambiguous meaning, iii. i48.. Two
cullections of them discovered 149. note. Descriptions
of their hiflorical pictures, 171. Various exaggerated
accounts of the number of human viQtims facriticed by
them , 88. 370. Their language furnished with
respectful terminations for all its words, 60o. -1ow
they contributed to the fiipport of government, 36r.
lMe.ico, arrival of Fcrnando Cortes on the coast of, ii. 22.
Ilis interview with two Mexican officers, ilid. Inforna-
tion ent to Montezunma, with fomc Spanifll presents,
226. Montezunla fends prfecnts to Cortes, with orders
not to approach his capital, 227. State of the empire
at that time, 228. The Zcmpoallms court the friendhip

Ft'

of Cortes, 24.. Several caziques enter into alliance
with Cortes, 24. Character of the natives of Tlafcala,
25t. The Tlafcalans reduced to ue for peace, 28.
Arrival of Cortes at the capital city, 269. The city
described, 27 . Montezuma acknowledges himself a
vaffll to the Spanish crown, 287. Amount of the
treasure collected by Cortes, 289. leafons of gold
being found in such small quantities, 290. The Mexicans
enraged by the imprudent z.eal of Cortes, 293. Attack
.Alvarado during the absence of Cortes, 3 o. Their
reflute attack on Cortes when he returned, 13 . Death
of Montezuma, 317. The city abandoned by Cortes,
3 9. Battle of Otumba, 32s. The Tepeacans reduced,
1 r. Preparations of the Mexicans against the return of
Cortes, 334. Cortes belieges the city with a fleet on
the lake, 47. '1 he Spaniards repulsed in storming the
city, 3 o. Guatimozin taken prisoner, C;7. Cortes
appointed governor, 371. His schemes and arrangements,
372. Inhuman treatment of the natives, 7 3. Lilt
and character of those authors who wrote accounts of
the conquest of, 437. Reception of the new regulation
there, iii. oo. A retrospect into the form of govern.
ment, policy, and arts in, 143. Our information
concerning, very imperfect, 146. Origin of the
monarchy, 149. Number and greatness of the cities,
1 53. Mechanical professions there diiinguiflied from
each other, i55. Diftindion of ranks, i 6. Politic:il
institutions, 1 9. Power and fpledclor of their monarchs,
162. Order of government, l 6. Proviion for the
support of it, ibid. Police of, 164. Their arts, 61.
Their paintings, 168. Their method of computing time,
I7. Their wars continual and ferocious, 174. Their
fiuneral rites, 17 ;. Imperfection of their agriculture, iid
Doubts concerning the extent of the empire , 177
Little intercourfl among its several provinces, 178
Ignorance of Money, 179. State of their cities, 8i
Temples and other public buildings, iid. 182. Religioi
of, 187. Caufcs of the depopulation of this country

238. The finall-pox very fatal there, 240. Number of
Indian natives emaining there, 244. Description of
the aqueduct for the supply of the capital city, 61.
See Colonies.

llicbael, St. the gulph of, in the South-Sea, discovered and

named by Balboa, i. 242. The colony of, established
by Pizarro, iii. 19.

Migrations of mankind, why first made by land, i. .
Mind, human, the efforts of it proportioned to the wants

of the body, ii. 82.
JMines of South-America, the great inducement to population,

iii. 17. Some account of, 287. Their produce,
289. The spirit with which they are worked, 290.
Fatal effeds of this ardor, 291. Evidence of the
pernicious effets of laboring in them, 387. Of
Mexico, total produce of, to the Spanish revenue , 41
-412.
lMolucca Islands, the Spanish claims on, fold by the Em-

peror Charles V. to the Portuguese, ii. 69.
Monastic inflitutions, the pernicious effets of, in the Spanifl-

American colonies, iii. 276. Number of convents
there, ;89.
iMonoJbons, the periodical courfc of, when discovered by
navigators, i. 2.
MonteJino, a Dominican preacher at St. Domingo, pub-

licly remonstrates against the cruel treatment of the In.
dians, i. 2.
loitezina , the first intelligence received by the Spaniards

of this prince, i. 288. Receives intelligence of the
,rrival of Fernando Cortes in his dominions, ii. 22.
Ilis presents to Cortes, 227. Forbids him to approach
his capital, 228. State of his empire at this time,
ibid. His character, 229. His perplexity at the arri-
val of the Spaniards, 20. lis timid negociations with
Cortes, 2 . His scheme olr dellroying Cortes at
Cholula difcovcred, 26;. IHis irrefblute conduct, 268.
lHis first interview with Cortes, ibid. Is eized by
Cortes, and confined to the Sp:nifl quarters, 28o. Is

' f 4

Fettered, 2T. Acknowledges himself a vassal to the
Spanish crown, 287. Remains inflexible with regard
to religion, 292. Circumltances of his death, ;i7.
Account of a gold cup of his, in ngland, iii. 62.
Mt/ulattoes, in the Spanifh-American colonies, explanation

of this dftindion , iii. 264.

N
NWrvatnr, Pamphilo, is ent by Velasquez with an arma-

ment to Alexico, to fupcrfede Cortes, ii. t97. Takes
poffeflion of Zempoalla, 304. Is defeated and taken
prisoner by Cortes, 307. How he carried on his cor-
refpondence with Montezuma , 4o.
Natcbez, an American nation, their political institutions,

ii. 1 17, 18. Causes of their tame fubmiflion to the
Spaniards, 122. Their religious dotrines, 12^;.
Navigationz, the arts of, very slowly improved by man-

kind, i. 2. The knowledge of, prior to commercial
intercourse, 3. Imperfecions of, among the ancients,
5. More improved by the invention of the mariner's
compass , than by all the efforts of preceding ages,
42. The firit naval discoveries undertaken by Portugal,
46.
Xergroes, their peculiar situation under the Spanish domi-

nion in America, iii. 265.

Ye-fotzstd/lr d, its ituation described, ii. 48.
yncv-Hollanid, some account ofthe country and inhabitants,

ii. 416.
Xe-v Szailn, discovered and named by Juan de Grijalva,

i. 287. See Alexico.

Nizo, AIlonfo, his voyage to Anerica, i. 178.
2vorregiaitr, mighlt in ancient times have migrated to, and

cnlonifed America, ii. 40.
itir}e ' Vela , Blafcn , appointed viceroy of Peru , to enforce
the New regulations, iii. 99. His character , o4.
Commils Vaca dt Caho to prison, oS. Dilfenlions

between him and the court of audience, ot. Is con-
fined, o08. Recovers his liberty, ilo. Refunmes his
command, ibid. Is pursued by Gonzalo Piz;u'ro, 1i2.
Is defeated and killed by Pizarro, 1 i.

0
Ocnampo, Diego, sent with a qiuadron from Ilifpanoila to

desolate the country of Cumara, i. 277. 2go.
Ocamtlo, Sebaflian de, firfl fails round Cuba, and discovers

it to be an island, i. 222.
Ocean , though adapted to facilitate the intercourse between

dillant countries, continued long a formidable barrier,
i. 2. See Compaft and Navigation.
Ojedo , Alonzo de, his private expedition to the Weft-In.

dies, i. 176. His second voyage, 189. Obtains a
government on the continent, 227.
Olmedo, Father Bartholomew de , checks the rash zeal

of Cortes at Tlafcala in Alexico, ii. z62. Is sent by
Cortes to negociate with Narvaez, o0i.
Ore/lanra, Francis, is appointed to the command of a bark

built by onzalo Pizarro, and deserts him, iii. 8o.
Sails down the Maragnon, ibid. Returns to Spain with
a report of wonderful discoveries, 8. Herrera's account
of his voyage, 3 .
Orgogne commands Almagro's party againit the Pizarros,

and is defeated and killed by them, iii. 71.

Orinoco , the great river of, discovered by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. 61. Strange method ofchufing a captain
among the Indian tribes on the banks of, 142. The
am;lzing plenty of fiflhing, ii. 4.
Otal/,itc, the inhabitants of, ignorant of the art of boiling

water, ii. 429.
Otmiba, battle of, between Cortes and the IMexicans, ii.

32s.
Ovanrlo, Nicholas de, is sent governor to iifipaniola, i.

19o. His prudent regulations, 191. Refuses admiflion
to Columbus, on his fourth voyage, 196. HIis iune-

nerous behaviour to Columbus, on his shipwreck, 21.
2o4. Receives him at length, and fends him home,
206. Engages in a war with the Indians, 211. His
cruel treatment of them 212. Encourages cultivation
and manufacturcs, 216. His method of trepanning the
natives of the Lucayos, 220. Is recalled, 223.

P

pacific ocean, why, and by whom so named, ii. 366.
placket-boats, sirs establishment of, between Spain and her

American colonies, iii. 320.

JPaa;iiwa is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 25r.
Farnienides, the first who divided the earth by zones, i.

3 o.
pata.gonians, ome account of, ii. 68. The reality of their

gigantic size yet to be decided, 405, 406.
Ped-rariar Davila is sent with a fleet to supersede Balboa in

his government of Santa Maria on the ithmus of
Darien, i. 245. Treats Balboa ill, 246. Rapacious
conduct of his men, 247. Is reconciled to Balboa, and
gives him his daughter, 249. Puts Balboa to death
2 o. Removes his settlement from Santa Maria to Pa-
nama, 2 1.
PenguZin, the name of that bird not derived from the Welsh

language, i. ; .
Perez, Juan , patronises Columbus at the court of Castile,

i. 87. His solemn invocation for the success of Coluni-
bus's voyage, 97.
Periplis of Hanno, the authenticity of that work juflified,

i. 291.
er , the first intelligence concerning this country, received
by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. -3 . 24z. The coalt
of, first discovered by Pizarro, iii. r. Pizarro's second
arrival, 17. His hoflile proceedings againi the natives, 18.
The colony of St. Michael efablifhed, 19. State of the
empire at the time of this invasion , o2. The kingdom
divided between Huafcar and Atahualpa, 2 . Atlhualp

uifirps the government, 2;. Huafcar solicits assistance
froni Pizarro , 26. Atahualpa visits Pizarro , 3 . Is
seized by Pizarro, ;4. Agreement for his ranforn, 36.
Is refifed his liberty, 40. Is cruelly put to death, 4.
Confulion of the empire on this event , 46. Quito
reduced by enalcazar, 49. The city of Lima founded
by Pizarro, Sq. Chili invaded by Almagro, q6. In-
furrection of the Peruvians, 8. Almagro put to death
by Pizarro, 74. Pizarro divides the country among his
followers, 76. Progress of the Spanish arms there, 77.
Francis Pizarro afiafinated, 85. Reception of the new
regulations there, ox. The viceroy confined by the
court of audience, log. The viceroy defeated and
hilled by Gonzalo Pizarro, ri . Arrival of Pedro de la
Gafca, 12 . Reduciion and death of Gonzalo Pizarro, I 1 o.
The civil wars there not carried on with mercenary fol-
diers , j; . But nevertheless gratified with inimenfe
rewards, 1;;. Their profusion and luxury, ibid. Fe-
rocity of their contcfts, 14. Their want of faith, 135.
Intances, ibid. Division of, by Gafca , among his
followers, 7. A retrofped into the original government,
arts, and manners of the natives, 143. The high anti-
quity they pretend to , 189. Their records , 190.
Origin of their civil policy, 192. This founded in
religion, g1;. The authority of the Incas ahfolutc and
unlimited, ibid. All crimes were punished capitally, 195.
Mlild genius of their religion, 196. Its influence on
their civil policy, 97. And on their military fyfteni,
198. Peculiar slate of property there, 199. Diftindin
of ians, 200. State of arts, ox. Improved state of
agriculture, o20. Their buildings, 203. Their 1publc
roads , o6. Their bridges, 208. Their mode of
refining lilver- ore, 209. Works of elegance, 211.
Their civilization , neverthelcfs , but imperfect , I 2.
Cuzco the only place that had the appearance of a
city, ibid. No perfect fep;iration of profellions, 212.
little commercial intercourse , z2r. Their uns:arlile
{Viirit, 2x14. Lat their eiP. ;;ld fifn raw, z16. Brief

nerous behaviour to Columbus, on his shipwreck, 20o.
204. Receives him at length, and fends him home,
206. Engages in a war with the Indians, 2zi. lis
cruel treatment of them 2 z. Encourages cultivation
and manufacturcs, 216. His method of trepanning the
natives of the Lucayos, 220. Is recalled, 223.

P

Pacific ocean, why, and by whom fu named, ii. 366.
PI'cket-boats, first establishment of, between Spain and her

American colonies, iii. 3 2.

Pa;zaima is fettled by Pedrarias Davila, i. 2 1.
Farmnenides, the first who divided the earth by zones, i.

3 oo.
Patagonians, ome account of, ii. 68. The reality of their

gigantic size yet to be decided, 40 , 406.
Pedrarias Davila is ent with a fleet to supersede Balboa in

his government of Santa Maria on the isthmus of
Darien, i. 245. Treats Balboa ill, 246. Rapacious
conduct of his men, 247. Is reconciled to Balboa, and
gives him his daughter, 249. Puts Balboa to death
2so. Removes his settlement from Santa Maria to Pa-
nama, 2 I.
Penaguin, the name of that bird not derived from the Welsh

language, i. 3 1.
Perez, Juan , patronises Columbus at the court of Catlile,

i. 87. His solemn invocation for the success of Coluni-
bus's voyage, 97.
Periplts of Hanno, the authenticity of that work jultificd,

i. 29;.
Per , the firfi intelligence concerning this country, reccived

by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa, i. ; 7. 242. The coalt
of, first discovered by Pizalrro, iii. . Pizarro's second
arrival, 1 7. His hostile proceedings againt the natives, 8.
The colony of St. Michael eftablifled, 19. State of the
empire at the time or this invasion, no. The kingdom
divided between Huafcar and Atahualpa, 23. Atiihuilp

uflirps the government, 2. Huafcar fblicits aflftance
f ron Pizarro , 26. Atahualpa visits Pizarro , . Is
seized by Pizarro, ;4. Agreement for his ranform, 36.
Is refused his liberty, 40. Is cruelly put to death, 45.
Confusion of the empire on this evelt , 46. Quitu
reduced by enalcazar, 49. The city of Lima founded
by Pizarro, ;. Chili invaded by Almagro, 6. In-
furrection of the Peruvians, 58. Almagro put to death
by Pizarro, 74. Pizarro divides the country among his
followers, 76. Progress of the Spanish arms there, 77.
Francis Pizarro affaflinated, 8. Reception of the new
regulations there , ox. The viceroy confined by the
court of audience, I og. The viceroy defeated and
killed by Gonzalo Pizarro, ri2. Arrival of Pedro de la
Gafca, 2 . Reduction and death of onzalo Pizarro, 1 3 o.
The civil wars there not carried on with mercenary fol-
diers , i ji. But nevertheless gratified with immense
rewards, i; . Their profusion and luxury, ibid. Fe-
rocity of their contcfts, 14. Their want of faith, 3 ;.
Initances, ibid. Division of, by Gafca, among his
followers, 13 7. A retrofped into the original government,
arts, and manners of the natives, 143. The high anti-
quity they pretend to, 189. Their records, 90.
Origin of their civil policy , 192. This founded in
religion, 191. The authority of the Incas absolute and
unlimited, ibid. All crimes were punished capitally, 9 .
Ilild genius of their religion, 196. Its influence on
their civil policy, 197. And on their military fyftenl,
198. Peculiar state of property there, 199. DiftinCtiun
of I.inks, 200. State of arts, o20. Improved state: f
agriculture, 202. Their buildings, 203. Their public
ro;ds , o6. Theii bridges , 208. Their mode of
refining lilver-ore, 209. Works of legance , 21 1.
Their civilization , nevertheless , but imperfect, I12.
Cuzco the only place that had the appearance aft a
city, ibid. No perfect fepration of profellions, 212.
little commercial intcrcourfe , 2z ;. Their un:arlike
{ip:rit, 14. Lat their flesh ;nd tif raw , zi6. Brief'

account of other provinces under the viceroy of Ncw
Spain, 2 1 7. Causes of the depopulation of this country,

3; 8. The finall pox very fatal there, 240. Yriters
who gave accounts of the conquelf of, 3 45. Their
method of building, 373. State of the revenue derived
from, by the crown of Spain, 408. Sec Colonies.
peter I. c7ar of Ruflia, his extensive views in prosecuting

Aliatic discoveries, ii. ~2.
Pi'cnlicians , ancient, itate of commerce and navigation,

among them, i. 7. Their trade, how conducted, 29 ,
Philip 11. of Spain his turbulent difpolicion aided by his

American treasures, iii. 298. Eltablifhes the colony of
Manila, 14.
Philip 111. exhausts his country by inconsiderate bigotry,

iii. 298.
Philippine islands, discovered by Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 66.

A colony established there by Philip II. of Spain, iii. 3 4.
Trade between, and America, ibid.
Phyjc ., the art of, in America, why connedted with divi.

nation, ii. 74.
Pinto, Chevalier, his description of the charadteriftic sea-

tures of the native Americans, ii. 401.
Pi7z30oz, Vincent Yanez, commands a vessel under Columbus

in his first voyage of discovery, i. 96. Sails to America
on a private adventure with four ships, 97. Discovers
Yucatan, 222.
Pizarrno , Ferdinand , is besieged in Cuzco by the Peru-

vians, iii. 6. Is surprised there by Almagro, 64.
Escapes with Alvarado, 67. Defends his brother at the
court of Spain, 74. Is committed to prison , 76.
Tizarro, Francisco, attends Balboa, in his fettlcment on

thl ihmus of Darien , i. 2 o. M;irches under him
icrofs the isthmus, where they difcovcr the South Sea , 24 .
lHis birth, education, and charadter, iii. 3. Aflbciites
with Almnagro and De Luque, in a voyage of difcovcry, 4.
Ils ill success, 6. Is recalled, and deserted by molt
of his followers, 8. Remains on the island of Gorgona
for supplics, ii. Difcovcrs the coafr of I'cru, ibDi.

Returns to Panama, . Goes to Spain to Colicit reinforce-
nments, 3. Procures the fuprcme command for himnielf, 14.
Is allifled with money by Cortes, ir. Lands again in
Peru, 17. His hostile proceedings againfi the natives, 8g.
Efiabliihes the colony of St. Michael, 19. State f the
Peruvian empire at this time, 20. Cause of his ea:y
penetration into the country, 2 . Is applied to b)
lluafcar for aiflance againf his viCtoriuus brother Ata-
hualpa, 26. State of his forces, 27. Arrives at Caxa-
mrnlca, 29. Is vilited by the Inca, 3 r. His perfidious
seizure of him , ;4. Agrees to Atahualpa's offer for his
ransom , ;6. Division of their plunder, 3g. Refues
Atahualpa his liberty, 40. His ignorance exposed to
Atahualpa, 43. Beltows a form of trial on the Inca, ibid.
Puts him to death , 4i. Advances to Cuzco, 47.
Honor'; contfcred on him by the Spanch court, 5z.
seginnlig of dissensions between him and Almagro, ,;.
His civil regulations , 4. Founds the city of Lima , i.
Inifilrrecion of the Peruvians , 8. Cuzco seized by
AInilg.to, 64. Deludes Almagro by negociations , 66.
Dcleats llnmagro, and takes him prisoner, 71. Puts
Almagro to death, 74. Divides the country among his
fbllowers, 76. The impolitic partiality of his allotments
77. Makes his brother Gonzalo governor of Quito , 78.
Is afnaflinated by Juan de Herrada, 86.
Piz'w;ro, (;o!lzalo, is made governor of Quito, by his

brother Francis , iii. 78. His expedition over the An-
dtes, 79. Is defrrted by Orellana , o. His diitrefs on
this event, 82. His difafrous return to Quito, 8. Is
encouraged by the people to oppose Nugnez Vela, the
new viceroy, o¢. Aflulnes the government ofPertu, o09.
Marches againit the viceroy, i l. Defeats and kills
him , IxI2, i i3. Is adviifd by Carvajal to aflume the
sovereignty of the country, 114. Chues to negociate
with the court of Spain, 1 6. Consultations of the
court on his conduct, ibid. His violent resolutions on
the arrival of Pedro de la Gafca, 1 22. Rclblves to
opputf him by violence, 124. Marches to reduce

Ccnte.,, at Cuzco, 26. Ileteats him, 127. Is deserted
by his troops on the approach of Gafca, 130. Surrenders
and is executed, ibid. His adherents men of no prin.
ciple, 3 S.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Dias de Solis , i. 2e2. Its

amazing width, ii. 384.
P'iyrair , Mr. ProfefTor of mathematics in Edinburgh, the

result of his comparison of the narrative and charts given
in Captain Cook's voyages published in 1780 ; and

ir. Coxe's account of the Ruffian discoveries, printed
in the fame year, in which the vicinity of the two con-
tinents of Asia and America is clearly acertained , ii.
398-402.
Tliny , the naturalist , instance of his ignorance in geogra-

phy, i. 299.
ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida, i. =; . Romantic

motive of his voyage, 2 4.

lPo.i'iution of tle earth flow progref; of, i. .
Ptoio - Bello, discovered and named by Chrillopher Co-

lumbus, i. 198.
l'orto- Rico , is fettled and fiLbiected by Juan Ponce de

,eon, i. 221.

l'orto-Santo, the firlt dif-ovcry of, i. S;.
Poiftugal, \xhen and by sihom the court of inquisition was

first introduccd into , i. lo.
Portug!ij'e , a view of the circumstances that induced them

to undertalke the discovery of unknown countries, i.
47. 49. First African discoveries of, so. Madeira dif
covered, 4. They double Cape Boj;idor, qS;. Obtain
a papal grant of all the countries they liould dilovcr, s8.
Carpe Verd lflands and the Azores discovered , 60.
Voyage to the Ealt Indies by Valco de (;ama, 172.
Putof/, the rich ilver mines there, how dilcovered, iii. 288.

The mines of , greatly cxhaullcd and icarccly worth
w orking, 399.
I'-iorions of war, how treated by the ntive Americans,

ii. 14.
.ol'erty, the idea of', unknown to the native Americans,

ii. i 0. Notions of' the Brallians cu lccrLilli , 418.

prote7or of the Indians, in Spanish America, his fun&ion,

iii. 271.
Ptole;ny, the philosopher, his geographical descriptions more

ample and exact than those of his predeceflbrs, i. 29.
lHis geography tranllated by the Arabians, 33. His er-
roneous polition of the Ganges, 297.

Q
.Qietlavaca, brother of Montezuma, succeeds him as king

of Mexico. ii. 3 4. Conducts in perion the fierce attacks
which obliged Cortes to abandon his capital, 33 . Dies
of the small-pox, 33 6.
.Qrevedo, Bishop of Darien, his conference with Las Casas

on the treatment of the Indians , in the presence of the
Emperor Charles V. i. 273.
,Qi'ickilver , the property, of the famous mines of, at Gua-

nacabelica, reserved by the crown of Spain, iii. 399.
The price of, why reduced, ibid.
Qinqueina , or Jesuits bark , a production peculiar to Peru,

iii. 294.
.Qdipor, or historic cords of the Peruvians, ome account

of, iii. 189.
$)?tito, the kingdom of, conquered by Huana Capac, Inca

of Peru, iii. 23. Is left to his son Atahualpa, ibid.
Atahualpa's general revolts after his death, 4.7. Is
reduced by the Spaniards under Benalcazar, 49. Be-
nailcazar deprived, and Gonzalo Pizarro made governor, 78.

R
liiimJiJo his defence of Hanno's account of the coast of

Africa, i. 294.
ReIl/,r- s1ips , ft)r what prpofe introduced in the trade

between S;pain and her colonies, iii. 314. Superli;d the
ulc of the gallons, 3 6.

Rl/!iilou of the native Americans, an inquiry into, ii. T6o.
Rihr , his account of the political slate of tie pexilc u:

Ciialoa , ii. 427. Of their want of religion , 43 .

Rio de lt 1P'lalt, and Tucuman, account of those provinces,

iii g27.

River , the amna7.ing size of those in America , ii. 3.

tol iJ); , proficfor, his remarks on the temperature of
various climates, ii S.
R'oianz, Francis, is left chief juflice in Hispaniola, by

Chiiitopher Columbus, i. 6. Becomes the ringleader
of a mutiny, 67. Subits, 17o.
.oiis, their progress in navigation and difcovcry, i. 20.

Their military iirit averse to mechanical arts and com-
merce, :2. Navigation and trade favored in the pro-
vinccs under their government, ibid. Their c:enlive
difcovcries by land, 24. Their empire and the ciences
destroyed together, 30.
Ritbritqzis , father, his embafny from France to the Chan

of the Tartars, i. 9.
Rilll;i s, Asiatic discoverics made by them, ii. 32. l.

certainty of, 96.

S
Sacotecnas, the rich silver mines there, when discovered,

iii. 288.
San Salvalor, discovered and named by Christopher Co-

lumbus, i. iii.
Sa;icho , Don Pedro, account of his liftory of the conquelt

of Peru, iii. 34^.
Samloval, the flocking barbarities executed by, in Mexico,

ii. 374.
SaL;doval , Francisco Tello de, is sent by the emperor

Charles V. to Mlexico, as vilitador of America, iii. 99.
I ls moderation and prudence, 00.

Savage life, a general cltimate of ii. 188.
·Scaljps, , motive of the native Americans for taking them

fronl their enemies, ii. 423.
Se)(lrr/vo, marquis de, his extraordinary gains during his

viccroyalty in America, iii. 412.
Seville , the American trade removed to Cadis iii. o04.

Extraordinry

Extraordinary increase of its manufactures by the
American trade, 400. Its trade greatly reduced, 401.
Silver ore, method of refining it practised by the native

Peruvians, iii. 209.
Sonora , late discoveries of rich mines made there by the

Spaniards, iii. 2 9.

Soul , American ideas of the immortality of, ii. 170.
South - Sea, first discovered by Vasco Nugnez de Balboa,

i. 241.
Spainz, general idea of the policy of, with regard to the

American colonies, iii. e24. Early interpolition of
the regal authority in the colonies, 246. All the
Anmerican dominions of, fubjeded to two viceroys, 248.
A third viceroyalty lately etablifled, ibid. The colonies
of, compared with those of Greece and Rome, z;s.
Advantages he derived from her colonies, 296. Why
she does not fill derive the fame, 297. Rapid decline
of trade, 299. This decline increased by the mode of
regulating the intercourse with America, 302. Employs
guarda costas to check illicit trade, 3 ;. The use of
register ships introduced, 14. Eitablifiment of the
company of Caraccas, ;3 . Enlargement of commercial
ideas there, 31 9. Free trade permitted to several
provinces, 2. Revenue derived from America, 337.
Specification, 408.
Spaniards, their curious form of taking poffeflion of new-

discovered countries, i. 3 7.
Str,(bo, a citation from, proving the great geogiaphical

ignorance of the ancients, i. 296. His own want of
geographical knowledge, 3oo.
SuperJfition always connedted with a desire of penetrating

into the fecrcts of futurity, ii. 173.

T
';a/ia, Chrifloval de, is sint from Spain to Mexico, to

supersede Cortes in his conmmand , but fails in the at-
tempt, ii. 69.

VoLr. Ill. C !

Tartars, the possibility of their migrating to America, ii.

t7.
Tithes of Spanifl America, how applied by the court of

Spain , iii. 4og9.
TI'c!la , in lexico, character of the natives of, ii. 2 .

Oppose the pallage of the Spaniards, 2 3. Are reduced
to sue for peace, 28.
Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavored of any in all

America, iii. 294.
ToztliJtlubos, account of their ferocious courage from

Lery , ii. 424.
Jrale, free, opened between Spain and her colonies, iii.
;22. Increase of the Spanish cultoms from this mea-
sure, 405.
Trade- winds, the periodical course of, when discovered

by navigators, i. 22.

Travellers, ancient charadCer of their writings, i. 42.
Trinidad, the illand of, discovered by Chriltopher Columbus

on his third voyage, i. 63.
Tztctmna;l, and Rio de la Plata, account of those provinces,

iii. 227.
Tyre, the commerce of that city, how conduted, i. 293.

V
i/aca de Cro, Chriltoval, is sent from Spain to regulate

the government of Peru, iii. 7. Arrives at Quito
89. Aflimes the upreme authority, ibid. Defeats
young Almagro , 9 . 'he fevcrity of his proceedings,
92. Prevents an insurreCtion concerted to oppose the
new regulations, 04. Is impriioned by the new vice-
roy, 105.
Va,'rerde , father Vincent , his curious harangue to Ata-

hualpa, Inca of Peru, iii. 12. (ivcs his ftinCtion to
the trial and cndcmnation of At;ullallu1i, 4<.
Vega, (arcila;bo de la, charater of his commentary on

the Spanilh writers concerning Peru, iii. 47.
Vegetables their natural tendency to fertilize the foil where

they grow, ii. 20, 21.

Felafquez, Diego de, conquers the island of Cuba, i. 22.

3 3. His preparations for invading New Spain, ii.
209. His difficulty in chuling a commander for the
expedition, 10. Appoints Fernando Cortes, 21 r.
lis motives to this choice, 2 1. Becomes suspicious
of Cortes, l4. Orders Cortes to be deprived of his
comirifion, and arrefled, 21z, 216. Sends an arma-
ment to M exico after Cortes, 29;.
Vezegts, P. his character of the native Californians, ii.

411.
'enereal disease, originally brought from America, ii. , .

Appears to be wearing out, 74. Its first rapid progress,
ii. 407.

Ve;zezuela, history of that settlement, iii. 2 3.
7'e;nice, its origin as a maritime state, i. 36. Travels of

Mlarco Polo, 40.
'erd , islands discovered by the Portuguese, i. 60.
Viceroys, all the Spanish dominions in America fubjeted

to two, iii. 248. A third lately established, ibid.
Their powers, 249. A fourth established, 328.
Villa Segnor, his account of the slate of population in New

Spain, iii. 381. His detail of the Spanish - American
revenue, 408.
;illefi;gna Antonio, one of Cortes's soldiers, foments a

mutiny among his troops, ii. 340. Is discovered by
Cortes, and hanged, 341.
U/loa, Don Antonio de, his description of the character-

iftic features of the native Americans, ii. 402. His
reason for the Americans not being so sensible of pain
as the rett of mankind, 42s. His account of the goods
exported from Spain to America, with the duty on them,
111. 412.
Volcanoes, remarkable number of, in the northern parts of

the globe discovered by the Rulfians, ii. 397.

W
laser , Lionel, his account of a peculiar race of diminu-

tive Americans, ii. 66. Compared with similar pro-
dutions in Africa, 67.
War-fong of the native Americans, the sentiments and

terms of, ii. 42 3.
[Women the condition of, among the native Americans,

ii. 87. Are not prolific, 90. Are not permitted to
join in their drunken seass , 85. Nor to wear orna-
ments, 426.

X
Xerez, Francisco de, secretary to Pizarro, the earliest

writer on his Peruvian expedition, iii. 345.
Xi,izenes, Cardinal, his regulations for the treatment of

the Indians in the Spanish colonies, i. 260. Patronises
the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 363.

Y
Tucatan, the province of, discovered by Pinzon and Dias

de Solis, i. 222. Described, 320. From whence that
province derives its value, iii. 221. Policy of the court
of Spain with refped to, 22.

z
Zarate, Don Augustine, character of his History of the

conquest of Peru , iii. 46.
Zoner, the earth how divided into, by the geography of the

ancients , i. 27. By whom first so divided, 300oo.
Zummarraga, Juan de, firit bilhop of Mlexico, the dc-

stroyer of all the ancient records of the Mexican em-
pire, iii. 148.

END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
Printed y .1. 1. T) U R N E 1I S N.

A~

wm3` (o (

-.~~ oc> -- "
IE

LB~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~at

,*,~~~~~~,C ~~,,' I~W
I~~~ OO0

qrr~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~L-~

_ ~c-Iz~;

-- -~~~--~~ .-.
~
