THE
HISTORY

O
SCOTLAND

DURING tHE REIGNS OF
Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW ofthe SCOTTISHHISTORY previous to thatPeriod;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D,

Minister of LADY YESTER'S. Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.
A NEW EDITION.

LONDON:
Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand,

M DCC LXXVI.

# BOOK VI.

THE
H I ST O-RY

O F
SC O T L AND

BOOK VI.
T H E unexpected blow, by which the Regent B o i

was cut off, struck the King's party with VI
the utmost consternation. Elizabeth be- '-

wailed his death as the most fatal disaster, which Difo5r7er
could have befallen her kingdom; and was incon- bccyt on.
folable to a degree that little suited her dignity. ge"t'

C t> / death#

Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, her reftora-
tion were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who
expressed such indecent joy at the commission of it.
And as the assassin made his efcapeon a horse, which
belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton, and fled direcly
to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph, it
was concluded that the Regent had fallen a sacrifice
to the resentment of the Queen's party, rather than

VOL. 1I. B to

B o K to the revenge of a private man. On the day after

VI. the murder, Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ser-
150. niherft, both zealous abettors of the Queen's cause,

entered England in an hostile manner, and plun-
dered and burnt the country, the inhabitants of
which expecced no such outrage. If the Regent
had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on
such an irregular incursion, nor could it well have
happened ib loon after his death, unless they had
been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the

anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave oc-
cafion. During such general confusion, men hoped
for universal impunity, and broke out into excesses
of every kind. As it was impossible to reitrain
these, without a fettled form of government, a

Steps taken Convention of the nobles was held, in order to de-
eleirng liberate concerning the elecion of a Regent. The
Roehne Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meet-
Feb. z. ing, and protested against its proceedings. The

King's own party was irresolute, and divided in
opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had set at li-
berty, and who obtained from the nobles then as-
fembled a declaration acquitting him of the crime
which had been laid to his charge, endeavoured to
bring about a coalition of the two parties, by pro-
poring to admit the Queen to the joint adminifira-
tion of government with her son. Elizabeth ad-
hering to her ancient system with regard to Scottish
affairs, laboured, notwithfranding the solicitations
of Mary's friends*, to multiply, and to perpetuate

See Append. No. I.
5 the

the fations, which tore in pieces the kingdom. B o o t
Randolph, whom she dispatched into Scotland on VI. -
the first news of the Regent's death, and who was her
usual agent for such services, found all parties so
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irre-
concilable rancour, that it cost him little trouble to
inflame their animosity. The Convention broke up
without coming to any agreement; and a new meet-
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited,
was appointed on the first of May *.

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still A coalition

of parties

continued to acknowledge the King's authority,attempted
were at the utmost pains to restore some degree of"~'"'
harmony among their countrymen. They procured
for this purpose, an amicable conference among the
leaders of the two fa&ions. But while the one de-
manded the restoration of the Queen, as the only
thingwhich could re-eflablihi thepublic tranquillity;
while the other esteemed the King's authority to be
so sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called
in queflion or impaired; and neither of them would
recede in the least point from their opinions, they
separated without any prospect of concord. Both
were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by
the hope of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from
France with promises of powerful succour to the
Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in that
kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating
in peace, it was expected that Charles would soon
be at liberty to fulfil what he promised. On the
other hand, the Earl of Suffex was assembling a

* Criwf. Mem. 131. Calderw. ii. 157.

B 2 power-

B o o K powerful army on the borders, and its operations

VI. could not fail of adding spirit and strength to the
70 King's party *

1570.

Queen's THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the
pouIry in of fations proved ineffecual, it contributed somewhat
£dinburzh. to moderate, or suspend their rage; but they soon

began to aft with their usual violence. Morton,
the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fide,
solicited Elizabeth to interpose, without delay, for
the safety of a party, so devoted to her interest,
and which flood so much in need of her assistance.
Ap;l1o. The Chiefs of the Queen's faction, assembling at

Linlithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and
Kirkaldy, who was both Governor of the castle,
and Provost of the town, prevailed on the citizens,
though with some difficulty, to admit them within
the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of
Athole, and Maitland, acceded almost openly to
their party; and the Duke, and Lord Herreis, hav-
ing recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour,
relumed the places, which they had formerly held
in their councils. Encouraged by the acquisition
of persons, so illuifrious by their birth, or so emi-
nent for their abilities, they published a proclama-
tion, declaring their intention to support the Queen's
authority, and seemed resolved not to leave the
city before the meeting of the approaching Con-
vention, in which, by their numbers and influ-
ence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of
voices on their fide t.

Crawf. Mem. 134. t Ibid. 137. Caldcrw. ii. 176.

AT

AT the fame time, they had formed a design of B o o K

kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if VI.
they could engage them in hoftillties, and revive -
their ancient emulation and antipathy, t!lhy hoped, Endr.v.,Nr
not only to dissolve a confederacy of ocwar ad van. ten-ion
tage to the King's cause, but to recolncil their coun- it-,h :.
trymen to the Queen, Elizabeth's natural and most hl'd.
dangerous rival. With this view, they had, imme-
diately after the murder of the Jegrn, prompted
Scott and Ker to commence hostilities, and had
since instigated them to continue and extend their
depredations. As hlizabeth foresaw, on the one
hand, the dangerous con'equences of ;endering this
a national quarrel; and refoived, on the other, not
to susser such an insult on her government to pats
with impunity; she issued a proclamation, declaring
that ihe imputed the outrages which had been com-
mitted, not to the Scottifli nation, but to a few def-
perate and ill-defigning persons; that, with the for-
mer, she was resolved to maintain an inviolable
friendship, whereas the duty, which the owed to
her own fubjecs, obliged her to chastise the licen-
tioufnefs of the latter*. Suflex and Scroop, accord-
ingly, entered Scotland, the one on the east, the
other on the well borders, and laid waste the adja-
cent countries with fire and sword-. Fame mag-
nified the number and progress of their armies, and
Mary's adherents, not thinking themselves safe in
Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill affecled
to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There by a April I3
public proclamation they asserted the Queen's au-
thority, and sorbad giving obedience to any, but

* Cald. ii. 81. t Cabala, 174,

B 3 the

B o o K the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Huntly,

VI. whom ihe had constituted her Lieutenants in the

kingdom.

J570.

King's par- THE nobles who continued faithful to the King,
ty enter E-
dinburgh. though considerably weakened by the defecion of
May ' so many of their friends, assembled at Edinburgh

on the day appointed. They issued a counter-pro-
clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder both of the late King, and
of the Regent. They could not, however, pre-
fume so much on their own ffrength as to venture
either to elect a Regent, or to take the field against
the Queen's party; but the aflitance, which they
received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both.
By her order, Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with a thousand foot, and three hundred
horse; the King's adherents joined him with a con-
fiderable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already be-
gun hoffilities by attacking the castle, they forced
them to retire, plundered the neighbouring coun-
try, which belonged to the FHamiltons, and, after
seizing some of their castles, and rating others, re-
turned to Edinburgh.

Motivesof UNDER Drury's protection, the Earl of Lennox
cEiuz s returned into Scotland. It was natural to commit
with regard the government of the kingdom to him, during
to them.

the minority of his grandson. His illustrious birth,
and alliance with the royal family of England, as
well as of Scotland, rendered him worthy of that

honour;

honour; and his resentment against Mary being B P o
implacable, and his estate lying in England, and VI.
his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him '
as a man, who, both from inclination, and from
interest, would as in concert with her, and ardently
wished that he might succeed Murray in the office
of Regent. But, on many accounts, she did not
think it prudent to discover her own fentinents, or
to favour his pretensions too openly. The civil
wars in France, which had been excited by a pre-
tended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierce.
ness that did it real dilhonour, appeared now to be
on the point of coming to an ifThe; and after shed-
ding the best blood, and waiting the richest pro-
vinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace
with an ardour, that facilitated the negociations
which were carrying on for that puipofc. Charles
IX. was known to be a passionate admirer of
Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser
a Queen of France, and the molt ancient ally of
his crown, to languish in her present cruel situation,
without attempting to procure her relief. He had,
hitherto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monilrating, by his ambassadors, against the indig-
nity, with which she had been treated. But if he
were once at full liberty to pursue his inclinations,
Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from
the impetuosity of his temper, and the power of
his arms. It therefore became necefary for her to
acl with some reserve, and not to appear, avowed-
ly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. Thejealoufy and pre-
judices of the Scots required no less management.

B 4 Had

B o o K Had she openly supported Lennox's claim; had she

VI. recommended him to the Convention, as the can-
-5' didate, whom she approved; this might have roused

the independent spirit of the nobles, and by too
plain a discovery of her intention, she might have
defeated its success. For there reasons, she hesitated
long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the
meflages, which she received from the King's party,
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments was
at last obtained, and an event of an extraordinary
nature seems to have been the occasion of it. Pope
Pius V. having issued a bull, whereby he excom-
municated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom,.
and absolved her fubjeEts from their oath of allegi-
ance, Felton, an Englishman, had the boldness to
fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's pa-
lace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own
ambition, or pride, or bigotry, denounced this fa-
tal sentence against the most powerful monarchs;
but as the authority of the court of Rome was now
less regarded, its proceedings were more cautious;
and it was only when they were roused by some
powerful Prince, that the thunders of the church
were ever heard. Elizabeth, therefore, imputed
this ftep, which the Pope had taken, to a combi-
nation of the Roman Catholic Princes against her,
and futpe&ed that some plot was on foot in favour
of the Scottish Queen. In that event, she knew
that the safety of her own kingdom depended on
preserving her influence in Scotland; and in order
to strengthen this, she renewed her promises of pro-
te¢ing the King's adherents, encouraged them to

pro-

proceed to the Eletion of a Regent, and even ven- B o o K
tured to point out the Earl of Lennox, as the person VI.
who had the best title. That honour was accord-
ingly conferred upon him, in a Convention of the
whole party, held on the 12th of July *.

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meet- Lennnx

elecsed Re.

ing of the Parliament, which the Queen's party gent.
had summoned to convene at Linlithgow. Having
effe&ed that, he marched against the Earl of Hunt-
ly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the
garrison, which he had placed in Brechin, to fur-
render at discretion. Soot after, he made himself
malter of some other castles. Emboldened by this
successful beginning of his administration, as well
as by the appearance of a considerable army, with
which the Earl of Suffex hovered on the borders,
he deprived Maitland of his office of Secretary, and
proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other
leaders of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies
of their country t-.

IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Mary'sad-

Queen's adherents had recourse to the King of gciate
Spain t, with whom Mary had held a close corre- with Spain.
fpondence ever since her confinement in England.
They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two
of his officers to take a view of the country, and
to examine its coasts and harbours; and obtained
from him a small supply of money and arms, which

t Spotfw. 240. Cald. ii. 186. See Append, No. II.
+ Crawf. Mem. 159. Cald. ii. 198.
$ See Append. No. III.

were

B o o K were sent to the Earl of Huntly *. But this aid,

VI. so disproportionate to their exigencies, would have

L-10 availed them little. They were indebted for their
1570.
Elizabeth safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
trop°yof's under colour of refloring the captive Queen to her
accommo- throne. The first fleps in this negociation had been
dationr h"-.
twen rM- taken in the month of May; but hitherto little pro-
ry and ;st:
subjec. grefs was made in it. The peace concluded between

the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France, and
her apprehensions that Charles would interpose with
vigour in behalf of his fifter-in-law, quickened Eli-
zabeth's motions. She affeced to treat her prisoner
with more indulgence, fle listened more graciously
to the solicitations of foreign ambassadors in her fa-
vour, and seemed fully determined to replace heron
the throne of her ancestors. As a proof of her fin-
cerity, ihe laboured to procure a cessation of arms
between the two contending factions in Scotland.
Lennox, elated with the good fortune, which had
hitherto attended his adminiflration, and flattering
himself with an easy triumph over enemies, whose
ellates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, re-
fused, for some time, to come into this measure.
It was not safe for him, however, to dispute the
will of his proteerefs. A cessation of hoflilities
during two months, to commence on the third of
September, was agreed upon; and being renewed
from time to time, it continued till the first of
April next year --.

SOON after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir
Walter Mildmay to the Queen of Scots. The dig-

Andcrf. iii. Izz. Crawf. Mcm. 153. t Spotfw. 243.

nity

nity of these ambassadors, the former her prime Mi- B o o K
nifer, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer, and VI.
one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties - .".
that the negociation was serious, and that the hour 570.
of Mary's liberty was now approaching. The pro-
positions, which they made to her, were advan-
tageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in
Mary's situation, had reason to expeEt. The rati-
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh; the renouncing
any pretensions to the English Crown, during Eli-
zabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the ad-
hering to the alliance between the two kingdoms;
the pardoning her fubjeóts, who had taken arms
against her; and her promising to hold no corre-
fpondence, and to countenance no enterprise, that
mightcdifurb Elizabeth's government; were among
the chief articles. By way of security for the ac-
complifhment of these, they demanded that some
persons of rank Ihould be given as hostages, that
the Prince her son should reside in England, and
that a few castles on the border should be put into
Elizabeth's hands. To some of these propositions
Mary consented; some fie endeavoured to miti-
gate; and others ihe attempted to evade. In the
mean time, the transmitted copies of them to the
Pope, to the Kings of France and Spain, and to
the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without
some timely and vigorous interpoGiion in her be-
half, the would be obliged to accept of there hard
conditions, and to purchase liberty at any price.
But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by
his efforts against the Turks, his treasury was en-
tirely exhaufled. Charles had already begun to me-

ditate

B o o K ditate that conspiracy againit the Hugonots, which

VI. marks his reign with such infamy; and it required
570" much leisure, and perfect tranquillity, to bring that

execrable plan to maturity. Philip was employed
in fitting out that fleet, which acquired so great re-
nown to the Christian arms, by the victory over the
infidels atLepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened
an insurrection and his subjects in the Netherlands,
provoked by much oppreflion, and many indigni-
ties, were breaking out into open rebellion. All
of them, for these different reaolns, advised Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude the
treaty on the best terms (he could procure *.

ilizabeth's MARY, accordingly, consented to many of Eli-
artificesin zabeth's demands, and discovered a facility of dif-
the conduucf
efit. position, which promised frill further conceflions.

But no concession fle could have made, would have
satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated
profeflions of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and
notwithstanding the solemnity with which (he car-
ried on the treaty, had no other object in it, than
to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time -. After
having so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for
refuge, in so ungenerous a manner, she could not
now dismiss her with safety. Under all the difad-
vantages of a rigorous confinement, Mary hadfound
means to excite commotions in England, which
were extremely formidable. What desperate effets
ofherjuft resentment might be expeced, if he were
set at liberty, and recovered her former power?

* Anders. vol. iii. o09, 2zo. t Digges, Compl. Amb. 78.

2 What

What engagements could bind her, not to revenge B o o K
the wrongs she had suffered, nor to take advantage VI.
of the favourable conjunctures, that might present o
themselves? Was it poflible for her to give such
security for her behaviour, in times to come, as
might remove all fulpicions and fears ? And was
there not good cause to conclude, that no future be-
nefits could ever obliterate the memory of past inju-
ries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though she
continued to act as if her views had been entirely
different. She appointed seven of her privy coun-
fellors to be commissioners for fettling the articles
of the treaty; and as Mary had already named the
Biihops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Leving-
son, for her ambassadors, she required the Regent
to impower proper persons to appear in behalf of the
King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn, abbotofDun-
fermling, and Sir James Macgill were the persons 1571.
chosen by the Regent. They prepared for their
journey, as slowly as Elizabeth herself could have
wished. At length they arrived at London, and
met the commissioners of the two 4Queens. Mary's Feb. 19,
ambassadors discovered the firongeft inclination to
comply with every thing, that would remove the
obstacles, which flood in the way of their miitrefs's
liberty. But when Morton and his associates were
called upon to vindicate their conduct, and toex-
plain the sentiments of their party, they began, in
justification of their treatment of the Queen, to ad-
vance such maxims concerning the limited powers
of Princes, and the natural right of fubjetls to refill
and to controul them, as were extremely shocking
to Elizabeth, whose notions of regal prerogative

were

B o o K were very exalted. With regard to the authority

VI. which the King now poffefled, they declared that
.^" Xthey neither had, nor could Fofibly receive infiruc-

tions, to content to any treaty, that tended to sub-
vert, or even to impair it, in the least degree*.
Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than
such a reply from the commissioners of the King of
Scots to the Queen of England. His party de-
pended absolutely on her protection, her hand had
feated him on the throne, and to her power he owed
the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease,
mhe could have brought them to talk in a very dif-
ferent manner; and whatever conditions file might
have thought fit to prescribe, they would have had
no other choice but to submit. This declaration,
however, she affeEted to confider as an insuperable
difficulty. And finding that there was no reason to
fruiefrs, dread any danger from the French King, who had

not discovered that eagerness in support of Mary,
which was expected; the reply made by Morton
furnished her with a pretence for putting a stop to
March 24 the negociation, till the Regent should fend ambaf-

fadors with more ample powers. Thus after being
amused for ten months with the hopes of liberty,
the unhappy Queen of Scots remained under ftriter
custody than ever, and without any prospect of
escaping from it; while those fubjeSts, who still ad-
hered to her, were exposed, without ally or protec-
tor, to the rage of enemies, whom their foccefs in
this negociation rendered still more infolentt.

*Cald. ii. 234. Digges, 51. Hayncs, 523, 5 4.
t And. iii. 91. &c.

ON

ON the day after theexpiration of the truce, which B o o K

had been observed with little exactness on either fide, Vl.
Captain Crawford of Jordan-hill, a gallant and en.·

1571.

terprifing officer, performed a service of great im- Dunbaron
portance to the Regent, by surprising the castle of I.c fy-
Dunbarton. This was the only fortified place in the Reets"
the kingdom, of which the Queen had kept poflef-
sion, ever since the commencement of the civil wars.
Its Situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rifes in the middle of a plain,
rendered it extremely strong, and in the opinion of
that age impregnable; as it commanded the river
Clyde, it was of great consequence, and esteemed
the most proper place in the kingdom for landing
any foreign troops, that might come to Mary's aid.
The strength of the place rendered Lord Fleming,
the governor, more secure than he ought to have
been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who
had served in the garrison, and had been disgusted
by some ill usage, proposed the scheme to the Re-
gent, endeavoured to demonfrate that it was prac-
ticable, and offered himself to go the foremost man
on the enterprise. It was thought prudent to risk
any danger for so great a prize. Scaling-ladders,
and whatever else was necessary, were prepared with
the urmolt secrecy and dispatch. All the avenues
to the castle were seized, that no intelligence of the
design might reach the governor. Towardsevening,
Crawford marched from Glasgow, with a small but
determined band. By midnight, they arrived at the
bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
fily, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rock

was

B o o K was highest, that the assailants made their attempt,

VI. because in that place there were few centinels, and

-they hoped to find them least alert. The first lad-
I57I. der was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness

of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed at the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and
fastened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which grew
in a cleft. This place they all reached with the ut-
most difficulty, but were still at a great ditfance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladder was made
fast a second time; but in the middle of the ascent,
they met with an unforeseen difficulty. One of their
companions was seized with rome sudden fit, and
clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All
were at a stand. It was impossible to pass him.
To tumble him headlong was cruel; and might oc-
cafion a discovery. But Crawford's prefenceof mind
did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fait to the ladder, that he might not fall when
the fit was over: And turning the other fide of the
ladder, they mounted, with ease, over his belly.
Day now began to break, and there still remained
a high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many
greater difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A
feintry observed the firif man, who appeared on the
parapet, and hadjuft time to give the alarm, before
he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and
morefolicitous about their own safety, than capable
of making resistance. The aflailants rulhed for-
wards, with repeated Ihouts, and with the utmost

fury,

fury; took possession of the magazine; seized the B o o K
cannon; and turned them against their enemies. VI.
Lord Fleming got into a small boat, and fled all
alone into Argylihire. Crawford, in reward of
his valour and good conduc, remained master of
the castle; and as he did not lore a single man in
the enterprise, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French En-
voy, and Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrew's,
were the prisoners of greatest diftintion *.

VERA C'S character protecEed him from the usage, Archbifop

which he merited by his activity in stirring up ene- drfeS, put
mies against the King. The Regent treated the tdeat'by
lady with great politeness, and humanity. But a
very different fate awaited the Archbishop; he'was
carried under a firong guard to Stirling; and as he
had formerly been attainted by a~t of Parliament,
he was, without any formal trial, condemned to be
hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken,
the sentence was executed. An attempt was made
to convict him of being accessary to the murder
both of the King and Regent, but there accusations
were supported by no proof. Our historians ob-
serve that he was the first Bishop in Scotland who
died by the hands of the executioner. The high
offices he had enjoyed, both in church and state,
ought to have exempted him from a puniflment,
infliEted only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal
for the Queen, his abilities, and his profeiion, ren-
dered him odious and formidable to the King's ad-
herents. Lennox hated him as the person, by whose

Buch. 394.
VOL. . II. C counsels

B o o K counsels the reputation and power of the house of

Vi. Hamilton were supported. And party rage, and
L--'_ personal enmity, dictated that indecent fenenrnce, for

which some colour was fought, by imputing to him
such odious crimes *.

Kirkaldy THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment
deflnd o of the Archbiflop, perplexed and enraged the
dinhburgh Queen's party; and hostilities were renewed with
Queen's all the fierceness, which disappointment and indig-

nation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, duringthetruce,
had taken care to increase the number of his garri-
son, and to provide every thing necessary for his de-
fence, issued a proclamation declaring Lennox's au-
thority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded
all who favoured his cause to leave the town within
fix hours; seized the arms, belonging to the citi-
zens; planted a battery on the steeple of St. Giles,
repaired the walls, and fortified thegates of the city;
and, though the affections of the inhabitants leaned
a different way, held out the metropolis against the
Regent. The Duke, Huntly, Home, Herreis, and
other chiefs of that facion, repaired to Edinburgh
with their followers; and having received a small
fum of money, and some ammunition from France,
formed no contemptible army within the walls. On
the other fide, Morton seized Leith, and fortified
it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable
body of men. While the armies lay so near each
other, daily flirmifhes happened, and with various
success. The Queen's party was not strong enough
to take the field against the Regent, nor was his

$ Spotfw.V 252.

superiority

fiperiority {o great as td Undertake the siege of the B o o K
castle, ot of the town *. VI.

SOME time before Edinbiirgh fell into the hands Bothpar.

of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- parlia.'
liament to meet in tlat place. In order to prevent ments.
any obje&ion against the lawfulness of the meeting,
the members obeyed the proclamation as exaEtly as
possible; and assembled in a house at the head of
the Canongatd, which, though without the walls,
lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meet-
ing; but they were so strongly guarded, that all his
efforts were vain. They paifed an act attainting
Maitland, and a few others, and then adjourned to
the 28th of August--.

THiE other patty, in order that their proceedings

might be countenanced by the fame shew of legal
authority, held a meeting of parliament soon after.
There was produced in this assembly, a declaration
by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, where-
by {he had resigned the Crown, and consented to the
coronation of her son. Conformable to this decla.
tation, an aC was passed, pronouncing the resignation
to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itself,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good
fubjecs to acknowledge the Queen alone to be their
lawful Sovereign, and to support those who aaed in
her name. The present eflablilhment of the pro.
teltant religion was confirmed by another flatute

*Cald. ii. 33, &c. - Crawf. Mem. 177.

C and,

Bo o K and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new meet-

VI. ing was appointed on the 26th of August*.

1571.
Mifrrable MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war defo-
of ,he king- lated the kingdom. Fellow-citizens, friends, bro-
dom. thers, took different fides, and ranged themselves

under the standards of the contending fations. In
every county, and almost in every town and village,
King's-mcnl and .Zueen's-men were names of diftinc-
tion. Political hatred dissolved all natural ties, and
extinguilhed the reciprocal good-will and confidence
which hold mankind together in society. Religious
zeal mingled itself with these civil diftintions, and
contributed not a little to heighten, and to inflame
them.
Stateof THE factions which divided the kingdom were,

ons. in appearance, only two. But in both these, there

were persons, with views and principles, so diffe-
rent from each other, that they ought to be diftin-
guifhed. With some, considerations of religion
were predominant, and they either adhered to the
Queen, because they hoped, by her means, to re-
establish Popery, or they defended the King's au-
thority, as the best support of the Protestant faith.
Among these the opposition was violent and irre-
concilable. Others were influenced by political
motives only, or allured by views of interest the
Regent aimed at uniting these, and did not despair
of gaining, by gentle arts, many of Mary's adhe-
rents to acknowledge the King's authority. Mait-

* Crawf. Mm,. 177.

land

land and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a B o o rK
coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might VI.
be restored to some lhare in the government, and 157
the kingdom hake off its dependence on England.
Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious, and the
most powerful man of the King's party, held a par-
ticular course; and moving only as he was prompt-
ed by the court of England, thwarted every mea-
sure, that tended towards a reconcilement of the
factions; and as he served Elizabeth with much si-
delity, he derived both power and credit from her
avowed proteaion.

THE time appointed by both parties, for the

meeting of their parliaments, now approached.
Only three peers and two bishops appeared in
that, which was held in the Queen's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were,
they passed an at for attainting upwards of 200 of
the adverse faftion. The meeting at Stirling was
numerous and splendid. The Regent had prevail-
ed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caffils, and
Lord Boyd, to acknowledge the King's authority.
The three Earls were among the mofo powerful
noblemen in the kingdom, and had hitherto been
zealous in the Queen's cause. Lord Boyd had been
one of Mary's commissioners at York and \' eftlin-
sier, and, since that time, had been admitted into
all her mot sec; et councils. But, during that tur-
bulent period, the conduEt of individuals, as well as
the principles of factions, varied so often, that the
sense of honour, the chief preservative of confiftcnce
in charater, was entirely loft; and without any re-

C 3 gard

B p o K gard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one par4

VI. ty, and adopted all the violent paflions of the other,

The defection, however, of so many persons of dif
tincion, not only weakened the Queen's party, but
added reputation to her adversaries.

The King's AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin-
party fur-
prired in burgh, that at Stirling began with framing ass a-

gainft the opposite faction. But in the midst of all
the security, which confidence in their own num.
bers, or diflance from danger could inspire, they
were awakened, early one morning, by the shouts
S'pt3' of the enemy in the heart of the town. In a mo.

ment, the houses of every person of dittintion were
surrounded, and before they knew what to think of
so strange an event, the Regent, the Earls of Ar-
gyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caffils, Eglinton, Mon-
trofe, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart, Ogil-
vie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind
troopers, who were ready to carry them to Edin-
burgh. Kirkaldy was the author of this daring en-
rerprife; and if he had not been induced, by the
ill-timed solicitude of his friends about his fafery,
not to hazard his own person in conducting it, that
day might have terminated the contest between the
two factions, and have restored peace to his coun-
try. By his direction, four hundred men, tunder
the command of Huntley, Lord Claud Hamilton,
and Scott of Buccleugh, set out from Edinburgh,
and the better to conceal their design, marched to-
wards the south. But they soon wheeled to the
right, and horses having been provided for the in-
fantry, rode firaight to Stirling. By four in t!t

morning,

4norning, they arrived there; not one sentry was B o o K
polled on the walls, not a single man was awake VI.
about the place. They met with no resistance from '"
any person they had seized, except Morton. He 157'
defending his house withobftinate valour, they were
obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
till forced out of it by the flames. In performing
this, some time was consumed; and the private
men, unaccustomed to regular discipline, left their
colours, and began to rifle the houses and shops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar of the town
reached the castle. The Earl of Mar sallied out
with thirty soldiers; fired briskly upon the enemy,
of whom almost none but the officers kept together
in a body. The townsmen took arms to affit their
governor; afudden panic 1truck the assailants; some
fled, some surrendered themselves to their own pri-
foners; and had not the borderers, who followed
Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the
horses within the place, not a man would have
escaped. If the Regent had not unfortunately been
killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been
as inconsiderable, as the alarm was great. Think on
the ArcbbiJhop of St. Andrew's, was the word among
the Queen's soldiers; and Lennox fell a sacrifice to The Re-
his memory. The officer, to whom he surrendered, gent killed.
endeavouring to proteCt him, loft his own life in
his defence. He was slain, according to the gene-
ral opinion, by command of Lord Claud Hamil-
ton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concerting this plan
with great secrecy and prudence; but Morton's
fortunate obstinacy, and the want of discipline a-
plong his own troops, deprived him of success, the

C 4 only

B o o K only thing wanting to render this equal to the most

VI. applauded military enterprises of the kind*.

157I.
Marcho- As so many of the nobles were assembled, they
fen Regent,
Sept. 6. proceeded, without delay, to the election of a Re-

gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, were candidates
for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of
voices. Amidfi all the fierce dissensions, which had
prevailed so long in Scotland, he had distinguished
himself by his moderation, his humanity, and his
disinterestedness. And as his power was far inferior
to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Mor-
ton's, he was, for these reasons, less formidable to
the other nobles. His merit, too, in having so
lately rescued the leaders of the party from im-
minent delfrution, contributed not a little to his
preferment.

Proceed. WHILE these things were carrying on in Scot-
ings in
IEngand land, the tranfations in England were no less inte-
again:st
MAary. refting to Mary, and frill more fatal to her cause.

The parliament of that kingdom, which met in
April, passed an aft, by which, it was declared to
be high treason, to claim any right to the Crown
during the life of the Queen; to affirm that the title
of any other person was better than hers, or to main-
tain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and
to limit the order of succession. This remarkable
statute was intended not only for the security of their
own Sovereign, but to curb the restless and in-
triguing spirit of the Scottish Queen, and her adhe-
rents t.

* Mclv. 226. Crawf. Mem. 204. f Camd. 436.

AT

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between B o o K

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, the French VI.
King's brother, was well advanced. Both courts i57'
seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave Marriage

negociatc8
out, with the utmost confidence, that it could not between

Elizabeth

fail of taking place. Neither of them, however, and the
wished it success; and they encouraged it for no Aoef
other end, but because it served to cover or to
promote their particular designs. The whole policy
of Catherine of Medicis was bent towards the ac-
compliLhment of her detestable project for the de-
ftruction of the Hugonot chiefs; and by carrying
on a negociation for the marriage of her son with a
Princess, who was juitly esteemed the protectress of
that party, by yielding some things in point of re-
ligion, and by discovering an indifference with re-
gard toothers, she hoped to amuse all the Protestants
in Europe, and to lull afeep thejealoufy even of the
Hugonots themselves. Elizabeth flattered herself
with reaping advantages of another kind. During
the dependance of the negociation, the French could
not with decency give any open afifance to the
Scottish Queen; if they conceived any hopes of fuc-
cess in the treaty of marriage, they would, of course,
interest themselves butcoldly in her concerns; Mary
herself must be dejected at losing an ally, whom she
had hitherto reckoned her most powerful protector;
and by interrupting her correspondence with France,
one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues
which disturbed the kingdom, would be rtopt. Both
(Queens succeeded in their schemes. Catherine's ar-
tifices imposed on Elizabeth, and blinded the l-lu-
gonots. The French discovered the utmonf indiffe-
rence about the interest of the Scottish Queen; and

Mary,

B o o K Mary, confidering that court as already united with

VI. her rival, turned herself, for protetion, towards the
'-' King of Spain*. Philip, whose dark and thought-
1571.
Norfoik' ful mind delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had
in sr held a secret correspondence with Mary, for some
f Mar. time, by means of the Bishop of Ross, and had

supplied both herself, and her adherents in Scotland,
with small fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florentine
gentleman, who resided at London under the cha-
raaer of a banker, and who acted privately as an
agent for the Pope, was the person whom the Bi-
Ihop intrusted with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to
the Duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately
restored to liberty, upon his solemn promief to have
no further intercourse with the Queen of Scots;
which, however, he regarded so little, that she took
no itep in any matter of moment, without his ad-
vice. She complained in a long letter, which she
wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, with which
the French court had abandoned her interest; the
declared her intention of imploring the assistance of
the Spanish Monarch, which was now her only re-
source; and recommended Ridolphi to his confi-
dence, as a person, capable both of explaining and
advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded
Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then to.
burn this letter; but whether he had been already
gained by the court, or resolved at that time to be-
tray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the
order, and hid the letter, together with other trea-
fonable papers, under the Duke's own bed.

" Digges, 144. 148. Camd. 434.

RIDOLPHIT

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted B o o r,

pone of those arguments, and spared none of those VI.
promises, which are the usual incentives to rebel- '
lion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum in
readiness to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of
Alva had undertaken to land ten thousand men, not
far from London. The Catholics to a man would
rife in arms. Many of the nobles were ripe for a
revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation
had turned their eyes towards him, and called on
him to revenge the unmerited injuries, which he
himself had suffered; and to rescue an unfortunate
Queen, who offered himn herperfon, and her Crown,
as the reward of his success. Norfolk approved of
the design, and though he refused to give Ridolphi
any letter of credit, allowed him to use his name, in
negociating with the Pope, and Alva*. The Bishop
of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and
impatience to procure relief for his niftrefs, was apt
to run into rash and desperate designs, advised the
Duke to assemble secretly a few of his followers, and
at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this the
Duke rejeded as a scheme equally wild and hazard-
ous. Meanwhile, the English court had received DifovcreA
some imperfect information of the plot, by inter- yt I"za-
cepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident Au"g1.
happened, which brought to light all the circum-
fiances of it. The Duke had employed Hickford
to transmit to Lord Herreis, some money, which
was to be distributed among Mary's friends in Scot-
land. A person not in the secret was intruded with

t Andcrf. iii. 161.

convey-

.

B o K conveying it to the borders, and he, fufpesting it

VI. from the weight to be gold, whereas he had been
' -V ' told that it was silver, carried it diretly to the Pri-
'571.

vy Council. The Duke, his domestics, and all who
were privy, or could be fufpefted of being privy to
Sept. 7. the design, were taken into custody. Never did the

accomplices in a conspiracy discover less firmness,
or servants betray an indulgent master with greater
baseness. Every one confessed the whole of what
he knew. Hickford gave directions how to find
the papers, which he had hidden. The Duke him-
self, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates,
and believing all dangerous papers to have been de-
itroyed, confidently aflerted his own innocence; but
when their depositions and the papers themselves
were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Qleen's
mercy. His offence was too heinous, and too often
repeated, to obtain pardon; and Elizabeth thought
it necessary to deter her fubjees, by his puniihment,
from holding correspondence with the Queen of
Scots, or her emissaries. Being tried by his Peers,
he was found guilty of high treason, and, after fe-
veral delays, suffered death for the crime *.

THE discovery of this conspiracy produced many

effets, extremely detrimental to Mary's interest.
The Biflop of Ross, who appeared by the consef.
sion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into cuf-
tody, his papers searched, himlelf committed to the

Andcrf. iii. 149. State Trials, 185.

5 Tower,

Tower, treated with the utmost rigour, threatened Bo o K
with capital punishment, and after a long confine- VI.
ment, set at liberty, on condition that he should J
leave the kingdom. Mary was not only deprived
of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal, and his
abilities, but was denied from that time, the privi-
lege of having an ambassador at the English court.
The Spanish ambassador, whom the power and
dignity of the prince he represented, exempted from
such insults as Ross had suffered, was commanded
to leave England *. Mary herself was kept under
a strider guard than formerly, the number of her
domeffics abridged, and no person permitted to fee
her, but in pretence of her keeperst-.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the storm Elizabeth
which was gathering, on the continent, against her declays

. openly a.'
kingdom, began to with that tranquillity were re- gains th'

Queen's

stored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's late at- party.
tempt against her government, Ihe determined to
aft, without disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the
King's party. This resolution she intimated to'the
leaders of both factions. Mary, she told them, oa.23.
had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous
conspiracies both againit her crown and herlife, that
flie would henceforth confider her as unworthy of
protection, and would never content to restore her
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. She
exhorted them therefore, to unite in acknowledging
the King's authority. She promised to procure by

* Digges, i63. 't Strype, Ann. ii. 50.

her

B o o K her mediation equitable terms for those, who had

VI. hitherto opposed it. But if they still continued re-

'" X fraftory, the threatened to employ her utmost power
3571. to compel them to submit *. Though this decla-

ration did not produce an immediate effec ; though
hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sit Adam Gor-
don, by his bravery, and good conduct, had routed
the King's adherents in the North, in many en-
counters; yet such an explicit discovery of Eliza-
beth's sentiments contributed not a little to animate
one party, and to depress the spirit and hopes of
the other t.

1572. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's for-
Hoflilities ces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy still held out the
carried on
between town and caitle of Edinburgh, scarce a. day palsed

without a skirmish. And while both avoided any
decisive action, they harassed each other by attack-
ing small parties, beating up quarters, and inter-
cepting convoys. These operations, though little
memorable in themselves, kept the passions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fury,
which rendered them regardless not only of the laws
9f war, but of the principles of humanity. Not
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of
combat, that this implacable rage appeared; both
parties hanged the prisoners they rook, of whatever
rank or quality, without mercy, and without trial,
Great numbers suffered in this Lhocking manner ;

* See Append. No. IV,
t Cald. ii. 289. 294. Strype, ii. j6.

1 the

the unhappy viAims were led, by fifties at a time, B o o K
to execution; and it was not till both fides had VI.
smarted severely, that they discontinued this barba-
rous practice, so reproachful to the chara&er of the 1572'
nation *. Mean while, those in the town and castle,
though they had received a supply of money from
the Duke of Alva -t, began to susser for want of
provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the mills
in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted
small garrisons in all the houses of strength around
it, scarcity daily increased. At last all the miseries
of famine were felt, and they muff have been fooa
reduced to such extremities, as would have forced
them to capitulate, if the English and French am-
bafiadors had not procured a suspension of hoftili-
ties, between the two parties $.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage, between League he-

Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had been fruit- tlaed End
less, both Charles and she were desirous ofconclud- F.ance.
ing a defensive alliance between the two Crowns.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the best
device for blinding the Protestants, against whom
the conspiracy was now almost ripe for execution;
but as a good precaution, likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious mea-
sure might expose him. Elizabeth, who had hither-
to reigned without a tingle ally, now saw her king-
dom so threatened with inteffine commotions, or
exposed Co invasions from abroad, that ihe was ex-

* Crawf. Mem. 21. 82 . t2 Cald. ii, 3T
t Id. 346.

tremely

B o o K tremely solicitous to secure the afliftance of so pow-

VI. erful a neighbour. The difficulties arising from
5- the situation of the Scottish Queen, were the chief

occasions of any delay. Charles demanded some
terms of advantage for Mary, and her party. Eli-
zabeth refused to liften to any proposition of that
kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint efforts of
the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so
much as mentioned in the treaty, and with regard
to Scottish affairs, a Ihort article was inferred, in ge-
April 1,. neral and ambiguous terms, to this purpose, " That

the parties contracting shall make no innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any stranger to enter, and to
foment the factions there; but it fliall be lawful for
the Queen of England to chastise, by force of arms,
those Scots who flall continue to harbour the Eng-
lifh rebels now in Scotland*." In consequence of
this treaty, France and England affected to act in
concert with regard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and
Sir William Drury, appeared there, in name of their
refpeetive Sovereigns. By their mediation, a truce,
for two months, was agreed upon, and during that
time, conferences were to be held between the lead.
ers of the opposite factions, in order to accommo-
date their differences, and reitore peace to the king-
dom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval of
tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South;
but in the North, it proved fatal to her interest.
Sir Adam Gordon had still maintained his reputa-
tion and superiority there. Several parties, under
different oflicers, were sent againIt him. Some of
them he attacked in the field; against others he

* Digges, 170. 191. Camd. 444. emoe

employed

employed stratagem; and as his courage and con. B o o K
du&t were equal, none of his enterprises failed of VI.
success. He made war, too, with the humanity, ~
which became so gallant a man, and gained ground 157
by that, no less than by the terror of his arms. If
he had not been obliged, by the truce, to suspend
his operations he would, in all probability, have
brought that part of the kingdom to submit entire-
ly to the Queen's authority *.

NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuc- Poed.

cess, Mary's intereff was on the decline, not only ingin Eng-
in her own kingdom, but among theEnglifh. No- Mary.
thing could be more offensive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the profpet of
the Spanith yoke, than her negociations with the
Duke of Alva. The parliament, which met in
May, proceeded against her as the most dangerous
enemy of the kingdom; and after a solemn confer-
ence between the Lords and Commons, both houses
agreed in bringing in a bill to declare her guilty of
high treason, and to deprive her of all right of fuc-
ceffilon to the Crown. This great cause, as it was
then called, occupied them during the whole felion,
and was carried on with much unanimity. Eliza-
beth, though she applauded their zeal, and approv-
ed greatly of the course they were taking, was fa-
tisfied with shewing Mary what the might expect
from the resentment of the nation; but as lhe did
not yet think it time to proceed to the most violent
extremity against her, she prorogued the parlia.
ment t.

* Crawf Mem. t D'Ewes Joarn. 206, &c.
VOL. II. D THESE

B o K THESE severe proceedings of the English parlia-

VI. mentwere not more mortifying to Mary, than the
1572. coldness and negleA of her allies the French. The
Tie French Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came over to
ni,, ge. ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a shew of in-

teresting himself in favour of the Scottish Queen,
but instead c;f soliciting for her liberty, or her re.
floration to her throne, all that he demanded was
a flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprison-
ment. And even this small requefl, he urged with
so little warmth or importunity, that no regard was
paid to ic*.

Thrmnaffa- THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth
tc of Paris. much satisfaction, and she expected from it a great

increase of security. She now turned her whole at-
tention towards Scotland, where the animofities of
the two factions were frill so high, and so many in-
tersering interests to be adjuffed, that a general pa-
cification seemed to be at a great diflance. But
while she laboured to bring them to some agree-
ment, an event happened which filled a great part
of Europe with astonishment, and with horror.
This was the massacre of Paris; an attempt, to
which there is no parallel in the history of mankind,
either for the dissimulation which led to it, or for
the cruelty and barbarity with which it was put
in execution. By the most solemn promises offafety
and of favour, the leaders of the Protestants were
drawn to court; and though doomed to deftruAion,
they were received with caresses, loaded with ho-

* Jebb, ii. 512.

nours,

hours, and treated, for seven months, with every B a o o
possible mark of familiarity and of confidence. In VI.
the rnidft of their security, the warrant for their de- ^

1572.

ftrudion was issued by their Sovereign; on whose Augu1 4.
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it, their
countrymen, their fellow-citizens, and companions,
imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten thousand
Protestants, without diflincion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The
fame barbarous orders were sent to other parts of
the kingdom, and a like carnage ensued. This
deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time, ap-
plauded in Spain; and at Rome, solemn thanks .-. /1
givings were offered to God, for its success. But/' ': :'i
among the Protestants, it excited incrediblehorror; '? '
a striking picture of which is drawn by the French
A mbaffador at the court of England, in his account
of his first audience after the massacre. " A gloomy
sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence, as in
the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers
of the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn.
ing, and as I passed through them, not one bestow-
ed on me a civil look, or made the least return to
my salutes *"

BUT horror was not the only passion, with which Dettin ei.
this event inspired the Protestants; it filled them "t,, Ma.

ry s Bite.

with fear. They confidered it as the prelude toa ty
some greater blow, and believed, not without much

' Carte, iii. 523.

D z pro-

B. o o K probability, that all the Popish Princes had confpir-

V l- ed the deftru&ion of their fed. This opinion did

5 no finall disservice to Mary's affairs in Scotland.
157 Many of her adherents were Protestants; and,

though they wilhed her restoration, were not wil-
ling, on that account, to sacrifice the faith which
they profefled. They dreaded her attachment to
a religion, which allowed its votaries to violate the
most lblemn engagements, and prompted them to
perpetrate the most barbarous crimes. A general
confederacy of the Protestants seemed to them the
only thing that could uphold the Reformation against
the league, which was formed to overturn it. Nor
could the present establishment of religion be long
maintained in Britain, but by a ftrif union with
Elizabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations,
in espousing the defence of it, as a common cause *.

The Regent THE Regent took hold of this favourable con-
t1d,"ur juncture for negociating a general peace. And as
both par. helaboured for this purpose, with the utmost zeal,
ties.

and the adverse faction placed entire confidence in
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce havefailed
of being successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came
so near to an agreement with him, that scarce any
thing remained, except the formality of signing the
treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the difap-
pointment he met within his pretensions to the Re-
gency; his abilities, his wealth, and the patronage
of the court of England, gave him greater sway
with the party, than even the Regent himself; and
he took pleasure in thwarting every measure pur.

Digges, 244, 267.
6 fried

sued by him. He was afraid that if Maitland and B o o K
his associates recovered any share in the adminiftra. VI.
tion, his own influence would be considerably dimi- .

1572.

nifhed; and the Regent, by their means, would re-
gain that ascendant, which belonged to his station.
With him, concurred all those, who were in posses-
sion of the lands, which belonged to any of the
Queen's party. And his ambition, and their ava-
rice, frustrated the Regent's pious intentions, and
retarded a blessing so necessary to the kingdom, as
the eftablifnment of peace *.

SUCH a discovery of the felfihnefs and ambition, His death.

which reigned among his party, made a deep im-
pression on the Regent, who loved his country, and
wifhedfor peace with much ardour. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on
a fettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper, of
which he died on the 29th of Ot)ober. He was,
perhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who could
have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy,
and have left it, without loss of reputation. Not-
withl:anding their mutual animnolities, both factions
acknowledged his views to be honourable, and his
integrity to be uncorrupted t.

No competitor now appeared against Morton. Morton

The Queen of England powerfully lupported his chosen Re
claim, and notwithstanding the fears of the people, Novem.
and thejealoufy of the nobles, he was elected Re.
gent; the fourth, who, in the space of five years,
had held that dangerous office.

* Mclv. 233. Crawf. Mem. 237. t- Id. z41.

D 3 As

o o K As the truce had been prolonged to the first of
VI. January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-
1572. ing the negociations with the opposite party, which

had been let on foot by his predecessor. They pro-
duced no effects, however, till the beginning of the
next year.

BEFORE we proceed to there, some events, hi-
therto untouched, deserve our notice.

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been

kept prisoner in Lochlevin, ever since his flight in-
to Scotland in the year 1 69, was given up to Lord
Hunfdon governor of Berwick; and being carried
to York, suffered there the puniihnent of his rebel-
lion. The King's party were so sensible of their de-
pendence on Elizabeth's proteCtion, that it was
scarce possible for them to refute putting into her
hands a person who had taken up arms against her.
But as a fum of money was paid, on that account,
and ihared between Morton and Douglas of Loch-
levin, the former of whom, during his exile in
England, had been much indebted to Northumber-
land's friendship, the abandoning this unhappy
nobleman, in such a manner, to certain deiRruCtion,
was deemed an ungrateful and mercenary action *.

Affars of THIS year was remarkable for a considerable in-
thi churchb. ovation in the government of the Church. Soon

after the Reformation, the Popilh bilhops had been
confirmed by law in poffeflion of part of their be-
pefices; but the fpiritualjurifdicion, which belong-

* Crawf. Mem. 55. 22Z, Camd. 445.

ed

ed to their order, was exercised by fuperintendants, B o o K
though with more moderate authority. On the VI.
death of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, Morton
obtained from the Crown a grant of the tempora- 7
lities of that fee. But as it was thought indecent
for a layman to hold a benefice, to which the cure
of fouls was annexed. he procured Doulas, rector
of the university ofSt. Andrews, to be chosen Arch-
bishop; and allotting him a fin:l. pension out of the
revenues of the fee, retair.cc! the remainder in his
own hands. The nobles, who saw the advantages
they might reap from such a practice, supported
him in the execution of his plan. It gave great
offence, however, to the Clergy, who, instead of
perpetuating an order, whose name and power was
odious to them, wifled that the revenues which had
belo.:ged to it, migiht bk- mployedin ipplyingfuch
parishes, as were still unprovided with fettledpaftors;
But on the one hand, it would have been ralh in
the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen,
on whom the very existence of the Protestant Church
in Scotland depended; and Morton, on the other,
conducted his scheme with such dexterity, and ma-
naged them with so much art, that it was, at last,
agreed, in a convention composed of the leading
men among the Clergy, together with a committee
of privy council, " that the name and office of
Archbishop, and Bilhop, flould be continued during
the King's minority, and these dignities be confer-
red upon the best qualified among the Protestant
Miniflers; but that with regard to their fpiritualju-
rifdiitions, they should be fubjecct to the general as-
fembly of the Church." The rules to be observed

D 4 in

B o o Kin theirelection; and theperfons who were to supply

VI. the place, and enjoy the privileges, which belonged
-572. to the Dean and Chapter in times of Popery, were

likewise particularly specified*. And the whole be-
ing laid before the General Assembly, after some
exceptions to the name of Archbilhop, Dean, Cbap.
ter, &c. and a proteflation that it Ihould be con-
fidered only as a temporary confftitution, till one
more perfect could be introduced, it obtained the
approbation of that court t, Even Knox, who
was prevented from attending the Assembly by the
ill state of his health, though he declaimed loudly
against the Simoniacal paction, to which Douglas
owed his preferment, and blamed the nomination of
a person, worn out with age and infirmities, to an
office, which required unimpaired vigour both of
body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention; and in a letter to the
Assembly, approved of some of their regulations
with respect to the Election of Bilhops, as worthy
of being carefully observed -. In consequence of
the Afflmbly's consent to the plan agreed upon in
the Convention, Douglas was installed in his office,
and at the fame time, an Archbishop of Glasgow
and a Bishop of Dunkeld, were chosen from among
the Proteilant Clergy. They were all admitted to
the place in Parliament, which belonged to the ec-
clefiatical order. But, in imitation of the example
let by Morton, fucih bargains were made with them
by different noblemen, as gave them poflEflion only

Cald. ii. 3cQ. t Id. 354.
t See Appendix, No. V.

of a very fniall part of the revenues, belonging to B o o Kt
their fees . VI.

SOON after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, Noy.57.

the prime initrument of spreading and eftablihing `Dath ,nd
the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life, of Knox.
in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif-
intereftednefs, were virtues which he possessed, in an
eminent degree. He was acquainted too, with the
learning, cultivated in that age; and excelled in
that species of eloquence, which is calculated to
route, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too severe, and the impetuosity of his
temper excessive. Rigid and uncomplying himself,
he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others,
Regardless of the diftinftions of rank and character,
he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony and ve-
hemence, more apt to irritate, than to reclaim.
This often betrayed him into indecent and undutiful
expressions, with respect to the Queen's person and
condu&. Those very qualities, however, which
now render his character less amiable, fitted him to
be the instrument of Providence for advancing the
Reformation among a fierce people, and enabled him
to face dangers, and to surmount opposition, from
which, a person of a more gentle spirit would have
been apt to shrink back. By an unwearied appli-
cation to fludy, and to business, as well as by the
frequency and fervour of his public discourses, he
had worn out a conflitution, naturallyftrong. Dur-
ing a lingering illnels, he discovered the utmost for-
titude; and met the approaches of death, with a

' Spots. 261,

mpagna,

B o o K magnanimity inseparable from his character. He

VI. was constantly employed in aóts of devotion, and

comforted himself with those profpedts of immorta-
lity, which not only preserve good men from de-
fponding, but fill them with exultation in their lafl
moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present
at his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few
words, the more honourable for Knox, as they
came from one whom he had often censured with
peculiar severity, " There lies He, who never fear-
ed the face of man *."

17c THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such

The Rl rgent generous motives as the former Regent, he laboured,
treals ,~ith
the Qeenl's however, ingood earnest to establish it. The pub-
party. lic confusions and calamities, to which he owed his

power and importance when he was only the second
person in the nation, were extremely detrimental to
him, now that he was railed to be the first. While
so many of the nobles continued in arms against
him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of
extinguimfing the flame, which she had kindled, and
kept ib long alive in Scotland t-. She had disco-
vered the alliance with France, from which (he had
expected such advantages, to be no foundation of
security. And though appearances of friendship
flill fu bfifled between her and that court,and Charles
daily renewed his protestations of inviolable adhe-
rence to the treaty, she was convinced, by a fatal
example, how little she ought to rely on the pro-
mises or oaths of that perfidious Monarch. Her

* Spots, 266. CP.ld. ii. 73. t Digges, 299.

am-

ambassador warned her that the French held secret B o o K
correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, VI.
and encouraged them in their obstinacy *. The''
Duke of Alva carried on his intrigues in that king-
dom, with less disguise. She was persuaded that
they would embrace the first serene interval, which
the commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land in
Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prevent their
getting any footing in the island, and to cut off all
their hopes of finding any assistance there, by unit-
ing the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Hi; over-

Regent to carry on his negociations with them to jaL, by
great advantage. They were now divided into two ,ait lrk
factions. At the head of the one, were Chatelhe- aldy.
rault and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were
the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their
extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
lowers, rendered the former considerable. The lat-
ter were indebted for their importance, to their per-
fonal abilities, and to the strength of the cafle of
Edinburgh, which was in their poffelfion. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in the
fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the Queen's
party, if it remained entire, would beable to thwart
and embarrass his administration, he resolved to di-
vide and weaken it, by a separate negociation. He
made the first overture to Kirkaldy, and his affo-
ciates, and endeavoured to renew the negociation

Digges, 296.312.

with

B o o K with them, which, during the life of his predecef.

VI.. for, had been broken off by his own artifices. But

Kirkaldy knew Morton's views, and system of go-
573 ernment, to be very different from those of the

former Regent. Maitland confidered him, as a
personal and implacable enemy. They received re-
peated assurances of protetion from France. And
though the siege of Rochelle employed the French
arms at that time, the fame hopes, which had so
often deceived the party, still amused them, and
they expeted that the obstinacy of the Hugonots
would soon be subdued, and that Charles would
then be at liberty to a& with vigour in Scotland.
Mean while, a supply of money was sent, and if
the cafile could be held out till Whitfunday, effec-
tual aid was promised *. Maitland's genius delight-
ed in forming schemes, that were dangerous; and
Kirkaldy pofleffed the intrepidity, necessary for put-
ting them in execution. The caltle, they knew,
was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's
power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate
the treaty with France, by fending forces to his as-
fiftance; and if the French should be able to land
any considerable body of men, it might be possible
to deliver the Queen from captivity, or at least to
balance the influence of France and England in
such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the dif-
honourable dependance on the latter, underwhich it
had fallen. This (plendid, but chimerical projet,
they preferred to the friendship of Morton. They
encouraged the negociation, however, because it
served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame

Digges, 4,

purt

purpose, that the whole of the Queen's party Ihould B o o K
be comprehended in it, and that Kirkaldy should VI.
retain the command of the castle, fix months after '
the treaty was signed. His interest prompted the573
Regent to reject the former; his penetration disco-
vered the danger of complying with the latter; and
all hopes of accommodation vanished *.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever, to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty with
Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of arms
still continued with them.

THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, Accepted

and liflened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke Y hae'll-
was naturally unsteady, and the approach of old Huntly.
age increased his irresolution, and aversion to acion.
The miseries of civil discord had afflited Scotland,
almost five years, a length of time far beyond the
duration of any former contest. The war, instead
of doing service, had been detrimental to the Queen;
and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had.
gained much honour; both had fufferedgreat lofles;
and had exhausted their own estates, in wafting
those of their adversaries. T;he commons were in
the utmost misery, and longed ardently for a peace,
which might terminate this fruitless, but deftruaive
quarrel.

Mclv. 335, &c.

A GREAT

Bo o K A GREAT ftep was taken towards this defirabli

VI. event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, between

the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and

1573.
Articles of Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil.
theb.' r legrew, Elizabeth's ambassador*. The chief arti-

cles in it were these; that all the parties compre-
hended in the treaty Ihould declare their approbation
of the Reformed religion, now established in the
kingdom; that they Ihould submit to the King's
government, and own Morton's authority as Re-
gent; that they should acknowledge every thing
done in opposition to the King, since his coronation,
to be illegal; that on both fides the prisoners who
had been taken ihould be set at liberty, and the
lands reflored to their proper owners; that the act
of attainder passed against the Queen's adherents
Should be repealed, and indemnity granted for all
the crimes, of which they had been guilty since the
:5th of June 1567; and that the treaty ihould be
ratified, by the common content of both parties, in
parliament t.

Siege of the KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates,
care of
d. jdibrgh. who neither discovered solicitude nor made provision

for his safety, did not lose courage, nor entertain
any thoughts of accommodation :. And though

all

* See Append. No. V. + Crawf. Mem. 251.
t Melvil, whose brother Sir Robert was one of those who

joined with Kirkaldy in the defence of the castle, and who was
himself firongly attached to their party, asserts that Kirkaldy
offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that all his offers were rejeced by the Regent, Melv. 240. But
as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous of reforing

peace

all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he fill B o o K
resolved to defend the catle, in the Queen's name VI.
and to wait the arrival of the promised succours. 57
The Regent was in want of every thing necessary
for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who de-
termined, at any rate, to bring the dissensions in
Scotland to a period, before the French could find
leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon afforded him
sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 500o foot, and a considerable train
of artillery. The Regent joined him, with all his Apil 25.
forces; and trenches were opened and approaches
regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,
though discouraged by the loss of a great fum of
money, remitted to him from France, and which
fell into the Regent's hands, through the treachery
of Sir James Balfour, the molt corrupt man of that
age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by
despair. Three and thirty days he resifted all the
efforts of the Scotch and English, who puihed on
their attacks, with courage, and with emulation.
Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications
were battered down, and one of the wells in the
caffle dried up, and the other choaked with rubbish.
Even then, his spirit was unfubdued, and he deter-

peace in Scotland, and her ambassador Killegrew, as well as
the Earl of Rothes, used their utmoR endeavours to persuade
Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems more cre-
dible to impute the continuance ofhoftilir&, toKirkaldy's ob-
ftinacy, his diltruft of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid, than
to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the pofiri e

teltimony of Spotfw. 269, 270. Camd. 448. Johllt. Hilt.
3, 4. Digges, 334. Crawford's account agrees, in the main,
with theirs, Mem. 263.

minrlJ

B o o K mined rather to fall gloriously behind the last irt

-VI. trenchment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies.

iC
I ' But his garrison was not animated with the fame he-
X573 3roic or desperate resolution, and rising in a mutiny,
May s9. forced him to capitulate. He surrendered himself

to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mif-
trefs, that he should be favourably treated. Toge.
ther with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord
Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few citi-
zens of Edinburgh, and about I60 soldiers, were
made prisoners *.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac-
company them into the Low-countries, and enter-
ing into the fcrvice of the States, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military
virtue, which has always been the characteritfic of
the Scottish Nation.

Review of THUS by the treaty withChatelheraultand Hunt-
ter o both ly, and the surrender of the castle, the civil wars in
parties. Scotland were brought to a period. When we re-

view the slate of the nation, and compare the
strength of the two factions, Mary's partisans
among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers, and in power. But these
advantages were more than counterbalanced by
others, which their antagonilts enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents,, which
times of action form, or call forth, appeared chiefly
on the King's fide. Nor could their enemies boast

* Cald. ii. 408. Melv, 240. Crawf. Meri. 265.

o?

of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur- B o o K
ray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity VI.
of Morton; the subtle genius, and insinuating ad- 5
dress of Maitland; or the successful valour of Kirk-
aldy; all which were, at first, employed in laying
the foundations of the King's authority. On the
one fide, measures were concerted with prudence,
and executed with vigour; on the other, their re-
solutions were rash, and their conduct feeble. The
people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompt.
ed by indignation against the Queen, warmly sup-
ported the King's cause. The Clergy threw the
whole weight of their popularity into the fame scale.
By means of these, as well as by the powerful inter-
position of England, the King's government was
finally established. Mary loft even that shadow of
sovereignty, which, amidl- all her fuflerings, fle had
hitherto retained among part of her own fubjeces.
And as fie was no longer permitted to have an
Ambassador at the court of England, the only mark
of dignity which she had, for some time, enjoyed
there, she must henceroreh be confidered as an exile
Itripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, and totally de-
Ifrted or forgotten in the other.

Ki, KALDY and his afibciates remained in Drury's r;. ,Jiy

cuflody, and were treated by him with great huma- ^'ti,
nity, till the Queen of England, whose prisoners
they were, flIould determine their fate. Morton
insisted that they should fiffer the punishment due
to their rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that,
so long as they were allowed to live, he did not

V L. II. E reckon

B o o K reckon his own person or authority secure; and

VI. Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or

his promises in her name, gave them up to the Re-
1573.

gent's disposal. He first confined them to separate
prisons; and, soon after, with Elizabeth's content,
Augul 3. condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hanged

at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not
expe&t to be treated more favourably, prevented
the ignominy of a public execution, by a volun-
tary death, and " ended his days, Says Melvil, after
the old Roman fashion *."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At
the fame time, her health began to be much im-
paired by confinement, and want of exercise. At
the entreaty of the French Ambassador, Lord
Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place
of her imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been
created Baron of Burleigh, and Lord High Trea-
furer of England, happened to be there at the
fame time. And though no minister ever entered
more warmly into the views of a Sovereign, or gave
fironger proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than
this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's diftruf: of
every person, who approached the Queen of Scots,
that her suspicions extended even to him; and,
while Mary justly reckoned him her molt danger-
ous enemy, he found some difficulty in persuading

* Mc:v. 242.

, _'

his own mistress that he was not partial to that B a o o
unhappy Queen *. VI.

TIIE Duke of Alva was this year recalled from 1573'

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and opprefive adtginiftration routed a fpi-
rit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhausted
its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory.
Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a milder
temper, and of a less enterprising genius. This
event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with
the Scotifll Queen, and his zeal for her interest.

THOUTGH the kingdom was now fettled in pro- I574i
found peace, many of the evils, which accompany The Re-

grnt's ad-
civil war, were still felt. The restraints of law, niniflra.

tiol be-

which, in times of public confusion, are little re- comes
garded even by civilized nations, were totally de- oadous
Ipifed by a fierce people, uilacculfomed to the re-
gular administration of justice. The diborders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intole-
rable; and, under the protection of the one, or the
other faA ion, crimes of every kind were cotmmitted
with impunity. The Regent let himself to redress
there, and, by his indultry and vigour, order and
security were re-eftablilhed in the kingdom. But
he loft the reputation due to this important ser-
vice, by the avarice, which he discovered, in per-
forming it; and his own exations became more
pernicious to the nation than all the irregularities
which he restrained t. Spies and informers were.
* Stuype, ii. 248. 28z. t See Append, No. VII.

E a ever/

Bo o K reckon his own person or authority secure; anc

VI. Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, oi

his promises in her name, gave them up to the Re.
gent's disposal. IHe first confined them to separate
prisons; and, soon after, with Elizabeth's consent,
Auguf 3. condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be hanged

at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not
expect to be treated more favourably, prevented
the ignominy of a public execution, by a volun-
tary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil, after
the old Roman fashion *."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At
the fame time, her health began to be much im-
paired by confinement, and want of exercise. At
the entreaty of the French Ambassador, Lord
Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place
of her imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been
created Baron of Burleigh, and Lord High Trea-
furer of England, happened to be there at the
fame time. And though no minister ever entered
more warmly into the views of a Sovereign, or gave
stronger proofs of his fidelity and attachment, than
this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's diftrufl: of
every person, who approached the Queen of Scots,
that her suspicions extended even to him; and,
while Mary juffly reckoned him her mos danger-
ous enemy, he found some difficulty in persuading

* Mev. z42.

his

his own mistress that he was not partial to that B O o IK
unhappy Queen *, VI.

T'HE Duke of Alva was this year recalled from 573

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppreflive adliniftration roused a fpi-
rit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain exhauffed
its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft its glory.
Requefens, who succeeded him, was of a milder
temper, and of a less enterprising genius. This
event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with
the Scottril Queen, and his zeal for her interest.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in pro. I574;
found peace, many of the evils, which accompany The Re.

gem's ad-

civil war, were still felt. The restraints of law, nlinlra-
which, in times of public confusion, are little re- comes
garded even by civilized nations, were totally de- Odio""v
ipifed by a fierce people, unaccuflomed to the re-
gular administration of justice. The disorders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intole-
rable; and, under the protection of the one, or the
other sac ion, crines of every kind were committed
with impunity. The Regent Itt himself to redress
these, and, by his indufiry and vigour, order and
security were re-established in the kingdom. But
he loft the reputation due to this important ser-
vice, by the avarice, which he discovered, in per-
forming it; and his own examtions became more
pernicious to the nation than all the irregularities
which he restrained t. Spies and informers were.

Strype, ii. 248. z28. t See Append, No. VII.

E a evecr

Bo o K every where employed; the remembrance of old

VI. offences were revived; imaginary crimes were in-

vented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and de-
157-..

linquents were forced to compound for their lives,
by the payment of exorbitant fines. At the fame
time, the current coin was debated *; licences were
fold for carrying on prohibited branches of com-
merce, .unusual taxes were imposed on commodities;
and all the refinements in oppression, from which,
nations so imperfetly polished as the Scots are ufu-
ally exempted, were put in pratice. None of these
were complained of more loudly, or with greater
reason, than his injustice towards the Church. The
thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy received
their fubfiffence, had always been slowly and irre-
gularly paid to collecors, appointed by the Gene-
ral Assembly; and, during the civil wars, no pay-
ment could be obtained in several parts of the king-
dom. Under colour of redrefling this grievance,
and upon a promise of assigning every Minister a
stipend within his own parish, the Regent extorted
fiom the Church the thirds to which they had right
ly law. But the Clergy, instead of reaping any
advantage from this alteration, found that pay-

* The corruption of the coin, during Morton's adminifira.

tion, was very great. Although the quantity of current money
coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gradually increased by
former princes; the flandard or fineness suffered little altera-
tion, and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame with what
is now used. But Morton mixed a fourth part of alloy with
every pound of silver, and funk, by consequence, the value of
coin in proportion. In the year 1581, all the money coined by
him was called in, and appointed to be recoined. The ltandard
was restored to the fame purity as formerly. Ruddim. Prxf. to
Anders. Diplom. p. 74.

ments

ments became more irregular and dilatory than B o o K
ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with VI.
the care of four or five parishes, a pitiful salary was
allotted him, and the Regent's insatiable avarice
seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this

year, was a new misfortune to the Scottilh Queen.
Henry II. who succeeded him, had not the fame
attachment to her person; and his jealousy of the
houle of Guile, and obsequiousness to the Queen
Mother, greatly alienated him from her interelt.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault must 1575.

likewise be confidered as some loss to Mary. As Jan. zz
the Parliament had frequently declared him next
heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great re-
fpe& among his countrymen, and enabled him,
more than any other person in the kingdom, to
counterbalance the Regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scottish and Englifli
marches, a scuffle happened, in which the Englifl
were worsted; a few killed on the spot; and Sir
James Forrester, the warden, with several gentle-
men who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
Elizabeth and the Regent were too sensible of the
advantage, which resulted from the good under-
standing that fubiffted between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

Crawf. Mem. 27. Spots. 273. Cald. ii. 42o. 427,

E 3 Tix

13 o o K THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was

VI. in some danger of being disturbed by another cause.
575
. Though the persons, railed to the dignity of Bi-
1575.
AitcmptEof Shops, possessed very finall revenues, and a very
the C-,rgy moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom
againfl the
Epifcopi the Regent and all his measures were become ex-

tremely odious, began to be jealous of that order.
Knowing that corruptions steal into the Church
gradually, under honourable names, and upon de-
cent pretences, they were afraid that, from such
finall beginnings, the hierarchy might grow, in
time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever.
The chief author of these fuipicions was Mr. An-
drew Melvil, a man, distinguished by his uncom-
mon erudition, by the severity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
retirement of an academy, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life; and being more attentive to
the ends which he pursued, than to the means
which he employed for promoting them, he often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and
imprudence with which he carried them on. A
question was moved by him in the aflembly " whe-
ther the office of Bishop, as now exercised in the
kingdom, were agreeable to the word of God ?"
In the ecclefiaflical judicatories, continual com-
plaints were made of the Biflops for neglect of
duty, many of which, their known remifinefs too
well justified. The Bishop of Dunkeld, being ac-
cufed of dilapidating his benefice, was found guilty
by the assembly. And the Regent, instead of
checking, connived at there disputes about Eccle-
fiaftical government, as they diverted the zeal of

the

the Clergy from attending to his daily encroach- B o o
ments on the patrimony of the Church *. VI.

THE weight of the Regent's oppressive admini- 1576.

He irritates

ftration had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the ro neof t
lower and middle rank; but he began now to take nobe.
such steps, as convinced the nobles, that their dig-
nity would not long exempt them from feeling the
effets of his power. An accident, which was a
frequent cause of diflenfion among the Scottifl no-
bles, occasioned a difference between the Earls of
Argyll and Athol. A vassal of the former had
made some depredations on the lands of the latter.
Athol took arms to punifi the offender; Argyll,
to protect him; and this ignoble quarrel they were
ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by
interposing his authority, obliged them to disband
their forces. Both of them had been guilty of irre-
gularities, which, though common, were contrary
to the letter of the law. Of there the Regent took
advantage, and resolved to found on them a charge
of treason. This design was revealed to the two
Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The common
danger, to which they were exposed, compelled
them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a clcfe
confederacy, for their mutual defence. Their junc-
tion rendered them formidable; they despised the
summons which the Regent gave them to appear
before a court of justice; and he was obliged to
desist from any further prosecution. But the injury
he intended made a deep impression on their minds,
and drew on him severe vengeance t.

Cald. Assemblies, 1574, &c. Johnft. Hill. i5,
t Crawf. Mem. 285.

E 4 NoR

B o o K NOR was he more successful in an attempt, which

VI. he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton with the

guilt of having formed a conspiracy against his
life. Though those, who were iuppofed to be his
accomplices, were seized, and tortured, no evidence
of any thing criminal appeared; but, on the con-
trary, many circumstances discovered his innocence,
as well as the Regent's secret views, in imputing
to him such an odious design *.

They turn THE Scottish Nobles, who were almotf equal to
their eles
t,,wardsthe their Monarchs in power, and treated by them with
Ki'n much distinction, observed these arbitrary proceed-

ings of a Regent, with the utmost indignation.
The people, who under a form of government, ex-
tremely simple, had been little accustomed to the
burden of taxes, complained loudly of the Regent's
rapacity. And all began to turn their eyes towards
the young King, from whom they expected the re-
dress of all their grievances, and the return of a
more gentle, and more equal administration.

j.am c's JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age.
education anddilpofi- The Queen, soon after his birth, had committed

him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the
civil wars he had resided securely in the castle of
Stirling. Alexander Erfline, that nobleman's bro-
ther, had the chief diretion of his education. Un-
der him, the famous Buchanan aced as preceptor,
together with three other masters, the most eminent
the nation afforded for skill in those sciences, which
were deemed necessary for a prince. The young

* Crawf. Mcm. 287.

King

King (hewed an uncommon pallion for learning, B o o K
and made great progress in it. And the Scots fan- VI.
cied that they already discovered in him, all those
virtues, which the fondness or credulity of fubjets
usually ascribe to princes, during their minority.
But as James was still far from that age, at which
the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to
the sentiments of the people, nor reflect, how na-
turally there prejudices in his favour might encou-
rage the King to anticipate that period. He not
only neglected to secure the friendihip of those
who were about the King's- person, and who pof-
sessed his ear, but had even exafperared some of
them, by personal injuries. Their resentment con- re is fufpi-

sci,.s of the

curred with the ambition of others, in infusing into Reent'a
the King early suspicions of Morton's power, and P"°:"'
designs. A King, they told him, had often reason
to fear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, and by interest, he would endeavour to
keep the Prince in perpetual infancy, at a diitance
from his fubjeats, and unacquainted with business.
A finall degree js vigour, however, was sufficient
to break the yoke. Subjects naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the tem-
porary and delegated jurisdiction of a Regent.
Morton had governed with rigour, unknown to the
ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groan-
ed under his oppressions; and would welcome the
first profpeEt of a milder administration. At pre-
sent the King's name was scarce mentioned in Scot-
land, his friends were without influence, and his
favourites without honour. But one effort would

discover

B o o K discover Morton's power to be as feeble, as it was

VI. arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himself
.577. in possession of his just authority, and rescue the

nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not re-
gard his own rights as a King, let him liften, at
least, to the cries of his people *.

Alotd a- THESE suggestions made a deep imprefion on
gain tle the young King, who was trained up in an opinion

that he was born to command. His approbation of
the design, however, was of finall consequence,
without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls
of Argyll and Athol, two of the most powerful
of that body, were animated with implacable re-
fentment against the Regent. To them the Cabal in
Stirling-caftle communicated the plot which was
on foot; and they entering warmly into it, Alex-
ander Erskine, who, since the death of his brother,
and during the minority of his nephew, had the
command of that fort, and the custody of the
King's person, admitted them secretly into the
King's presence. They gave him the fame account
of the misery of his fubjets, under the Regent's
arbitrary administration; they complained loudly
of the injustice with which themselves had been
treated, and besought the King, as the only means
for redressing the grievances of the nation, to call
a council of all the nobles. James consented, and
letters were issued, in his name, for that purpose;
but the two Earls took care that they should be
sent only to such as were known to bear no good
will to Morton --.

* Melvil, 249. - Spots. 278.

THE

THE number of there was, however, so inconfi- B o o K

derable, that, on the day appointed, far the greater VI.
part of the nobles assembled at Stirling; and so 578
highly were they incensed against Morton, that al- March 4.
though, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and
Athol's interview with the King, he had made a
feint as if he would resign the Regency, they ad-
vised the King, without regarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his office, and to take the adminiftra-
tion of government into his own hands. Lord
Glamis the Chancellor, and Herreis, were appoint-
ed to signify this resolution to Morton, who was,
at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of refi-
dence. Nothing could equal the joy with which elirte,'.,
this unexpected resolution filled the nation, but the a,^ etires.
surprise occasioned by the teeming alacrity with
which the Regent descended from io high a station.
He neither wanted sagacity to foresee the danger
of resigning, nor inclination to keep poffielion of
an office, for the expiration of which the law had
fixed so distant a term. But all the sources, whence
the faction of which he was head, derived their
strength, had either failed, or now supplied his ad-
verfaries with the means of humbling him. The
Commons, the city of Edinburgh, the Clergy, were
all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied
oppressions. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself
by treaty, to fend a considerable body of troops to
the assistance of the inhabitants of the Netherlands,
who were struggling for liberty, had little leisure
to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as fie had
nothing to dread from France, in whose councils
the Princes of Lorrain had not, at that time, much

influence,

B o o K influence, she was not displeased, perhaps, at the

VI. birth of new facions in the kingdom. Even those
578' "nobles, who had long been joined with Morton in

faction, or whom he had attached to his person by
benefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the
secretary, Murray of Tillibardin Comptroller, all
deserted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the
council at Stirling. So many concurring circum-
fiances convinced Morton of his own weakness, and
determined him to give way to a torrent, which
Marc, 12. was too impetuous to be resifted. He attended the

chancellor and Herries to Edinburgh; was present,
when the King's acceptance of the government was
proclaimed; and, in the presence of the people,
surrendered to the King all the authority to which
he had any claim in virtue of his office. This cere-
mony was accompanied with such excefive joy and
acclamations of the multitude, as added, no doubt
to the anguish, which an ambitious spirit mull
feel when compelled to renounce supreme power;
and convinced Morton how entirely he had loft
the affections of his countrymen. He obtained,
however, fiom the King, an at, containing the
approbation of every thing done by him in the
exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the most
ample form, that his fear or caution could devise,
of all past offences, crimes, and treasons. The
nobles, who adhered to the King, bound them-
selves, under great penalty, to procure the ratifi-
cation of this ac, in the firfl parliament *.

* Spots. 278. Crawf. Mem. 289. Cald. ii. 522.

A couN-

A COUNCIL of twelve Peers was appointed to B o o K:

assist the King in the adminiitration of affairs. VI.
And Morton, deserted by his own party, and un- ,573
able to ltruggle with the facion, which governed Continues
absolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and te,, ,on
seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be occupied ,fe pd-ty.
only in the amusements, of a country life. His
mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all the
uneasy reflections which accompany disappointed
ambition, and intent on schemes for recovering his
former grandeur. Even in this retreat, which the
people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and abilities
rendered him formidable. And the new Counsel-
lors were so imprudent as to rouse him, by the
precipitancy with which they hastened to it-rip hint
of all remains of power. They required him to
surrender the caitle of Edinburgh, which was still
in his pofeffion. He refuted at first to do so, and
began to prepare for its defence; but the citizens
of Edinburgh having taken arms, and repulsed a
part of the garrison, which was sent out to guard
a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up
that important fortress, without resistance. This
encouraged his adversaries to call a parliament to
meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply their demands
upon him, in such a manner, as convinced him that
nothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their
inveterate hatred.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began

already to decline. The Chancellor, the ablest and
most moderate man in the party, having been killed
at Stirling, in an accidental rencounte between his

fol-

Bo oK followers and those of the Earl of Crawford;

VI. Athol, who was appointed his successor in that

high office, the Earls of Eglington, Cathnefs, and
Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at court,
were either avowed Papists, or suspected of leaning
to the opinions of that fedt. In an age, when the
return of popery was so much, and so justly,
dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as Mor-
ton had always treated the Papists with rigour, this
unseasonable indulgence made all zealous Protel-
tants remember that circumitance in his admini-
ftration, with great praise *.

Rerumes his MORTON, to whom none of there particulars
former au-
tnoiity. were unknown, thought this the proper junture

for setting to work the instruments which he had
been preparing. laving gained the confidence of
the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother,
he insinuated to them that Alexander Erskine had
formed a plot to deprive his nephew of the govern-
ment of Stirling-cadtle, and the custody of the
King's person; and easily induced an ambitious
woman, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to
prevent this fuppoled injury. The Earl repairing
suddenly to Stirling, and being admitted, as usual,
into the castle with his attendants, seized the gates
April :6. early in the morning, and turned out his Uncle,

who dreaded no danger from his hands. The fol-
diers of the garrison submitted to him as their go-
vernor, and, with little danger, and no effusion of
blood, he became master both of the King's per-
son, and the fortress -.

* Spot. 283. t Cald. ii. 535

AN
2

AN event so unexpeEted occasioned great confter- B o o K

nation. And though Morron's hand did not ap- VI.
pear in the execution, he was universally believed i57'
to be the author of the attempt. The new Coun-
fellors saw it to be necessary, for their own safety,
to change their measures, and, instead of pursuing
him with such implacable resentment, to enter into
terms of accommodation with an adversary, still so
capable of creating them trouble. Fourwere named,
on each fide, to adjust their differences. They met
not far from Dalkeith. And when they had brought
matters near a conclusion, Morton, who was too
sagacious not to improve the advantage which their
security and their attention to the treaty afforded
him, set out in the night-time for Stirling, and May24,
having gained Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle,
was admitted by him into the cafile; and manag-
ing matters there with his usual dexterity, he soon
had more entirely the command of the fort, than
the Earl himfdlf. He was likewise admitted to a
feat in the privy council, and acquired the fame
ascendant in it *.

As the time appointed for the meeting of par-

liament at Edinburgh now approached, this gave
him rome anxiety. He was afraid of carrying the
young King to a city, whole inhabitants were so
much at the devotion of the adverse facion. He
was no less unwilling to leave James behind at Stir-
ling. In order to avoid this dilemma, he issued a
proclamation, in the King's name, changing the
place of meeting from Edinburgh to Stirling-caltle.

Cald. ii. 53 .
r~~~~~~~~~~~~il

Bo o K This Athol and his party represented as a ftep al-

VI. together unconstitutional. The King, said they, is

8 Morton's prisoner; the pretended counsellors are

his slaves ; a parliament, to which all the nobles
may repair without fear, and where they may deli-
berate with freedom, is absolutely necessary for set-
tling the nation, after disorders of such long conti-
nuance. But in an assembly, called contrary to all
form, held within the walls of a garrison, and over-
awed by armed men, what safety could members
cxpet ? what liberty could prevail in debate ? or
what benefit result to the public ? The Parliament
J'y 53 met, however, on the day appointed, and notwith-

itanding the protestation of the Earl of Montrose
and Lord Lindsay, in name of their party, pro-
ceeded to bufineis. The King's acceptance of the
government was confirmed; the act granted to
Morton, for his security, ratified; some regula-
tions, with regard to the numbers and authority of
the privy council, were agreed upon; and a pen-
sion for life granted to the Countess of Mar, who
had been to instrumental in bringing about the late
revolution *.

Ary:l and MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athol, and their follow-
Athol takcarms ers, took arms, upon the specious pretence of ref-
againfl
:lira. cuing the King from captivity, and the kingdom

from oppression. James himself, impatient of the
servitude in which he was held, by a man whom he
had long been taught to hate, secretly encouraged
their enterprifc; though, at the fame time, he was
obliged not only to disavow them in public, but

* Cald. ii. 517. Parl. 5 Jac. VI.

to

to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by B o o K
proclamation, that he was perfectly free from any Vl.
confiraint, either upon his person, or his will. Both S
fides quickly took the field. Argyll and Athol
were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus,
Morton's nephew, met them with an army 500ooo Auguf, i,
strong; neither party, however, was eager to en-
gage. Morton distrusted the fidelity of his own
troops. The two Earls were sensible that a single
vi6cory, however complete, would not be decisive;
and as they were in no condition to undertake the
siege of Stirling castle, where the King was kept,
their strength would soon be exhausted, while Mor-
ton's own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen
of England, might furnish him with endless re-
sources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Eli,
zabeth had sent into Scotland to negociate an ac-
commodation between the two factions, a treaty Elizabeh-
was concluded, in consequence of which, Argyll anacco
and Athol were admitted into the King's pretence; modationn

between

some of their party were added to the privy council; them.
and a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring
all remaining differences to an amicable ifue *.

So soon as James alfumed the government into

his own hands, he dispatched the abbot of Dun,
fermling to inform Elizabeth of that event; to of-
ser to renew the alliance between the two kingdoms;
and to demand poffeflion of the estate, which had
lately fallen to him, by the death of his grandmo-
ther, the Countess of Lennox. That Lady's fe-
cond son had left one daughter, Arabella Stewarts

* Crawf. Mem. 307,
VOL. II. F who

B o OK who was born in England. And as the chief ob.

VI. jetion against the pretensions of the Scottish line to
5785 the crown of England, was that maxim of English

law, which excludes aliens from any right of in.
heritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by grant.
ing this demand, would have established a prece-
dent in James's favour, that might have been esteem-
ed decisive, with regard to a point, which it had been
her constant care to keep undecided. Without sus.
fering this delicate question to be tried, or allowing
any new light to be thrown on that, which she con-
fidered as the great mystery of her reign, she com-
manded the rents of the estate to be sequestered by
Lord Burleigh, mailer of the wards; and by this
method of proceeding, gave the Scottish King early
warning how necessary it would be to court her fa.
vour, if ever he hoped for success in claims of greater
importance, but equally liable to be controverted *.
j179. AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty,

the contending nobles were at last brought to some
agreement. But it was followed by a tragical event.
Morton, in token of reconcilement, having invited
April 2 the leaders of the opposite party to a great enter-

tainment, Athol the Chancellor was, soon after,
taken ill, and died within a few days. The fymp-
toms and violence of the disease gave rife to strong
suspicions of his being poisoned; and though the
physicians, who opened his body, differed in opinion
as to the cause of the distemper, the Chancellor's re-
lations publickly accused Morton of that odious
crime. The advantage which visibly accrued to him,

* Camd 461.

by

by the removal of a man of great abilities, and B o o K
averse from all his measures, was sufficient proof of VI.
his guilt to the people, who are ever fond of im- ..^
puting the death of eminent perfonstoextraordinary
causes *.

THE office of Chancellor was beflowed iupon Morton',

Argyll, whom this preferment reconciled, in a great ileei Ps
ineafure, to Morton's administration. He had noW againfi the
recovered all the authority he polfeffed during his Hamiltod,
Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the
power and cabals of his enemies. None of the great
families remained to be the objecs of his jealousy,
or to obftrud his designs, but that of Hamilton.
The Earl of Arran, the eldest brother, had never
recovered the Ihock, which he received from the
ill success of his paflioh for the Queen, and had
now altogether loft his reason. Lord John, the fe-
condc brother, Was in poffeffioi of the family estate.
Lord Claud was Commiendator of Paisley; both of
them young men, ambitious, and enterprising.
Morton dreaded their influence in the kingdom; the
courtiers hoped to share their spoils among them
and as all Princes naturally view their successors with
jealousy and hatred, it was easy to infuse these pas-
sions into the mind of the young King. A pre-
tence was at hand tojuftify the moftviolentproceed-
ings. The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth,
did not extend to those who were accessary to the
murder of the Regents Murray or Lennox. Lord
John and his brother were fufpe&ed of being the
authors of both these crimes, and had been includ-

Spotfw. 306.

F X ed

B o o K ed in a general aft of attainder on that account.

VI. Without summoning them to trial, or examining
579Q a tingle witness to prove the charge, this attainder

was now thought sufficient to fubjeEt them to all
the penalties, which they would have incurred by
being formally convicted. The Earls of Morton,
Mar, and Eglinton, together with the Lords Ruth-
ven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a commission
to seize their persons and estates. On a few hours
warning, a considerable body of troops was ready,
and marched towards Hamilton, in hostile array.
Happily, the two brothers made their escape,
though with great difficulty. But their lands were
confiscated; the castles of Hamilton and Draffan
besieged; those who defended them punished.
The Earl of Arran, though incapable, from his
situation, of committing any crime, was involved,
by a shameful abuse of law, in the common ruin of
his family; and as if he, too, could have been
guilty of rebellion, confined a close prisoner. These
proceedings, so contrary to the fundamental prin.
ciples of justice, were all ratified in the subsequent
parliament*.

ABouT this time Mary sent, by Nauce her fecre-

tary, a letter to her son, together with some jewels
of value, and a vest embroidered with her own
hands. But as flie gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was dimnifild, without
being admitted into his presence t.

* Crawf. Mem. 311. Spotfw. 306.
t- Crawf. Mem. 314.

THOUov

THOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti- B o o K

cular reason to fear any attempt of the Popifl Prin- VI.
ces, in Mary's favour, she still continued to guard ,'

1579.

her with the fame anxious care. The acquisition Ncgcia,
of Portugal, on the one hand, and the defence of tinaaf
the Netherlands, on the other, fully employed the b'ltn
councils and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces and the

councl 1 torn in piece Duke of

by intestine commotions, and under a weak and ca- Alt ,n.
pricious Prince, despised and diltrufted by his own
fulbjeis, was in no condition to disturb its neigh-
bours. Elizabeth had lng, mulet that court by
carrying on a treaty of marriage with the Duke of
Aler<un, the King's brother. But whether, at the
age of forty-five, she really intended to marry a
Prince of twenty ? whether the pleasure of being
flattered and courted, made her iiiten to the addref-
fls of so young a lover, whom the allowed to visit
her at two different times, and treated with the molt
distinguishing refpet ? or whether considerations of
intereli, predominated in this, as well as in every
other tranfation of her reign, are problems in his-
tory which we are not concerned to resolve. Dur-
ing the progrels of this negociation, which was
drawn out to an extraordinary length, Mary could
expect no assistance from the French court, and
seems to have held little correspondence with it.
And there was no period in her reign, wherein Eli-
zabeth enjoyed more perfec security.

MORTON seems at this time to have been equal- Two f-

ly secure; but his security was not so well founded. i,",,, r
11e had weathered out one florm, had crushed his ,,'iJ^m.i
adversaries, and was again in pofeffion of the sole

F 3 diretion

B o o K direcion of affairs. But as the King was now of

VI. an age, when the charaeter and dispositions of the
'-7- mind begin to unfold themselves, and to become vi.

fible, the smallest attention to there might have con-
vinced him, that there was reason to expect new
and more dangerous attacks on his power. James
earlydifcovered that excessive attachment to favour-
ices, which accompanied him through his whole
life. This passion, which naturally arises from inex-
perience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far from being culpable; nor could it well be
expected that the choice of the objects, on whom he
placed his aff'edions, should be made with great
ikill. The molt considerable of them, was Efme
Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second
brother of the Earl of Lennox. He was diftin-
guifhed by the title of Lord D'Aubigne, an estate
in France, which descended to him from his ancef-
tors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of
their valour, and services to the French crown. He
spt. t. arrived in Scotland, about this time, on purpose ta

demand the estate and title of Lennox, to which he
pretended a legal right. He was received, at first,
by the King, with the respect due to so near a rela-
tion. The gracefulness of his person, the elegance
of his dress, and his courtly behaviour, made a great
impreflion on James, who, even in his more mature
years, was little able to resist there frivolous charms;
and his affition flowed with its usual rapidity, and
profusion. Within a few days after Stewart's ap-
pearance at court, he was created Lord Aberbro-
thock, soon after Earl, and then Duke of Lennox,
Governorof Dunbarton castle, Captain of the guard,

first

firRf Lord of the bed-chamber, and Lord High B o o K
Chamberlain. At the fame time, and without any VI.
of the envy or emulation which is usual among '
candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, the 579
second son os.Lord Ochiltree, grew into great con-
fidence. But notwithstanding this union, Lennox
and Captain Stewart were persons of very opposite
characters. The former was naturally gentle, hu-
mane, candid; but unacquainted with the itate of
the country, and mifned, or misinformed by those,
whom he trussed; not unworthy to be the compa-
nion of the young King, in his amusements, but
utterly disqualified for acting as a Minifler, in di-
recting his affairs. The latter was remarkable for
all the vices, which render a man formidable to his
country, and a pernicious counsellor to his Prince;
nor did he possess any one virtue, to counterbalance
these vices, unless a dexterity in conducting his own
designs, and an enterprising courage, superior to
the sense of danger, may pass by that name. Un-
restrained by religion, regardless of decency, and un-
dismayed by opposition, he aimed at objects, seem-
ingly unattainable; but under a Prince, void of ex-
perience, and blind to all the defects of those who
had gained his favour, his audacity was successful;
and honours, wealth, and power, were the reward
of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their They la.

whole address to undermine Morton's credit, which eurt"n,,
alone obftruced their full poffefion of power. And Morto's
as Janres had been bred up with an aversion for that

F 4 noble-

B o o K nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain the

V1. authority of a Tutor, than to at with the obfequi-

oufnefs of a minister, they found it no difficult mat-
ter to accomplilh their design. Morton, who could
no longer keep the King shut up within the walls of
oCob. 17. Stirling castle, having called a parliament to meet

at Edinburgh, brought him thither. James made
his entry into the capital, with great solemnity; the
citizens received him with the loudest acclamations
of joy, and with many expensive pageants, accord-
ing to the mode of that age. After a long period
of thirty-feven years, during which, Scotland had
been fubjeted to the delegated power of Regents,
or to the feeble government of a woman, and had
suffered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the in-
folence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to ice
the sceptre once more in the hands of a King. Fond
even of that ihadow of authority, which a Prince of
fifteen could poflefs, the Scots flattered themselves,
that union, order, and tranquillity would now be
restored to the kingdom. James opened the parlia-
ment with extraordinary pomp, but nothing re.
markable pased in it.

THESE demonitrations, however, of the people's

love and attachment to their Sovereign, encouraged
the favourites to continue their insinuations against
Morton; and as the King now resided in the palace
of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his fubjets had ac-
cess, the cabal against the Earl grew daily stronger,
and the intrigue, which occasioned his fall, ripened
gradually.

MOR TQN

MORTON began to be sensible of his danger, and B o o

endeavoured to put a stop to the career of Lennox's Vi.
preferment, by representing him as a formidable ;
enemy to the Reformed Religion, a secret agent in Mortro
favour of Popery, and a known emissary of the todevrn
house of Guise. The clergy, apt to believe every tile"
rumour of this kind, spread the alarm among the
people. But Lennox, either out of complaisance
to his master, or convinced by the arguments of
bmre learned Divines, whom the King appointed to
infruct him in the principles of the Protestant Re-
ligion, publickly renounced the errors of Popery, in
the Church of St. Giles, and declared himself a
member of the Church of Scotland, by fignin i her
Confefflon of Faith. This, though it did not re-
move all suspicions, nor silence some zealous preach-
ers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufation*.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Mor-

ton was preparing to seize the King's peribn, and to
carry him into England. Whether delpair of main-
taining his power, by any other means, hadl driven
lim to make any overture of that kind to thr lFig-
lifl court, or whether it was a calumny, invented
by his adversaries to render him odious, cannot now
be determined with certainty. As he declared at his
death, that such a design had neverenterdi into his
thoughts, the latter ieems to be nolt probable. It
afforded a pretence, however, for reviving the olice
of Lord Chamberlain, which had been for i me
time difuled. That honour was conferred on Len-

* Crawf. Mem.3. Spots. 308.

nox,

B o o K nox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy,

VI. was his deputy; they had under them a band of
1580. Gentlemen, who were appointed constantly to at-

tend the King, and to guard his person *.

Elizabeth MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies
interposes
inhisbe- intended to insinuate, by such unusual precautions
bhalf for the King's safety; and as his last resource, ap-

plied to Elizabeth, whole protection had often flood
him in fiead, in his greareft difficulties. In confe.
quencc of this application, Bowes her Envoy accuf-
ed Lennox of practices against the peace of the two
kingdoms, and insisted, in her name, that he should
instantly be removed from the Privy Council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidered by the
Counsellors, as an affront to the King, and an en-
croachment on the independence of the kingdom.
They affected to call in question the Envoy's powers,
and upon that pretence, refused him farther audi-
ence; and he retiring in disgust, and without taking
leave, Sir Alexander Home was sent to expostulate
with Elizabeth on the subjec. After the treatment
which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought
it below her dignity to admit Home into her pre-
fence. Burleigh, to whom he was commanded to
impart his commiflion, reproached him with his
maIter's ingratitude towards a benefa&refs, who had
placed the Crown on his head, and required him to
advise the King to beware of sacrificing the friend-
ship of so necefary an ally, to the giddy humours
of a young man, without experience, and strongly

* Crawf. Mem. 320.

fwf-

fufpeced of principles, and attachments, incompa- B o o K
tible with the happiness of the Scottifi nation. VI.

1580.
THIS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all pro- Mor5on ac-

cured of the

bability, Morton's fall. The a&t of indemnity, murdr of
which he had obtained when he resigned the Re- tKit
gency, was worded with such scrupulous exaftnefs,
as almost screened him from any legal proiccution.
The murder of the late King was the only crime,
which could not, with decency, be inserted in a par-
don, granted by his son. Here Morton frill lay
open to the penalties ofthe law. And Captain Stew-
art, who shunned no aEtion, however desperate, if
it led to power, or to favour, entered the council-
chamber, while the King and nobles wereaffembled,
and falling on his knees, accused Morton of being Decem 30.
accessary, or according to the language of the Scot-
tifh law, art and part, in the conspiracy againit the
life of his Majesty's father, and offered, under the
usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dence. Morton, who was present, heard this ac-
cufation with firmness; and replied with a disdain-
ful smile, proceeding either from contempt of the
infamous character of his accuser, or from confci.
oufnefs of his own innocence, " that his known
zeal, in punishing those who were suspectcd of that
detestable crime, might well exempt himself from
any suspicion of being accessary to it, nevertheless,
he would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that
place, or in any other court; and doubted not but
his own innocence, and the malice of his enemies,
would then appear in the clearest light." Stewart,
who was still on his knees, began to enquire how

2 he

B o o K he would reconcile his bestowing so many honours

VI. on Archibald Douglas, whom he certainly knew to

be one of the murderers, with his pretended zeal
against that crime. Morton was ready to answer.
But the King commanded both of them to be re-

1 I, 1. moved The Earl was confined, firit of all, to his
Janluy2. own house, and then committed to the castle of

Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erfline was Go-
vernor; and as if it had not been a fuflicient indig-
nity to subjeh him to the power of one of his ene-
I,:;e, he wa., ofon after, carried to Punbarton, of
Jan, is. v. lhici Lennox had the command. A warrant was,

likeiVc.. iflued for apprehending Archibald Dou-
glas; but he, having received timely intelligence of
the approaching danger, fled into England *.

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent

proceedings not to hatred against Morton alone, but
to the ancient enmity between the houtes of Stewart
and of Douglas, and who believed that a conspiracy
was now formed for the deltrution of the whole
name, was ready to take arms in order to rescue his
kinsman. But Morton absolutely sorbad any such
attempt, and declared that he would rather fussier
ten thousand deaths, than bring an imputation on
his own character by seeming to decline a trial t.

Elizabcth's ELIZABETH- did not fail to interpose, with
ord "to" warmth, in behalf of a man, who had contributed so
avehimn. nmuch to preserve her influence over Scotland. The

late tranfadions in that kingdom had given her great
uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquir-

Crawf,Mem. 323. t Johnt. 64. Spotfw. 311.

Cd

ed independent of her was dangerous; the treatment B o o K
her ambassadors had met with,differed greatly from VI.
the refpe6t, with which the Scots were in use to re- 1, '
ceive her Ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an in-
tention to sow the feeds of discord between the two
nations, and to seduce James into a new alliance
with France, or into a marriage with some Popish
Princess. Full of these apprehensions, fle ordered
a considerable body of troops to be assembled on
the borders of Scotland, and dispatched Randolph
as her ambassador into that kingdom. He addressed
himself not only to James, and to his council,
but to a convention ofeftates met at that time. He
began with enumerating the extraordinary benefits
which Elizabeth had conferred on the Scottish na-
tion: That without demanding a tingle foot of
land for herself, without encroaching on the liber-
ties of the kingdom in the smallest article, she had,
at the expence of the blood of her subjects, and the
treasures of her Crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, established among them true
religion, and put them in pofeffion of their an-
cient rights: That from the beginning flhe had pro-
tected those, who espoused the King's cause, and
by her afiftance alone, the Crown had been pre-
served on his head, and all the attempts of the ad-
verse faction baffled: That an union, unknown to
their ancestors, but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had subsisted for a long period of years; and
though so many Popifi Princes had combined to
disturb this happy state of things, her care, and
their conflancy, had hitherto defeated all thete es-

forts:

B o o K forts: That she had observed, of late» an unusual

VI. coldness, diftruff, and estrangement in the Scot.
58-.V tifh Council, which Ihe could impute to none

but to Lennox, a subjet of France, a retainer
to the house of Guise, bred up in the errors of
Popery, and still fulpeted of favouring that fu.
perftition. Not satisfied with having mounted so
fast to an uncommon height of power, which he
exercised with all the rashness of youth, and all the
ignorance of a stranger; nor thinking it enough
to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the autho.
rity, due to his abilities and experience, he had
conspired the ruin of that nobleman, who had often
exposed his life in the King's cause, who had con-
tributed more than any other subje6t to place him
on the throne, to resist the encroachments of Pope-
ry, and to preserve the union between the two king.
doms. If any zeal for religion remained among
the nobles in Scotland, if they wished for the conti-
nuance of amity with England, if they valued the
privileges of their own order, he called upon them,
in the name of his Mistress, to remove such a per-
nicious counsellor as Lennox from the pretence of
the young King, to rescue Morton out of the hands
of his avowed enemy, and secure him to the benefit
of a fair and impartial trial: And if force were net
cefiary towards accomplishing a design so salutary
to the King and kingdom, he promised them the
protection of his Mistress in the enterprise, and
whatever affiltance they ihould demand either of
men or money *.

* Cald. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 62.

BUT

BUT these extraordinary remonstrances, accom- B o o K

panied with such an unusual appeal from the King VI.
to his subjects, were not the only means employed I58
by Elizabeth, in favour of Morton, and against
Lennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
fend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour,
which many of his fubjeEs had displayed in the ser-
vice of the States, to enter into a long detail of the
restless enterprises of the Popish Princes, against the
Froteftant Religion; to beseech him to adhere in-
violably to the alliance with England, the only bar-
rier which secured his kingdom against their dan-
gerous cabals; and above all things, to difiruft the
insinuations of those, who endeavoured to weaken
or to dissolve thatunion between the British nations,
which all the Proteflants in Europe beheld with so
much pleasure *.

JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the de- James de-

ftruEtion of their enemy to liften to there remon- proceed l
ftrances. The officious interposition of the Prince gains him.
of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's mef-
'age, and her avowed attempt to excite fubjets to
rebel against their Sovereign, were confidered as un-
exampled insults on the majefly and independence
us a crowned head. A general and evasive answer
was given to Randolph. James prepared to aflert
his own dignity with Ipirit. All those fufpeded of
favouring Morton were turned out of office, tbme
of them were required to surrender themselves pri-
foners; the sensible men throughout the kingdom

a Cald. iii, 9.

cWre

B o o K were commanded to take arms; and troops were

VI. levied, and polled, on the borders. The Englilh
581. ambassador, finding that neither the public mani-
x581.

fello which he had delivered to the Convention, nor
his private cabals with the nobles could excite them
to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scotland,
where libels against him had been daily published,
and even attempts made upon his life. In both
kingdoms every thing wore an hollile aspet. But
Elizabeth, though she wished to have intimidated
the Scottish King by her preparations, had no incli.
nation to enter into a war with him, and the troops
on the borders, which had given such umbrage,
were soon dispersed *.

THIE greater solicitude Elizabeth di.scovered for

Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his enemies
drive on their schemes for his deftruaion. Captain
Stewart, his accuser, was first appointed Tutor to the
Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and
estate of his unhappy ward, to which he advanced
some frivolous claim, were conferred upon him.
The new-made Peer was commanded to conduc
MIorton fiom Dunbarton to Edinburgh; and, by
that choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate
he might expect, but had the cruel mortification of
feeing his deadly enemy already loaded with ho-
nours, in reward of the malice with which he had
contributed to his ruin.

Heistried TiHE records of the court of Yufticiary at this pe-
dan°d . riod are lol. The account which our historians

Crawf.Mcm. 332. Strype, ii App. 138.

give

give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfac. B o o K
tory. The whole proceedings seem to have been VI.
violent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in order 158i.
to extort evidence, tortured several of the Earls do-
meftics with unusual cruelty. During the trial,
great bodies of armed men were drawn up in diffe-
rent parts of the city. The jury was composed of
the Earl's known enemies; and though he challeng-
ed several of them, his objeAions were over-ruled.
After a short consultation, his Peers found him
guilty of concealing, and of being art and part in
the conspiracy against the life of the late King.
The first part of the verdit did not surprise him,
but he twice repeated the words art andpart with
tome vehemence, and added, ' God knows it is not
so." The doom, which the law decrees against a
Traitor, was pronounced. The King, however,
remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the fen-
tence, and appointed that he flould susser death
next day, by being beheaded .

DURING that awful interval, Morton possessed His death.

the utmost composure of mind. He fupped cheer-
fully; slept a part of the night in his usual manner,
and employed the reft of his time in religious con-
ferences, and in ads of devotion, with some Mini-
fters of the city. The Clergymen who attended
him, dealt freely with his conscience, and pressed
his crimes home upon him. What he contfffed
with regard to the crime for which lie suffered is re-
markable, and supplies, in some measure, the im-

* Spotfw. 314. Johnft, 65. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald. iii 45.
VOL. II. G per-

B o o K perfecion of our records. He acknowledged, that

Vt. on his return from England after the death of Ri-
L 8I. zio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy

against the King, which the Queen, as he told him,
knew of and approved that he folkited him to
concur in the execution of it, which, at that time,
he absolutely declined; that, soon after, Bothwell
himself, and Archibald Douglas, in his name, re-
newing their solicitations to the fame purpose, hehad
required a warrant, under the Queen's hand, autho.
riling the attempt, and as that had never been pro.
duced, he had refused to be any farther concerned
in the matter. " But, continued he, as I neither
" consented to this treasonable a&t, nor aflifted in
"the committing of it, so it was impossible for me
"to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I
" make the discovery ? The Queen was the author
" of the enterprise. Darnly was such a changeling,

that no secret could be safely communicated to
' him. Huntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief

f' sway in the kingdom, were themselves the per-

' petrators of the crime." These circumstances,
it muff be confessed, go tome length towards exte-
nuating Morton's guilt; and though his apology
for the favour he had shewn to Archibald Douglas,
whom he knew to be one of the conspirators, be far
less fatisfaftory, no uneaiy' refletions teem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account*. When
his keepers told him that the guards were attending,
and all things in readiness, " I praii my God, said
C' he, I am ready likewise." Arran commanded
there guards; and even in those moments, when

Crawf. Mem. App. iii.

~~~~6 ~~-the

the most implacable hatred is apt to relent, the mta- B a o
lice of his enemies could not forbear this infuil. VL
On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm; his coun-

.58:x.

tenance and voice unaltered; and after some timq
spent in devotion, he suffered death with the intre-
pidity which became the name of Douglas. His
head was placed on the public gaol of Edinburgh;
and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold,
covered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by corn.
mon porters to the usual burial place of criminals.
None of his friends durst accompany it to the
grave, or discover their gratitude and refp¢c; by
any symptoms of sorrow *.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than Odious con

audacious in his public condu&t, soon afterdrew the A,,n.
attention of his countrymen, by his infamous mar-
riage with the Countess of March. Before he grew
into favour at court, he had been often entertained
in her husband's house, and without regarding the
laws of hospitality or of gratitude, carried on a cri.
minal intrigue with the wife of his benefa6or, a
woman young and beautiful, but according to the
description of a cotemporary Historian, " intole-
rable in all the imperfeEtions incident to her sex."
Impatient of any restraint upon theirmutual desires,
they, with equal ardour, wished to avow their union
publickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the
offspring of their unlawful paflion. The Countess
petitioned to be divorced from her husband, fora rca-
son, which no modest woman will ever plead. The

Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotfw. 314.

G 2 judges,

B o o K judges, over-awed by Arran, passed fenencewithout

VI. delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a
in marriage, solemnized with greatpomp, and beheld
July 6. by all ranks of men with the utmost horror *.
Oaob.24. A PARLIAMENT was held this year, attheopening

of which tome disputes arose between Arran and the
Earl now created Duke of Lennox. Arran, haugh-
ty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's ambition,
began to asset an equality with the Duke, under
whose protection he had hitherto been contented to
place hin;fe]f. After various attempts to form a
party in the council againfl Lennox, he found him
fixed so firmly in the King's affsetions, that it was
impossible to fliake him, and rather than lose all in-
terest at court, from which lie was banished, he
made the most humble iubmifions to the favourite,
and again recovered his former credit. This rup-
ture contributed, however, to render the Duke still
more odious to the nation. During the continu-
ance of it, Arran asseted to court the clergy, pre-
tended an extraordinary zeal for the Protettant Re-
ligion, and laboured to confirm the suSpicions, which
were entertained of his rival, as an emissary of the
house of GuitI, and a favourer of Popery. As he
was fuppoled to be acquainted with the Duke's molt
secret deligns, his calumnies were liltened to with
more credit, than w'as due to his character. To
the fame catufe, we muil ascribe leveral ats of par-
.iament uncommonly flavourable totheChurch, par-
ticularly one, which aboli(ied the practice, intro.

' potfw. j i7.

duced

duced by Morton, of appointing but one minifler B o o K
to several parishes. VI.

1581.

No notice hath been taken forfeveral years of Ec- Ecciefiafi.

clefialtical affairs. While the civil government un- cal affi"s.
derwent so many extraordinary revolutions, the
Church was not free from convulsions. Two ob-
jects, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy.
The one was the forming a system of discipline, or
Ecclefiatical polity. After longlabour, and many
difficulties, this was at last brought to some degree
of perfection. The Assembly solemnly approved
of it, and appointed it to be laid before the Privy
Council, in order to obtain the ratification of it in
Parliament. But Morton, during his adminiftra-
tion, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into
execution; and by darting difficulties, and throw-
ing in objections, prevented it from receiving a le-
gal fantion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The Bifflops were
so devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
promotion, that the function itself was by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed
a fiat in Parliament, and distinguished by titles of
honour, these not only occasioned many avocations
from their spiritual employments, but loon render-
ed their character and manners extremely different
from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles
viewed their power withjealoufy; the populace con-
fidered their lives as profane; and both wilhed their
downfal with equal ardour. The personal emula-
tion between Melvil and Adamson, a man of learn.

G3 ing,

B o o K iRn, 'and eminent for his popular eloquence, who

VI was promoted on the death of Douglas, to be
"-. Archbishop of St. Andrew's, mingled itself with the

pafions on each fide, and heightened them. At-
tacks were made, in every aflembly, on the order
of Bishops; their privileges were gradually circum-
fcribed; and at last an aft was passed, declaring the
office of Bishop, as it was then exercised within the
realm, to have neither foundation nor warrant in
the word of God; and requiring, under'pain of
excommunication, all who now possessed that of-
fice, instantly to resign it, and to abstain from
preaching or administering the sacraments, till they
should receive permillion from the Assembly. The
court did not acquiesce in this decree. A vacancy
happenirg, soon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Mont-
gonery Minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickle,
presumptuous, and more apt, by the blemishes in
his characer, to have alienated the people'from an
order already beloved, than to reconcile them to
one which was the object of their hatred, struck up
an infamous bargain with Lennox, and on his re-
com mendation was chosen Archbishop. The Pref-
bytery of Stirling of which he was a member, the
presbytery of Glasgow whither he was to be tranf-
)ated, the General Assembly, vied with each other
1582. in profeciting him on that account. In order to

screen Montgonmery, James made trial:both of gen-
tle and of rigorous measures, and both were equally
ineffecual. The General Affemrbly was just ready
to pronounce against him the fenrence of excom-
munication, when an HeraM entered and com-
mfanded them, in theKing's-natn-e, and Junder pain

of rebellion, to flop further proceedings. Even B o o a
this injuntion they despised. And thoughMont- VI.
gomery, by his tears, and teeming penitence, pro.- 52
cured a short respite, the sentence was at last issued
by their appointment, and published in all the
churches throughout the kingdom.

THE firmness of the Clergy in a colle&ive body,

was not greater than the boldness of some indivi-
duals, particularly of the Ministers of Edinburgh.
They inveighed daily against the corruptions in the
adminifiration, and, with the freedom of speech
admitted into the pulpit in that age, named Len-
nox and Arran as the chief authors of the grie-
vances, under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained
to the King of the insolent and seditious spirit of
the Clergy. In order to check the boldness of their
discourses, James issued a proclamation, command-
ing Dury, oneof the most popular Ministers, not
only to leave the town, but to abstain from preach-
ing in any other place. Dury complained to the
judicatories of the Church, of this encroachment
upon the immunities of his office. They approved
of the docrine which he had delivered; and he
determined to disregard the royal proclamation.
Butthe magistrates being determined tocompel him
to leave She city, according to the King's orders,
he was obliged to abandon his charge, after pro-
testing publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, againfl
the violence, which was put upon him. The people
accompanied him to the gates, with tears and la-
mentations; and the Clergy denounced ethe ven-

G 4 geance

B o o K geance of Heaven against the authors of this out.

VI. rage*.
158z.

IN this perilous situation stood the Church; the

authority of its judicatories called in question, and
the liberty of the pulpit restrained, when a sudden
revolution of the civil government procured them
unexpcted relief.

His (rvour- THE two favourites, by their ascendant over the
th Kinein King, possessed uncontrouled power in the king-
unppu'r dom, and exercised it with the utmost wantonness.

James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the
feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended
by such company, and employed in such amuse.
ments, as did not suit his dignity. The services of
those, who had contributed most to place the Crown
on his head, were but little remembered. Many
who had opposed him with the greatest virulence,
enjoyel tle rewards and honours,. to which the
others were entitled Exalted notions of regal-pre-
rogative, utterly inconliftent with the constitution
of Scori.and, being initill.d by his favourites into
the mind of the young Monarch, unfortunately
made, at that early age, a deep impression there,
and became the source of almost all his subsequent
errors in the government of both kingdomst-.
Courts of justice were held in almof every county,
the proprietors of land were called before them,
and upon the flightef: neglect of any of the nume-
rous forms, which are peculiar to feudal holdings,

Cald. Acrmb. 15/6--i1°O . Spotyv,. 277, &c.
- Cald. iii. 15z.

they

they were fined with unusual and intolerable rigour. B o o K
The Lord Chamberlain revived the obsolete jurif- VI.
dition of his office over the Boroughs, and they 8
were fubjeaed to exations no less grievous. A de-
sign seemed, likewise, to have been formed to ex-
afperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with
her, which all good ProteRants esteemed the chief
Ifcurity of their religion in Scotland. A close cor-
refpondence was set on foot between the King and
his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty of
association, as Maitland had projeEted; which could
not fail of endangering or diminishing his authority,
and mufft have proved fatal to those, who had acted
against her with greatest vigour *.

ALL these circumstances irritated the impatient The nobls
spirit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to tole- cfpi"

against

rate no longer the insolence of the two minions, or tile.
to sand by, while their presumption and inexperi-
ence ruined both the King and kingdom. Eliza-
beth, who, during the administration of the four
Regents, had the entire direEtion of the affairs of
Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence in
that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and
was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue the
King out of the hands of favourites, who were
leading him into measures, so repugnant to all her
views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord
Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord
Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the
Matter of Oliphant, with several Barons and gen-

e Cald. iii. 157.

tlemec

B o o K tlemen of diftin5tion, entered into a combinttion

VI. for that purpo,; and as changes in admanifAration,
15s' which among ?olelhed nations, are brough about

slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue, were
in that rude age effected suddenly and by violence,
the King's Situation, and the Security of the favour-
ites, encouraged the conspirators to have inmediate
recourse to force.

eize the JAMES, after having resided for some time in
foispn r Athol, where he enjoyed his favourite amukment
Ruthven, of hunting, was now returning towards Edinburgh,

with a small train. He was invited to Ruthven.
castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpe&ted
no danger, he went thither in hopes of farther sport.
Augufn 2. The multitude of strangers whom he found there

gave him some uneasiness; and as those who were
in the 1ecret arrived every moment from different
parts, the appearance of so many new faces in-
creased his fears. He concealed his uneasiness,
however, with the utmost care; and next morning
prepared for the field, expecing to find there iomne
opportunity of making his .escape. But jut as 'he
was 'ready to depart, the Nobles entered his bed-
*chamberin abody, and presented a memorial against
the illegal and oppressive ations of 'his two favour-
ites, 'whom they represented as molf dangerous ene-
mies to the religion and liberties 'of the nation.
James, though he received this remonstrance with
.the complaisance which -was neceflary.in.his prcfent
'situation, was extremely inpatientto-be gone, ibut
as he approached the door of his apartment, the
Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him. The King

comr

conmplained, expoftulated, threatened, and finding B o o i
all there without eftea, burst into tears; "No mat- VI.
ter, said Glamis fiercely, better children weep than .u~'2
bearded men." Tht fe words made a deep impref- 158
sion on the King's mind, and were never forgotten.
The conspirators, without regarding his tears or
indignation, dismissed such of his followers as they
fufpeted; allowed none but their own party to
have access to him; and though they treated him
with great refpeó&, guarded his person with the ut.
most care. This enterprise is usually called, by our
historians, Tshe raid of Ruthven *.

LENNOX and Arran were astonished to the last Commit

Arran to

degree at an event so unexpeced, and so fatal to prison.
their power. The former endeavoured, but with-
out success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms in order to rescue their Sovereign from
captivity. The latter, with his usual impetuosity,
mounted on horseback the moment he heard what
had befallen the King, and with a few followers,
rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable
body of the conspirators, under the command of
the Earl of Mar, lay in his way ready to oppose
him, he separated himself from his companions,
and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
cafle. At the fight of a man so odious to his
country, the indignation of the conspirators rose,
and instant death mufl have been the punishment of
his rashness, if the friendflip of Gowrie, or orme
other cause not explained by our historians, had not
saved a life, so pernicious to the kingdom. He

Cald. iii. 134. Spotfw. 320. Melv. 357.

wAs

B o o K was confined, however, to the castle of Stirling,

VI. without being admitted into the King's presence.

cj502a2 p THE King, though really the prisoner of his own
Comrnmand
Lennox to subje&s, with whose conduct he could not help dif.
kingdom. covering many symptoms of disgust, was obliged to

publish a proclmation, signifying his approbation
of their enterprise, declaring that himself was at
full liberty, without any restraint or violence offered
to his person; and forbidding any attempt againlt
those concerned in the Raidof Rutbven, underpre-
tence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
Augul ss. fame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scot-

land before the 2oth of September*.

71ie con- SOON after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arriv-
fpirators ed as abaffadors from Elizabeth. The pretext
counte-
nanced by of their ei-tbaffy was to inquire after the King's

:izabc.h.

safety; to encourage and countenance the confpi-
ratcrs was the real motive of it. By their inter-
cesion, the Earl of Angus, who ever since the
death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile, ob-
tained leave to return. And the accefion of a no-
bleman so powerful and lb popular strengthened
the faction t.

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had

procured him many friends, and who received pri-
vate assurances that the King's favour towards him
was in no degree abated, seemed resolved, at first,
to pay no regard to a command, extorted by vio-
lence, and no less difigreeable to James, than it was

Cald. iii. 135 1389. t Cald. iii. 152.

rigor.

rigorous with regard to himself. But the power of B o o K
his enemies, who were matters of the King's per- VI.
son, who were secretly supported by Elizabeth, and ' '

J582.

openly applauded by the Clergy, deterred him from
an enterprise, the success of which vas dubious,
and the danger certain, both to himself, and to his
Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure,
however, by various artifices, in expectation either
that James might make his escape from the confpi-
rators, or that fortune might present some more
favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

ON the other hand, the conspirators were ex- Theircon-

tremely solicitous not only to secure the approbation du aPb-
of their countrymen, but to obtain some legal fanc- bl Atnd
tion of their enterprise. For this purpose, they pub- Conventio

of eftatas.

liifhed a long declaration, containing the motives,
which had induced them to venture on such an ir-
regular ftep, and endeavoured to heighten the pub-
lic indignation against the favourites, by represent-
ing, in the strongest colours, their inexperience and
insolence, theircontempt of the nobles, their vio-
lation of the privileges of the Church, and their
oppression of the people. They obliged the King,
who could not with fafcty refute any of their de-
mands, to grant them a remission in the most am-
ple form; and not satisfied with that, they applied
to the Assembly of the Church, and easily procur- oe
ed an ac, declaring, " that they had done good
and acceptable service to God, to their Sovereign,
and to their native country ;" and requiring all fin-
cere Protestants to concur with them in carrying
forward such a laudable enterprise. In order to add

the

B o o K the greater weight to this a&, every Minifler was

VI. enjoined to read it, in his own pulpit, and to infliA
-'- -the Censures of the Church on those who fee them-

selves in opposition to so good a cause. A Conven.
tion of estates assembled a few days after, passed
an a& to the fame effect, and granted full indemnity
to the conspirators for every thing they had done *.

Lennox' JAMES was conducted by them, firRf to Stirling,
departure
from Scot- and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe;
lan'd and though he was received every where with the

external marks of respect due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under
a restraint no less strict, than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lennox,
after eluding many commands to depart out of the
kingdom, was at lafl obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for tome time in the neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had still intended
to make one effort towards restoring the King to
liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own
disposition, averse to bloodshed and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause, unknown
to us, he abandoned the design, and set out for
Dec. 30. France, by the way of England. The King ifrued

the order for his departure, with no less reluctance
than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a
reparation, which neither of them had power to
prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguish of his mind,
threw him into a fever. In his last moments he
discovered fuchl a firm adherence to the Protestant

Cald. iii. 177. 187. zoo. Spotfw. 322.

faith,

faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im- B o o K
putation of an attachment to Popery, with which VI.
he had been uncharitably loaded inScotland*. As X-58-
hewas the earliest, and belt beloved, he was, per-
haps, the most deserving, though not the most able
of all James's favourites. The warmth and tender-
ness of his Master's affecion for him was not
abated by death itself. By many ats of kindness
and generosity towards his posterity, the King not
only did great honour to the memory of Lennox,
but set his own character in one of the moit favour-
able points of view.

THE success of the'confpiracy, which deprived Mary's

anxiety ao
James of liberty, made great noise over all Europe; bout her

son

and at last reached the ears of Mary in the prison
to which the was confined. As her own experience
had taught her what injuries a captive Prince is ex-
posed to susser; and as many of those, who were
now concerned in the enterprise against her son,
were the fame persons whom the confidered as the
chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natu-
ral for the tenderness of a mother to apprehend that
the fame calamities were ready to fall on his head;
and such a profpeet did not fail of adding to the
distress and horror of her own situation. In the
anguish of her heart, she wrote to Elizabeth, com-
plaining in the bitterest terms of the unprecedented
rigour, with which she herself had been treated,
and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the
mercy of his rebellious subje&s; nor permit him to
be involved in the fame misfortunes, under which

Spotfw. 324.

she

B o o K Ihe had so long groaned. The peculiar vigour and

VI. acrimony of style, for which this letter is remark.
5'8' able, discover both the high spirit of the Scottilh

Queen, unfubdued by her sufferings, and the vio.
lence of her indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and
severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the end Ihe
had in view, and accordingly it neither procured
any mitigation of the rigour of her own confine-
ment, nor any interposition in favour of the King *.

r583. HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated

Ambaffa- the Princes of Guise, was often obliged to court
dors arrive
from their favour, interposed with warmth, in order to
France and
England. extricate James out of the hands of a party so in-

tirely devcted to the English interest. He com-
manded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambassador at
the court of England, to repair to Edinburgh, and
to contribute his utmost endeavours towards placing
James in a situation, more suitable to his dignity.
As Elizabeth could nor, with decency, refuse him
liberty to execute this commission, Ihe appointed
Davison to attend him into Scotland as her Envoy,
under colour of concurring with him in the nego-
ciation, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions,
and to obftrut his fucccfs. James, whole title to
the Crown had not hitherto been recognised by any
of the Princes on the continent, was extremely fond
of such an honourable embassy from the French
Monarch; and, on that account, as well as for the
fake of the errand on which he came, received Fe-
nelon with great refpe&. The nobles, in whose
power the King was, did not relish this interposition

* Camnd. 489.

of

of the French court, which had long loft its anci- B o o K
ent influence over the affairs of Scotland. The VI.
Clergy were alarmed at the danger to which reli- 8,-
gion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise 5
lhould recover any ascendant over the public coun-
cils. And though the King tried every method for
restraining them within the bounds of decency, they
declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise, against the Ambassador, against
entering into any alliance with such notorious per-
fecutors of the Church of God, with a vehemence,
which no regular government would now tolerate,
but which was then extremely common. The Am-
baffador, watched by Davison, distrusted by the
nobles, and exposed to the insults of the Clergy,
and of the people, returned into England without
procuring any change in the King's situation, or re-
ceiving any answer to a proposal which he made,
that the government should be carried on in the
joint names of James, and the Queen his mother*.

MEANWHILE, James, though he dissembled with Jameses-

capes out of

great art, became every day more uneasy under his ih, hnds,
confinement; his uneasiness rendered him continu- ,f theon
ally attentive to find out a proper opportunity for
making his escape; and to this attention, he at last
owed his liberty, which the King of France was
not able, nor the Queen of England willing to pro-
cure for him. As the conspirators had forced
Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a
distance from court, they grew secure; and ima-
gining that time had reconciled the King to tlim,

*Cald. iii. 207. Spotfw3. e34. Appendix, No. VIII.
VOL. II. H and

B oo K and to his situation, they watched him with little

VI. care. Some occasions of discord had arisen among
583. themselves; and theFrench Ambaflador, by foment-

ing these, during the time of his residence in Scot-
land, had weakened the union, in which alone their
safety consisted *. Colonel William Stewart, the
commander of the band of gentlemen, who guard.
ed the King's person, being gained by James, had
the principal merit in the scheme for restoring his
June 27. master to liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit

to the Earl of March his grand uncle, James was
permitted to go from Falkland to St. Andrew's.
That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged
at first, in an open defenceless house in the town,
but pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner
was he entered with some of his attendants whom
he could truss, than Colonel Stewart commanded
the gates to be shut, and excluded all the reft of
his train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll,
Huntly, Crawford, Montrose, Rothes, with others
to whom the secret had been communicated, entered
the town with their followers; and though Mar,
with several of the leaders of the faction, appeared
in arms, they found themselves so far out-number.
ed, that it was in vain to think of recovering pof.
session of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James
was naturally of so soft and dudile a temper, that
those who were near his person, commonly made a
deep impression on his heart, which was formed to
be under the sway of favourites. As he remained
implacable and unreconciled to the conspirators,

Camd. 432.

during

during so long a time, and at a period of life when B o o K
resentments are rather violent than lasting, they VI.
must either have improved the opportunities of in- 158
finuating themselves intofavour with little dexterity,
or the indignation, with which this first insult to his
person and authority filled him, must have been
very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and exceflive. RefoIves,

He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James thoIer
Melvil, and his wisest counsellors, to at with the thed with
utmost moderation. Having called, into his pre-tion.
fence, the leaders of both faCions, the neighbour-
ing gentry, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs,
the Ministers, and the heads of colleges, he de-
clared, that although he had been held under re-
firaint for Come time by violence, he would not im-
pute that as a crime to any man, but without re-
membering the irregularities, which had been so
frequent during his minority, would pass a general
al of oblivion, and govern all his fubjets with un-
diftinguilfing and equal affedion. And as an evi-
dence of his sincerity, he visited the Earl of Gow-
rie at Ruthven-caftle, and granted him a full par-
don of any guilt he had contracted, by the crime
committed in that very place.*.

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent But Arra

t regains hh

and moderate plan. His former favourite, the arccndat
Earl of Arran, had been permitted for some time o
to reside at Kinneil, one of his country feats. As
soon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for

Mclv. 272.

H 2 him

B o o t him began to revive, and he exprefied a strong desire

Vl. to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed the re-
15833 turn of a minion, whose insolent and overbearing

temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detested
his crimes. James, however, continued his impor.
tunity, and promising that he should continue with
him no longer than one day, they were obliged to
yield. This interview rekindled ancient affeation;
the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his
ascendant over him; and within a few days resumed
the exercise of power, with all the arrogance of an
undeferving favourite, and all the rashness peculiar
to himself*.

And the THE first effec of his influence was a proclama.
King pur-
sues aPo- tion with regard to those concerned in the Raid of
thcr plan. Ruthven. They were required to acknowledge

their crime in the humblest manner; and the King
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided
their future conduct were such, as did not oblige
him to remember pait miscarriages. The tenour of
this proclamation was extremely different from the
aft of oblivion, which the conspirators had been
encouraged to expect. Nor did any of them reckon
it safe to rely on a promise, clogged with such an
equivocalcondition, and granted by a young Prince,
under the dominion of a minister, void of faith,
regardless of decency, and transported by the de-
fire of revenge, even beyond the usual ferocity of
his temper. Many of the leaders, who had at first
appeared openly at court, retired to their own houses;
and foreseeing the dangerous itorm which was ga-

Melv. 274.

thering,

thering, began to look out for a retreat in foreign B o o K
countries *, VI.

1583.

ELIZABETH, who had all along protected the Elizabeth's

conspirators, was extremely disgusted with measures ions in be.
which tended so visibly to their deftrucion, and hbaloofthe
wrote to the King a harsh and haughty letter, trs

,..0 ' *Augus 7.

reproaching him in a style, very uncommon among
Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to
court, and with imprudence in proceeding so rigor-
oufly against his befft and most faithful fubjcEts.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that pro-
mises extorted by violence, and conditions yielded
out of fear, were no longer binding, when these
were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chufe what ministers he would employ in his ser-
vice; and that though he resolved to treat the con-
fpirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency, it
was necessary, for the support of his authority, that
such an insult on his person should not pass altoge-
ther uncenfured t,

ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by Wal- Sept. .

.alsing-

fingham her secretary, whom she appointed her.am- ham's em.
baffador to James, and who appeared at the Scot- scotland
tifh court, with a splendour and magnificence, well
calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince.
Walingham was admitted to several conferences
with James himself, in which he insisted on the
fame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former answers.

* Melv. 278. Spotfw. 326. Cald. iii. i3o.
' Mclv. z79.

F 3 AFTER

B o o K AFTER suffering, fevera} indignities, from the ay-

vI. rogance of Arran and his creatures, he returned
1583 to England, without concluding any new treaty

with the Kiing. Walsingham wass next to Bur-
leigh, the Minister on whom the chief weight of
the English administration refted; and when a per.
son of his rank, ftept so far out of the ordinary
road of business, as to undertake a longjourney, in
his old age, and under a declining state of health,
some affair of consequence was supposed to be the
cause, or some important event was expeced to be
the effect of this measure. But as nothing confpi.
cuous either occasioned, or followed this embassy,
it is probable that Elizabeth had no other intention
in employing this sagacious Minister, than to dif-
cover, with exaftnefs, the capacity and disposition
of the Scottish King, who was now arrived at a
time of life, when, with some degree of certainty,
conjectures might be formed concerning his charac-
ter, and future conduc. As Jam'cs pofflcfed ta-
lents of that kind, which make a better figure in
conversation, than in action, he gained a great deal
by this interview with the Fnglilh secretary, who,
notwithstanding the cold reception he met wi:h,
gave such an advantageous representation of his abi-
lities, as determined Fsliabeth to treat him, hence-
forward, with more decency and refpet *.

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to proteAt the conspirators

rendered James more violent in his proceedings
against them. As they had all refused to accept of
pardon, upon the terms which he had offered, they

Melv. 293. Cald. iii. 258. Jcbb, ii. 536.

were

were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender B o o K
themselves prisoners, The Earl of Angus alone VI.
complied; the reft either fled into England, or ob- '- 3
tained the King's licence to retire into foreign parts.
A Convention of estates was held, the members ofDecem. '7.
which, deceived by an unworthy artifice ofArran's,
declared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven,
to have been guilty of high treason; appointed the
a& passed last year approving of their conduct, to
be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with
the utmost rigour of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done
any thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age.
among mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled
slate of government, must be acknowledged to have
been guilty of an act of treason against their Sove-
reign; and James, who confidered their conduct in
this light, had good reason to boast of his clemency,
when he offered to pardon them, upon their consef-
sing their crime. But, on the other hand, it muff
be allowed that, after the King's voluntary promise
of a general oblivion, they had some reason to
complain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
out the most unpardonable imprudence, have puc
their lives in Arran's power.

THE interest of the Church was considerably as. 1584.
fested by there contrary revolutions. While the The Clergy

·tergy favour dl,'

confpiiators kept poffeflion of power, the Clergy con^fira.
not only recovered, but extended their privileges. ir,"'at',
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be Ki,

H 4 un-

B o o K unlawful, they took some bold meaftires towards ex.

VI. terminating the Episcopal order out of the Church;

and it was owing more to Adamson's dexterity in
perplexing and lengthening out the process for that
purpose, than to their own want of zeal, that they
did not deprive, and perhaps excommunicate all the
Bishops in Scotland. When the King recovered
his liberty, things put on a very different aspel.
The favour be flowed upon Arran, the enemy of every
thing decent and sacred, and the rigorous profecu-
tion of those nobles, who had been the most zeal-
ous defenders of the Protestant cause, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of
the Church. The Clergy could not conceal their
apprehensions, nor view this impending danger in
silence. Drury, who had been restored to his of-
fice as one of the Ministers of-Edinburgh, openly
applauded the Raid of Ruthven in the pulpit, at
which the King was so enraged, that, notwithftand.
ing some symptoms of his submission, he command-
ed him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. An.
drew Melvil, being summoned before the Privy
,Council to answer for the doctrine he had uttered in
A.fermon at St. Andrew's, and accused of compar-
ing the present grievances of the nation with those
under James III. and of intimating obliquely that
they ought to be redressed in the fame manner,
thought it incumbent on him to behave with greater
firmness. He declined thejurifdiction of a Civil
court, in a cause which he maintained to be purely
Ecclesiastical; the Presbytery of which he was a
member had, as he contended, the sole right to call
him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and

neither

neither the King nor council couldjudge, in the first B o o X
instance, of the doctrine delivered by Preachers, VI.
without violating the immunities of the Church. 584.
This exemption from civiljurifdidion was a privi-
lege, which the Popiih Ecclesiastics, admirable
judges of whatever contributed to increase the
lustre or power of their body, had long firuggled
for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergy would
have become independent on the civil Magistrate;
and an order of men extremely useful to society
while they inculcate those duties which tend to pro-
mote its happiness and tranquillity, might have be-
come no less pernicious by teaching, without fear or
controul, the most dangerous principles, or by ex.
citing their hearers to the most desperate and lawless
actions. The King,jealous to excess of his prero-
gative, was alarmed at this daring encroachment on
it; and as Melvil, by his learning and zeal, had
acquired the reputation and authority of head of
the party, he resolved to punish him with the ri-
gour, which that pre-eminence rendered necessary,
and to discourage, by a timely severity, the revival
of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoided his rage, by flying into England; and the
pulpits resounded with complaints that the King
had extinguished the light of learning in the king-
dom, and deprived the Church of the ablest and most
faithful guardian of its liberties and discipline*.

TH ESE violent declamations of the Clergy, againfi
tle measures of the court, were extremely accept-

Spotfw. 330. Cald.iii. 3o4.

able

B o o K able tothe people, The conspirators, though dri.

VLn ven out of the kingdom; fti pnfftffed grearinfl-.

~ ence there; and as they had every thing to fear

from the refemment of a young prince, irritated by
the furious counsels of Arran, they never ceased
soliciting their adherents to take arms in their de-
fence. Gowrie, the only person among them who
had submitted to the King, and accepted of a par-
don, soon repented of a flep, which loft him the
esteem of one party, without gaining the confidence
of the other; and, after suffering many mortifica-
tions from the King's negle&t, and the haughtiness
of Arran, he was at last commanded to leave Scot-
land, and to reside in France. While he waited at
Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was in-
formed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the
Tutor of Glamis, had concerted a scheme for fur-
prifing the castle of Stirling. In his situation, lit-
tle persuasion was necessary to draw him to engage
in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage,
and lay ready to take arms on the day fixed, by
the conspirators, for the execution of their enter-
prise. His lingering so long at Dundee, without
any apparent reason, awakened thefufpicion of the
court, proved f.atalto himself, and disappointed the
success of the conspiracy. Colonel William Stew-
art surrounded the house where he lodged with a
body of soldiers, and in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and
Glamis, seized the cafile of Stirling, and erecting
their flandard there, published a manifeflo declar-
ing that they took arms for no other reason, but to
remove from the King's pretence, a minion who

l~ ~~~had

had acquired power by the most unworthy a&ions, B o K o
and who exercised it with the most intolerable info- VI.
lence. The account of Gowrie's imprisonment v'- .
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputed it
to treachery on his part, and fufpe&ed that as he
had formerly deserted, he had now betrayed them.
At the fame time, a fum of money, with which
Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being
duly paid, and their friends and vassals coming in
slowly, they appeared irresolute and disheartened;
and as the King, who a&ted with great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men,
they fled precipitately towards England, and with
difficulty made their escape*. This rash and fee-
ble attempt produced such effe&s, as usually follow
disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the
cause, for which it was undertaken, but added
strength and reputation to the King; confirmed Ar-
ran's power; and enabled them to pursue their
mealures with more boldness, and greater success.
Gowrie was the first victim of their resentment.
After a very informal trial, a jury of Peers found
him guilty of treason, and he was publickly be-
headed at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next flep. My 2,.

But as it became necessary, for this purpose, to call mctrhlid.
in the aid of the legislative authority, a i'arliament
was hastily summoned : and while so many of the
nobles were banithed out of the kingdom, or for-
bidden to appear in the King's prelsnce; while Ar-
ran's haughtiness kept tome at a distance, and inti-

Home's Hilt ofHoufe of Dougl. 376. Spetfw. 30o.

midated

B o o K midated others; the meeting confifed only ofthofe,

VI. who were absolutely at the devotion of the court.
5g4. In order to conceal the laws which were framing

sere, laws from the knowledge of the Clergy, the Lords of the
againfl the
Chuch. Articles were sworn to secrecy; and when some of

the Ministers, who either suspected, or were inform-
ed of the danger, deputed one of their number to
declare their apprehensions to the King, he was
seized at the palace-gate, and carried to a distant
prison. Others, attempting to enter the Parlia.
ment-houfe, were refused admittance*; and such
'May . laws were passed, as totally overturned the confti-

tution and discipline of the Church. Therefufing
to acknowledge the jurifdi&ion of the Privy CQun-
cil; the pretending an exemption from the autho-
rity of the civil courts, the attempting to diminish
the rights and privileges of any of the three estates
in parliament, were declared to be high treason.
The holding assemblies, whether Civil, or Eccle-
fiaftical, without the King's permiflion or appoint-
ment; the uttering, either privately or publickly,
in sermons or in declamations, any false and scan-
dalous reports against the King, his ancestors, or
ministers, were pronounced capital crimes t.

WHEN these laws were publilhed at the cross of

Edinburgh, according to the ancient custom, Mr.
Robert Pont, Minister of St. Cuthbert's, and one
of the Lords of Seflion, solemnly protested against
them, in the name of his brethren, because they
had been passed without the knowledge or content
of the Church. Ever since the Reformation, the

*Cald. iii. 365. - Parl. 8 Jac. VI.

pul-

pulpits and ecclefiafticaljudicatories, had both been B o o K
eteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had VI.
been accuitomed to censure, and admonish, with 158.
unbounded liberty. In the latter, they exercised an
uncontrouled and independant jurisdiction. The
blow was now aimed at both these privileges. These
new statutes were calculated to render churchmen
as inconsiderable as they were indigent; and as the
avarice of the nobles had stripped them of the
wealth, the King's ambition was about to deprive
them of the power which once belonged to their
order. No wonder the alarm was universal, and
the complaints loud. All the Ministers of Edin-
burgh forsook their charge, and fled into England.
The most eminent Clergymen, throughout the
kingdom, imitated their example. Desolation and
astonishment appeared in every part of the Scottish
Church; the people bewailed the loss of Pastors,
whom they esteemed; and full of consternation, at
an event so unexpected, openly expressed their rage
against Arran, and began to suspect the King him-
self to be an enemy to the Reformed Religion .

* Spotfv. 333.

# BOOK VII.

THE
HIS TORY

F
SCOTL AN D.

B O OCK VII.

HILE Scotland was torn by inteltine sac- B 0 o
tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru- VI I.

mour of a project in agitation for setting Mary at a_
liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Cheshire gentle- 1584.

Throgmor-

man, was suspected of being deeply concerned in ton's con-
the design, and on that fulpicion he was taken into fpiracya-
custody. Among his papers were found two lifts, zabcth.
one of the principal harbours in the kingdom, with
an account of their situation, and of the depth of
water in each; the other, of all the eminent Roman
Catholics in England. This circumfiance confirm-
ed the suspicion against him, and some dark and
desperate conspiracy was fuppofedjult ready to break
out. At first he boldly avowed his innocence, and

declared

B o o K declared that the two papers were forged by the

VI. Queen's Ministers, in order to intimidate or insnare
584 him; and he even endured the rack with the utmost

fortitude. But being brought a second time to the
place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he
not only acknowledged that he had held a secret
correspondence with the Queen of Scots, but dif.
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng.
land. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to
furnish troops, and to conduCt the enterprise. The
Pope and King of Spain were to supply the money
necessary for carrying it on; all the English exiles
were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics at
home would be ready to join them, at their landing;
Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador, who was the life
of the conspiracy, spared no pains in fomenting the
spirit of difaffetion among the English, or in has.
tening the preparations on the Continent; and by
his command, he made the two lifts, the copies
whereof had been found in his poffelffion. This con-
session he retracted at his trial; returned to it again,
after sentence was passed upon him; and retracted
it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in form.

ing our opinion of this matter, by the light which
time and history have thrown upon the designs and
characters of the Princes of Guise, many circum-
fiances of Throgmorton's confession appear to be
extremely remote from truth, or even from proba-
bility. The Duke of Guise was, at that juncture,
far from being in a situation to undertake foreign

* Holinglhead, 1370.

con,

conquests. Without either power or office at court B o o K
hated by the King; and persecuted by the favour- VII.
ites, he had no leisure for any thoughts of disturb- 158-.
ing the quiet of neighbouring states; and his vati54
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying
the foundation of that famous league, which shook
the throne of France. But about the time Eliza-
beth detected this conspiracy, the close union be-
tween the house of Guise and Philip was remark-
able to all Europe; and as their great enterprise
againit Henry III. was not yet disclosed, as they
endeavoured to conceal that under their threaten-
ings to invade England, Thrugmorton's discovery
appeared to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth,
who knew how ardently all the parties mentioned
by him wished her downfal, thought that she could
not guard her kingdom with too much care. The Defignsof

Mary's ad.
indiscreet zeal of the English exiles increased her herentsa-

,,gains[ Eli.

fears. Not satisfied with incessant outcries against zabeth.
her severity towards the Scottilh Queen, and her
cruel persecution of her catholic fubjeEs, not think-
ing it enough that one Pope had threatened her
with the sentence of excommunication, and another
had actually pronounced it, they now began to dif-
perse books and writings, in which they endea-
voured to persuade their disciples, that it would be
a meritorious action to take away her life; they
openly exhorted the maids of honour to treat her
as Judith did Holofernes, and by such an illus-
trious deed, to render their own names honourable
and sacred in the Church throughout all future
ages *. For all these reasons, Elizabeth not only

* Camd.497.
VOL. II. I inflicted

B oo K inflied the punishment of a traitor on Throo.
VII. morton, but commanded the Spanish ambassador
L"J instantly to leave England; and that she might be
1584.

in no danger of being attacked within the island,
fihe determined to ule her utmost efforts, in order
to recover that influence over the Scottish councils,
which she had for some time entirely loft.

She endea THERE were three different methods, by which
vours to re-
eflabl:fh her Elizabeth might hope to accomplish this; either by
influence in
Scotland, furnishing such effectual aid to the banilhed nobles,
brgaian.n as would enable them to resume the chief direction

of affairs; or by entering into such a treaty with
Mary, as might intimidate her son, who being now
accustomed to govern, would be apt to agree to
any terms rather than resign the sceptre, or admit
an associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl of
Arran, to secure the direEtion of the King his maf-
ter. The last was not only the easiest and fpeedieft,
but most likely to be successful. This Elizabeth re.
solved to pursue; but without laying the other two
altogether aside. With this view she sent Davison,
one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities
and address, into Scotland. A Minister so venal as
Arran, hated by his own countrymen, and holding
his power by the most precarious of all tenures, the
favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's of-
sers without hesitation, and esteemed the acquifi-
tion of her protection to be the moit solid founda-
tion of his own greatness. Soon after he consented
August 13. to an interview with Lord Hunfdon the Governor

of Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous
title of Lieutenant General for the King, he ap-

peared

peared at the place appointed with a splendid trait. B o b K
In Hunfdon's pretence he renewed his promises of Vlf.
an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English '
interest, and assured him that James should enter
into no negociation, which might tend to interrupt
the peace between the two kingdoms; and as Eli-
zabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jea.
loufies concerning the King's marriage, which had
formerly disquieted her with regard to his mother's,
he undertook to prevent James from liflening to
any overture of that kind, till he had previously
obtained the Queen of England's content *.

THE banilhed Lords and their adherents soon felt Severe pro-

ceedings a-
the effects of Arran's friendihip with England. As gcL'ftth

banifihe4

Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge in her L"o,,d'.
dominions, and several of her Ministers were of opi-
nion that the ought to employ her arms in defence
of their cause, the fear of this was the only thing,
which restrained James and his favourite, from pro-
ceeding to such extremities against them, as might
have excited the pity or indignation of the English,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with
vigour in their behalf. But every apprehension of Auguzz.
this kind being now removed, they ventured to call
a parliament, in which an a6t was passed, attainting
Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of their
followers. Their estates devolved to the Crown, and
according to the pra&ice of the Scottilh Monarchs,
who were obliged to reward the faction which ad-
hered to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the
*Cald. iii. 491 Melv. 3 S. Sec Append, No. IX.

I 2 van-

B o o K vanquiihed, James dealt out the greater part of

VII. these to Arran, and his associates*.

1584.
Against the NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigo-
Clery. rous. All Ministers, readers, and profeflfo of

Colleges were enjoined to subscribe, within forty
days, a paper testifying their approbation of the
laws concerning the Church enacted in last parlia-
ment. Many, overawed or corrupted by the
Court, yielded obedience; others flood out. The
stipends of the latter were sequestered, some of the
more aTive committed to prison, and numbers com-
pelled to fly the kingdom. Those who complied,
fell under the suspicion of acting from mercenary
or ambitious motives. Those who suffered acquir-
ed high reputation, by giving such convincing evi-
dence of their firmness and sincerity. Thejudica-
tories of the Church were almost entirely suppressed.
In some places, scarce as many Ministers remained,
as to perform the duties of religious worship; they
soon fink in reputation among the people, and
being prohibited not only from discoursing of pub-
lic affairs, but obliged, by the jealousy of the ad.
ministration, to frame every sentiment and expref.
sion in such a manner, as to give the court no of-
fence, their sermons were deemed languid, insipid,
and contemptible; and it became the general opi-
nion, that together with the most virtuous of the
nobles, and the molt faithful of the Clergy, the
power and vigour of religion were now banilhed
out of the kingdom t.

* Cald. iii. 527. Ibid. iii. 589.

6 MEANs

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of B o o K

those fruitless negociations with the Queen of Scots, VII.
which it had become almost matter of form to re- .
new every year. They served not only to amuse that
unhappy Princess with some profpeft of liberty;
but furnished an apology for eluding the folicita-
tions of foreign powers in her behalf; and were of
use to overawe James, by shewing him that (he
could, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to
dispute his authority. These treaties she suffered to
proceed to what length she pleased, and never want-
ed a pretence for breaking them off, when they be-
came no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot
was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which
preceded it; the reasons, however, which rendered
it ineffecual were far from being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders Newcon-

towards Scotland, the ship on board of which he ginftt
was a passenger happened to be chased by Pirates, 2zbt.
who, in that age, often infested the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some
papers in his custody, and threw them away; but,
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the ship, and they were immediately
taken up by some of the palTengers, who carried
them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He,
with great industry and patience, joined them toge-
ther, and they were found to contain the account
of a plot said to have been formed by the King of
Spain, and Duke of Guise, for invading England.
The people were not yet recovered from the fear
and anxiety occasioned by the conspiracy, in which

1 3 Throg-

B o o K Throgmorton had been engaged, and as his disco-

VII. veries appeared now to be confirmed by additional
i-- evidence, not only all their former apprehensions

recurred, but the consternation became general and
excessive. As all the dangers, with which England
had been threatened for some years, flowed either
immediately from Mary herself, or from those, who
made use of her name to justify their infurretions
and conspiracies, this gradually diminished the com-
paflion due to her situation, and the Englilh, instead
of pitying, began to fear and to hate her. Eliza.
beth, under whose wife and pacific reign the Eng-
lifh enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened sources of
wealth unknown to their ancestors, was extremely
beloved by all her people; and regard to her safe.
ty, not less than to her own interest, animated

Occafoons them against the Scottish Queen. In order to dif-
an afrocid.
toinop- courage her adherents, it was thought necessary
ri"ry. to convince them, by some public deed, of the

attachment of the Englith to their own Sove-
reign, and that any attempt against her life would
prove fatal to her rival. With this view, an A/o-
oaober 19, ciation was framed, the subscribers of which bound

themfclves by the molt solemn oaths, " to defend
I' the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and
" domestic; and if violence should be offered to

helr life, in order to favour the title of any pre.
' tender to the Crown, they not only engaged ne-
" ver to allow or acknowledge the person or persons

by whom, or for whom, such a detestable aa
' (hould be committed, but vowed, in the presence
of the eternal God, to prosecute such person or
" persons to the death, and to pursue the@, wijh

" their

," their utmost vengeance, to their utter overthrow B o o K
,' and extirpation *." Persons of all ranks sub- VII.
fcribed this combination, with the greatest eager-
ness and unanimity t.

MARY conidered this combination, not only as Which

an avowed design to exclude her from all right of harth.
succession, but as the certain and immediate fore-
runner of her deftruftion. In order to avert this,
she made such feeble efforts as were fill in her pow-
er, and sent Naue her secretary to court, with offers
of more entire resignation to the will of Elizabeth,
in every point, which had been the occasion of their
long enmity, than all her sufferings hitherto had
been able to extort $. But whether Mary adhered
inflexibly to her privileges, as an independent Sove-
reign, or yielding to the necessity of her situation,
endeavoured, by conceflions, to tooth her rival, she
was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was im-
puted to obstinacy, or to the secret hope of foreign
afiiftance; her concefions were either believed to be
insincere, or to flow from the fear of some imminent
danger. Her present willingness, however, to com-
ply with any terms were so great, that Walsingham
warmly urged his mistress to come to a final agree-
ment with her. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that
it was the spirit raised by the association, which had
rendered her so passive and compliant. She always
imagined that there was something mysterious and
deceitful in all Mary's actions, and fufpeted her of
carrying on a dangerous correspondence with the
English Catholics, both within and without the
$ StateTrials, i. 12. t Camd. 499. Camd. ibid.

1 4 kingdom.

B o o K kingdom. Nor were her suspicions altogether void

VII. of foundation. Mary had, about this time, written

84. a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging him to

haften the execution of what she calls the Great
plot or Designment, without hesitating on account
of any danger in which it might involve her life,
which (he would most willingly part with, if, by that
sacrifice, the could procure relief for so great a
number of the opprefled children of the Church *,

Sheis treat Infead, therefore, of hearkening to the overtures
greater i- which the Scottish Queen made, or granting any
gour.

mitigation of the hardships of which she complain.
ed, Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands
of the Earl of Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir
Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury, to be her keep.
ers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trufi with great
fidelity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame time,
had treated Mary with gentleness and respect, and
had always sweetened harsh commands, by the hu-
manity with which he put them in execution. The
fame politeness was not to be expe&ed from men
of an inferior rank, whose severe vigilance, per.
haps, was their chief recommendation to that em-
ployment, and the only merit, by which they could
pretend to gain favour or preferment t.

Gray a new As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive
faore teoae
thc Kng's. the banished Nobles of Elizabeth's protection, he

appointed the Malter of Gray his Ambaflador to
the court of England, and intrusted him with the
condu& of a negociation for that purpose. An ho-

* Strype, iii. 246. t Camd. 500.

nour

nour for which he was indebted to the envy andjea- B o o K
lousy of the Earl of Arran. Gray possessed all the VII
talents of a Courtier; a graceful person, an infinu- 584
ating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France,
he had been admitted into the most intimate fami-
liarity with the Duke of Guise, and in order to gain
his favour, had renounced the Protestant Religion,
and professed the utmost zeal for the captive Queen,
who carried on a secret correspondence with him,
from which ihe expe&ed great advantages. On his
return into Scotland, he paid court to James with
extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplilhments
did not fail to make their usual impression on the
King's heart. Arran, who had introduced him, be-
gan quickly to dread his growing favour; and flat-
tering himself, that absence would efface any senti-
ments of tenderness from the mind of a young
Prince, pointed him out, by his malicious praises,
as the most proper person in the kingdom, for an
embassy of such importance; and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften
his fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dexterity
in discovering the proper instruments for carrying
on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and by
presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The for-
mer flattered his vanity, which was great; the lat-
ter supplied his profuseness which was still greater.
He abandoned himself without reserve toElizabeth's
direcion, and not only undertook to retain the King
under the influence of England, but acted as a spy
lippn the Scottish Queen, and betrayed to her rival

every

B o o K every secret that he could draw from her by his

VII. high pretensions of zeal in her service *

1584.
Higintereft GRAY'S credit with the English court was ex-
with the
courtof tremely galling to the baniihed nobles. Elizabeth
Engand. no longer thoughtof employingher power to restore

them; (he found it easier to govern Scotland, by
corrupting theKing's favourites; and in compliance
with Gray's solicitations, Ihe commanded the exiles
Dcem. 3. to leave the north of England, and to remove into

the heart of the kingdom. This rendered it diffi.
cult for them to hold any correspondence with their
partizans in Scotland, and almost impossible to re-
turn thither without her permifion. Gray, by gain-
ing a point which James had so much at heart, rivet-
ted himself more firmly than ever in his favour; and
by acquiring greater reputation, became capable of
serving Elizabeth with greater success %.

1585. ARRAN had now possessed, for some time, all the
Arran's power, the riches, and the honours, that his imno-
corru.p lon
and info- derate ambition could desire, or the fondness of a

Prince, who set no limits to his liberality towards
his favourites, could bestow. The office of Lord
Chancellor, the highest and most important in the
kingdom, was conferred upon him, even during the
life of the Earl of Argyll, who succeeded Athol
in that t!gnity t; and the public beheld, with
aftonifhillent and indignation, a man educated as a
foldic- of fortune, ignorant of law, and a con-
temner of justice, appointed to preside in parlia-

* Strype, iii. 302. Melv. 316. f Cald. iii. 643.
t Crawf. Oflic. of State, App. 447.

mnen3

ment, in the privy council, in the court of session, B o o I
and intrusted with the supreme disposal of the pro- VII.
perty of his fellow.fubjeds. He was, at the fame 1585
time, governor of the caRles of Stirling and Edin.
burgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Pro-
volt of the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all
these accumulated dignities his merits were not fils-
ficiently recolnpenced, he had bern created Lieute-
nant General over the whole kingdom. No person
wvas admitted into the King's pretence without his
permifnion; no favour could be obtained but by his
mediation. James, occupied with youthful amuse-
ments, devolved upon him the whole regal autho-
rity. Such unmerited elevation increased his natu-
ral arrogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was
no longer content with the condition of a subjet,
but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, that his
title to the Crown was preferable to that of the King
Hlimfelf. But, together with there thoughts of roy-
alty, he retained the meanness, suitable to his pri-
mitive indigence. His venality as a judge was scan-
lalous, and was exceeded only by that of his wife,
who, in defiance of decency, made herself a party
in almost every question which came to be decided,
employed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe
the judges, and almost openly dictated their deci-
sions *. His rapaciousness as a Minister was infa-
tiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many
offices; with the estate and honours which belong-
ed to the family of Hamilton; or with the greater
part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his
* Cald. iii. 331. Scotflarvet's Staggering State, 7.

fliare

B o o K share; he grasped at the poffeflion of several of the

VII. nobles. He required Lord Maxwell to exchange
585. part of his eftare, for the forfeited lands of Kin.

neil; and because he was unwilling to quit an an.
cient inheritance for a poffeflion so precarious, he
stirred up against him, his hereditary rival, the
Laird of Johnston, and involved that corner of the
kingdom in a civil war. He committed to prison
the Earl of Athol, Lord Home, and the Master
of Caffils; the first, because he would not divorce
his wife, the daughter of the Earl of Gowrie, and
entail his estate on him; the second, because he was
unwilling to part with some lands, adjacent to one
of his estates; and the third, for refuting to lend
him money. His spies and informers filled the
whole country, and intruded themselves into every
company. The nearest neighbours distrusted and
feared each other. All familiar society was at an
end. Even the common intercourses of humanity
were interrupted, no man knowing in whom to
confide, or where to utter his complaints. There is
not perhaps in history, an example of a Minister
so universally detestable to a nation, or who more
juily deserved its detestation *.

ARRAN, notwithifanding, regardless of the fen.

timents, and despising the murmurs of the people,
gave a loose to his natural temper, and proceeded
to ads still more violent. David Home of Argaty,
and Patrick his brother, having received letters from
one of the banilhed Lords, about private business,
were condemned and put to death, for holding cor-

*potfw. 337, 338.

respond.

refpondence with rebels. Cunninghame of Drum- B o o K
whafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of VII.
honour and reputation, were accused of having con- GU
spired, with the exiled nobles, to seize the King's
person. A tingle witness only appeared; the evi-
dence they produced of their innocence was unan-
fwerable; their accuser himself not long after ac-
knowledged that he had been suborned by Arran;
and all men believed the charge against them to be
groundless: They were found guilty, notwithftand- Feb. 9.
ing, and suffered the death of traitors *.

About the fame time, that these gentlemen were Parry's

punished for apretendedconfpiracy, Elizabeth's life cgi fpira i
was endangered by a real one. Parry, a DocRor of zabeth.
laws, and a Member of the House of Commons,
a man vain and fantaltic, but of a resolute spirit,
had lately been reconciled to the Church of Rome;
and fraught with the zeal of a new convert, he of-
sered to demonstrate the sincerity of his attach-
ment to the religion which he had embraced, by
killing Elizabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a
book, to prove the murder of an excommunicated
Prince to be not only lawful, but a meritorious
astion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jesuits
both there and at Paris, the Englilh exiles, all ap-
proved of the design. The Pope himself exhorted
him to persevere; and granted him, for his encou-
ragement, a plenary indulgence, and remission of
his fins. Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter to
the fame purpose. But though he often got access
to the Queen, fear, or some remaining sense of duty,

* Spotfw. 338. Cald. iii. 794.

restrained

B o O K restrained him from perpetrating the crimre. Hap.

VII. pily, his intention was at lass discovered by Nevil,
'"* the only person in England to whom he had corn.

municated it; and he himself having voluntarily
March , confessed his guilt, he suffered the puninhment

which it deserved *.

A severe THESE repeated conspiracies against their Sove.
flatute,
which reign awakened the indignation of the English par.
proved
fatal to liament, and produced a very extraordinary statute,
May.

which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of
Scots. By this law the association in defence of
Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was further en.
acted; " that if any rebellion (hall be excited in

the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the

" hurt of her Majesty's person, by or for any per.
" son pretending a title to the Crown, the Queen
"( flall empower twenty-four perforis, by a corn.

mission under the Great Seal, to examine into,

" and pass sentence upon such offences; and after
" judgement given, a proclamation shall be issued,
" declaring the persons whom they find guilty, ex-
"cluded from any right to the Crown; and her
"Majesty's fubjets may lawfully pursue every one
" of them to the death, with all their aiders and
"abettors: And if any design against the life of
' the Queen take effEt, the persons, by or for
whom, such a detestable act is executed, and their
" ifues, being in any wife assenting or privy to the

fame, shall be disabled for ever from pretending

"to the Crown, and be pursued to death in the
" like manner t." This at was plainly levelled at

State Trials, vol. i. 103. t Ibid. 123.

the

the Queen of Scots; and whether we confider it as B o a K
a voluntary expression of the zeal and concern of VI.
the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we im- 15.
pute it to the influence, which that artful Princess
preserved over her parliaments, it is no easy matter
to reconcile it with the general principles of ju-
ftice or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered ac-
countable not only for her own actions, but for
those of others; in consequence of which, ihe
might forfeit her right of succession, and even her
life itself.

MARY justly confidered this a& as a warning to The rigour
prepare for the worst extremities. Elizabeth's mi- Ihe wa

treated, in-

nifers, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, created.
to take away her life; and suffered books to be
published, in order to persuade the nation, that this
cruel and unprecedented measure was not only ne-
ceffary, but just *. Even that lhort period of her
days which remained, they rendered uncomfort-
able, by every hardship and indignity which it was
in their power to inflict. Almost all her servants
were dismissed; she was treated no longer with the
reflpet due to a Queen; and though the rigour of
tfventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
Ititurion, ihe was confined to two ruinous chambers,
scarce habitable, even in the middle of summer, by
reason of cold. Notwithstanding the fcanrinefs of
her revenue, she had been accustomed to distribute
regularly some alms among the poor in the village
adjoining to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her

Strype, iii. 299.

liberty

B o o K liberty to perform this pious and humane office,

VII. which had afforded her great consolation, amidst

her own sufferings. The castle in which she re-
fided, was converted into a common prison; and a
young man, fufpefted of Popery, was confined
there, and treated under her eye, with such rigour,
that he died of the ill usage. She often complained
to Elizabeth of these multiplied injuries, and expo-
fiulated as became a woman, and a Queen; but as
no political reason now obliged that Princess to
amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes, far
from granting her any redress, the did not even
deign to give her any answer. The King of France,
closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended
for afiftance, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause,
with any warmth; and all his solicitations in her
behalf were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But
Caftlenau, the French ambassador, whose compaf.
sion and zeal for the unhappy Queen supplied the
defects in his instructions, remonstrated with such
vigour against the indignities, to which fle was ex-
poled, that, by his importunity, he prevailed at
length to have her removed to Tuthbury; though
she was confined, the greater part of another win-
ter, in her present wretched habitation *.

A breach NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the ne.
between
Mary and glect of her friends, made such an impreflion on
he on. Mary, as the ingratitude of her son James had

hitherto treated his mother with filial refpedf, and
had even entered into negociations with her, which
gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her

Jebb, v. z. 576-598.

interef

interest that this good correspondence Ihould conti- B o o K
nue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland, found VII.
his favour with theKing greatly increafedbythefuc- 18j.
cess of his embassy, persuaded him to write a harlh
and undutiful letter to his mother, in which he ex-
prefsly refused to acknowledge her to be Queen of
Scotland, or to confider his affairs as connected, in
any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her
maternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with for-
row and despair. " Was it for this, laid Ihe, in a March 24.
- letter to the French Ambassador, that I have en-

u dured so much, in order to prefcrve for him the

, inheritance, to which I have ajuft right? I am
: far from envying his authority in Scotland. I
" desire no power there; nor wifl to fat my foot
: in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleasure
" of once embracing a son, whom I have hitherto
: loved with too tender affction. Whatever he

either enjoys or expects, he derived it from me.
F From him, I never received assistance, supply, or

" benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him
"any longer as a King; he holds that dignity by
" my consent; and if a speedy repentance does not
"appeale myjuft retentment, I will load him with

a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with

" all my pretensions, to one, who will receive them
"with gratitude, and defend them with vigour*."
The love which James bore to his mother, whom
he had never known, nay whom he had been early
taught to confider as the most abandoned person of
lher tex, cannot befuppofedever tohave been ardent;

' Jebb, ii. 571, See Append. No. X.
VOL. 1I. K anti

B o o K and he did not now take any pains to regain hei

VII. favour. But whether her indignation at his undu

V-..- tiful behaviour, added to her bigoted attachment

to Popery, prompted Mary at any time to think fe'
rioufly of disinheriting her son; or whether these
threatenings were uttered in a sudden rally ofdifap.
pointed affecion, it is now no easy matter to deter-
mine. Some papers which are fill extant seem to
render the former not improbable *.

Dangerous CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting,
ituation of
Elizabeth ioccupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm, which

She had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end;
and such storms were gathering in every quarter,
as filled her with juLt alarm. All the neighbouring
nations had undergone revolutions, extremely to
her disadvantage. The great qualities, which Hen-
ry III. had difplayecl in his youth, and which raised
the exFectations of his fubjets so high, vanished on
his ascending the throne; and his acquiring supreme
power seems not only to have corrupted his heart,
but to have impaired his understanding. He soon
loft the esteem and affection of the nation; and a
life divided between the aufterities of a fuperilitious
devotion, and the extravagancies of the most diffo-
lute debauchery, rendered him as contemptible as
he was odious on account of his rapaciousness, his
profusion, and the fondness with which he doated
on many unworthy minions. On the death of his
only brother, those sentiments of the people burns
out with violence. Henry had no children, and
though but thirty-two years of age, the fucceflion

* See Appendix, No. XL

of

of the Crown was already confidered as open. The B o o K
King of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal VI.
family, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was i58
a zealous Protestant. The prospect of an event, so from the

progress of

fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne the league,
of France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe,
and the Duke of Guise, countenanced by the Pope,
and aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
defenderof the Romish faith, and the aflerter of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In
order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
was formed, diftinguilhed by the name of the Holy
Laglgue. All ranks of men joined in it with emu-
lation. The spirit spread with the irresistible rapi-
dity, which was natural to religious passions, in
th;t age. The deftrution of the Reformation not
only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be
the object and wifl of the whole party; and the
DT)l:e o. Guise, the head of this mighty and zeal-
ous body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far
fupcrior to that, which the King himself poffefled.
P!hilip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly from the
iucrealIel the naval power of Spain, and had at last Philip t.
reduced under his dominion all that portion of the
Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrencan moun-
t.lins, and which Nature seems to have destined to
formn one great monarchy. William, Prince of
Orange, who first encouraged the inhabitants of
the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whole
willom and valour formed and protected the rising
commonwealth, had fallen by the hands of an as-
Iffin. The superior genius of the Prince of Parma,
had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in

K 2 the

B o o K the Low Countries; all his enterprises, concerted

VII. with consummate ikill, and executed with equal
55 bravery, had been attended with success; and the

Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on the
point of falling under the dominion of their ancient
matter.

Her wire NONE ofthofe circumstances, to which Elizabeth
:tndualt had hitherto owed her security, existed any longer.

She could derive no advantage from the jealousy,
which had subsisted between France and Spain;
Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke
of Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both
kingdoms. The Hugonots were unable to contend
with the power of the league; and little could be
expected from any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could
long employ the arms, or divide the strength of
Spain. In this situation of the affairs of Europe, it
became necessary for Elizabeth to form a new plan
of conduct; and her wisdom in forming it, was
not greater than the vigour with which she carried
it on. The measures, mott suitable to her natural
temper, and which the had hitherto pursued, were
cautious and safe; those she now adopted were en-
terprifing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but
was not afraid of war; and was capable, when com-
pelled by necessity, not only of defending herself
with lpirit, but of attacking her enemies with a bold-
ness, which averted danger from her own domi-
nions. She immediately furnifled the Hugonots
with a considerable supply in money. She carried
on a private negociation with Henry III. who,

though

though compelled tojoin the league, hated thelead- B o o K
ers of it, and wished for their deftruetion. She VII.
openly undertook the protetion of the Dutch corn 1585.
monwealth, and sent a powerful army to its assist-
ance. She endeavoured to form a general confe-
deracy of the Protestant Princes in opposition to the
'opifh League. She determined to proceed with Ru'vet^
the utmost rigour against the Queen of Scots, whose ry, and to

ga~n the

sufferings and rights afforded her enemies a specious King.
pretence for invading her dominions. She resolved
to redouble her endeavours inorderto effect a closer
union with Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate
her influence over the councils of that nation.

SIE found it no difficult matter to induce most

of the Scottifi courtiers to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother for-
merly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden, the Justice Clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident at
London, were the persons in whom (he chiefly con-
fided. In order to diret and quicken their mo-
tions, fie dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along
with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay, ay 9
well-bred and entertaining; he excelled in all the
exercises, for which James had a paflion; and
amused the young King by relating the adventures
he had met with, and the observations he had made,
during a long residence in foreign countries; but
under the veil of there superficial qualities, he con-
cealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon
grew into high favour with James, and while he
was seemingly attentive only to pleasure and diver-

K 3 lions,

B o o K sions, he acquired influence over the public coun-

VII. cils, to a degree which was indecent for a stranger

to possess *.

Propofesa NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable
league with to the nation, than the proposal he made of a ftric-
Scotland.

alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of
the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarming
progress of the Popilh league feenmed to call on all
Protefliant Princes, to unite for the preservation of
July 29. their common faith. James embraced the overture

with warmth, and a Convention of estates empow.
ered him to conclude such a treaty, and engaged to
ratify it in parliament t. The alacrity with which
James concurred in this measure, must not be whul-
ly ascribed either to his own zeal, or to Wotton's
address; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's libe-
rality. As a mark of her motherly affection for the
young King, she fettled on him an annual pension
of 5coo pounds; the fame fum which her father
had allotted her before she ascended the throne.
This circumstance, which ifhe took care to mention,
rendered a furm, which in that age was far from
being inconsiderable, a very acceptable present to
the King, whose revenues, during a long minority,
had been almost totally diflipated 1.

Under. BUT the chief object of Wotton's intrigues, was
,in's Ar to ruin Arran. While a minion so odious tothe
ran'ó pow-
er. nation continued to govern the King, his afiltance

could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with lHunl-

* Melv. 317. l Spotfw. 339. t Cald. iii. 505,

dane,

dane, had appeared extremely for her interest, she B o o K
could place no great confidence in a man, whose VII.
condut was so capricious and irregular, and who, 1" '
notwithstanding his protestations to the contrary,
still continued a secret correspondence both with
Mary, and with the Duke of Guile. The banifli-
ed Lords were attached to England from affection,
as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency,
Ihe could thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left
London, they had been summoned thither, under
colour of vindicating themfclves from his accufa-
tions, but, in reality, to concert with him the mroft
proper measures for restoring them to their country.
Wotton pursued this plan, and endeavoured to ripen
it for execution ; and it was greatly facilitated by
an event, neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
John Forster, and Ker of Ferniherft, the Englilh
and Scottish wardens of the middle marches, hav-
ing met, according to the custom of the borders,
about mid-summer, a fray arose, and Lord Rufll,
the Earl of Bedford's eldest ton, hapipened to be
killed. This scuffle was purely accidlentl, but l; i-
zabeth chore to confider it as a design formed by
Ker, at the instigation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them
should be delivered up to her; and though James
eluded that demand, he was obliged to confine Ar-
ran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen. During im,, t
his absence from court, Wotton and his affoci- ".llh.:

nobles,

ates carried on their intrigues without interruption.
By their advice, the banished nobles endeavoured to
accommodate their differences with Lord John, and

K 4 Lord

B o o K Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons

VII. whom Morton's violence had driven out of the
`5 - kingdom. Their common sufferings, and common
Oa.6. 6 interest, induced both parties to bury in oblivion

the ancient discord, which had fubfifled between
the houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Eliza-
beth's permiflion, they returned in a body to the
borders of Scotland. Arran, who had again reco.
vered favour, infited on putting the kingdom in a
posture of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and
Maitland, fccretly thwarted all his measures. Some
necessary orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffeEtual, by the manner of
execution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and
with reluctance %.

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to seize the King, and to carry him
by force into England. But the design was happily
discovered; and in order to avoid the punishment
his treachery merited, he departed without talking
leave -.

Theyrcturn MEANWHILE the banished Lords haltened the
into Scot-
land, and execution of their enterprise; and as their friends
cilde the and vassals were now ready tojoin them, they entcr-
Kin'. ed Scotland. Wherever they came, they were wel-

comed as the deliverers of their country, and the
most fervent prayers were addressed to -leaven ibr
the success of their arms. They advanced with-
out losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the
head of 1o,ooo nmen. The King, though lie
had assembled an army superior in number, could

* Spotfw. 3.1j. t Mclv. 335.

110t

not venture to meet them in the field, with troops, B o o K
whole loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at VII.
best, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor 15;
was either the town or castle provided for a siege.
T'he gates, however, of both were shut, and the
nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame night Nov. .
tichy surprised the town, or more probably it was
betrayed into their hands; and Arran, who had un-
dertaaken to defend it, was obliged to save himself
by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invested
the castle, in which there were not provisions for
twenty-four hours; and James was necessitated im-
mediately to hearken to terms of accommodation.
'I'ley were not so elated with success, as to urge ex-
travagant demands, nor was the King unwilling to
nlake every reasonable concession. They obtained
a pardon in the most ample form, of all the of-
fences they had committed; the principal forts in
the kingdom were, by way of security, put into
their hands; Crawford, Montrotf, and Colonel
Stewart were removed from the King's prelencc;
and a parliament was called, to eflaif lifl tranquil-
lity in the nation .

T'loUcin a great majority in this parliamrent con- ., i,,.i,.

fifled of the confederate nobles, and their adherents, '$',',
they were far from discovering a vinditlive li;i-i..
Satisfied with procuring an act, relloring themn to
their ancient honours an.d ellates, and ratifying the
pardon granted by the King, they teenmed willing to
forget all past errors in the admilltrl.tion, and

' Cald. iii. 795.

f..ared

B o o K spared James the mortification of feeing his Mini.

VII. fters branded with any public note of infamy. Ar-
'"Sy ran, alone, deprived of all his honours, stripped of
1585. his borrowed spoils, and declared an enemy to his

country by public proclamation, funk back into
obscurity, and musd, henceforth, be mentioned by
his primitive title of Captain James Stewart. As
he had been, during his unmerited prosperity, the
object of the hatred and indignation of his country.
men, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all
his sufferings mitigate their rcfentment in the least
degree.

hurch as- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who
fairs' obtained no redress of their grievances by this revo-

lution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
affected to be confidered as guardians of the privi-
leges and discipline of the Church. In all their
manifestos they had declared their resolution to re-
Itore these, and by that popular pretence, had gain-
ed many friends. It was now natural to expect
bome fruit of these promises, and some returns of
gratitude towards many of the most eminent preach-
ers who had suffered in their cause, and who de-
manded the repeal of the laws passed the preceding
year. The King, however, was resolute to main-
tain these laws in full authority; and as the nobles
were extremely solicitous not to disgust him, by
insisting on any disagreeable request, the claims of
the Church in this, as well as in many former
instances, were sacrificed to the interest of the laity.
The Ministers gave vent to their indignation in the
pulpit, and their impatience under the disappoint-

ment

ment broke out in some expressions, extremely dif- B o o K
refpeEful even towards the King himself*. VII.

THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the

effects of their anger. The Provincial Synod of
Fife summoned him to appear, and to answer for
his contempt of the decrees of former Assemblies,
in presuming to exercise the funEtion of a Bishop.
And though he refused to aclknowledge the jurilf-
diftion of the court, and appealed from it to the
King, afentenceof excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregul;r, was pronounced against him.
Adamson, with no lcls indecency, thundered his
archiepiscopal excommunic-a.ion agalii't Mclvil, and
some other of his opponents.

SOON after, a General Alfeibily was !!eld, in A;::-13.

which the King, with fonie difficulty, obtained an
a&, permitting the name and office of a Bishop frill
to continue in the Church. The p)v,er of the or.
der, however, was considerably retrenched. The
exercil'e of discip:line, and the infpetion of tihl life
and doctrine of the Clergy, were committed to . 'el-
byteries, in which Biflhops flould be allowed no
other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as p:rl;e -
tual moderators. Tlhey themnllves were declared
to be subject, in the fame manner as other pallors,
to thejurifdiction of the General Allenmly. ,And
as the dilcuffion of the Archbiflop's app-al mi. lic
have kindled unuliaul heats in the AiTembly, tiat a:-
fair wa~; terminated by a compromile. lie r.c;o"ii-
ced any claim of ful remacy over the Church, and

Spots. 3'13.

pro.

B o o K promised to demean himself suitably to the charac.

V11. terof a Eifhop, as dfcribed by St. Paul. The As.
t.--S fembly, without examinitig the foundations of the

fentenceof excommunication, declared that it should
be held of no effect, and restored him to all the
privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pro-
nounced. Notwithstanding the extraordinary ten.
dernefs flewni for the honour of the lynod, and the
delicacy and relpect, · with which its jurifdiciion was
treated, several members were lo zealous as to pro.
test against this decision *.

A iFiEc THi court of Scotland was now filled with per-
'^ T- ifobns, so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the
*1iiic" league between the two kingdoms, which had been

proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French envoy. James him-
self first offered to renew tle negociation. Eliza-
beth did not fuffcr such a favourable opportunity to
r v. nflip, and inltantly dilpatched Randolph to conclude

a treaty, which Isle so much desired. The danger
to which the Protestant religion was exposed, by
the late combination of the Popill powers for its
deftrudion, and the necessity of a t-rict confederacy
among those, who had embraced the Reformation,
in order to obstruct their pernicious designs, were
mentioned as the foundation of the league. The
chicl- articles in it were, that both parties Ihould
bind thcmiflves to defend the Evangelic Religion;
that the league flould be ofienlive and defensive
against all, who flall cndeavour to diftlurb the ex-
ercilc of religion in either kingdom ; that if one of

*Cald. iii. 894. Spotfw. 346.

the

the two parties be invaded, the other, notwithfl-and- B o O K
ing any forlner alliance, flould not, directly or in- VII.
directly, afift the invader; that if England be in- .--
vaded in any part remote from Scotland, James
Ihould aflilf the Queen with 2000 horse, and 50oo
foot; that if the enemy landed or approached within
lixty miles of Scotland, the King should trke the
field with his whole forces, in the fame manner, as
h : would do in defence of his own kingdon. Eli-
zabeth, in return, undertook to aCt in defence of
Scotland, if it fiould be invaded. At the fame
time, ile assured the King that no ftep should be
taken, which might derogate in any degree from
his pretensions to the English Crown *. Elizabeth
cxpreffed great fatisfadtion with a treaty, which ren-
dered Scotland an useful ally, inflead of a danger-
olus neighbour, and afforded her a degree of fecu-
rity on that fide, which all her ancestors had aimed
at, but none of them had been able to obtain. Zeal
for religion, together with the blessings of peace,
which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a con-
fiderable period, had so far abated the violence of
national antipathy, that the King's conduEt was
universally acceptable to his own people t.

Ti E acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this time,
expoled James to much and deserved censure. This
man was deeply engaged in the conspiracy against
the life of the King his father. Both Morton and
Btliny one of his own servants, whlo fulfercd for
that crime, had accused him of being prelent at the

* Spotfw. 351 . -1 Carl. 513.

mur-

B o o K murder *. He had escaped punishment by flying

VII. into England, and James had often required Eli-

8' ' zabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her pro.

te&ion. Hie now obtained a licence, from the King
himself, to return into Scotland; and after under.
going a mock-trial, calculated to conceal rather
than to detect his guilt, he was not only taken into
favour by the King, but sent back to the court of
England, with the honourable character of his am-
baffador. James was now of such an age, that his
youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excuse
for this indecent tranfadion. It muff be imputed
to the excessive facility of his temper, which often
led him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of
his own dignity and reputation t.
RiCeof a- Nor long after, the inconsiderate affetion of

Vp;.~,-, the Englifl Catholics towards Mary, and their
zb:i:i; mli- implacable resentment against Elizabeth, gave rile

to a conlpi acy, which proved fatal to the one Queen,
left an indelible stain on the reputation of the other,
and presented a lpecacle to Europe, of which
there had hitherto been no example in the hiflory
of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifford, Gilbert Gifford, and llodg-

son, priests educated in the seminary at Rheims,
had adopted an extravigant and enthulfiaflic notion,
that the Bull of Pius V. agailnfl Elizabeth was dic-
tated ilnmediately by thle Holy Glhoft. Tlhis wild
opinion they inilillcd into Savage, an officer in the

* £Ic Append. No. XIL. - SpotRfl. 348. Cald. iii. 917.

Spa-

Spanish army, noted for his furious zeal, and dar- B o o K
ing courage; and persuaded him that no service VII.
could be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away 1586.
the life of an excommunicated Heretic. Savage, April 26.
eager to obtain the Crown of martyrdom, bound
himfnelf by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal-
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come
over to Paris, and solicited Mendoza the Spanish
ambafador there, to procure an invasion of Eng-
land, while the affairs of the league were so protpe-
rous, and the kingdom left naked by fending so
many of the Queen's best troops into the Nether-
lands. Paget and the English exiles demonstrated
the fruitleflhefs of such an attempt, unless Eliza-
beth were first cutoff, or the invaders secured of a
powerful concurrence on their landing. If it could
be hoped that either of there events would happen,
efCTeual aid was promised; and in the mean time
Ballard was sent back to renew his intrigues. May 15.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Ba-

bington, a young gentleman in Derbyshire, of a
plentiful fortune, and many amiable qualities, who
having contracted, during his residence in France,
a faniiliarity with the Archbishop of Glasgow, had
been recommended by him to the Queen of Scots.
fle concurred with Paget in confidering the death
of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any inva-
sion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would
loon be put to her days, and imparted to him Sa-
v;age's vow, who was now in London waiting for
an opportunity to strike the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of too much importance, to

rely

B o o K rely on a single hand for the execution of it, ant

VII. proposed that five reoblute gentlemen Ihould bejoin

8óT"" ed with Savage, in an enterprise, the success o:
56 which was the foundation of all their hopes. H(

offered to find out persons willing to undertake th(
service, whoie honour, secrecy, and courage, they
might iafely trust. He accordingly opened the
matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury,
Charles Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage,
John Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock,
Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all
of them, except Polly, whose buffling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of good
families united together in the bonds of private
friendship, strengthened by the more powerful tie
of religious zeal. Many consultations were hell;
June. their plan of operations was at last fettled; and their

different parts alligned. Babington himself was

Thcicheme appointed to rescue the Queen of Scots; Salisbury,
f tile con-
flirtors. with tome others, undertook to excite several coun-

ties to take arms; the murder of the Queen, t!:
most dangerous and important service of all, fell to
Tichbourne and Savage, with four associates. And
so totally had their bigoted prejudices extinguifled
the principles of honour, and the sentiments of hu-
manity suitable to their rank, that without scruple
or compunction, they undertook an acion, which
is viewed with horror, even when committed by
the meanefi and most profligate of mankind. This
attempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no less
honourable than it was desperate, and in order to
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a picture
drawn containing the portraits of the fix affalfins,

with

with that of Babington in the middle, and a motto B o o K
intimating that they were jointly embarked in Iome VII.
hazardous design;

1506.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and Dircnvered

imprudent instance of vanity, seem to have thought fighdl.
a discovery Icarce possible, and neither diftrufled the
fidelity of their companions, nor doubted tile Iuc-
c|fs of their undertaking. But while they believed
that their machinations were carried on with the
imoft profound and impenetrable secrecy, every Ipep
they took was fully known to Walsingham. Pclly
was one of his Ipies, and had entered into the con-
fpiracy with no other dcfign than to betray his as-
Jociatcs. Gilbert Gifford too, having been sent
over to England toquicken-the motions of the con-
f)irators, had been gained by Walsingham, and
gave him sure intelligence of all their projects. That
vigilant minitler immediately imparted the difcove-
ries which he had made to Elizabeth; and without
communicating the matter toanyother of the Coun-
fellors, they agreed, in order to understand the plot
more perfectly, to wait till it was ripened into tome
form, and brought near the point of execution.

AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and cri- Theay
minal to expose her own life, and to tempt Provi- rizedind

punilhed.

dence any farther. Ballard, the prime mover in Augu,4.
the whole conspiracy, was arrested. His associates,
disconcerted and struck with astonishment, endea-
voured to fave.themfeives by flight. But, within a
cw days, all of them, except Windsor, were seized
n different places of the kingdom, and committed
,VOL. II. L to

B o o K to the Tower. Though they had undertaken th

VII. part, they wanted the firm and determined spirit o
586. affaflins; and, influenced by fear or by hope, dil

covered all they knew. The indignation of thl
peop;le, and their impatience to revenge such an ex
ecrable combination against the life of their Sove
reign, hastened their trial, and all of themfufferec

Sept. 20. the death of traitors .

Xary is ac- TFiUS far Elizabeth's condua may be pronounc.
cr fed of
beingan ed both prudent-and laudable, nor can she be ac
PCCOmpice
in theon- cufed of violating any law of humanity, or oftak.
fpirq'". ing any precautions beyond what were necellary for

her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with
regard to which, poflerity will pass a very different
judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men ac-

counts sufficiently for all the wild and wicked ds
signs which they had formed. But this was not the
light, in which Elizabeth and her Mlinifters chore
to place the conlpiracy. They represented Babing.
ton and his associates to be infttrumnts employed
by the Qicen of Scots, the real though secret au-
thor of lo many attempts against the life of Eliza-
beth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They pro.
duced letters, which they ascribed to her, in flip.
port of this charge. These, as they gave out, had
come into their hands, by the following singular,
and mylterious method of conveyance. Gifford,
on his return into England, had been intrufled by
some of the exiles with letters to Mary; but in or-

* Camd. 5 5. State Trials, Vol. i. ixo.

dcr

der to make a trial of his fidelity and address, B o o K
they were only blank papers made up in that form. VII.
These being safely delivered by him, he was after- .,'
wards employed without farther scruple. Wal-
fingham having found means to gain this man, he
by his permiflion, and the connivance of Paulet,
bribed a tradefnan in the neighbourhood of Chart-
ley, whither Mary had been conveyed, who de-
posited the letters in a hole in the wall of the castle,
covered with a loole stone. Thence they were
taken by the Queen, and in the fame manner,
her answers returned. All there were carried to
\alfingham, opened by him, decyphered, fealed
again lo dexterously that the fraud could not be
perceived, and then transmitted to the persons to
whom they were directed. Two letters to Ba-
bington, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Engle-
field, and the English fugitives, were procured
by this artifice. It was given out that in there
letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and even
of the assassination; that Ihe direced them to
proceed with the utmost circumfpeation, and not
to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to
join them; that she recommended the Earl of
Arundel, his brothers, and the young Earl of
Northumberland, as proper persons to conduct
and to add reputation to their enterprise; that she
advised them, if possible, to excite at the fame
time some commotion in Ireland; and above all,
besought them to concert with care the means of
her elcape, suggesting to them several expedients
for that purpose,

L 2 ALL

B o o K ALL these circumstances were opened at thetrial

VII. of the conspirators. And while the nation was un.
586 der the influence ofthofe terrors which the affocia.

The indig. tion had raised, and the late danger had augmented,
nation of
theEnglifh they were believed without hesitation or inquiry,
againfiher and spread a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her
n that
account, religion was well known; and in that age, exam.

p!es of the violent and sanguinary spirit which it
inspired, were numerous. All the cabals again!t
the peace of the kingdom for many years had been
carried on in her name; and it now appears rvi.
dently, said the English, that the safety of the one
Qteen is incompatible with that of the other. W'by
then, added they, flould the tranquillity of Eng.
land be sacrificed for the fake of a stranger ? Why
is a life so dear to the nation exposed to the repeat.
ed assaults of an exasperated rival ? The cafe sup
posed in the aflbciation, has now happened, the fa'
cred person of our Sovereign has been threatened,
and why Ihould not an injured people execute tha
just revenge which they ha 1 vowed ?

Elizabeth No sentiments could be more agreeable thanthere
pfoce to to Elizabeth and her Ministers. They themselves
there UXts had at first propagated them among the people, and
extre mities
a·aint her. they now served both as an apology, and a motive

for their proceeding to such extremities againlt the
Scottifli Queen, as they had long meditated. The
more injuries Elizabeth heaped on Mary, the more
she feared and hated that unhappy Queen, and
came at last to be persuaded that there could be no
other security for her own life, but the death of hrb
rival. Burleigh and Walsingham had promoted o

zealoul

zealously all her measures with regard to Scottish B o o K
affairs; and had acted, with so little reserve, in op- VII.
position to Mary, that they had reason to dread the 1586
most violent effecs of her rcfentment, if ever she
Thould mount the throne of England; and there-
fore they endeavourcd to hinder an event so fatal to
thenfelves, by confirming their Mistress's fear and
hatred of the Scottish Queen.

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unusual Her do.
'lance, an g care Pelics, pc

vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her ig- pr,. .'c
norant of the discovery of the conspiracy. Sir seied
Thomas Gorges was at last sent from court, to ac-
qiaint her both of it, and of the imputation with
vhich Ihe was loaded as accefiary to that crime;
and lie Iurprifed her with the account, just as flie
,i:d got on horseback to ride out along with her
ekceepeis. She was struck with astonishment, and
wouli ldave returned to her apartment, but she was
nt i:periitted ; and in her absence, her private clo-
let was broke open, her cabinet and papers were
klizdl, fealed, and lent up to court. Her principal
domestics too, were arrested, and committed to
diftfrent keepers. N aue and Curie, her two fecre-
taiies, the one a native of France, the other of
Scotland, were carried prisoners to London. All
the money in hercultody, amounting to little more
than 20C0 pounds, was Iecured. And after lead-
ing her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
houlc to another, she was conveyed to Fotherinay,
a firong castle in Northamptonflire *.

Camd. 517.

L 3 No

B o o K No farther evidence could now be expeted a.

VII. gainit Mary, and nothing remained but to decide
^S6.p what Thould be her fate. With regard to this, Eli.

Deliberates zabeth and those Ministers in whom she chiefly
Concern ig
the method confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but
igrocee- there was fill great variety of sentiments among

her other Counsellors. Sonm thought it sufficient
to dihfifs all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
under such close ren.raint, as would cut off all pof.
fibility of corresponding with the enemies of the
kingdom; and as her constitution, broken by long
confinement, and her spirit dejeced with so many
cares, could not long support such an additional
load, the Queen and nation would soon be deliver.
ed from all their fears. But though it might be
easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible
to diminish the reverence which the Roman Catho.
lics had for her name, or to extinguish the corn.
paflion with which they viewed herilufferings; while
these continued, insurrections and invasions would
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effec
of any new rigour would be to render them more
frequent and dangerous. For this reason the expe,
dient was rejected.
Determines A PUBLIC and legal trial, though the most un.

ltotry he exampled, was judged the most unexceptionable

method of proceeding; and it had, at the fame time,
a semblance ofjuflice, accompanied with an air of
dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient re.
cords, for any statute or precedent, to justify such
an uncommon ftep, as the trial of a foreign Prince,
who had not entered the kingdom in arms, but

4 had

had fled thither forrefuge. The proceedings againfl B o o K
her were founded on the aft of laiR Parliament, and VII.
by applying it in this manner, the intention of "'--
those who had framed that revere statute became
more apparent *.

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumstance of
pomp or solemnity should be wanting, which could
render this traniaftion such as became the dignity
of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
cominffinon under the great feal, forty persons, the
moit illustrious in the kingdom, by their birth or
ofices, together with five of the judges, to hear and
decide this great cause. Many difficulties were start-
ed by the lawyers, about the name and title by
which Mary ihould be arraigned; and while the
ciS ntials of justice were so grossly violated, the

;t'ry forms of it were the objecs of their care.
They at length agreed that she flmould be flyled,
" Mary, daughter and heir of James V. late King

of Scots, commonly called Queen of Scots, and
Dowager of France --."

AFTER the many indignities which flie had lately

fusrered, Mary could no longer doubt but that her
deitrudion was determined. She expected, every
moment, to end her days by poison, or by some of
those secret means, usually employed againfl cap-
tive Princes. And left the malice of her enemies,
at the lame time that it deprived her of life, fould
endeavour likewise to blast her reputation, fhl
wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated her-

'Camd. si9. Jolhnt. Hist. 113. Strype, iii.36z.

L 4 self,

B o o K self, in the itrongeft terms, from'the imputation of

VII. encouraging or of being accessary to the conspiracy

for aflaffinating Elizabeth *. In the solitude of her
pri,)in, the flrange resolution of bringing her to a
public trial had not reached her ears, nor did the
idea of any thing f( unprecedented, and so repug.
nant to regal Majesty, once enter into her thoughts.

The tr,1, at O?; the eleventh of October, the Commiffloners
:orthcrin-
gay. appointed by Elizabe:h arrived at Fotheringay.

Next morning they delivered a letter from her to
Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches and
accufLtions, she informed her, that regard to her
own Safety had, at last, rendered it necessary to make
a public inquiry into her conduct, and therefore re-
quired her, as fl(e had lived fb long under the pro.
tetion of the laws of England, to fubinit now to
the trial, which they ordained to be taken of her

Mary re crimes. Mary, though furpriled at this message,
fui 's at fir(i
toplccid.. was neither appalled at the danger, nor unmindful

of her own dignity. She protcfted, in the most so-
lemrn manner, that she was innocent of the crime,
laid to her charge, and had never countenanced any
at:tempt against the life of the Queen of England;
but, at the fame time, refused to acknowledge the
jurifdition of her commifioners. " I came into
"the kingdom," said she, " an independent So-
,' vereign, to implore the Queen's assistance, not

to fulbjct myself to her authority. Nor is my
spirit so broken by its past misfortunes, or so in-
" timidated by present dangers, as to stoop to any

thing unbecoming the Majesty ofacrowned head,

" Jcbb, ii. 283.

" or

" or that will disgrace the ancestors from whom I B o o K
," am descended, and the son to whom I shall leave VII.
", my throne. If I must be tried, Princes alone 1586
" can be my Peers. The Queen of England's sub.
" jeEs, however noble their birth may be, are of
" a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival in
:, this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner.
"Its laws never afforded me any protetion. Let

them not now be perverted, in order to take
, away my life."

THE Commissioners employed arguments and in-

treaties to overcome Mary's resolution. They even
threatened to proceed according to the forms of law,
and to pass sentence against her on account of her
contumacy in refuting to plead; she persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline theirjurifdi&ion. An
argument used by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain,
at last prevailed. He told her, that by avoiding a
trial, she injured her own reputation, and deprived
herfdlf of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be
more agreeable to them, or more acceptable to the
Queen their Mistress, than to be convinced, by un-
doubted evidence, that she had been unjustly loaded
with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible /hould impose on ConTent

the unwary Queen, or that she, unafifed, at that howe"'v t
time, by any friend or counsellor, should not be
able to detect and elude all the artifices of Eliza-
beth's ablest Ministers. In a situation equally me-
lancholy, and under circumstances nearly similar,

her

B o o K her Grandson, Charles I. refused, with the utmofl

VII. firmness, to acknowledge the ufurpedj urifdidionof
,86.. the High Court of Julfice; and posterity has ap.

proved his conduct, as suitable to the dignity of a
King. If Mary was less constant in her resolution,
it must be imputed solely to her anxious desire of
vindicating her own honour.
0<a. 14. AT her appearance before the Judges, who were

feated in the great hall of the cai'le, where they re.
ceived her with much ceremony, Ihe took care to
protetR, that by condescending to hear and to give
an aniver to the accusations, which should be of-
sercd againit her, fie neither acknowledged the ju-
rifdiction of the court, nor admitted of the validity
andjuflice of those acts, by which they pretended
to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, en.

deavoured to vindicate the authority of the court.

Theaccu- THEN the Queen's Attorney and Solicitoropen-
ition a- ed the charge against her, with all the circumstances
gainift her. 0 0

of the late conspiracy. Copies of her letters to
Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and Paget were
produced. Babington's confefflon, those of Ballard,
Savage, and the other conspirators, together with
the declarations of Nauc and Curie her secretaries,
were read, and the whole ranged in the molt fpe-
cious order, which the art of the lawyers could de-
vise, and heightened by every colour their elo.
quence could add,

MARY

MARY listened to their harangues attentively, B o o

and without emotion. But at the mention of the VII.
Earl of Arundel's name, who was then confined
in the Tower on suspicion of being accessary to 86
the conspiracy, she broke out into this tender and
gcnerous exclamation: "' Alas ! how much has
, the noble House of Howard suffered for my
- fake !"

WHEN the Queen's council had finished, Mary Herde?

stood up, and with great magnanimity, and equal fe'e.
pretence of mind, began her defence. She bewail-
ed the unhappiness of her own situation, that as-
tera captivity of nineteen years, during which she
had fuflered treatment no less cruel than unmerited,
she was at last loaded with an accusation, which
tended not only to rob her of her right of fuccef-
sion, and to deprive her of life itself, but to tranf-
mit her name with infamy to future ages: That,
without regarding the sacred rights of sovereignty,
she was now fubjeded to laws framed against pri.
vate persons; though an anointed Queen, com-
manded to appear before the tribunal of fubjets;
and, like a common criminal, her honour exposed
to the petulant tongues of lawyers, capable of wrest-
ing her words, and of misrepresenting her aEtions:
That, even in this dishonourable situation, Ihe was
denied the privileges usually granted to criminals,
and obliged to undertake her own defence, without
the pretence of any friend with whom to advise,
without the aid of council, and without the use of
Ier own papers.

SHP

B o o K SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in

VII. the accusation. She absolutely denied any corre-


v fpondence with Babington: The name of Ballard

was not so much as known to her: Copiesonlyofher
pretended letters to them were produced: though
nothing less than her hand-writing or fublcription
was sufficient to convict her of iuch an odious
crime: No proof could be brought that the letters
were delivered into her hands, or that any answer
was returned by her direEtion: The confefions of
wretches condemned and executed for such a detest,
able aCtion, were of little weight; fear or hope
might extort fiom them many things inconsistent
with truth, nor ought the honour of a Queen to be
ftaint:i by iuch vile teflimony. The declaration of
her secretaries was not more conclusive: Promises
and threats might easily overcome the rfolution of
two rangers; in order to screen themselves, they
might throw the blame on her; but they could dif-
cover nothing to her prejudice, without violating,
in the first place, their oath of fidelity; and their
perjury, in one instance, rendered them unworthy
of credit in another: The letters to the Spanish am-
baffador were either nothing more than copies, or
contained only what was perfectly innocent: " I
"have often," continued ihe, " made such efforts
" for the recovery of my liberty, as are natural to
" a human creature. And convinced, by the fad
' experience of so many years, that it was vain to
" expect it from the jufrice or generosity of the
' Queen of England, I have frequently solicited
foreign Princes, and called on all my friends to
"employ their whole interest for my relief. I

"' have,

" have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the B o o K
, English Catholics some mitigation of the rigour VII.
, with which they are now treated; and if I could j 6

hope, by my death, to deliver them from op-

, prcTion, I am willing to die for their fake. I
"4 with, however, to imitate the example of Esther,

not of Judith, and would rather make intercef-

"sion for my people, than flied the blood of the
' meanest creature, in order to save them. I have
" often checked the intemperate zeal of my adhe-
, rents, when either the severity of their own per-
, fecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of irju-
' ries which I have endured, were apt to precipi-
" tate them into violent councils. I have even
" warned the Queen of dangers to which these
" harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn
c" out, as I now am, with cares and sufferings, the
" profpea of a Crown is not so inviting, that I

should ruin my foul in order to obtain it. I am
no stranger to the feelings of humanity, nor un-

:' acquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor
' the detestable crime of aaffafination, as equally
' repugnant to both. And, if ever I have given
"content by my words, or even by my thoughts,
"to any attempt against the life of the Queen of
"England, far from declining the judgment of
" men, I shall not even pray for the mercy of
' God *."

Two different days did Mary appear before the
Judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-

* Camd. 520, &c.

tained

B o o K tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered with

VII. the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

1586. THE Commissioners, by Elizabeth's express conm

Sentence a-
gains her. mand, adjourned, without pronouncing any sentence,
Oaob. 25.

to the Star-Chamber in Westminster. When as-
fembled in that place, Naue and Curie were brought
into court, and confirmed their former declaration
upon oath. And after reviewing their whole pro-
ceedings, the Commininoners unanimously declared
Mary " To be accessary to Babington's conspiracy,
" and to have imagined diverse matters, tending to
"' the hurt, death, and deftrution of Elizabeth,
" contrary to the express words of the flatute, made
C for the security of the Queen's life *."

Irregulari- IT is no easy matter to determine whether the in-
i'iL" the justice in appointing this trial, or the irregularity in

conducting it, were greatest and most flagrant. By
what right did Elizabeth claim authority over an
independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply
with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could
the fubjefts of another Prince become her judges?
or if such an infulton royalty were allowed, ought
not the common forms of justice to have been ob-
served ? If the testimony of Babington and his affo-
ciates were so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare
them for a few weeks, and by confronting them
with Mary, overwhelm her with the full conviction
of her crimes. Naue and Curie were both alive,
wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for
what reason were they produced in the Star-Cham-

Camd. 5z5.

ber,

her, where Mary was not present to hear what they B o o K
dcpofed ? Was this suspicious evidence enough to VII.
condemn a Queen ? Ought the meanest criminal to ó-,
have been found guilty, upon such feeble and in- 1
conclusive proofs ?

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced

at her trial, that the sentence against Mary was
founded. That served as a pretence tojuftify, but
was not the cause of the violent steps taken by Eli-
zabeth and her Ministers towards her destruction
and was employed to give some appearance of jus-
tice, to what was the offspring of jealousy and fear.
And the nation, blinded with resentment against
Mary, and solicitous to secure the life of its own
Sovereign from every danger, observed no irregu-
larities in the proceedings, and attended to no de-
feEts in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and
probabilities, as if they had been irrefragable de-
monftrations.

THE parliament met a few days after fentencee pa r^ic

was pronounced against Mary. In that illufirious fim ethn(lo"
assembly more temper and discernment than are to f{tenLe
be found among the people, might have been ex-
peted. Both Lords and Commons, however,
were eqnally under the dominion of popular preju-
dices and passions, and the fame excesses of zeal or
of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are apparent
in all their proceedings. They entered with impa-
tience upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the
dangers which threatened the Queen's life and the
peace of the kingdom. All the papers, which had

been

B o o K been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before

VII. them. And after many violent invecives against

the Queen of Scots, both houses, unanimously, ra.
tified the proceedings of the Commilfioners by whom
she had been tried, and declared the sentence against

and de- her to bejuft and well founded. Not satisfied with
exeautio this, they presented a joint address to the Queen,
f1 it, beseeching her, as she regarded her own safety, the

preservation of the Protestant religion, the welfare
and wishes of her people, to publish the sentence;
and without farther delay to inflict on a rival, no
less irreclaimable than dangerous, the punishment
which the had merited by so many crimes. This
request, dictated by fears unworthy of that great
Assembly, was enforced by reasons still more un-
worthy. They were drawn not from justice, but
fromconveniency. The most rigorous confinement,
it was pretended, could not curb Mary's intriguing
spirit; her acdrefs was found, by long experience,
to be an overmatch for the vigilance andjealoufy of
all her keepers: The severest penal laws could not
restrain her adherents, who, while they believed
her person to be sacred, would despise any danger
to which themselves alone were exposed: Several
foreign Princes were ready to second their attempts,
and waited only a proper opportunity for invading
the kingdom, and asserting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons,
was incompatible with Elizabeth's safety; and if
she were spared out of a faire clemency, the Queen's
person, the religion and liberties of the kingdom,
could not be one moment secure. Necessity requir-
ed that fle mhould be sacrificed in order to preserve

there;

b:.

these; and to prove this sacrifice to be no less jufi B o o K
than necessary, several examples in history were VII.
produced, and many texts of scripture quoted, but .-
both the one and the other were misapplied, and
distorted from their true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable Eiz3beth's

di fFmulaI-

to Elizabeth than an address in this firain. It extri- tion.
cared her out of a situation, extremely emnbarrafing;
and without depriving her of the power of spar-
ing, it enabled her to punifhl her rival with less ap-
pearance of blame. If the chose the former, the
whole honour would redound to her own clemency.
If fle determined on the latter, whatever was rigor-
ous might now seem to be extorted by the folici-
tations of her people, rather than to flow from her
own inclination. Her answer, however, was in a
style, which she often used, ambiguous and evasive,
under the appearance ofopennefs and candour; full
of such profcffions of regard for her people, as served
to heighten their loyalty; of such complaints of
Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated to excite their
indignation; and of such insinuations that her own
life was in danger, as could not fail to keep ali e
their fears. In the end, fle besought them to save
her the infamy and the pain of delivering up a
Q(leern, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment; and
to confider whether it might not still be pofible to
Frovide for the public fccurity, without forcing her
to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily under-
0ood. The Lords and Commons rcnewed their
Vo L. I. IM forncr

B o o K former request, with additional importunity, which

VII. was far from being either unexpe&ed, or offensive,
C"58 Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;

and having obtained such a public sanction of her
proceedings, there was no longer any reafonforpro-
trading this scene of dissimulation; there was even
some danger that her feigned difficulties might at
last be treated as real ones; Ihe therefore adjourn.
ed the parliament, and reserved in her own hands
the sole dilpofal of her rival's fate *.

France in. ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceed.
feePbly in gs against Mary with aitonifhment and horror;
behalf of and even Henry III. notwithstanding his known

aversion to the house of Guise, was obliged to in-
terpofe in her behalf, and to appear in defence of
the common rights of royalty. Aubefpine his refi-
dent Ambassador, and Bellievre, who was sent with
an extraordinary commission to the fame purpose,
interceded for Mary with great appearance of
warmth. They employed all the arguments which
Nov. ii. the cause naturally suggested; they pleaded from

justice, from generosity, and humanity; they inter-
mingled reproaches and threats. But to all there
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable; and hav-
ing received some intimation of Henry's real un-
concern about the fate of the Scottith Queen, and
knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, she
trusted, that these loud remonstrances would be fol-
lowed by no violent resentment --.

* Camd. 52z. .)'Ewes, 375. t Caimd. 53'.

3 SHt

SHE paid no greater regard to the solicitations of B o o K

the Scottilh King, which, as they were urged with VII.
more sincerity, merited more attention. Though 15 6
her commissioners had been extremely careful to Jams en-
sooth James, by publithing a declaration that their eavors tO
sentence againit Mary did, in no degree, derogate moher's
from his honour, or invalidate any title which he
formerly possessed; he beheld the indignities to
which his mother had been exposed with filial con-
cern, and with the sentiments which became a
King. The pride of the Scottilh nation was
routed, by the insult offered to the blood of their
Monarchs, and called upon him to employ the most
vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to revenge
the Queen's death.

AT firfi, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth
would venture upon an ation so unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render the persons of
Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other
times, the was so remarkably jealous. But as soon
as the extraordinary steps which she took discovered
her intention, he dispatched Sir William Keith to
London; who, together with Douglas his Ambaf-
fador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the ftrongelt
terms, against the injury done to an independent
Queen, in fubjeaing her to be tried like a private
person, and by laws to which the owed no obedi-
ence; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this
injury, by suffering a sentence unjust in itself, as
well as dishonourable to the King of Scots, to be
put into execution *

Sec Appendix, No. XIII.

M 2 ELIZA,

B o o K ELIZ ABETH returning no answer to there remon-

VII. fTrances of his ambassador, James wrote to her with
1586. his own hand, complaining in the bitterest terms of

her condude, not without threats that both his duty
and his honour would oblige him to renounce her
friendship, and to act as became a son when called
to revenge his mother's wrongs *. At the fame
time he afiembled the nobles, who promised to stand
by him in so good a cause. He appointed ambaf-
fadiors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in order to
im-piore the aid of there courts; and took other
feps towards executing his threats with vigour.
The high itrain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to
such a degree, that she was ready to dismiss his am-
baffadors without any reply. But his preparations
alarmed and embarrassed her Miniftcrs, and at their
intreaty she returned a soft ard evasive answer
promising to liften to any overture from the King,
that tended to his mother's safety; and to suspend
the execution of the sentence, till the arrivalof
new ambassadors from Scotland t.

Decem 6 ME AN WIILE, ihe com m anded the sentence against
The ten-
Te ier a- Mary to be published, and forgot not to inform the
pUbfl.'r people, that this was extorted from her by the re-

peated intreaty of both houses of Parliament. At
the fame time, (he dispatched Lord Buckhurft and
Beale to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how
importunately the nation demanded the execution
of it; and though flhe had not hitherto yielded to
these solicitations, fle advised her to prepare for an
event which might become necefary fodr'ecutiing

* Birch, Men .i. . i- Spotfw. .25. Cald, iv. 5s

2 tlhe

tile Proteffant religion, as well as quieting the minds B o o K
of the people. Mary received the message not oily VII.
without symptoms of fear, but with expreflions of 86
triumph. " No wonder, said she, the English
" fould now thirst for the blood of a foreign
" Prince, they have often offered violence to their
" own Monarchs. But after so many sufferings,
" death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I
" am proud to think that my life is esteemed of
,; importance to the Catholic religion, and as a
( martyr for it I am now willing to die *."
AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary was she is

treated

iripped of every remaining mark of royalty. The with ,he
canopy of state in her apartment was pulled down; gour.
I'aulet entered her chamber, and approached her
person without any ceremony; and even appeared
covered in her pretence. Shocked with these indig-
nities, and offended at this gross familiarity, towhich
Ihe had never been accustomed, Mary once more
complained to Elizabeth; and at the fame time, as Dccem. r.
her last request, intreated that she would permit her
servants to carry her dead body into France, to be
laid among her ancestors, in hallowed ground;
that tome of her domestics might be prelent at her
death, to bear witness of her innocence, and firm
2dherence to the Catholic faith; that all her ser-
vants might be suffered to leave the kingdom, and
to enjoy those finall legacies, which file Ihould be-
flow on them, as teflimonies of her affeition; and
that, in the mean time, her almoner, or some other

* Camd. 528. Jebb, z91.

M 3 Catholic

B o o K Catholic Priest, might be allowed to attend her, and

VII. to assist her in preparing for an eternal world. She
\ '58 besought her in the name of Jesus, by the foul and

memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor
by their near consanguinity, and the royal dignity
with which they were both invested, to gratify her
in these particulars, and to indulge her so far as tc
signify her compliance by a letter under her own
hand. Whether Mary's letter was ever delivered to
Elizabeth is uncertain. No answer was returned,
and no regard paid to her requests. She was offered
a Protestant Bishop or Dean to attend ler. Them
she rejeced, and without any clergyman to direct
her devotions, she prepared, in great tranquillity,
for the approach of death, which she now believed
to be at no great distance *.

1587. JAMES, without losing a moment, ent new am-
James re- baffadors to London. These were the master of
news his
folicittions Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In order to remove
in her be-
half. Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Maiter
Jaluary I. would become bound that no conspiracy lhould be

undertaken against her person, or the peace of the
kingdom, with Mary's consent; and for the faith.
ful performance of this, would deliver some of the
most considerable of the Scottish nobles as hostages.
If this were not thought sufficient, they proposed
that Mary should resign all her rights and preten-
sions to her son, from whom nothing injurious to
the Protestant religion, or inconsistent with Eliza-
beth's safety, could be feared. The former pro-
pofal, Elizabeth reje6ted as insecure; the latter, as

Canid. 5z8. Jebb, ii. 295.

dann

dangerous. The ambassadors were then inltruded B o o
to talk in a higher tone; and Melvil executed the VII.
commiflion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, 1587.
with his usual perfidy, deceived his Maiter, who
trusted him with a negociation osso much import-
ance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was em-
ployed to save. He encouraged and urged Eliza-
beth, to execute the sentence against her rival. He
often repeated the old proverbial sentence, " The
dead cannot bite." And whatever should happen,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at leait
to prevent any violent effects of his resentment *.

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp- Elizabeth'a

tomsofthe most violent agitation and disquietude of difalimul
mind. She shunned society, Ihe was often found in a tion.
melancholy and musing poffture, and repeating, with
much emphasis, these sentences which she borrowed
from some of the devices then in vogue; Aut ser
atg feri; neferiare, feri. Much, no doubt, of this
apparent uneasiness muff be imputed to diflimula-
tion; it was impossible, however, that a Princess,
naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture
on an action, which might expose her memory to
infamy, and her life and kingdom to danger, with-
out reflecing deeply, and hesitating long. The
people waited her determination in fufprnie and an-
xiety; and left their fear or their zeal Ihould sub-
fide, rumours of danger were artfully invented, and
propagated with the utmost indultry; Aubefpine,
the French ambassador, was accused of having sub-

Spotfw. 352. Murdin, S68. See Append. No. XIV.

M 4 orned

B o o K orned an aflaflin to murder the Queen. The Spa:

VII. nifh fleet was said by some to be already arrived at
Ji87' Milford-haven. Others affirmed that the Duke of

Guise had landed with a strong army, in Suffex.
Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties
were up in arms; next day, that the Scots had en-
tered England with all their forces; and a confpi.
racy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing the
Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew
every day Inore violent; and the people, astonished
and enraged, calleJ for the execution of the fen-
tence against Mary, as the only thing which could
reitore tranquillity to the kingdom *.

Wai:nt for WHILE there sentiments prevailed among her
Mirvy's exc-
c:i',.g n- fubjcgts, Elizabeth thought she might safely ven-
February i. ture to itrike the blow, which file had so long me-

ditared. She commanded Davison, one of the fe-
cretaries of itate, to bring to her the fatal warrant;
and her behaviour, on that occasion, plainly ihewed
that it is not to humanity that we muff subscribe
her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment ihe
was fublfcribing the writ which gave up a woman,
a Queen, and her own nearest relation, into the
hands of the executioner, she was capable of jest-
ing. " Go, fays flhe, to Davison, and tell Walling-
ham what I have now done, though I am afraid he
will die for grief when he hears it." Her chief
anxiety was now to secure the advantages which
would arise from Mary's death, without appearing
to have given her content to a deed so infamous.
.She often hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as

"' C':!ind , 53, 5 4.

to

to some other courtiers, that now was the time to B o o K
discover the sincerity of their concern for her safe- VII.
ty,'and that fle expeced their zeal would extricate 1587.
her out of her present perplexity. But they were
wife enough to seem not to understand her mean-
ing. Even after the warrant was signed, the com-
manded a letter to be written to Paulet, in less
ambiguous terms, complaining of his remissness in
sparing so long the life of her capital enemy,
and begging him to remember at last what was in-
cumbent on him as an affectionate fubjeEt, and to de-
liver his Sovereign from continual fear and dan-
ger, by shortening the days of his prisoner. Paulet,
though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal in the
dilcharge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's
keeper, was nevertheless a man of honour and in-
tegrity. He rejeced the proposal with disdain;
and lamenting that he should ever have been deem-
ed capable of aEting the part of an affaflin, he de-
clared that the Queen might dispose of his life at
her pleasure, but he would never stain his own
honour, nor leave an everlasting mark of infamy
on his posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate
Io foul a crime. On the receipt of this answer,
Elizabeth became extremely peevih; and calling
him a dainty and precise fellow, who would promise
much, but perform nothing, she proposed to em-
ploy one Wingfield, who had both courage and
inclination to strike the blow *. But Davison
remolnltrating against this method, as no less dan-
gerous than dishonourable, she again declared her
intention that the sentence pronounced by the com-

* Biogr. Britan, Article Davilon.

miflioners

Bo o K miffloners should be executed according to law;

VII. and as she had already signed the warrant, the beg.

87o' ged that no farther application might be made to

her on that head. By this the privy counsellors
thought themselves sufficiently authorised to pro.
ceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal
for the Q een's safety, or instigated, as is more pro.
bable, by the apprehension of the danger to which
they would themselves be exposed, if the life of the
Queen of Scots were spared, they aflembled in the
Council Chamber, and by a letter under all their
hands, empowered the Earls of Shrewibury and
Kent, together with the High Sheriff of the coun.
ty, to fee the sentence put in execution *

Mary's be. ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls
haviour at
her death. arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded access to the

Queen, read in her pretence the warrant for execu-
tion, and required her to prepare to die next morn-
ing. Mary heard them to the end without emotion,
and crofling herself in' the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, " That foul
said she, is not worthy the joys of Heaven, which
repines because the body must endure the firoke of
the executioner; and though I did not expe& that
the Queen of England would set the first example
of violating the sacred person of a Sovereign Prince,
I willingly submit to that which Providence has de-
creed to be my lot." And laying her hand on a
Bible, which happened to be near her, he solemnly
protested that she was innocent of that conspiracy

Camd. 534. Strype, iii. 361. 364.

which

which Babington had carried on against Elizabeth's B o o x
life . She then mentioned the requests contained in VII.
her letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfa&ory 18.
answer. She entreated with particular earnestness,
that now in her last moments, her Almoner might be
suffered to attend her, and that ihe might enjoy the
consolation of those pious inltitutions prescribed by
her religion. Even this favour, which is usually
granted to the vileit criminal, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two Earls, with difficulty suppressed
their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and
buri out into the most passionate expressions of ten-
dcrnefs and sorrow. Mary, however, not only re-
tained perfe&t composure of mind, but endeavoured
to moderate their excellive grief. And falling on
her knees, with all her domestics round her, she
thanked Heaven that her sufferings were now so
near an end, and prayed that ihe might be enabled
to endure what still remained with decency and with
fortitude. The greater part of the evening she em-
ployed in fettling her worldly affairs. She wrote
her testament with her own hand. Her money,
her jewels, and her clothes, the ditributed among
her servants, according to their rank or merit. She
wrote a short letter to the King of France, and an-
other to the Duke of Guise, full of tender but mag-
nanimous sentiments, and recommended her foul to
their prayers, and her afflited servants to their pro-

* Jebb, ii. 301,

teetion,

B o o K teation. At supper, she eat temperately, as usual

VII. and conversed not only with ease, but with cheer
5-
S fulness; she drank to every one of her servants, anc

asked their forgiveness, if ever the had failed in any
part of her duty towards them. At her wonted
time she went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours.
Early in the morning she retired into her closet, and
employed a considerable time in devotion. At eight
o'clock, the high Sheriff and his officers entered her
chamber, and found her still kneeling at the altar.
She immediately started up, and with a majestic
mien, and a countenance undismayed, and even
cheerful, advanced towards the place of execution,
leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was
drefled in a mourning habit, but with an elegance
and Iplendour, which file had long laid aside, ex-
cept on a few festival days, An Agnus Dei hung by
a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at her
girdle; and in her hand he carried a crucifix of
ivory. At the bottom of the stairs the two Earls,
attended by several gentlemen from the neighbour-
ing counties, received her; and there Sir Andrew
Melvil, the master of her household, who had been
secluded, for some weeks, from her presence, was
permitted to take his last farewell. At the fight of
a Mistress whom he tenderly loved, in such a fitua-
tion, he melted into tears; and as he was bewail-
ing her condition, and complaining of his own hard
fate in being appointed to carry the account of
such a mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied,
" Weep not, goodMelvil, there is at present greater
cause for rejoicing. Thou shalt this day fee Mary
Stuart delivered from all her cares, and such an

end

end put to her tedious sufferings, as she has long B o o K
expected. Bear witness that I die constant in my VII.
religion; firm in my fidelity towards Scotland; 8-,
and unchanged in my affeEtion to France. Com-
mend me to my son. Tell him I have done no-
thing injurious to his kingdom, to his honour, or
to his rights; and God forgive all those who have
thirsted, without cause, for my blood."

WITH much difficulty, and after many intrea.

ties, The prevailed on the two Earls to allow Mel-
vil, together with three of her men servants, and
two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was erected in the fame hall where she had been
tried, raised a little above the floor, and covered, as
well as a chair, the cuflion, and block, with black
cloth. Mary mounted the fleps with alacrity, be-
held all this apparatus of death with an unaltered
countenance, and signing herself with the cross,
flie fat down in the chair. Beale read the warrant
for execution with a loud voice, to which fhc lif-
tened with a careless air, and like one occupied in
other thoughts. Then the Dean of Peterborough
I)egan a devout discourse, suitable to her present
condition, and offered up prayers to Heaven in her
behalf; but she declared that she could not in con-
science hearken to one, nor join with the other;
and falling on her knees, repeated a Latin prayer.
When the Dean had finifled his devotions, (he,
with an audible voice, and in the English tongue,
recommended unto God the affliced ltate of the
Church, and prayed for prosperity to her son, and
for a long life, and peaceable reign to Elizabeth.

She

B o o K She declared that the hoped for mercy only througl

VII. the death of Christ, at the foot of whose image fh(
i587' now willingly shed her blood; and lifting up, and

killing the crucifi:r, she thus addressed it, " As thy
arms, O Jesus, were extended on the Cross; so
with the outffretched arms of thy mercy, receive
me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off

her veil, and upper garments; and one of the exe.
cutioners rudely endeavouring to aflift, the gently
checked him, and said, with a smile, that the had
not been accustomed to undress before so many
fpetators, nor to be served by such valets. With
calm but undaunted fortitude, the laid her neck on
the block; and while one executioner held her
hands, the other, at the second firoke, cut off her
head, which falling out of its attire, discovered her
hair already grown quite grey, with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up frill fireaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, " So perish
all Queen Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of Kent
alone answered Amen. The reft of the fpetators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capable, at that moment, of any other sentiments,
but those of pity or admiration *.

Sentiments SUCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of
of historians
concerning Scots, after a life of forty-four years and two
her.

mhonths, almost nineteen years of which the passed
in captivity. The political parties which were form-
ed in the kingdom, during her reign, have subsist-

Camd. 534. Spotfw. 3SS. Jcbb, ii. 300. Strype, iii. 383.

ed,

ed, under various denominations, ever since that B o o K
time. The rancour, with which they were at first VII.
animated, hath descended to succeeding ages, and '-
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been 1587.
perpetuated, and even augmented. Among His-
torians, who were under the dominion of all there
passions, and who have either ascribed to her every
virtuous and amiable quality, or have imputed to
her all the vices, of which the human heart is -us-
ceptible, we search in vain for Mary's real charac-
ter. She neither merited the exaggerated praises
of the one, nor the undiftingui/hing censure of the
other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmot Her cha-

elegance of external form, ihe added those accom- "rar.
pliflments, which render their impression irrefifti-
ble. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and ca-
pable of speaking and of writing with equal ease
and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all
her attachments; because her heart was warm and
unfufpicious. Impatient of contradition; because
lhe had been accustomed from her infancy to be
treated as a Queen. No stranger, on some occa.
sions, to dissimulation; which in that perfidious
court where ihe received her education, was rec-
koned among the necessary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconlcious of that
pleasure, with which almost every woman beholds
the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents
that we admire; ihe was an agreeable woman rather.
than an illultrious Queen. The vivacity of her

spirit

B o o K spirit not sufficiently tempered with found judg.

VII. ment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not,

at all times, under the restraint of discretion, be.
trayed her both into errors, and into crimes. To
fay that she was always unfortunate, will not ac.
count for that long and almost uninterrupted fuc.
cession of calamities which besel her; we must
likewise add that fihe was often imprudent. Her
paflion for Darnly was rash, youthiul, and excef-
five. And though the sudden transition to the op.
pofite extreme was the natural effeat of her ill.
requited love, and of his ingratitude, insolence, and
brutality; yet neither these, nor Bothwell's artful
address and impor-tant services, can juflify her at-
tachment to that nobleman. Even the manners of
the age, licentious as they were, are no apology for
this unhappy passion; nor can they induce us to
look on that tragical and infamous scene which
followed upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity
will draw a veil over this partof her character which
it cannot approve, and may, perhaps, prompt some
to impute her actions to her situation, more than to
her dispositions; and to lament the unhappiness of
the former, rather than accuse the perverseness of
the latter. Mary's sufferings exceed, both in degree
and in duration, those tragical distresses, which
fancy has feigned to excite lorrow and commifera.
tion; and while we survey them, we are apt alto.
gether to forget her frailties, we think of her faults
with lels indignation, and approve of our tears, as
if they were ihed for a person who had attained
much nearer to pure virtue.

WITH

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circum- B o o i

stance not to be omitted in writing the history of a VII.
female reign, all cotemporary authors agree in as- -.
cribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of countenance,
and elegance of shape, of which the human form
is capable. Her hair was black, though, accord-
ing to the fashion of that age, she frequently wore
borrowed locks, and of different colours. Her
eyes were a dark grey; her complexion was exqui-
fitely fine; and her hands and arms remarkably de-
licate, both as to shape and colour. Her itature
was of an height that role to the majestic. She
danced, she walked, and rode with equal grace.
lHer taste for music wasjuft, and she both sung and
played upon the lute, with uncommon ikill. To-
wards the end of her life, flhe began to grow fat;
and her long confinement, and the coldness of the
houses in which she had been imprisoned, brought
on a rheumatism, which deprived her of the use of
her limbs. No man, fays Brantome, ever beheld
her person without admiration and love, or will read
her history without sorrow.

NONE of her women were suffered to come near
her dead body, which was carried into a room ad-
joining to the place of execution, where it lay, for
tome days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from a
billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons
of the executioners, and every thing slained with
her blood, were reduced to afles. Not long after,
Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
Cathedral of Peterborough, with royal n-m niili
cence. But this vulgar artifice was employed in

VOL. II. N vain;

B o o K vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did no

VII. efface the memory :of those injuries, which laic
15 7 Mary in her grave. James, soon after his acceffior

to the English throne, ordered her body to be re.
moved to Weftminfter-abbey, and to be deposited
among the Monarchs of England.

Elizabeth ELIZABETH affected to receive the accounts of
afsecrs rll
lament Ma- Mary's death, with the most violent emotions of
,s death. ,urprif and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamenta-

tions and mourning, were all employed to display
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident
marks of dissimulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of Elizabeth's proceedings
againlt the life of the Scottiflh Queen. The cor-
mission for bringing Mary to a publictrial was seem-
ingly extorted from her, by the intreaties of her
privy counsellors. She delayed publishing the fen.
tence against her, tilllhe was twice solicited -by both
houses of Parliament. Nor did she sign the war-
rant for execution without the utmost apparent re-
lutance. One scene more of the boldest and most
solemn deceit remained to beexhibited. She under-
took to make the world believe that Mary had been
put to death without her knowledge, and against
her will. And Davison, who neither fufpeded her
intention, nor his own danger, was her infitumenz
in carrying on this artifice, and tell a vi&im to it.

IT was his duty as secretary offtate to lay before

her the warrant for execution, in order.to be figled;
and by her command, he carried it to the Great
Seal. She pretended, however, that fle had charg-

,cd

ed him not to communicate what she had done to B o o ,
any person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of VII.
his hands, without her express permission that, in ^
contempt of this order, he had not only revealed
the matter to several of her Ministers, but had, in
concert with them, aflembled her Privy Counfcllors,
by whom, without her consent or knowledge, the
warrant was issued, and the Earls of ShrewSbury
and Kent impowered to put it in execution. Tho'
Davison denied all this, and with circumitances
which bear the itrongef marks of truth and credi-
bility; though it can scarce be conceived that her
Privy-Council, composed of the persons in whomn
she most confided, of her Ministers and favourites,
would assemble within the walls of her palace, and
venture to tranfaft a matter of so much importance,
without her privity, and contrary to her inclination;
yet so far did she carry her dissimulation, that, with
all the signs of displeasure and of rage, she banilh-
ed most of her Counsellors out of her pretence;
and treated Burleigh, in particular, foharfhly, and
with such marks of disgust, that he gave up him-
self for loft, and in the deep.et affliction wrote to
the Queen begging leave to resign all his places,
that he might retire to his own estate. Davilon flie
instantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a clole prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after March.
brought to a folenmn trial in the Star Chamber;
condemned to pay a fine of io,ooo pounds, and to
be imprisoned during the Qieen's pjeafure. -Ie
languilhed, several years, in confinemert, and ne-
ver recovered any degree of favour or of power.
As herjealoufy and fear had bereaved the Queen of

N 2 Scots

B o o K Scots of life, in order to palliate this part of hei

VII. conduct, Elizabeth made no scruple of facrificinE
5 87. the reputation and happiness of one of the most vir

tuous and able men in her kingdom *.

Eli:hbe.th THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no bettername,
endeavours
to ó,oth furnished Elizabeth, however, with an apology to
Jamle:. the King of Scots. As the prospect of his mother's

danger had excited the King's filial care and con.
cern, the account of her death filled him with grief
and resentment. His fubjets felt the dishonour
done to him, and to the nation. In order to footli
both, Elizabeth inflantly dispatched Robert Carey,
one of Lord Hunfdane's sons, with a letter exprefl
sing her extreme affliction on account of that miser-
able accident, which, as ihe pretended, had happen.
ed far contrary to her appointment, or intention.
James would not permit her messenger to enter
Scotland; and with some difficulty, received a me-
morial he sent from Berwick. It contained the tale
concerning Davison, dressed up with all the circum-
itances, which tended to exculpate Elizabeth, and
to throw the whole blame on his rashness or trea-
chery. Such a defence gave little fatisfa&ion, and
was confidered as mockery added to insult; and
many of the nobles, as well as the King, breathed
nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely so-
licitous to pacify them, and neither wanted inftru-
ments, nor reasons to gain her end. Leicester wrote
to the King, and Walsingham to lecretary Mait-
land. They represented the certain dellrudtion, to
which James would expolc himself, if with the

Camd. 536. Strypc, iii. 370.

forces

forces of Scotland alone, he ihould venture to at- B o oK
tack a kingdom, so far superior in power; that the VII.
kiftory of past ages, as well as his mother's fad ex-
perience, might convince him that nothing could be
more dangerous, or deceitful, than dependance on
foreign aid; that the King of France would never
wish to fee the Britifl kingdoms united under one
Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince so
nearly allied to the house of Guise, with such for-
midable power; that Philip might be a more ac-
tive ally, but would certainly prove a more danger-
ous one, and under pretence of affifling him, would
assert his own right to the English Crown, which
he already began openly to claim; that the fame
flatute, on which the lentence of death against his
mother had been founded, would justify the ex-
cluding him from the fuccelffon to the Crown; that
the English, naturally averse from the dominion of
strangers, would not fail, if exasperated by his hof-
tilities, to apply it in that manner; that Llizabe h
was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mother
had suffered, by her tenderness and affeSion towards
the son; and that by engaging in a fruitless war, he
would deprive himself ofa noble inheritance, which,
by cultivating her friendlhip, he must infallibly ob-
tain. These representations, added to the confci-
oulhefs of his own weakness, to the smallness of his
revenues, to the mutinous spirit of some of the no-
bles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and to the
influence of that faction, which was entirely at Eli-
zabeth's devotion, convinced James that a war with
England, however just, would in the prese.:t junc-
trre be altogether impolitical. All there confide-

N 3 rations

B o o K rations induced him to stifle his refentmeft; tb ap.

VII. pear satisfied with the pthifhrfieit inflicted bh Da.

8 8 vifron; and to preserve all the semblances of friend.

ship with the English court*. In this manner did
the cloud which threarehed such a storm pals away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal, re-
mained unavenged by any Prince; and whatever
infamy Elizabeth might incur, the was exposed to
no new danger on that account.

Difgraceof MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the
tClMylt"r hMafer of Gray, and loft him the King's favour,

which he had for some time poffefled. lHe was be-
come as odious to the nation, as favourites, who
acquire power withoutmerit, and exercise it without
discretion, usually are. The treacherous part, which
he had acted during his late embassy, was no lecret,
and filled James, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers ob.
served the symptoms of disgust arising in the King's
mind, his enemies seized the opportunity, and Sir
William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy with
Which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain Jahmes,
May Io. publickly accused him before a Convention of no-

bles, not only of having contributed, by his advice
and suggestions, to take away the life of the Queen,
but of holding correspondence with Popish Princes,
in order to subvert the religion established in the
kingdotm. Gray, unsupported by the King, de-
ferted by all, and conscious of his own guilt, made
a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual
banifbhment, apunilhment very unequal tohiscrimes.

* Spotfw. Strype, iii. 377.

But

But the King was unwilling to abandon one, whom B o o K
he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour of V-I.
justice; and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and 158
the other nobles who had lately returned from exile,
in gratitude for the zeal with which he had served
threm, interceded warmly in his behalf.

HAVING thus accomplished the destruction of one
of his enemies, Captain James thought thejun&ture
favourable for prosecuting his revenge on them all.
He tingled out secretary Maitland, the molt emi-
nent both for abilities and enmity to him; and of-
sered to prove that he was no less accessary than
Gray to the Queen's death, and had even formed
a design of delivering up the King himself into the
hands of the Engliih. But time and absence had,
in a great measure, extinguilhed the King's affection
for a minion, who so little deserved it. All the
courtiers combined against him as a common ene-
my. And instead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of Chancellor confer-
red upon Maitland, who, together witlthtatdignity,
enjoyed all the power and influence of a prime mi-
nifter.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this
year, the fame hatred to the order of Biflops, and
the fame jealousy and fear of their encroachments,
appeared. But as the King was now of full age,
and a parliament was fmnmmoned on that occasion,
the Clergy remained satisfied with appointing some
of their number to represent their grievances to that
court, from which great things were expected.

N 4 PRE-

B o o K PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, James

VII. attempted a work worthy of a King. The deadly

feuds which subsisted between niany of the great fa.

The King milies, and which were tranfmittedfrom onegene.
i:,ite tie ration to another, weakened the strength of the
nobles- kingdom; contributed, more than any other cir-

cumftance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit
among the nobles; and proved the occasion of
many difaRers to themselves, and to their coun-
try. After many preparatory negociations, he in-
vited the contending parties to a royal entertain-
ment in the p.iace of Holy-rood-houfe; and partly
by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained
their promile to bury their diflmenions in perpetual
oblivion. From thence he conduEted them, in so-
lemn procelion, through the streets of Edinburgh,
marching by pairs, each hand in hand with his ene-
my. A collation of wine and fweec-meats was pre.
pared at the public Cross, and there they drank to
each other, with all the signs of reciprocal forgive-
ness, and of future fi-endfiip. The people, who
were present at a spectacle so unusual, conceived
the most sanguine hopes of lieing concord and tran-
quillity established in every part of the kingdom,
and teltified their fatisfadcion by repeated acclama-
tions. Unhappily the effects of this reconciliation
were not correspondent either to the pious endea-
vours of the King, or the fond wishes of the people.

THE first care of the parliament was the security

of the Protestant religion. All the laws passcd in
its favour, since the Reformation, were ratified;
and a new and severe one was cnaced againl fenmi-

nary

nary Priests and Jesuits, whose restless industry in B o o K
making proselytes brought many of them into Scot- VII.
land about this time. Two acts of this parliament S
deserve more particular notice, on account of the 15
consequences with which they were followed.

THE one refpeaed the lands of the Church. As General

the public revenues were not sufficient for defray- of nChuc.
ing the King's ordinary charges; as the adminifira- lads.
tion of the government became more complicated
and more expensive; as James was naturally profuse,
and a firanger to cconomy; it was necessary, on
all these accounts, to provide some fund propor-
tioned to his exigencies. But no considerable fum
could be levied on the Commons, who did not en-
joy the benefit of an extensive commerce. The
nobles were unaccustomed to bear the burden of
heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
were the only source whence a proper supply could
be drawn. Notwithstanding all the depredations of
the laity since the Reformation, and the various
devices which they had employed to seize the Church
lands, some considerable portion of them remained
flill unalienated, and were held either by the Bishops
who possessed the benefices, or were granted to lay-
men during pleasure. All these lands were, in this
parliament, annexed, by one general law *, to the
Crown, and the King was impowered to apply the
rents of them to his own use. The tithes alone
were reserved for the maintenance of the persons
who served for the cure, and the principal mansion-
hou)le, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe,

Parl. 1 Jac. VI. c. 29.

allot-

B o o K allotted for h;s residence. By this great accession
VII. of property, it is natural to conclude, that the King

8- must have acquired a vast increase of power, and
3587. the influence of the nobles have suffered a propor.

tional diminution. The very reverse of this seems,
however, to have been the cafe. Almost all grants
of Church-lands, prior to this aft, were thereby
confirmed; and titles, which ware formerly reckon.
ed precarious, derived from thence the fandion of
parliamentary authority. James was likewise au.
thorifed, during a limited time, to make new alie.
nations; and such was the facility of his temper,
ever ready to yield to the solicitations of his ser.
vants, and to gratify their most extravagant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his whole reign, he was continually em-
ployed in bestowing, and his parliament in ratifying
grants of this kind to his nobles; hence little ad-
vantage accrued to the Crown from that which
might have been so valuable an addition to its re-
venues. The Bishops, however, were great sufferers
by the law. But at this juncture neither the King
nor his Ministers were solicitous about the interests
of an order of men, odious to the people, and per-
fecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted
the law with the utmost zeal. The profpec of
lharing in their spoils induced all parties to consent
to it; and after a ftep so fatal to the wealth and
power of the dignified Clergy, it was no difficult
matter to introduce that change in the government
of the Church which soon after took place *.

* Spotfw. 365.

TII

THE change, which the other Statute produced B o o K

in the civil constitution, was no less remarkable. VII.
Under the Feudal system, every Freeholder, or vas- ' -

I 587.

fal of the Crown, had a right to be present in par- Lefier Ba-
liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few ntlad.
in number, but possessed of great and extensive pro to pdIl.
perty. By degrees, these vast poifeflions were di- theirre-

preienta.

vided by the proprietors themselves, or parcelled tives.
out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The
number of Fteeholders became greater, and their
condition more unequal: betides the ancient Barons,
who preserved their estates and their power unim-
paired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were
far inferior. But, in those rude ages, when the
art of government was extremely imperfe&, wh]en
parliaments were seldom assembled, and delibet ated
on matters little interesting to a martial people, few
of the Le.ser Barons took their feats, and the whole
parliamentary jurifdition was exercised by the
Greater Barons, together with the Ecclesiastical or-
der. James I. fond of imitating the forms of the
English constitution, to which he had been long
accufomed, and desirous of providing a counter-
poise to the power of the great nobles, procured an
act in the year 1427, dilpenfing with the personal
attendance of the lesser Barons, and imnpowering
those in each county, to chufe two commissioners
to represent them in parliament. This law, like
many other regulations of that wile Prince, pro-
duced little effect All the King's vassals continued,
as formerly, poffefild of a right to be present in
parliament, and, unless in some extraordinary con-

junl ures,

B o o KjunAures, none but the greater Barons attended

VII. But by means of the Reformation, the conltitutior
'7 7 had undergone a great change. The ariftocratical

power of the nobles had been much increased, and
the influence of the Ecclesiastical order, which the
Crown usually employed to check their usurpations,
and to balance their authority, had diminished in
proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had
been erected into temporal peerages; and the Pro.
teftant Bishops, an indigent race of men, and odious
to the nation, were far from polffcling the weight
and credit, which their predecessors derived from
the exorbitant wealth, and the superstitious reve.
rence of the people. In this situation, the King
had recourse to the expedient employed by James I,
and obtained a law reviving the flatute of 1427;
and from that time the Commons of Scotland have
sent their representatives to parliament. An aft,
which tended so visibly to abridge their authority,
did not pals without opposition from many of the
nobles. But as the King had a right to summon
the lesser Barons to attend in person, others were
apprehensive of feeing the house filled with a multi.
tude of his dependants, and conItnted the more wil-
lingly to a law, which laid them under the refiric-
tion of appearing only by their representatives.

158'8 THE year 1588 began with an universal expesa.

The ap- tion throughout all Europe, that it was to be dif-
thea spani tinguilhed by wonderful events and revolutions.
rquado. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of

cotemporary historians, had prediced this; and the
situation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms of

Europe

Europe was such, that a sagacious observer, with- B o o K
out any supernatural intelligence, might have ha- VII.
zarded the prediction, and have foreseen the ap-
proach of some grand crisis. In France, it was evi-
dent from the astonishing progress of the league,
conducEed by a leader whose ambition was restrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
furnmounted all difficulties; as well as from the
timid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry III.
that either that Monarch must submit to abandon
the throne, of which he was unworthy; or by some
sudden and daring blow, cut off his formidable rival.
Accordingly, in the beginning of the year, the
Duke of Guise drove his Master out of his capital
city, and forced him to conclude a peace, which
left him only the shadow of royalty; and before the
year expired, he himself fell a victim to Henry's
fears, and to his own security. In Spain, the ope-
rations were such as promised something still more
uncommon. During three years, Philip had em-
ployed all the power of his European dominions,
and exhausted the treasures of the Indies, in vast
preparations for war. A fleet, the greatefl that had
ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from
Lisbon, and a numerous land army was assembled
to embark on board of it. Its destination was still
unknown, though many circumfiances made it pro-
bable that the blow was aimed, in the first place,
against England. Elizabeth had long given secret
aid to the revolted provinces in the Low Countries,
and now openly afforded them her protecion. A
numerous body of her troops was in their service;
the Earl of Leiceller commanded their armies; fie

had

B o o K had great sway in the civil governmentof therepub.

VII. lie; and some of its most considerable towns were
.-.J in her poffeflion, Her fleets had infulLed the coafis

of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the Weft
Indies, and threatened thecolonies there. Roused
by so many injuries, allured by views of ambition,
and animated by a superstitious zeal for propagating
the Romish Religion, Philip resolved not only to
invade, but to conquer England, to which his de.
scent from the hou'e of Lancaller, and the donation
of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his own opinion, a
double title.

Condue of ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and pre.
tileO cao pared to encounter it witl the utmost intrepidity,
lion". The measures for the defence of her kingdom, were

concerted and carried on, with the wisdom? and
vigour, which distinguished her reign. Her chief
care was to secure the friendship of the King of
Scots. She had treated the Queen his mother with
a rigour unknown among Princes; (he had often
used himself harshly, and with contempt; and
though he had hitherto prudently fupprefed his re-
fentr.ent of these injuries, she did not believe it to
be altogether extinguished, and was afraid that, in
her present situation, it might burst out with a fatal
violence. Philip, fenifible how much an alliance
with Scotland would facilitate his enterprise, court-
ed James with the utmost assiduity. He excited
him to revenge his Mother's wrongs; he flattered
him with the hopes of isaring his conquests and
offered him in marriage his daughter the Infanta
isabella. At the lame time, Scotland swarmed with

priess

priefis his emissaries, who seduced some of the no- B o o a
bles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes VII.
and promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were i88
the heads of a fation, which openly espoused the
interest of Spain, Lord Maxwell, arriving from
that court, began to assemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spa-
niards. In order to counterbalance all there, Eli-
zabeth made the warmest profelfions of friendship
to the K.ig; and Athby, her ambassador, enter-
| tained him with magnificent hopes and pronmies.

lHe assured him that .his right of fucceflion to the
Crown hlould .bepublickly acknowledged in Eng-
j land; that he liould be created a Duke in that

kingdom .; that he should be .admitted to some ihare
in the government; and receivea considerable pen-
sion annually. James, it is probable, was too well
acquainted with Elizaheth's.arts, to rely entirely on
these promires. But he underltood his own in-
terest in the present j.unatre, and p.ursued it with
i nuch fteadiaefs. He rejeced an alliance with
Spain, as dangerous. He:refuTfed to admit into his
pretence an ambalTador from the Pope. He seized
Colonel Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma.
lie drove many of the trafficking Priefis out of the
kingdom. He:marched suddenly to Dumfries, dif-
pcricd Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.
In a Convention of the nobles he declared his refo-
lution to adhere inviolably to the league with Eng-
land; and, without listening to the suggestions of
revenge, determined to ad in concert with Eliza-
beth, against the common enemy of the Proteflant
1lith. He put the kingdom in a polture of defence,

2 and

B o o K and levied troops to obftrud the landing of the Spa.

VII. niards. He offered to fend an army to Elizabet!h's
I v
affi afltance, and told her ambassador that he expected

no other favour from the King of Spain, but that
which Polyphemus had promised to Ulysses, that
when he had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his last morsel *.

A national THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was
covena/ t in
dcfrne of not inferior to that of the King; and theextraordi.
Reigion. nary danger, with which they were threatened, fug-

gested to them an extraordinary expedient for their
security. A bond was framed for the maintenance
of true Religion, and the defence of the King's per.
son and government, in opposition to all enemies
foreign and doimefic. This contained a confeflion
of the Froteflant faith, a particular renunciation of
the errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises,
in the name, and through the strength of God, of
adhering to each otherin supporting the former, and
contending against the latter, to the utmost of their
power t. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and
the people subscribed with equal alacrity. Strange
or uncommon as such a combination may now ap-
pear, many circumstances contributed, at that time,
to recommend it, and to render the idea familiar to
the Scots. When routed by any extraordinary
event, or alarmed by any public danger, the people
of Israel were accuitomed to bind themselves, by a
solemn Covenant, toadhere to that Religion, which
the Almighty had eflablifled among them; this the

Camd. 544. JohnR. 139. Spotfw. 369.
t Dunlop's Collect. of Confefl. Vol. ii. 108.

Scots

Scots c6nfidered aS a sacred precedent, which it be- B o o K
came them to imitate. In that age, no confider- VII.
able enterprise was undertaken in Scotland, with- 1go
out a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned 158
reckoned neceflary for their security. The form of
this religious confederacy is plainly borrowed from
those political ones, of which so many instances have
occurred; the articles, stipulations, and peculiar
modes of expreflion, are exactly the fame in both.
Almost all the considerable Popish Princes were
then joined in a league for extirpating the Reform-
ed Religion, and nothing could be more natural,
or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a
counter-affociation, in order to oppose the progress
of that formidable conspiracy. To these causes,
did the Covenant, which is become so famous in
history, owe its origin. It was renewed at different
times during the reign of James *. It was revived
with great solemnity, though with considerable al-
terations, in the year 1638. It was adopted by the
lEnglifh, in the year 1643, and enforced by the civil
and ecclesiastical authority of both kingdoms. The
political purposes to which it was then made subser-
vicnt, and the violent and unconfiturional measures
whiich it was then employed to promote, it is not
our province to explain. But at the juncture, in
which it was first introduced, we may pronounce it
to have been a prudent and laudable device for the
defence of the religion and liberties of the nation;
nor were the terms in which it was conceived, other
tl;an might have been expeCted from men alarmed

Cald. iv. 2z9.
VOL. II. 0 with

B o o K with the impending danger of Popery, and threa

VII. ened with an invasion by the molt bigoted an

.'8.J. molt powerful Prince in Europe.
1588.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England did nc

inspire him either with the vigour or dispatch ne
ceffary to ensure the success of so mighty an enter
prise. His fleet, which ought to have failed ir
April, did not enter the English channel till the
middle of July. It hovered many days on the
coast, in expectation of being joined by the Prince
of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of

The Arm- Slanders by a Dutch Squadron. Continual disasters
du detstied.

pursued the Spaniards during that time; fucceflive
Forms and battles, which are well known, conspired
with their own ill conduct, to disappoint their en.
terpiife. And by the blessing of Providence,
which watched with remarkable care over the Pro.
teftant Religion, and the liberties of Britain, the
English valour scattered and destroyed the Armado
on which they had arrogantly bestowed the nameof
Invincible. After being driven out of the Englilh
ifas, they were forced to fleer their course towards
Spain, round Scotland and Ireland. Many of them
suffered flipwreck on these dangerous and unknown
eoafls. Though James kept his subjects under arms
to watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to pre.
vent their landing in an hostile manner, he received
with great humanity 700 who were forced ashore by
a tempest, and after supplying them with necessaries,
permitted them to return into their own country.

ON

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent B o o K

an ambassador to congratulate with James, and to VII.
compliment him on the firmness and generosity he I588*
had discovered during a conjunture so dangerous.
But none of Afhby's promises were any longer re-
membered; that Minister was even accused of hav-
ing exceeded his powers, by these two liberal offirs;
and conscious of his own falsehood, or ashamed of
being dilbwned by his court, he withdrew secretly
out of Scotland *.

PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his own I589;

rashness in attempting the conquest of England, by ili¥'p'"sis,
a naval armament, equipped at so great a distance, Scotland,
and fubjefted, in all its operations, to the delays
and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from /eas
and winds, resolved to make his attack in another
form, and to adopt the plan which the Princes of
Lorrain had long meditated of invading England
through Scotland. A body of his troops, he ima-
gined, might be easily wafted over from the Low
Countries to that kingdom, and if they could once
obtain footing, or procure assistance there, the fron-
tier of England was open and defenceless, and the
northern counties full of Roman Catholics, who
would receive them with open arms. Mean while,
a descent might be threatened on the southern coast,
which would divide the English army, diftradt their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into tcr-
rible convulsions. In order to prepare the way for
the execution of this design, he remitted a confi-

* Jo;, -l. 34. Camd. 548.

0 2 derable

B o o K derable fulm of money to Bruce, a seminary pries

VIt- in Scotland, and employed him, together with

g9'. Hlay, Creighton, and Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits, to

popiih no- gdin over as many persons of diftinAion as possible
blr ',ain, to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful in-
thcllK'ig. fnuarions of there emissaries, induced several of

the nobles to favour a measure, which tended so
manifettly to the deftrucltion of their country.
-Iuntly, though the King had lately married him
to the daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Len-
nox, continued warmly attached to the Romish
Church. Crawford and Errol were animated with
the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
corre:pondcnce with the Prince of Parma, and in
their letters to him, offered their service to the King
of Spain, and undertook, with the aid of 6000
men, to render him matter of Scotland, and to
bring ib many of their vafials into the field, that
he Ihould be able to enter England witha numerous
army. Francis Stewart, grandson of James V.
whom the King had created Earl of Bothwell,
though influenced by no motive of religion, for he
still adhered to the Protestant faith, was prompted
mrelly by caprice, and the reftlelTnefs of his na-
ture, to join this treasonable correspondence.
feb. 7, Ai r.r these letters were intercepted in England.

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threatened
her owvn kingdom, 1ent them immediately to the
King, and reproaching him with his former lenity
toward the Popifhl party, called upon him to check
this formidable conspiracy by a proper Icverity.
But J.tmes, though firmly attached to the Protef-

trant

tant religion, though profoundly versed in the theo- B o o K
logical controverfiesbetween theReformers and the VIl.
Church of Rome, though he had employed himself, "

1589.

at that early period of life, in writing a Commen- The K,,i'
tary on the Revelations, in which he proved the mXhiard
Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheleis adopted, to Poj ar
already, those maxims concerning the treatment of
the Roman Catholics, to which he adhered through
the reit of his life. The Roman Catholics were at
that time a powerful and active party in England;
they were far from being an inconsiderable fation
in his own kingdom. The Pope and Kingof Spain
were ready to take part in all their machinations,
and to second every effort of their bigotry. The
oppolition of such a body to his fuccefion to the
Crown of England, added to the averlinefs of the
English from the government of strangers, might
create him many difficulties. In order to avoid
theie, he thought it necessary to sooth rather than
to irritate the Roman Catholics, and to reconcile
theti to his succession, by the hopes of gentler
treatment, and tome mitigation of the rigour of
those laws, which were now in force against them.
This attempt to gain one party by promises of in-
dulgence and acs of clemency, while he adhered
with all the obstinacy of a disputant, to the doc-
trines and tenets of the other, has given an air of
mystery, and even of contradi.tion, to this part of
the King's charafter. The Papills, with the crcdu-
lity of a seA llruggling to obtain power, believed
his heart to be wholly theirs; and the Protcfeants,
with tlc jealousy inl(.pirahlle lioni tllofl who are al-
;'eakly in poffl]llon, vievvedi every ai, of lenit), as a

0 3 mlark

B o o K mark of indifference, or a symptom of apoftacy.

VII. And in order to please both, James often aimed at

- an excelfive refinement, mingled with dissimulation,
1589.

in which he imagined the perfection of government,
and of king-craft to consist.

His excel- His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to
five lenity

the corl- thefegeneral maxims. Notwithftandingthefolicita.

tions of the Queen of England, enforced by the
zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a short
imprisonment was the only punilhment he inflicted
on Huntly and his associa,tes. But he soon had rea-
son to repent an act of cremency so inconsistent
with the dignity of government. The first use which
the conspirators made of their liberty, was to as-
femble their followers, and, under pretence of re-
moving Chancellor Maitland, an able Minifier, but
wariinly devoted to the English interest, from the
King's councils and presence, they attempted to
seize James himself. This attempt being defeated,
partly by Maitland's vigilance, and partly by their
own ill condut, they were forced to retire to the
North, where they openly ereCted the standard of
Rebellion. But as the King's government was not
generally unpopular, or his ministers odious, their
own vasals joined them slowly, and discovered no
zeal in the cause. And the King, in person, ad-
vancing against them with such forces as he could
suddenly levy, they durst not rely so much on the
fidelity of the troops, which, though superior in
number, followed them with reluctance, as to ha-
zard a battle; but suffering them to disperse, they
Jfrrendcird to the King, and threw themselves on

2 his

his mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Both. B o o K
well, were all brought to a public trial. Repeated VII.
aas of treason were easily proved against them. 58^
The King, however, did not permit any sentence
to be pronounced; and after keeping them a few
months in confinement, he took occasion, amidit
the public festivity and rejoicings, at the approach
of his marriage, to set them at liberty *.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient The King',

marriage

Monarchs of Scotland, in the direct line; as all with ^nn-
hopes of uniting the crowns of the two kingdoms mfar'n
would have expired with him; as the Earl of Ar-
ran, the presumptive heir to the throne, was
lunatic; the King's marriage was, on all there ac-
counts, an event which the nation wished for with
the utmost ardour. He himself was no less desirous
of accomplishing it; and had made overtures, for
that purpose, to the eldest daughter of Frederick II.
king of Denmark. But Elizabeth, jealous of every
thing that would render the accession of the house
of Stewart more acceptable to the English, endea-
voured to perplex James, in the fame manner she
had done Mary, and employed as many artifices
to defeat or to retard his marriage. His ministers,
gained by bribes and promises, seconded her inten-
tion; and though several different ambassadors
were sent from Scotland to Denmark, they produced
powers so limited, or insisted on conditions so ex-
travagant, that Frederick could not believethe King
to be in earnest; and fufpeting that there was some

*Spotfw. 373. Cald. iv. 103.

0 4 design

B o o K design to deceive, or amuse him, gave his daughtec

VII. in marriage to the Duke of Brunswick. Not dif.
1589. couraged by this disappointment, which he imputed

entirely to the conduct of his own ministers, James
made addresses to the princess Anne, Frederick's
second daughter. And though Elizabeth endea.
voured to divert him from this, by recommending
Catherine the King of Navarre's filter, as a more
advantageous match; though she prevailed on the
privy council of Scotland to declare against the
alliance with Denmark, he pelrifted in his choice.
And despairing of overcoming the obfcinacy of
his own ministers, in any other manner, he secretly
encouraged the citizens of Edinburgh to take
arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the Chan.
cellor, whom they accused as the person, whose ar.
tifices had hitherto disappointed the wishes of the
King, and the expectations of his people. In con.
sequence of this, the Earl Marlhal was sent into
Denmark at the head of a splendid embassy. He
received ample powers and inftruEcions, drawn with
the King's own hand. The marriage articles were
quickly agreed upon, and the young Queen set fail
towards Scotland. James made great preparations
for her reception, and waited her landing with all
the impatience of a lover; when the unwelcome
account arrived, that a violent tempest had arisen,
which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condi-
tion so bhartered, that there was little hope of its
putting again to.lia before the spring. This unex-
pe&ed dilappointment he felt with the utmolt seq-
fibility. He instantly fitted out some ships, and,
without conumunicatir.g his intention to any of his

7 couln

council, failed in person, attended by the Chancel- B o o K
lor, several noblemen, and a train of 300 persons, VII.
in quest of his bride. He arrived safely in a small .--.
harbour near Upflo, where the Queen then reGided. oa 2s.
There the marriage was solemnized. And as it No,.4.
Ywould have been rash to trust those boisterous seas
ip the winter season, James accepted the invitation
of the court of Denmark, and repairing to Copen-
hagen, passed several months there, amidst conti-
nual feasting and amusements, in which, both the
Queen and himself had great delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider

deviation from his general character, than this fud-
den sally. His son Charles I. was capable of that
exceflive admiration of the other sex, which arises
from great sensibility of heart, heightened by ele-
gance of taste; and the romantic air of his jour-
ney to Spain suited such a disposition. But James
was not susceptible of any refined gallantry, and al-
ways expressed that contempt for the female cha-
rater, which a pedantic erudition, unacquainted
with politeness, is apt to inspire. He was fretted,
however, at the many obstacles which had been laid
in his way. He was anxious to secure the political
advantages, which he expected from marriage; and
fearing that a delay might afford Elizabeth, and his
own ministers, an opportunity of thwarting him by
new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of
preventing tlhem, by a voyage from which he ex-
pettcd to return in a few weeks. The nation seem-
-d to applaud his conduct, and to be plealed witcl

Melvil, 352. Spotfw. 377.

this

B o K this appearance of amorous Ardour in a young

VII. Prince. Notwithstanding his absence so long be-
589 yond the time he expected, the nobles, the clergy,

and the people, vied with one another in loyalty
and obedience; and no period in the King's reign
was more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free
from any eruption of those faCtions, which so often
disturbed the kingdom.

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HIS TORY

OF
SCOTL A ND.

BOOK VIII.
O N the first of May the King and Queen ar- B o o K

rived at Leith, and were received by their VIII.

fubjefs, with every possible expreflion of joy. 1590.
The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was con- The King
duted with great magnificence; but so low had a:rivei,"
the order of Bishops fallen, in the opinion of the Scotland,
public, that none of them were present on that
occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian
Minister of great reputation, set the Crown on her
head, administered the sacred unftion, and perform-
ed the other customary ceremonies.

THz

3 o o K THE zeal and success with which many of the
VIII. clergy had contributed towards preserving peace

9 and order in the kingdom, during his abfenee, re.

conciled James, in a great degree, to their persons,
and even to the Presbyterian form of government.
August4. In pretence of an assembly, which met this year, he

made high encomiums on the discipline as well as
the dotrine of the church, promised to adhere in.
violably to both, and permitted the assembly to
frame such ads as gradually abolished all the re-
mains of episcopal jurisdiction, and paved the way
for a full and legal establishment of the Prefbyte.
rian model *,
j591' AN event happened soon after, which afforded

the Clergy no small triumph. Archbishop Adamn-
son, their ancient enemy, having fallen under the
King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in consequence of the a& of an-
nexation, and being oppressed with age, with po-
verty, and diseases, made the meanest fubmiflion to
the clergy, and delivered to the affrebly a formal
recantation of all his opinions concerning Church
government, which had been matter of offence to
the Presbyterians. S.ich a confession, from the most
learned person of the order, was confidered as a
testimony, which the force of truth had extorted
from an adverfaryt-.

D;rrder in MIEANWHI i.E, the King's excetrve clemency tQ-
,om.' n yvards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, and

encouraged such ats of violence, as brought his

Cald i.
i 204. Sp(tflw, 35., Cald iv. 214.

gOYsI'ps'

government under contempt, and proved fatal to B o o K
many of his subjects. The hiffory of several years, VIII.
about this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly 159'n'
quarrels between the great families, and of murders
and assassinations perpetrated in the most audacious
manner, and with circumstances of the utmost bar-
barity. All the defects in the feudal aristocracy were
now felt more sensibly, than at any other period in
the history of Scotland, and universal licence and
anarchy prevailed to a degree, scarce consistent with
the preservation of society. While the King, too
gentle to punish, or too feeble to act with vigour,
suffered all there enormities to pass with impunity.
BUT though James connived at realcrimes, witch- An"attRnpt

of Both-
craft, which is commonly an imaginary one, en- we-l'sa-

gainft the

grossed his attention, and those fufpedted of it, felt King.
the whole weight of his authority. Many persons
neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which
were usually held to be certain indications of this
crime, but masters of families, and matrons of a
decent rank, and in the middle age cf life, were
fcized and tortured; and though their confeflions
contained the most absurd and incredible circum-
frances, the King's prejudices, those of the clergy,
and of the people, conspired in believing their ex-
travagancies, without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of these un-
happy sufferers accused Bothwell of having consult-
ed them, in order to know the time of the King's
death, and having employed their art, to raise the,
storms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and
had detained James so long in Denmark. Upon

this

B o o K this evidence, that nobleman was committed to
VIII. prison. His turbulent and haughty spirit could
'..,-. neither submit to the reitraint, nor brook such an

indignity. Having gained his keepers, he made
his escape, and imputing the accusation to the arti-
sices of his enemy, the Chancellor, aflembled his
followers, under pretence of driving him from the
King's councils. Being favoured by some of the
King's attendants, he was admitted by a secret pas.
sage, under cloud of night, into the court of the
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. He advanced diretly
towards the royal apartment, but happily, before he
entered, the alarm was taken, and the doors shut,
ec. 27. While he attempted to burst open some of them,

and to set fire to others, the citizens of Edinburgh
had time to run to their arms, and he escaped
with the utmost difficulty; owing his safety to the
darkness of the night, and the precipitancy with
which he fled *.
1592. HE retired towards theNorth, and the King hay.

ing unadvisedly given a commission to the Earl of
Huntly, to pursue him and his followers, with fire
and sword, he, under colour of executing that
commission, gratified his private revenge, and fur.
rounded the house of the Earl of Murray, burnt it
Feb.8. to the ground, and flew Murray himself. The

murder of a young nobleman of such promising
virtues, and the heir of the Regent Murray, the
darling of the people, excited universal indigna-
tion. The citizens of Edinburgh rose in a tumul-
tuous manner; and though they were refrained,

* Melv. 388. Spotfw. 386.

by

by the care of the magistrates, from any a& of B o o i
violence, they threw aside all refpeet for the King VIlI.
and his ministers, and openly insulted and threaten- '* J
ed both. While this mutinous spirit continued,
James thought it prudent to withdraw from the
city, and fixed his residence for some time at Glaf-
gow. There Huntly surrendered himself to jus-
tice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his
crime, and the clamours of the people, the power
of the Chancellor, with whom he was now closely
confederated, and the King's regard for the me-
mory of the Duke'ofLennox, whose daughter he had
married, not only proteced him from the sentence
whichfuchan odious action merited, butexempted
him even from the formality of a public trial*.

A STEP of much importance was taken, soon as- Prebdyte-

ter, with regard to the government of the church. goanCrhur
The Clergy had long complained of the encroach- bylbl"i',
ments made upon their privileges and jurifdiation,
by the acts of the parliament 1584, and though
there laws had now loft much of their force, they
resolved to petition the parliament, which was ap-
proaching, to repeal them in form. The juncduri
for pushing such a measure was well chosen. The
King had loft much of the public favour, by his
lenity towards the Popish faction, and still more by
his remissness in pursuing the murderers of the Earl
of Murray. The Chancellor lhad not only a power-
ful party of the courtiers combined against him, but
was become odious to the people, who imputed to
him every false ftep in the King's conduct. Both-

* Spotfw. 387.

well

B o o i well flill lurked in tle kingdom, and being fecretle
VIII. supported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini.
52' ftration, was ready, every moment, to renew his

audacious enterprises. James, for all these reasons,
was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy in their
request, and not only consented to a law, whereby
the a&ts 1584 were rescinded or explained, but he
carried his complaisance frill further, and permitted
the parliament to establish the Presbyterian govern-
ment, its General Assemblies, Provincial Iynods,
Prefbyteries and Kirk sessions, with all the different
branches of their discipline and jurisdiction, in the
most ample manner. All the zeal and authority of
the Clergy, even under the administration of Re-
gents, from whom they might have expected the
most partial favour, could not obtain the fanEion
of law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclefi.
aftical government. No Prince was ever left dif-
posed than James to approve a system, whose re-
publican genius inspired a passion for liberty, so re-
pugnant to his exalted notions of royal prerogative.
Nor could any aversion be more inveterate than his,
to the austere and uncomplying character of the
Presbyterian Clergy in that age; who, more emi-
nent for zeal, than for policy, often contradiced
his opinions, and censured his conduct, with a free.
dom equally offensive to his dogmatism as a Theo-
logian, and to his pride as a King. His situation,
however, obliged him frequently to conceal, or to
dissemble his sentiments; and as he often disgusted
his lubjeets, by indulging the Popish faction more
than thty approved, he endeavoured to atone for
thds, by cogceflions to the Prelbytertan Clergy,

wsK~

more liberal than he himfilf would otherwise have B o o K
chosen to grant*. VIIs.

1592.

IN this parliament, Bothwell, and all his adhe-59
rents, were attainted. But he soon made a new at-
tempt to seize the King at Falkland; and James,
betrayed by some of his courtiers, and feebly de-
fended by others, who wilhed well to 3Bothwell, as
the Chancellor's avowed enemy, owed his safety to
the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert Melvil, and
to the irresolution of Bothwell's associates t.

SCARCELY was this danger over, when the nation A new

eonrpracy

was alarmed with the discovery of a new and more of the po-
formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the Lord pi L"ard'
Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was ready
to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were
found in his custody, and among there; several
blanks signed by the Earls of Angus, Huntly, and
Errol. By this extraordinary precaution, they
hoped to escape any danger of discovery. But Ker's
relblution shrinking when torture was threatened, he
confessed that he was employed by thelt noblemen,
to carry on a negociation with the King of Spain;
that the blanks subscribed with their names were to
be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were
inftruEted to offer the faithful service of the three
Earls to that Monarch; and to solicit him to land
a body of his troops, either in Galloway, or at the
mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the first place, to establish the Roman Catholic Re-
ligion in Scotland, and then to invade England,

* Cald. iv. 248. 252. Spotfw. 388. t Melv, 402.
VOL. II. P with

B o o K with the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David
VIII. Graham ofFintry, and Barclay of Ladyland, whom
r'"I he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were
1592. taken into custody, and confirmed all the circum.

fiances of his confeflion *.

i593. THE nation having been kept for some time in
Zeal of the continual terror and agitation by so many successive

conspiracies, the discovery of this new danger com-
pleted the panic. All ranks of men, as if the
enemy had already been at their gates, thought
themselves called upon to Rfand forth in defenceof
their Country. The Ministers of Edinburgh, with.
out waiting for any warrant from the King, who
happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commission,
assembled a considerable number of Peers and Ba-
rons, in order to provide an instant remedy against
the impending danger. They seized the Earl of
Angus, and committed him to the catle; they exa-
mined Ker; and prepared a remonitrance to be laid
before the King, concerning the itate of the nation;
and the necessity of prosecuting the conspirators with

And pro- becoming vigour. James, though jealous of every
ceedings of
the King encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with
taghem fubjets, who, instead of petitioning, feemedtopre.

scribe to him, found it necessary, during the vio.
lence of the ferment, not only to adopt their plan,
but even to declare that no consideration ihould ever
induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty
of so odious a trealbn. He summoned the Earls
I,,. s. of Huntly and Errol to surrender themselves to

Rymer, xvi. 19o.

jutice,

justice. Graham of Fintry, whom his peers pro- B o o K
nounced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to VIII.
bepublickly beheaded; and marchinginto the North 59
at the head of an army, the two Earls, together
with Angus, who had escaped out of prison, retir-
ed to the mountains. He placed garrisons in the
castles which belonged to them; compelled their
vassals, and the Barons in the adjacent counties, to
subscribe a bond containing professions of their loy-
alty towards him, and of their firm adherence to
the Protestant faith; and, the better to secure the
tranquillity of that part of the kingdomn, constituted
the Earls of Athol, and Marshal, his Lieutenants
there *.

HAVING finished this expedition, James returned March ,g.

to Edinburgh, where he found Lord Borrough, an fulicits him
extraordinary ambassador from the court of Eng- t,': iat
land. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a rgour'
conspiracy, which she confidered as no less formi-
dable to her own kingdom, than to Scotland, re-
proached James with his former remissness, and ur-
gedhim, as he regarded the preservation of the Pro-
teftant religion, or the dignity of his own Crown,
to punish this repeated treason with rigour; and if
he could not apprehend the persons, at least to con-
fifcate the eltates of such audacious rebels. She
weakened however the force of there requefLs, by
interceding at the fame time in behalf of Both-
well, whom, according to her usual policy in nou-
sising a factious spirit among the Scottish nobles,
fle had taken under her protedtion. James abfo-

Spotfw. 301. Cald. iv. 291.

P 2 lutely

B o o K lutely refused to liften to any intercession in favou
VIII. of one, who had so often, and with so much out.

rage, insulted both his government and his person.
1593. · b

With regard to the popifn conspirators, he declared
his resolution to prosecute them with vigour; but
that he might be the better able to do so, he de.
manded a small fum of money from Elizabeth,
which the, diptruftful perhaps of the mannerin
which he might apply it, /hewed no inclination to
grant. The zeal, however, and importunity of his
own subjects obliged him to call a parliament, in
order to pass an ad of attainder against the three
Earls. But before it met, Ker made his escape out
of prison, and on pretence, that legal evidenceof
their guilt could not be produced, nothing was con.
cluded against them. The King himself was uni.
verfally suspected of having contrived this artifice,
on purpose to elude the requests of the Queen of
England, and to disappoint the wilhes of his own
people. And therefore in order to tooth the Clergy,
who exclaimed loudly against his conduet, he gave
way to the pasTing of an aft, which ordained those
who obitinately contemned the censures of the
Church, to be declared outlaws *.

Bothwell WHILE the terror excited by the Popifi confpi.
surprises
the King. racy poffcffed the nation, the court had been divided

by two rival factions, which contended for the chief
diretion of affairs. At the head of one, was the
Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire con-
fidence. For that very reason, perhaps, he had fal.
len early under the QQueen's displeasure. The Duke

'* Cald. iv. 343. Spotif. 393. Parl. 13 Jac.VI. c. 164.

of

of Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree, B o o K
and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, VIII.
and widened the breach. And James, fond no less ~ ,'1,
of doniellic tranquillity, than of public peace, ad- 193
vistd his favourite to retire, for tome time, in hopes
that the Queen's resentment would fublide. But
as he flood in need, in the present junclure, of the
afilflance of an able Minister, he had recalled him
to court. In order to prevent him from recover-
ing his sorner power, the Stewarts had recourse to
an expedient no less illegal than dtlperate. I--laving
combined with Bothwell, who was of the itme
li.namc, they brought him back lecretly into Scot- Jul- 24.
land; and seizing the gates of the palace, introduced
I.i:i into the royal apartment with a nunecrous train
oi armed followers. James, though deserted by all
his courtiers, and incapable of refictance, diicovered
more indignation than fear, and reproaching them
for their treachery, called on the Earl to fini ll his
trca.ibns, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
Btlt Bothweli fell on his knees, and implored par-
don. The King was not in a condition to refuft his
demands. And asew days after he signed a capitu-
lation with this successful traitor, to whom he was
really a prisoner, whereby he bound himlelf to grant
him a remiflion for all past offences, and to procure
t;e ratification of it in parliament; and in the mean
time to dismiss the Chancellor, the master of Gla-
ipis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, fiom
his councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part,
conlented to remove from court, though he left
tlere as many of his afibciates, as he thought iuf-
icicnt to prevent the return of the adverse faction.

P 3 BUT

B OO 0 BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the KinI
VIII. under the fame kind of bondage, to which he hac

'.-- been often subject during his minority. He disco

'59?.
He recovers vered so much impatience to Ihake off his fetters
Sebt.b 7y that those who imposed, durst not continue, the

restraint. · They permitted him to call a Convention
of the nobles at Stirling, and to repair thither him.
self. All Bothwell's enemies, and all who were
desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing
to be so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced
the insult offered to the King's person and authority
to be high treason, and declared him absolved from
any obligation to observe conditions, extorted by
force, and which violated so essentially his royal pre.
rogative. James, however, itill proffered him a
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an as of
mercy, and promise to retire out of the kingdom,
These conditions Bothwell rejected with disdain,
and betaking himself once more to arms, attempted
to surprise the King, but finding him on his guard,
fled to the borders *.

Sulrpeaed THE King's ardour against Bothwell, compared
of favour-
ing thepo. with his flow and evasive proceedings against the
pn Lords,. Popilh Lords, occasioned a general disgust among

his fubjecs; and was imputed either to an excellive
attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or
to a secret partiality towards their opinions; both
which gave rife to no unreasonable fears. The
Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the Pro.
tefant Religion, thought themselves bound, in
such a juncture, to take extraordinary lteps for it

Cald, iv. 32z. Spotfw. 395.

pr,

preservation. And the provincial fynod of Fife Bo O K
happening to meet at that time, a motion was made VIII.
to excommunicate all concerned in the late confpi- .--J

1593.

racy, as obstinate and irreclaimable Papists. And Sept. zS.
though none of the conspirators resided within the
bounds of the fynod, or were subject to itsjurifdic-
tion, such was the zeal of the members, that, over-
looking this irregularity, they pronounced against
them the sentence of excommunication, to which
the a& of last parliament added new terrors. And
left this should be imputed to a few men, and ac-
counted the aft of a finall part of the church, de-
puties were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,
and to desire their approbation and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which H:slenity
increased the people's suspicions of the King. As th.d'
he was marching on an expedition against the bor- O. '17.
derers, the three Earls coming suddenly into his
presence, offered to submit themselves to a legal
trial; and James, without committing them to cuf-
tody, appointed a day for that purpole. The con-
fpirators prepared to appear with a formidable train
of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean time,
the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons,
assembling at Edinburgh, remonstrated against the
King's extreme indulgence with great boldness, and
demanded of him, according to the regular course
ofjuftice, to commit to sure custody, persons charg-
ed with the highest acts of treason, who could not
be brought to a legal trial, until they were absolved
from the censures of the Church; and to call a
Convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the

P 4 me-

B o o K method of proceeding against them. At the fame
VIII. time they offered to accompany him in arms to the

place of trial, left such audacious and powerful cri-
93minals should overawe juffice, and dictate to the

judges to whom they pretended to submit. James,
though extremely offended both with the irregula.
rity of their proceedings, and the presumption of
their demands, found it expedient to put off the
day of trial, and to call a Convention of eftatcs, in
order to quiet the fears and jealousies of the people.
By being humoured in this point, their fulpicions
began gradually to abate, and the Chancellor
managed the Convention lo artfully, that he him.
self, together with a few other members, was im-
powered to pronounce a final sentence upon the con.
Nov. 6. fpirators. After much deliberation, they ordained

that the three Earls, and their associates, ihould be
exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution,
on account of their correspondence with Spain;
that, before the first day of February, they should
either submit to the Church, and publickly renounce
the errors of Popery, or remove out of the king.
dom; that, before the first of January, they should
declare which of these alternatives they would em-
brace; that they should find surety for their peace.
able demeanor for the future; and that if they
failed to signify their choice in due time, they should
lose the benefit of this aft of abolition, and remain
exposed to all the pains of law *.

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James
incurred much reproach, and gained no advantage.

" Cald. iv. 330. Spotfw. 397.

De-

Devoted to the Pdpifh superstition, fubmifmve to B o oK
all the dicates of their priests, and buoyed up with VIII.
hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls '
refused to accept of the conditions, and continued
their treasonable correspondence with the court of
Spain. A Convention of estates pronounced them J"n 13.
to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which
were offered ; and the King required them, by pro-
clamation, to surrender themiclves tojuftice. The
prelence of the Englilh ambassador contributed,
perhaps, to the vigour of thele proceedings. Eli-
zabeth, ever attentive to James's motions, and im-
puting his reluctance to puniih the PIopihi Lords to
a secret approbation of their designs, had ilnt to
Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger
to which he exposed himtelf, by this false modera-
tion; and to require him to exercile that rigour,
which their crimes, as well as the posture of affairs,
rendered necessary. And though the steps now taken
by the King silenced all complaints on that head,
yet Zouche, forgetful of his character as an ambaf-
fador, entered into private negociations with such
of the Scottilh nobles as disapproved of the King's
nmeafures, and held almost an open correspondence
with Bothwell, who, according to the iufual artifice
of malecontents, pretended much lilickude for re-
forming the disorders of the commonwealth; and
covered his own ambition with the specious veil of
zeal against those Counsellors, who refIrained the
King from pursuing the avowed enemies of the
Proteflant faith. Zouche encouraged him, in the
name of his Miftrels, to take arms against his So-
vereign.

MEAN-

B O O MEANWHILE, the King and the Clergy were

VIII. filled with mutual distrust of each other. They
--,- were- jealous, perhaps, toexcefs, that his assertions
I594.
A new at- leaned too much towards the Popish faction; he
Bev 'E. fufl)pefted them, without good reason, of prompt-

ing Bothwell to rebellion, and even of supplying
him with money for that purpose. Little inftiga-
tion, indeed, was wanting to route such a turbulent
spirit as Bothwtll's, to any daring enterprise. He
appeared iuddenly within a mile of Edinburgh, at
the heaJ of 400 horse. The pretences, by which
heendeavoured to j ulify this infurretion, were ex-
tremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Po-
pery, concern for the King's honour, and for the li-
berties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, and was
accompanied only with a few horsemen of Lord
Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the
aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to
encourage them to act with zeal, he promised to
proceed against the Popilh Lords with the utmnoft
rigour of law. Animated by their Miniffers, they
ran cheerfully to their arms, and advanced, with the
King at their head, against Bothwell; but he, not-
witlilanding his success in putting to flight Lord
Home, who had raflly charged him with a far in.
ferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith with-
out daring to attack the King. His followers aban-
doned him soon after, and discouraged by so many
fitcceflive disappointments, could never afterwards
be brought to venture into the field. He betook
himself to his usual lurking-places, in the North of
England; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the

5 King's

King's remonstrances, obliged him to quit that re- B o o K
treat*. VIII.

I594.

No sooner was the King delivered from one dan. Frehdan.

ger, than he was called to attend to another. The hlopif
Popish Lords, in consequence of their negociations ^d, 3.
with Spain, received, in the spring, a supply of
money, from Philip. What bold designs this
might inspire, it was no easy matter to conjecture.
From men under the dominion of bigotry, and
whom indulgence could not reclaim, the most
desperate actions were to be dreaded. The aifembly
of the Church immediately took the alarm; remon-
ftrated against them with more bitterness than ever;
and unanimously ratified the sentence of excommu-
nication, pronourced by the fynod of Fife. James
himself, provoked by their obflinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only
be generally displeasing to his own fubjecds, but
give rife to unfavourable suspicions among the Eng-
lifh, exerted himself with unusual vigour. He call-June s.
ed a parliament; laid before it all the circum-
flances and aggravations of the conspiracy; and
though there were but few members present, and
several of these conneEted with the conspirators by
blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his
influence and importunity, to pronounce the most
rigorous sentence the law can inflic. They were
declaredto beguilty of high treason, and their estates
and honours forfeited. At the fame time, flatutes,
more severe than ever, were enacted againfl the
professors of the Popilh Religion.

* Spotfw. 403. Call. iv. 359.

How

B o o K How to put this sentence in execution, was a mat.
VIII. ter of greater difficulty. Three powerful Barons,

cantoned in a part of the country almost inacceflible,

Bat.leof surrounded with numerous vassals, and supported
Clenivat. by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an

overmatch for a Scottilh Monarch. No intreaty
could prevail on Elizabeth to advance the money,
neceifary for defraying the expences of an expedi-
tion against them. To attack them in perfon,.with
his own forces alone, might expole him both to
disgrace and to danger. He had recourse to the
only expedient which remained in such a situation,
for aiding the impotence of Sovereign authority; he
delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll, and
Lord Sorbes, the leaders of two clans at enmity
with the conspirators; and gave them a commiflion
to invade their lands, and to seize the caitles which
belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all
his high pretensions of zeal for the Proteltant Re-
ligion, having now entered into a close confederacy
with them, the danger became every day more
urging. Argyll, solicited by the King, and roused
by the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7000
nien. Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat,
with an army far inferior in number, but composed
chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries, mounted
on horseback, and who brought along with them
o. 3. a train of field-pieces. They encountered each

other with all the fury, which hereditary enmity
and ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined courage.
But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the first dif-
charge of the cannon, to which they were little ac-
customed, and unable to resist the impreiflon of

3 cavalry,

cavalry, were soon put to flight. And Argyll, a B o o K
gallant young man of eighteen, .was carried by his VIII.
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation '- "-
at their disgrace, and calling on them to fland, and 55
to vindicate the honour of their name *.

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James

though obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raise
moneyt, aftembled a small body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys, Forbeses, and other
clans at enmity with Huntly and Errol, who hav-
ing loft several of their principal followers at Glen-
livat, and others refusing to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James wafted their lands ; put garrisons in
some of their castles; burnt others; and left the
Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that part of
the kingdom, with a body of men sufficient to re.
ffrain them from gathering to any head there, or
from infesting the low country. Reduced at last
to extreme distress, by the rigour of the season, and
the desertion of their followers, they obtained the
King's permilion to go beyond seas, and gave fe-
curity that they ihould neither return without his po;,;ah
licence, nor engage in any new intrigues against ,ord^i.f
the Proteltant Religion, or the peace of the king- he king-
dom ::.

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-established in

the North of Scotland; and the firmness and vi-

* Cald. iv. 408. t Birch, Mem. i. 186.
1 Spotfw.404. Cald. 373, &c.

gour,

B o o K gour, which James had displayed in his last proceed.
VIII. ings against them, regained him, in a great degree,
L-tV the confidence of his Proteltant fubjeEts. But he
1595.
TheRo- funk, in the fame proportion, and for the fame rea.
:nan Ca-
tholicsn- son, in the esteem of the Roman Catholics. They
gai-fl had asserted his mother's right to the Crown of
James. England with so much warmth, that they could not,

with any decency, reject his. And the indulgence,
with which he affected to treat the professors of that
religion, inspired them with such hopes, that they
viewed his accession to the throne as no undesirable
event. But the rigour with which the King pur.
sued the conspirators, and the severe statutes against
Popery to which he had given his content, con-
vinced them that there hopes were visionary;
and they began to look about in quest of some new
successor, whose rights they might oppose to his.
The English Papists turned their eyes towards the
Earl of Effex, whose generous mind, though firmly
established in the Protestant faith, abhorred the fe.
verities inflicted in that age, on account of religious
opinions. Those of the fame sea, who were in
exile, formed a bolder scheme, and one more suit-
able to their situation. They advanced the claim
of the Infanta of Spain; and Parsons the Jesuit
published a book, in which, by false quotations
from history, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd
arguments, intermingled with bitter invectives
against the King of Scots, he endeavoured to prove
the Infanta's title to the Englifl Crown to be pre.
ferable to his. And Philip, though involved al-
ready in a war both with France and England, and
scarce able to defend the remains of the Burgun-

dian

dian Provinces against the Dutch commonwealth, B o o K
easily grasped at this airy proje&t. The dread of VIII.
a Spanilh Pretender to the Crown, and the oppo- -.-
fition which the Papists began to form against the 1595.
King's fuccefflon, contributed not a little to remove
the prejudices of the Proteflants, and to prepare
the way for that event.

BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often men- Botlell
tioned as the disturber of the King's tranquillity, forcaofly

t0 into $?ain.

and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen of
England, on account of his confederacy with the
Popibh Lords; excommunicated by the Church for
the fame reason; and deserted, in his distress, by
his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safety
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where,
after renouncing the Proteflanr faith, he led, many
years, an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
I for a low and infamous debauchery. The King,
though extremely ready to sacrifice the strongest re-
lentinent to the slightest acknowledgments, could
never be softened by his fubmiflion, nor be induced
to liflen to any intercession in his behalf *.

THIS year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an
able Minister, on whom he had long devolved the
whole weight of public affairs. As James loved
him, while alive, he wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of verses, which, when compared
with the compositions of that age, are far from be-
ing inelegant t.

* Winw, Mem, i. Spotrw.4io. t Id, 4S .

Soon

B o o K SOON after his death, a considerable change was
VIII. made in the adminiltration. At that time, the an.
i595. nual charges of government far exceeded the King's
A clang in revenues. The Queen was fond of expensive
the adminif-
tration. amusements. James himfelfwas a tranger to eco.

non.y. It became necessary, for all these reasons, to
levy the public revenues with greater order and ri-
gour, and to husband them with more care. This
important trust was committed to eight gentlemen
of the law *, who, from their number, were call-
ed O©avians. The powers veiled in them were
ample, and almofr unlimited. The King bound
himself neither to add to their number, nor to sup.
ply any vacancy that might happen, without their
content: And knowing the facility of his own tern.
per, agreed that no alienation of his revenue, no
grant of a pension, or order on the treasury, should
be held valid, unlcfs it were ratified by the fubfcrip.
tion of five of the commiflioners; all their ats and
decisions were declared to be of equal force with the
sentences ofjudges in civilcourts; and in consequence
of them, and without any other warrant, any person
might be arrested, or their goods seized. Such ex-
tensive jurifdition, together with the abfolutedif.
pofal of the public money, drew the whole execu.
tive part of the government into their hands. Unit.
ed among themtclves, they gradually undermined
the reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every
lucrative or honourable office. Theancient servants

* Alexander Seaton President ofthe Seflion, Walter Stewart

Commend.tor of Blantyre Lord Privy Seal, David Carnegy,
John Lindsay, lames liphingllon, Thomas Hamilton, John
Skcne Cleik Regilklr, and Peter Young Elemofynar.

of

of the Crown repined, at being obliged to quit their B o o K
stations to new men. The favourites, and young VIII.
courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality 59
itinted by their prescriptions. And the Clergy ex-
claimed against some of them as known apostates
to Popery, and fufpeaed others of secretly favour-
ing it. They retained their power, however, nor-
withstanding this general combination against them;
and they owed it entirely to the order and ceconomy

E which they introduced into the administration of the
| finances, by which the necessary expencesofgovern-

ment were more easily defrayed, than in any other
period of the King's reign *.

1 THE rumour of vast preparations which Philip Violence o
s was said to be carrying on at this time, filled both agia ,th'

I England and Scotland with the dread of a new in- Lopdfh
! vafion. James took proper measures for the de-
: fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the

zeal of the Clergyj whose suspicions of the King's
| sincerity began to revive; and as he had permit-

td
t the wives of the banished Peers to levy the
rents of their estates, and to live in their houfcs,
they charged him with rendering the act of forfeit-
ure ineffctual, hy fuipporting the avowed enemies
of the I'roteftant faith. The assembly of the Church Mt;ch 4
took under consideration the state of the kingdom,
and having appointed a day of public falling, they
oblemnly renewed the Covenant, by which the na-
tion was bound to adhere to the Protestant faith,
and to defend it against all aggressors, A commit-

Spotfw. 413. 425.
VOJL. (I. teev

B o o K tee, consisting of the most eminent Clergymen, an(
VIII. of many Barons and gentlemen of diftinEtion, wait

.--- ed on the King, and laid before him a plan for thó

security of the kingdom, and the preservation o:
religion. They urged him to appropriate the eftater
of the banished Lords, as a fund for the mainte.
nance of soldiers; to take the ftriteft precautions
for preventing the return of such turbulent fubjeLts
into the country; and to pursue all who were fu.
pec'ed of being their adherents, with the utmoflt ri
gour.

The King's NOTE-INoC could be more repugnant to the King's
rem'iTefs schemes, or more disagreeable to his inclination,
with regard
to them. than thcte propositions. Averse, through his whole

life, to any course, where he expected opposition or
danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the
character of moderation, and by the arts of policy,
he observed with concern the prejudices against him,
which were growing among the Roman Catholics,
and resolved to make some atonement for'that part
of his conduct, which had drawn on him their
indignation. Elizabeth was now well advanced in
years; her life had lately been in danger; if any
Popifl competitor should arise to dispute his right
of fucceflion, a faction, so powerful as that of the
banished Lords, might be extremely formidable;
and any division among his own fubjeEts might
prove fatal,tat ajunture, which would require their
united and most vigorous efforts. Instead, there.
fore, of the additional severities which the assembly
proposed, James had thoughts of mitigating the
punishment, which they already suffered. And

I a5

as they were surrounded, during their refidence'in B o o K
foreign parts, by Philip'semiffaries; asrefentment VIII.
might dispose them to lissen more favourably than '..
ever, to their suggestions; as despair might drive 59
them to frill more atrocious afions; he resolved to
recall them, under certain conditions, into their na-
tive country. Encouraged by these fentirnents of
the King in their favour, of which they did not
want intelligence, and wearied already of the de-
pendant and anxious life of exiles, they ventured to
return secretly into Scotland. Soon after, theypre-
sented a petition to the King, begging his permif-
lion to retide at their own houses, and offering to
give security for their peaceable and dutiful beha-
vlour. James called a Convention of estates to de-
liberate on a matter of such importance, and by
their advice he granted the petition.

So soon as they were informed of this, the mem- The ra(h

bers of a committee, appointed by the last assembly, ngs of the
met at Edinburgh, and with all the precipitancy of Cl"y and
fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions as they
thought necefary for the safety of the kingdom.
They wrote circular letters to all the Prefbyteries in
Scotland; they warned them of the approaching
danger; they exhorted them to stir up their people
to the delence of theirjuft rights; they commanded
them to publiih, in all their pulpits, the ael of ex-
communicating the Popifl Lords; and enjoined
them to lay all thole who were fulpeded of favour-
ing Popery under the fame censure, by a summary
eIntence, and without observing the usual formali-
ties of trial. And as the danger feemled too prelling

0 2 to

B o o K to wait for the Rated meetings of thejudicatories of
VIII. the Church, they made choice of the molt eminent
I96 clergymen in different corners of the kingdom, ap.

pointed them to reside constantly at Edinburgh, and
to meet every day with the Ministers of that city,
under the name of the StandingCouncilof the Churhb,
and vested in this body the supreme authority, by
enjoining it, in imitation of the ancient Roman
form, to take care that the Church flould receive
no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconflitutional than

unprecedented, were manifest encroachments on the
royal prerogative, and bold steps towards open re-
bellion. The King's condut, however, juflified in
om-e degree fuchi excesses. His lenity towards the
Papifis, so repugnant to the principles of that age;
his pardoning the conspirators, notwithstanding re.
peated promises to the contrary; the refpet he paid
to Lady Huntly, who was attached to the Romish
religion no less than her husband; his committing
the care of his daughter, the Princess Elizabeth, to
Lady Levingfton, who was infected with the fame
lilperftition; the contempt with which he talked, on
all occasions, both of the character of Miniflers,
and of their function; were circumfiances which
might have filled minds, not prone by nature to
jealousy, with tome suspicions; and might have pre.
cipitated into rash councils, those, who were far re.
moved from intemperate zeal. But, howevcrpower-
ful the motives might be which influenced the
Clergy, or however laudable the end they had in
view, they conduted their measures with no address,

and

and even with little prudence. James discovered a B o o K
strong inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, VIII.
andjealous as he wasof his prerogative, would wil- 5 6
jingly have made many conceftions for the fake of
peace. By his command, fomeof the Privy Coun-
fellors had an interview with the more moderate
among the CJergy, and inquired whether Huntly
and his associates might not, upon making proper
acknowledgments, be again received into the bosom
of the Church, and be exempted from any further
punishment, on account of their part apoftacy and
treasons. They replied, that though the gate of
mercy isood always open for those who repented and
returned, yet as these noblemen had been guilty of
idolatry, a crime deserving death both by the law of
God and of man, the civil magiflrate could not le-
gally grant them a pardon; and even though the
Church ihould absolve them, it was his duty to in-
flit punishment upon them. This inflexibility in
those, who were reckoned the most compliant of
the order, filled the King with indignation, which
the imprudence and obsinacy of a private Clergy-
man heightened into rage.

MR. DAVID BLACK, MVinifter at St. Andrew's, Sedit;ous

dilcourfing in one of his sermons, accordingto cuf- tauuht by
tom, concerning the state of the nation, affirmed Back.
that the King had permitted the Popish Lords to re-
turn into Scotland, and by that aftion, had disco-
vered the treachery of his own heart; that all Kings
were the Devil's children ; that Satan had now the
guidance of the court; that the Queen of England

Q3 was

B o o K was an atheist; that thejudges were miscreants and
VIII. bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the
1596' Privy Counsellors cormorants, and men of no reli.

gion; and in his prayer for the Queen, he used theft

Nov. To. words, we must pray for her for fafhion-fake, but
Tne Clergy
efrouf hiis we have no cauif, she will never do us good. James

commanded him to be summoned before the Privy
Council, to answer for such seditious exprefflons;
and the Clergy, instead of abandoning him to the
punifhmcnt, which such a petulant and criminal at-
tack on his iuperiors deserved, were so imprudent as
to espouse his cause, as if it had been the common
one of the whole order. The controversy concern.
ing the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to testify againr vices of every kind,
which had been agitated in i534, was now revived.
It was pretended, that, with regard to their sacred
function, Ministers were subjed to the Church
alone; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical
superiors to judge of the truth or falsehood of doc.
trines, delivered in the pulpit; that if, upon aiy
pretence whatever, the King uifurped this jurifl
difion, the Church would, from that moment, fink
under servitude to the civil magifirate; that inftlad
of reproving vice, with that hones boldness which
had often been of advantage to individuals, and 1a-
lutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the paflions of the Prince, and to connive at
the vices of others; that the King's eagerneis to
punilh the indiscretion of a Protestant Minifler,
while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of Po-
pish conspirators, called on them to stand on their
guard, and that now was the time to contend for

their

their privileges, and to prevent any encroachment B o o K
on those rights, of which the church had been in VIII.
polffelon ever since the Reformation. Influenced'6
by these considerations, the Council of the Church
enjoined Black to decline the jurifdi&ion of the Pri-
vy Council. And he, proud of such an opportu-
nity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that
purpose, and with the utmost firmnels refuled to
plead, or to answer the questions which were put to
him. In order to add greater weight to there pro-
ceedings, the Council of the Church tranfinitted the
declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the
kingdom, and commanded every Minifler to sub-
icribe it, in testimony of his approbation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour

than they were attacked. Sensible of the contempt
under which his authority mufft fall, if the clergy
should be permitted, publickly, and with impunity,
to calumniate his ministers, and even to cenlure
himself; and knowing, by former examples, what
unequal reparation for such offences he might ex-
peat from thejudicatories of the church, he urged
on the inquiry into Black's conduct-, and issued a
proclamation, commanding the members of the
council of the church to leave Edinburgh, and to
return totheirown parifies. Black, instead of sub-
mirting, renewed his declinature; and the Council,
in defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as
they met by the authority of the Church, obedience
to it was a duty still more sacred, than that which
they owed to the King himself. The Privy Coun-
cil, notwithstanding Black's refuting to plead, pro-

Q 4 ceedcd

B o o K ceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry
VIII. pronounced him guilty of the crimes of which h(

had been accused; but referred it to the King, t(
X596,

appoint what punishment he should susser.

MEAN while, many endeavours were used to

bring matters to accommodation. Almost every
day produced some new scheme of reconcilement;
but through the King's fickleness, the obstinacy of
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they
all proved ineffeeual. Both parties appealed to the
people, and by reciprocal and exaggerated accufa.
tions, endeavoured to render each other odious,
Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes with
which James charged the Clergy; while they made
the pulpits resound with complaints of his excessive
lenity towards pIapifts, and of the no less excessive
rigour, with which he oppressed the established
Church. Exasperated by their bold invectives, he,
at last, sentenced Black to retire beyond the river
Spey, and to reside there during his pleasure; and
once more commanding the members of the stand-
ing council to depart from Edinburgh, he required
all the Ministers in the kingdom to subscribe a bond,
obliging themselves to submit, in the fame manner
as other fubjets, to the jurifdiftion of the civil
courts, in matters of a civil nature.

A tumult in THIS decisive measure excited all the violent pas.
Edinburgh. sIons, which poffefs'difappointed fa&ions; anddeedg

no less violent immediately followed. These mutt
be imputed in part to the artifices of some cour-
tiers, who expected to reap advantage from the ca-

I.amjtie

ainities of their country, or who hoped to lefien the B o o I
authority of the Oftavians, by engaging them in VIII.
hostilities with the church. On one hand, they in- '-
formed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh 1596
were under arms every night, and had planted a
strong guard round the houses of their ministers.
James, in order to put a stop to this imaginary
insult on his government, issued a proclamation,
commanding twenty-four of the principal citizens
to leave the town, within fix hours. On the other
hand, they wrote to the Ministers, advifng them to
look to their own safety, as Huntly had been secret-
ly admitted to an interview with the King, and had
been the author of the severe proclamation againfl
the citizens of Edinburgh *. They doubted no
more of the truth of this intelligence, than the
King had done of that which he received, and fell
as blindly into the snare. The letter came to their
hands, jult as one of their number was going to
mount the pulpit. They resolved that he should Dccem. 17.
acquaint the people of their danger: and he paint-
ed it, with all the strong colours, which men natu-
rally employ, in describing any dreadful and instant
calamity. When the sermon was over, he desired
the nobles and gentlemen to assemble in the Little

* Though matters were industriously aggravated by persons,
who wished both parties to pursue violent mealures; neither of
these reports were altogetherdeltituteof foundation. As their
Minillers were supposed to be in danger, some of the more zeal-
ous citizens had determined to defend them, by force of arms.
Birch. Mem. ii. 250. Huntly had been privatelyin Edinburgh,
where he had an interview, if not with the King, at Icall with
rone of his Miniliers. Birch. Ibid. 230.

Church.

B o o K Church. The whole multitude, terrified at whai
VIII. they had heard, crowded thither; they promised

6 and vowed to stand by the Church; they drew up
1596 a petition to the King, craving the redress of those

grievances, of which the Clergy complained, and
beseeching him to deliver them from all future ap.
prehensions of danger, by removing such of his
Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the
Protestant Religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen,
two Burgefles, and two Ministers, were appointed

TheKing to present it. The King happened to be in the
in dansgr. great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of fef.

sion was fitting. The manner in which the petition
was delivered, as well as its contents, offended him,
He gave an haughty reply; the petitioners inillted
with warmth; and a promiscuous n ultitude pressing
into the room, James retired abruptly into another
apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut be.
hind him. The deputies returned to the multitude,
who were still aflembled, and to whom a minister
had been reading, in their absence, the fory of Ha.
man. When they reported that the King had re-
fuLed to liften to their petitions, the Church swas
filled in a moment with noise, threatenings, execra.
tions, and all the outrage and confusion of a popular
tumult. Some called for their arms, some to bring
out the wicked Haman; others cried, The sword of
the Lord and of Gideon; and ruffling out with the
moat furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth,
threatening the King himself, and demanding fomeof
his Counsellors whom they named, that they might
tear them in pieces. The magiflrates ofthecity, part-
ly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell

the

the tumult; the King attempted to sooth the male. B o o ic
contents, by promising to receive their petitions, VIII.
when presented in a regular manner; the Ministers, i596
sensible of their own raihnefs in kindling such a
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the popu-
lace, subsiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all
dispersed, and theKingreturned to thepalace; happy
in having escaped from an infurretion, which,
though the instantaneous and unconcertedeffet of
popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent dan-
ger, and was confidered by him as an unpardonable
aiTront to his authority *

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecon-

tents assembled, in order to prepare their petition.
The punishment of the Popish Lords; the removal
of thole Counsellors, who were fufpe&ed of favour-
ing their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the
late acEs of council, subversive of the authority of
the Church; together with an act approving the
proceedings of the standing council; were the chief
of their demands. But the King's indignation was
itill so high, that the deputies, chosen for this pur-
pose, durst not venture, that night, to prelenit re-
quests which could not fail of kindling his rare a-
new. Before next morning, James, with all his
attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the session, e leaves

1 1 r * n * * i i Edinburgh.

anci other courts of jutice, were required to leave a nd pro-
city, whereit was no longerconfitent either with their fevcrity a-
safety, or their dignity, to remain; and the noblemen ,atin
ianl( barons were commanded to return to their own

Spotfw. 417, &c. Cald. v. 54, &c. Birch. Mem. ii. z35.

houses,

B o o K houses, and not to reassemble without the King's
VIII. permiflion. The vigour, with which the King at-
t.g .- ed, ilruck a damp upon the spirits of his adverfa.

9 ries. The citizens, sensible how much they would

susser by his absence, and the removal of the courts
ofjuftice, repented already of their conduct. The
Ministers alone resolved to maintain the contest.
They endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dif.
pering; they inflamed the people by violent invec.
tives against the King; they laboured to procure
subscriptions to an association for their mutual de-
fence; and conscious what lustre and power the
junEtion of some of the greater nobles would add to
their cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to
Lord Hamilton, that the people, moved by the
word of God, and provoked by the injuries offered
to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to proteEt the Protestant Re.
ligion, which owed its establishment to the piety
and valour of their ancestors; that they wanted only
a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less
than his noble birth, entitled him to that honour:
They conjured him therefore not to disappoint their
hopes and wishes, nor to refute the fuffcring Church
that aid, which she so much needed. Lord Ha-
milton, instead of complying with their desire, car-
ried the letter diretly to the King, whom this new
insult irritated to stich a degree, that he commanded
the magistrates of Edinburgh inltantly to seize their
Ministers, as manifest incendiaries, and encouragers
of rebellion. The magistrates, in order to regain
the King's favour, were preparing to obeyc and

the

the Ministers, who saw no other hope of safety, fed B o o K
towards England*. VIII.

1597.

THIs unfuccefsfulinfurretion,inflead ofoverturn- The King
ing, eftablilhed the King's authority. Those con- the poler
cerned in it were confounded and dispersed. And c hthe!h;

Church.

the reft of his fubjeas, in order to avoid suspicion, Jan3.
or to gain his favour, contended who fiould be molt
forward to execute his vengeance. A Convention
of estates being called, pronounced the late infur-
retion to be high treason; ordained every Minister
to subscribe a declaration of his fubmiflion to the
King's jurifdiation, in all matters civil and crimi-
nal; impowered magistrates to commit, inltantly,
to prison any Minilfer, who, in his sermons, should
utter any indecent refledionson theKing's conduct;
prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet,
without the King's license; commanded that no
perlbn should be elected a magistrate of Edinburgh,
for the future, without the King's approbation; and
that, in the mean time, the preftnt magiftrares
Ihould either discover, and inflict condign punilh-
ment on the authors of the late tumult, or the city
itself should be fubje6ed to all the penalties of that
treasonable action t.

AR ME D with the authority of these decrees, James Abridge,
resolved to crush entirely the mutinous spirit of his the pivi,

leges of the

subje&s. As the clergy had, hitherto, derived citizenof
their chief credit and strength from the favour and Edinburh.
zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his first care was

Spotfw. 451. Cald. v. 126. Cald. v. 147.

5 to

B o o K to humble them. Though the magistrates submit
VIII. ted to him in the most abjet terms ; though the'

-vindicated themselves, and their fellow-citizens
1597. from the most distant intention of violating his roy

al person or authority; though after the strictel
scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix on them
the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been
discovered; though many of the nobles, and such of
the clergy as still retained any degree of favour, in.
terceded in their behalf; neither acknowledgments,
nor intercefiions, were of the least avail*. The
Feb. A, King continued inexorable, the city was declared to

have forfeited its privileges as a corporation, and to
be liable to all the penalties of treason. The capital
of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, deserted
by its ministers, abandoned by the court of justice,
and proscribed by the King, remained in desolation
and despair. The courtiers even threatened to rase
the city to the foundation, and to eredt a pillar
where it stood, as an everlasting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who inter.
posed in their favour, and moved by the continual
March . solicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-

tizens from the penalties of law, but at the fame
time he flripped them of their most important pri-
vileges; they were neither allowed to elet their
own MagifPrates, nor their own Ministers; many
new burdens were imposed on them; and a great
fum of money was exated by way of peace offer.
ingt.

Cald. v. 149. Spotfw. 134. 444.

J AMSl

JA.MES was, mean while, equally assiduous, and B o o

no less successful, in circumscribing the jurisdic'tion VIII.
of the Church. Experience had discovered that to

'597.

attempt this, by aEts of parliament, and sentences New regu-
of privy council, was both i leffetual and odious. ht.io ndsith
-He had recourse, now, to an expedient more artful, 'citCh"ch.
and better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclesiastical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the clergy were extreme-
ly indigent, and unprovided of legal stipend; the
minifers in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, not-
withstanding the parity established by the Prefby-
tcrian government, had assumed a leading in the
Church, which filled their brethren with envy;
every numerous body of men is susceptible of fud-
den and strong imprefflions, and liable to be influ-
enced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by there
considerations, James thought it polffble to gain
the Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to sub-
due. Proper agents were set to work all over the
kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were em-
ployed; the usurpations of the brethren near the ca-
pital were aggravated; the jealouiy of their power,
which was growing in the diltant provinces, was aug.
mented; and two different General Assemblies were
held, in both which, notwithstanding the zeal and
boldness wherewith afewleadingClergymen defend-
ed the privileges of the Church, a majority declared
in favour of those measures which were agreeable to
the King. Many practices, which had continued
since the Reformation, were condemned; many
points of dilcipline, which had hitherto been reckon-

ed

B o o Ked sacred and uncontroverted, were given up; the
VIII. license, with which ministers discoursed of political

matters, was restrained; the freedom, with which
they inveighed against particular persons, censured;
sentences of summary excommunication declared
unlawful; the convoking aGeneral Assembly, with.
out the King's permission, prohibited; and the right
of nominating ministers to the principal towns,
veiled in the Crown. Thus, the Clergy themfdlves
surrendered privileges, which it would have been
dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted to
a yoke, more intolerable than any James would
have ventured to impose by force; while those who
continued to oppose his measures, instead of their
former popular topic of the King's violent encroach-
ments on ajurifdidion which did not belong to him,
were obliged to turn their outcries againit the cor.
ruptions of their own order*.

Popifi BY the authority of these assemblies, the Popish
doned.'r Earls were allowed to make a public recantation of

their errors; were absolved from the sentence of ex.
communication; and received into the bosom of the
Church. But, not many years after, they relapied
into their former errors, were again reconciled to
the church of Rome, and by their apoftacy jutti.
fled, in some degree, the fears and scruples of the
Clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the inter.
ceflion of these assemblies, the liberty of returning

* Spotfw. 433. Cald. v. 189. e33,

ta

to their charges in the city. But this liberty was B o o K
clogged in such a manner as greatly abridged their VIII.
power. The city was divided into diffinA parishes; 157
the number ofMinifters doubled; persons on whose
fidelity the King could rely were fixed in the new
parishes; and these circum(lances, added to the au-
thority of the late decrees of the Church, contri-
buted to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecc!efi-
aftical affairs, which James possessed during the
remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new modelling the

Church, that the other tranfadtions of this period
scarce delerve to be remembered. The Octavians,
envied by the other courtiers, and splitting into sac-
tions among themselves, resigned their commission;
and the administration of the revenue returning into
its former channel, both the King and the nation
were deprived of the benefit of their regular and
firugal ceconomy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was Dxc. 9g.
held in order to restore Huntly, and his arociates,
to their estates and honours, by repealing the aft of
forfeiture passed against them. The authority of
this supreme court was likewise employed to intro-
duce a farther innovation into the Church; but con-
formable to the system which the King had now
adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife Ecclefianice
from the Clergy themselves. As the at of general a'edti
annexation, and that eflablifhing the Presbyterian parliamcnt
government, had reduced the few Bilhops, who frill
survived, to poverty and contempt; as those who

VOL. I. R pof-

B o o K pioeffied the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere lay
VIII. men, and many of them temporal Peers, few ol

none of the Ecclesiastical order remained to vote in
parliament, and by means of that, the influenceoi
the Crown was considerably diminished there, and
a proper balance to the power and number of the
nobles was wanting. But the prejudices the nation
had conceived againfR the name. and charaEter of
Bilhops, were so violent, that James was obliged,
with the utinoit care, to avoid the appearance of a
design to revive that order. He prevailed therefore
on the comini.ion appointed by last Assembly to
complain to the parliament, that the Church was
the only body in the kingdom destitute of its repre.
fentatives in that supr-eme court, where it ib nearly
concerned every order to have some, who were bound
to d.fend its rights; and to crave that a competent
number of the Clergy should be admitted, accord-
ing to ancient cuionm, to a feat there. In compli-
ance with their requcfl , an act was pased, by which
those Ministers, on whom the King should confer
the vacant Bifhopricks and Abbeys, were intitled
to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy might
conceive no jealousy on any encroachment on their

rlivilvges, it was remitted to the General Aflnm-
liy, to determine what spiritual jurifdiciion or au-
thority in the government of the Church thele
perlbns fliou!d pofiifs *.

TrrE King, however, found it no easy matter to

obtain the concurrence of the Ecclefiaflical judica-
torics, in which the a& of parliament met with a

' Spotfwv. 150. Parl. i5th Jac. VI. c. 235.

+^~~~~~~~~ ~~~fierce

fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived B o o K
how much lustre this new privilege would reflect VIII.
upon their order; though they were not inienfible . ---.
of the great acceflion of perlbnal power and dig-5
nity, which many of them would acquire, by be-
insg admitted into the supreme council of the nation,
, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and
to that they sacrificed every consideration of inte-
rcft or ambition. All the King's profcfions of re-
i ga-rd for the present conflitution of the Church did
not convince them of his sincerity ; all the devices
that could be invented for restraining and circum-
tcribing the jurifdicqion of those, who were to be
raild to this new honour, did not diminish their
jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy
advances, and though admitted at first with mode-
rate authority, and under specious pretences, how
rapidly it extends its dominion. " Varnifl over
this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen,
with what colours you please; deck the intruder
with the utmost art; under all this disguise, I fee
the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments pre-
vailed among many of his brethren, and induced
them to rejec power, and honours, with as much
zeal, as ever those of their order courted them.
Many, however, were allured by the hopes of pre-
ferment; the King himself and his Minillers em-
ployed the fame arts, which they had tried Co fuc-
cefsfully last year; and after long debates, and
much opposition, the General Assembly declared March 7.
that it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a feat
il parliament; that it would be highly beneficial to

R 2 the

B o o K the Church, to have its representatives in that fu.
VIII. preme court; and that fifty-one persons, a number

o5S8 nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics who were

anciently called to parliament, should be chosen
from among the Clergy for that purpose. The
manner of their elction, together with the powers
to be veiled in them, were left undecided for the
present, and furnished matter of future delibera.
tion *.

; .399 As the profpe& of succeeding to the Crown of
Jmin:s n- England drew nearer, James multiplied precautions

- in order to render it certain. As he was allied to

c'.s t.rain many of the Princes of Germany by his marriage,
ins and. he sent ambalTadors extraordinary to their several

courts, in order to explain the jultnefs of his title
to the English throne, and to desire their affifance,
if any competitor fiould arise to dispute his un.
douu'ed rights. These Princes readily acknow.
ledged the equity of his claim; but the aid they
could afford him was distant and feeble. At the
fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of Kinlofs, his
ambassador at the English court, solicited Eliza-
beth, with the utmofl: warmth, to recognize his
title by some public deed, and to deliver her own
fubjeas from the calamities, which are occasioned
by an uncertain or disputed fucceflion. But age
had fRrengthened all the paflions, which had, hi.
therto, induced Elizabeth to keep this great quef-
tion obscure, and undecided; and a general and
evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As
no impreflion could be made on the Queen, the ani

Spotfw.45o. Cald. v. 278.

baflador

baffador was commanded to found the disposition B o o K
of her fubjeds, and to try what progress he could Vii.-
make in gaining them. Bruce possessed all the ta- 1
lents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite
for conducing a negociation, no less delicate than
important. A Minister of this character was inti-
tied to the confidence of the Englith. Many of
the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him with-
out reserve, and gave him repeated assurances of
their resolution to aflert his master's right, in oppo-
fition to every pretender*. And as several pam-
phlets were.difperfed, at this time, in England, con-
taining objecions to his title, James employed orme
learned men in his kingdom to answer there cavil-
lers, and to explain the advantages which would
relult to both kingdoms, by the union of the
Crowns. These books were eagerly read, and con-
tributed not a little to reconcile the English to that
event. A book publifled this year, by the King
himself, produced an effect still more favourable.
It was intitled Bafilicon Doron, and contained pre-
cepts concerning the art of government, addressed
to Prince Henry his son. Notwithstanding the
great alterations and refinements in national taste
since that time, we must allow this to be no con-
temptible performance, and not to be inferior to the
works of most cotemporary writers, either in pu-
rity of style orjuftnefs of composition. Even the
vain parade of erudition with which it abounds,
and which now difgults us, raised the admiration of
that age; and as it was filled with those general
rules, which speculative authors deliver for render-

* Johnlt. 242.

R 3 ing

B o o K ing a nation happy, and of which James could dif.
VIII. course with great plausibility, though often incapa.

ble of putting them in praftice, the English con.
x599.

ceived an high opinion of his abilities, and expected
an increase of national honour and prosperity, under
a Prince so profoundly skilled in politics, and who
gave such a specimen both of his wisdom, and of
his love to his people *.

TH E Queen of England's sentiments, concerning

James, were very different from these of her sub-
jests. His excessive indulgence towards the Popifi
Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his refloring Beaton, the Popiih
Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scot.
land at the time of the Reformation, to the pofl'e.
sion of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap.
pointing him his Ambassador at the court of France;
the applause he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doron,
on those who adhered to the Queen his mothr,
Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of a
mind alienated from the ProtefPant religion; and
fifpeEted that he would soon revolt from the pro.
session of it. These suspicions seemed to be fuily

Acctsr confirmed, by a diicovery which came fromn the
himofcor Mailer of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy,
rcfpondbiig
1,ilIllie and who, rather than fufler his intriguing spirit to

o be idle, demeaned himself so far as to aft as a spy

for the Engliih court. 1-He conveyed to Elizabeth
the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Cle-
ment VIII. in which the King, after many cxprel-
sions of regard for that pontiff, and of gratitude

Camd. Spotfw. 457.

for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat B o o K
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in or- VIII.
der to render the intercourse between the court of -"-'
Rome and Scotland more frequent and familiar, he L599.
solicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bifhlop
of Vaifon, a Scotfinan, to the dignity of a Cardi-
nal*. Elizabeth, who had received, by another
channelt , some imperfe& intelligence of this cor-
refpondence, was filled with just iurprile, and im-
mediately dispatched Bowes into Scotland, to in-
quire more fully into the truth of the matter, and
to reproach James for an acion so unbecoming a
Protestant prince. He was no lels aftonifled at the
accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing
but the confcioufnels of innocence could inspire, as-
firmed the whole to be a mere caiumny, and the
letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpole
to bring his sincerity in Religion to be fulpecled.
Elphingfton the Secretary of State denied the mat-
er with equal solemnity. It came to be known by
a very singular accident, which happzned so-ne
yea;s after, that the information which .liza!erh
had received was well founded, thoulgh at the Ia;ne
ti:m the King's declarations of his own innoce;:ce
w(Tr plcrtfe6ly consistent wirh truth. Cardinrl Bel-
lrmi.ne, in a reply which he published to a cullro-
verrial trc.tite, of which the King was the author,
accil;'.c him of having aba:doned the fav<,uri-ble
fentimntnts which lie had once entertaincl of the
Rolran Catholic religion, and as a pro.:: of this
quoted his letter to Clement VIII. It was iipolli-
ble, any longer, to believe this to be a fitiun ; and
" Cald. 33, -3 Winw. Men. vol. i. 37. 5.

R 4 it

B o o K it was a matter too delicate to be passed over with-
VIII. out firit inquiry. James immediately examined
LV 'Elphingfton, and his confeflion unravelledthe whole
1599.

mystery. He acknowledged that he had shuffled in
this letter among other papers, which he laid before
the King to be signed, who fufpedting no such de.
ceit, subscribed it together with the reft, and with.
out knowing what it contained; that he had no
other motive, however, to this action, but zeal for
his Majelly's service; and, by fattering the Roman
Catholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's
government, he imagined that he was paving the
way for iis more easy accession to the English throne.
The Privy Council of England entertained very dif-
ferent sentiments of the Secretary's conduct. In
their opinion, not only the King's reputation had
been exposed to reproach, but his life to danger,
by this rafl imposture; they even imputed the gun-
powder treason to the rage and disappointment of
the Papists, upon finding that the hopes which this
letter inspired were frustrated. The Secretary was
sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried for high
treason. l-is peers found him guilty, but, by the
Queen's intercession, he obtained a pardon*.

ACCORDING to the account of other historians,

James himself was no tfranger to this correspond-
ence with the Pope; and, if we believe them, El.
phingfton being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed some circumstances
in his narrative of this tranfaftion, and falsified

Spotfw. 456. 507. Johnft. 448.

others;

others; and at the expence of his own fame, And B o K
with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a VIII.
veil over this part of his matter's conduct *. 1

1599.

BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter JAme at

to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's t, g'i the
command, it is certain, that, about this time, James PCa:i os.
was at the utmost pains to gain the friendship of
the Roman Catholic princes, as a neccffary precau-
tion towards facilitating his accefflon to the Englih
throne. Lord Home, who was himself a Papist,
was entrufed with afecretcommiffion to the Pope t;
the Archbishop of Glasgow was an acsive inftru-
ment with those of his own religion:. The Pope
expressed such favourable sentiments both of the
King, and of his right to the Crown of England,
that James thought himself bound, some years as-
ter, to acknowledge the obligation in a public man-
ner §. Sir James Lindsay made great progrcfs in
gaining the Englilh Papifts'toacknowledge his Ma-
jefty's title. Of all there intrigues Elizabeil re-
ceived obscure hints, from different quarters. The
more imperfeEtly the knew, the more violently fte
fulpeeted the King's designs; and the natural jea-
lousy of her temper increasing with age, Iie oblcrv-
ed his conduct with greater solicitude than ever.

THE questions with regard to the election and rioo.
power of the representatives of the Church, were Mrch 28'

Ils regu La-

finally decided this year, by the General Afnembly, tion, with
which met at Montrose. That place was chosen the Church.

' Cald. vol. v. 322. vi. 147. + Winw. Mem. vol. ii. 57.
I Cald. vol. vi. 147. § Ibid. vol. v. 604.

as

B o o K as Aloft convenient for the miniflers of the north,
VIII. among whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And
' 600. although great numbers resorted from the northern

provinces, and the King employed his whole inte-
reft, and the authority of his own pretence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with dif-
ficulty agreed on. That the General Afiembly fliall
recommend fix persons to every vacant benefice,
which gave a title to a feat in parliament, out of
whom the King fliould nominate one; that the per.
ion so elected, after obtaining his feat in parliament,
shall neither propose, nor consent to any thing there,
that may aledct the interest of the church, without
special instructions to that purpose; that he shall
be answerable for his conduc&t to every General As-
fembly; and fi.bmnic to its cenlure, without appeal,
upon pain of infamy and excommunication; that
he shall discharge the d;.ties of a Paflor, in a parti.
cular congregation; that he fiall not usurp any cc
cleriafticaljurifii&(i;n, superior to that of his other
brethren t `har if the Church inflict on him the cen-
sure or d' privation, he si ail, thereby, forfeit his feat
in Parlianient; that he fihail annually resign his corn.
mission to the General Afiembly, which may be re-
storcd to him,or not, asthe Aleembly, with the King's
approbation, lhall judge most expedient for the
gool of the Church*. Nothing could be more
rc)ulgnant to -t'i iJla of episcopal government,
thlin, twheC rii)!O!s. It vas nrot in consequence
of r:ights tiriv.:d froin their office, but of powers
conferred by a colmmifion, that ecclefiaflical per-
ions were to bc admitted to a leat in Parliament;

* Sp:fiv. -153. t57. Cald. vol. v, 368.

they

they were the representatives, not the superiors of B o o x
the clergy. Destitute of all fpiitual authority, even VIII.
their civil jurifdistion was temporary. James, how- -"-_
ever, flattered himself that they would loon be able i
to shake off thele fetters, and gradually acquire all
the privileges which belonged to the epilcopal order.
The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he con-
tended for, and they opposed the nomination of theie
commifinoners, not to much on account of the
powers then vefl-edin them, as of those, to which
it was believed they would soon attain *.

DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an cGoy's

unusual tranquillity. The clergy, after many ftrug- c , cy.
gles, were brought undergreat fubje6ion; the Popish
earls were restored to their estates and honours, by
the authority of Parliament, and with the consent
of the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace
among themselves, and obedient to the royal au-
thority; when, in the midst of this security, the
King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by
a conspiracy altogether unexpec'ed, and almost in.
explicable. The authors of it were John Ruthven,
Earl of Gowry, and his brother Alexander, the
sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1584. Nature had adorned both there young men,
especially the elder brother, with many accomplish-
nmnts, to which education had added its moa ele.
gant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than
is common at their age of life; generous, brave,
popular; their countrymen, far from thinking them

Spots. 454.

capable

B o o K capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the mos
VIII. sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwith.

r standing all these noble qualities, some unknown

motive engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we
adhere to the account commonly received, must be
transmitted to pofferity, as one of the most wicked,
as well as one of the worst concerted, of which his-
tory makes any mention.

ON the fifth of Augufl, as the King, who re-

fided during the hunting season in his Palace of
Falkland, was going out to his sport early in the
morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander Ruth-
ven, who, with an air of great importance, told the
King, that the evening before he had met an un.
known man, of a lufpicious aspect, walking alone
in a by-path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a
pot filled with a vafc quantity of foreign gold; that
he had immediately seized both him and his trea-
sure, and without communicating the matter to any
person, had kept him confined and bound in a soli-
tary house; and that he thought it his duty to im-
part such a singular event, first of all to his Ma-
jelly. James immediately fufpeted this unknown
person to be a trafficking prierd, supplied with so-
reign coin, in order to excite new commotions in
the kingdom; and resolved to inpower the Magi-
itrates of Perth to call the person before them, and
inquire intoall thecircumftancesofthe iory. Ruth-
ven violently opposed this resolution, and with many
arguments urged the King to ride directly to Perth,
and to examine the nmtterwitl hisown eyes. Mean-

while

while the chace began; and James, notwithfland- B o o K
ing his paflion for that amusement, could not help VIII.
ruminating on the strangeness of the tale, and on
Ruthven's importunity. At last, he called him,
and promised when the sport was over, to set out
for Perth. The chace, however, continued long;
and Ruthven, who all the while kept close by the
King, was frill calling on him to make haste. At
the death of the Buck, he would not allow James
to stay till a fresh horse was brought him; and ob-
serving the Duke of Lennox and the Earl of Mar
preparing to accompany the King, he intreated him
to countermand them. This James refused; and
though Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well
as the apparent perturbation in his whole behaviour,
raised some suspicions in his mind; yet his own cu-
riofity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on
him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of
the town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his bro-
ther of the King's arrival, though he had already
dispatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by
several of the citizens, met the King, who had
only twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no
pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for
the bad fare with which he treated his guests. When
the King's repast was over, his attendants were led
to dine in another room, and he being left almost
alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
time to go to the chamber where the unknown
peroln was kept. James commanded him to bring

Sir

B o o _K Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, instead
VIII. of that, Ruthven ordered him not to follow: And
L
-. conducing the King up a stair cafe, and then

through several apartments, the doors of which he
locked behind him, led him at last into a fmnall
study, in which there flood a man clad in ar.
mour, with a sword and dagger by his fide. The
King, who expeEted to have found one disarmed
and bound, started at the fight, and inquired if this
was the person ; but Ruthven snatching the dagger
from the girdle of the man in armour, and holding
it to the King's breast, " Remember, said he, how
" unjustly my father suffered by your command;
"you are now my prisoner; submit to my difpolal
" vwithout resistance, or outcry; or this dagger
" shall instantly avenge his blood." James expos.
tulated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him,
The man, whom he found in the fludy, flood, all
the while, trembling, and dismayed, without cou-
rage either to aid the King, or to second his ag.
greifor. Ruthven protested, that if the King railed
no outcry, his life should be safe; and moved by
some unknown reason, retired in order to call his
brother, leaving to the man in armour the care of
the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make
any noise during his absence.

WHr I L E the King was in this dangerous.fituation,

his attendants growing impatient to know whither
he had retired, one of Gowry's attendants entered
the room haltily, and told them that the King had
jult rode away towards Falkland. All of them
ruf.ied out into the street; and the Earl, in the ut-

most

nmoft hurry, called for their horses. But by this B o o K
time, his brother had returned to the King, and VIII.
swearing that now there was no remedy, he behoved - -
to die; offered to bind his hands. Unarmed asJames
was, lie scorned to submit to that indignity; and
clofong with the affaflin, a fierce firuggle ensued.
1 The man in armour stood, as formerly, amazed and
nmentionlefs; and the King dragging Ruthven to.
wards a window, which during his absence he had
i ceri uade tlie person with whom he was lefr, to open,
cried, with a wild and affrighted voice. " Treason !
Trealon ! Help ! I am murdered !" His attendants
lheard, and knew the voice; and saw, at the window,
a hand which grasped the King's neck with violence.

lThey few with precipitation to his affiltance. Lennox
and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the prin-
cipal flair-cafe, where they found all the doors Ihut,
which they. battered with the utmost fury, endea-
vouring to burst them open. But Sir John Ramsey,
ente;ing by a back-flair, which led to the apartment
where the King was, found the door open; and
rushing upon Ruthven, who was fiill fsruggling with
the King, struck him twice with his dagger, and
thruti him towards the stair-case, where Sir Thomas
Erlkine and Sir Hugh Herries met, and killed him;
he crying with his laid breath, " Alas ! I am not to
blame for this action." During this scuffle, the man,
who had been concealed in the fludy, escaped un-
oblcrved, Together with Ramsey, Erskine, and
Herries, one Wilson, a footman, entered the room
where the King was, and before they had time to
flilt the door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn sword
i each hand, followed by seven of his attendants

well

B o oK well armed, and with a loud voice threatened them
VIII. all with instant death. They immediately thrust
i- .-' the King into the little study, and shutting the door

upon him, encountered theEarl. Notwithstanding
the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced
Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having re-
ceived several wounds, immediately fled. Three of
the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the con.
flit. A dreadful noise continued still at the opposite
door, where m:ny persons laboured in vain to force
a paflage; and the King beingaflured that they were
Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened
on the inside. They ran to the King, whom they
unexpectedly found Iafe, with transports of congra.
tulation; and he, failing on his knees, with all his
attendants around him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. Thedanger, how-
ever, was not yet over. The inhabitants of the
town, whose Provost Gowrie was, and by whom he
was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the two
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the
house, threatening revenge, with many insolent and
opprobrious speeches against the King. James en.
deavou red to pacify the enraged multitude, by speak-
ing to them from the window; he admitted their
magistrates into the house; related to them the
whole circumstances of the fat; and, their fury sub.
fiding by degrees, they dispersed. On searching
the Earl's pockets, for papers, that might discover
his designs and accomplices, nothing was found but
a small parchment bag, full of magical charaters
and words of inchantment; and if we may believe

the
3

the accountoftheconfpiracypublifhedbytheKing, Bo oK
" wviiile these were about him, the wound of which VIII.
, ihe died, bled not; but as soon as they were ta- 6co
" ken away, the blood gushed out in great abun-
" dance." After all the dangerous adventures of
this busy dav, the King returned in the evening to
Falkland, having committed the dead bodies of the
two brothers to the cufrody of the Magistrates of
Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the The motive

King gave of all the circumstances of this confpi- of th"n-
racy againD- his life, the motives which induced the "ot° vd

explaincd,

two brothers to attempt an adion so detestable, the
end they had in view, and the accomplices, on
whose aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
The words of Rurhven to the King gave some
grounds to think, that the desire of revenging their
father's death had inffigated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had suffered, it
is scarce probable that they could impute them to
the King, whose youth and fubjeEtion, at that
tile, to the violence of a faction, exempted him
from being the objet of resentment, on account of
aftions which were not done by his command.
James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs
which the father had suffered, by benefits to his chil.
dren; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his favour,
acknowledged it with the warmest expressions of
gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being
convicted of assisting him in this assault on the King's
servants, were executed at Perth; but they could
give no light into the motives, which had prompt-

VOL. II. S ed

B o o K ed their master to an action so repugnant to these

VIII. acknowledgments. Diligent search was made for
ó00~ the person concealed in the fludy, and from him
16oo.

great discoveries were expected. But Andrew Hen.
derfon the Earl's iteward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as
much a stranger to his master's design as the reft;
and tho' placed in the study by Gowrie's command,
he did not even know for what end that station had
been assigned him. The whole tranfation remain.
ed as impenetrably dark as ever; and the two bro.
thers, it was concluded, had concerted their scheme
without either confident or accomplice, with unex.
ampled secrecy as well as wickedness.

Sprot's AN accident, no less strange than the other cir.
Cdoic'iing cumrfances of the flory, and which happened nine

. years after, discovered that this opinion, however

plausible, was ill-founded; and that the two bro.
thers had not carried on their machinations all alone.
One Sprot, a notary, having whispered among fe.
veral persons that he knew some secrets relating to
Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought the
matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary,
and partly forced from him by torture. According
to his account, Logan of Reftalrig, a gentleman of
an opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was
privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he laid, had frequent
interviews with him, in order to concert the plan of
their operations; the Earl had corresponded with
him to the fame purpose; and one Bour, Logan'i

con.

confident, was trusted with the secret, and carried B o o K
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour VIII.
were now dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had '
read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan, on
that occasion; and in confirmation of his teftimo-
ny, several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fa-
tal to himself had prompted Sprot to steal from
among Bour's papers, were produced . These
were compared, by the privy council, with pa-
pers of Logan's hand writing, and the refem-
blance was manifest. Persons of undoubted credit,
and well qualified to judge of the matter, examined
them, and swore to their authenticity. Death itself
did not exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones
were dug up, and tried for High Treason, and by
a fenence, equally, odious and illegal t, his lands

were

Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, another

to Gowrie, and three ofjthem without any direAion; nor could
Sprot discover the name of the person to whom they were writ-
ten. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Honourable.
Itappears from this, however, and from other words in the let-
ter, Cronm 95. that there were several persons privy to the con-
fpiracy. The date of the first letter is July 18th. Mr. Ruthven
had communicated the matter to Logan only five days before.
Ibid. It appears from the original Jummons of Forfaulture
against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he had letters ad-
dressed to him with regard to a conspiracy equally dangerous
and important, was so illiterate that he could not read. "Ja-
" cobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarua, diai Gcorgii opera
" in legendis omnibus fcriptis ad eum missis, vel pertinentibus,
" utebatur." This is altogether firange; and nothing but the
capricious character of Logan can account for his chufing such
a confident.

t By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High
Trlafon might be tried even after dcath. T'is practice was

S 2 adopt-

B o o K were forfeited, and his posterity declared infamous,
VIII. Sprot was condemned to be hanged for misprision
i6"ó of treason. He adhered to his confession to the lat,

and having promised, on the scaffold, to give the
fpeaators a sign in confirmation of the truth of

adopted by the Scots, without any limitation, Parl. 1540 c. 69.
But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown waslaid under proper refritions,
by an aft A.D. 1542. which has never been printed. The
words of it are, " And because the said Lords, (i e. the Lords
of Articles) think the faidaa (viz. in 15o0) too general,
and prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore tfatutes
and ordains that the said aat (hall have no place in time coming,
but against the heirs of them that notoriously commit or Ihall
commit lefe majesty against the King's person, against the realm
for averting the fame, and againit them that shall happen to be.
tray the King's army allenarly, and being notourly known in
their time; and the heirs of these persons to be called andjudged
within five years after the decease of the said persons committers
of the said crimes; and the said time being bypast, the said
heirs never to be pursued for the fame." The sentence againll
Logan violated this fatute in two particulars. He was not no-
tourly known during his life to be an accomplice in the crime
for which he was tried; and his heir was called in queflion
more than five years after his death. It is remarkable, that this
flatute fecms not to have been attended to in the parliament
which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumstance deserves
notice. As it is a maxim ofjultice that no person can be tried in
absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms,
and ofien absurd in their devices for preserving them, they con.
trived that in any process against a dead person, his corpse or
bones faiall be presented at the bar. Examples of this occur fre-
quently in the Scottish history. After the battle of Corrichie,
the dead body of the Earl of Huntly was presented in parlia
ment, before sentence offorfaulture was pronounced againl
him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowrie and his bro.
ther were preierved, in order that they might be produced in
parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with the famerule,
were dug up. rlackenz. Crinl. Law, Booki, Tit. 6. § 22z

what

what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, B o o K
after he was thrown off the ladder by the execu- VIII.
tioner *.

I 6oo.

It appears that Archbilhop Spotfwood was present at the

execution of Sprot. Crom. 1 5: and yet he seems to have given
no credit to his discoveries. The manner in which he speaks of
him is remarkable, " Whether or not I should mention the ar-

raignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at

"Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His confeflion, though volun-
" tary and confiant, carrying finall probability. The man de.
"posed, &c. It seemed to be a very fiction, and a mere in-
" vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he shew the
i letter, nor could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went

about the treason so secretly, would have communicated the

" matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 5oS8
Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the folemnitv with which
Logan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
ticity of his letters. He himself was probably present in par-
liament at the trial. The Earl of Dunbar, of whom he always
speaks with the highest refpeat, was the person who direlced the
process against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration against
the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithstanding all these circum-
fiances, is surprising. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the King's advo.
cate at that time, and af:erwards Earl of HaJingtcn, repre.
sents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convinc-
ing; and in an original letter of his to the King the z i1t ofjune
i6o{). (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) afLer mentioning the manner in
hlich the trial had been conduted, he thus goes on.
" When the probation of the fummnons was referred to the
Lords of Articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one voice,
the said summons to be so clearly proved, that they seemed to
contend who flould be able molt zealously to express the satis-
farion of his heart, not only by the most pithy words, but by
tears ofjoy; diverse of the bel rank confessing, that that where-
of they doubted at their entry into the house was now so ma-
nifell, that they behoved to ctieem them traitors, who flould
any longer rcfufe to declare their assurcd resolution of the truth
of that trcafon."

S 3 BUT

B o o It BUT though it be thus unexpectedly discoverec
VIII. that Gowrie did not at without associates, little ad-
ói00 ditional light is thrown, by this discovery, on the

motives and intention of his conduEt. It appears
aWmoft incredible that two young men of such dif.
tinguilhed virtue, should revolt all at once, from
their duty, and attempt a crime so atrocious, as the
murder of their Sovereign. It appears fill more
improbable, that they lhould have concerted their
undertaking with so little foresight and prudence.
If they intended that the deed should have remain-
ed concealed they could not have chosen a more
improper scene for executing it than their own house,
If they intended that Henderibn should have fruck
the blow, they could not have pitched on a man
more destitute of the courage, that must direc the
hand of an affaflin; nor could they expect that he,
unsolicited, and unacquainted with their purpose,
would venture on such a desperate adtion. If Ruth.
yen meant to flab the King with his own hand, why
did he withdraw the dagger, after it was pointed at
his breat ? How could he leave the King, after such
a plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not pre-
pofterous to commit him to the keeping of such a
timid and faife associate, as Henderson ? For what
purpose did he waste time, in binding the hands of an
unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched
with his sword ? Had Providence permitted them
to embrue their hands in the blood of their Sove-
reign, what advantage could have accrued to them
by his death? and what claims or pretensions
could they have opposed to the rights of his chil-

2 dren ?

dren * ? Inevitable and instant vengeance, together R o o I
with perpetual infamy, were the only consequences VIII.
they could expect to follow such a crime. L600.

ON the other hand, it is impossible to believe that
the King had formed any design against the life of
the two brothers. They had not incurred his in-
dignation, by any crime; and were, in no degree,
the objeEts of hisjealoufy or hatred -,; nor was he of

a pi-

* It has been afrerted, that, in consequence of the King's

death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
of England, as the son of Dorothca Stewart daughter of Lord
Me:hven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce from
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband.
Burnet HilR. of his own times. But this afertion is ill -founded.
It appears, from undoubted evidence, that Lord Mvethven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen
Margaret, but of Janet Stewart, Lord Methven's second wife, a
daughter ofJohn Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though
Gowrie had really been descended from the blood royal ofEng-
land, the King at that time had a son and a daughter; and be-
fides them, Lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of Charles Earl of
Lennox, had a preferable title to the Crown of England.

t Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Win wood, im-
putes the death ofthe two brothers to a cause not mentioned by
any of our hiflorians. " Out of Scotland we hear that there
is no good agreement, butratheran open diffidence betwixt the
King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery
of fomc affetion between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother
(who was killed with him) was the truelt cause and motive of
that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. i. 274. Whether the follow-
ing passages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that
suspicion, is submitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. z2,
1602, he mentions the return of Gowrie's two younger brothers
into Scotland, and adds, " The coming in of these two, and

S 4 the

B o o K a spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for rash and del
VIII. perate valour, as to have attempted to murder them
I600 in their own house, where they were surrounded

with many domestics, he only with a slender and
unarmed train; where they could call to their assist.
ance the inhabitants of a city, at the devotion of
their family, while he was at a diflance from all aid;
and least of all would he have chosen for his affo.
ciates, in such an enterprise, the Earl of Mar, and
the Duke of Lennox, the former connetSed in close
friendlfip with the house of Gowrie, and the latter
married to one of the Earl's filters.

A conjec- WHICHSOEVER of these opposite systems weem.
cernig the brace; whether we impute the intention of murder
theaoi-iof to Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficulties
tators. arise, and we are involved in darkness, mystery, and

contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole
conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by
deriving it from a more remote cause, we may dif-
cover it to be less criminal.

the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and
furnishing Mrs. Beatrix [their lifter] with such information as
Sir Thomas Erfllin has given, hath brcd great suspicion in the
King of Scots that they come not in but upon some dangerous
plot." In another letter, January I, 1603. " The day of
writing my last. Mrs. Beatrix Ruthven was broughtbythe Lady
Paisley, and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into
the court in the evening, and flowed in a chamber prepared for
her by the Queen's dirction, where the Queen had much time
and conference with her. Of this the King got notice, and
shewcd his dislike thereof to the Queen, gently reproving her
for it, and examining quietly of the Queen's servants of the
fame, and of other matters thereunto belonging, with such dif-
cretion and secrecy as requires such a matter."

To

To keep the King of Scots in continual depend- B o o

ance, was one great object of Elizabeth's policy. VIII.
In order to this, the sometimes toothed him and '-
sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites; 600o
and when she failed of attaining her end by these
means, she encouraged the Clergy to render any ad-
ministration she diflrufied unpopular, by decrying
it, or stirred up some faction of the nobles to op-
Fpoe, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with
the arts of undermining a Ministry by intrigues,
had recourse to the ruder practice of rendering
themlelves maiters of the King's person, that they
might thereby obtain the directions of his councils.
Thole nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of
Rithven, were inmtigated, and supported by her.
Bothwell, in all his wild attempts, enjoyed her pro.
tetion, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connexions which James had been forming of late
with the Roman Catholic princes, his secret nego-
ciations in England with her subjects, and the max-
ims by which he governed his own kingdom, all
contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded
tome great revolution in Scotland to be approach-
ing, and it was her interest to prevent it. The
Earl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful of the
Scottish nobles, and descended from anceflors warm-
ly attached to the English interest. He had adopt-
ed the fame system, and believed the welfare of his
country to be inseparably connected with the fubift-
ence of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his residence at Paris, he had contrasted an
intimate friendship with Sir Henry Neville, the

Queen's

Il

B o o K Queen's ambassador there, and was recommendec
VIII. by him to his court, as a person of whom great

6 use might be made *. Elizabeth received him, as

he passed through England, with diitinguifhed
marks of refpe& and favour. From all there cir.
cumifances, a suspicion may arise, that the plan of
the conspiracy against the King was formed at that
time, in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevail.
ed in that age, and from the letters of Nicholson,
Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to be
destitute of foundation. An English ship was ob-
served hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the
frith of Forth. The Earl's two younger brothers
fled into England, after the ill success of the confpi.
racy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And James
himself, though he prudently concealed it, took
great umbrage at her behaviour. None, however,
of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotland tended to hurt
the King's person, but only to circumscribe his au-
thority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained the
Popish pretenders to her Crown, and their abettors,
from desperate attempts, to which their impatience
and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged them on.
To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sove-
reign, would, on her part, have been an aCf of the
utmost imprudence. Nor does this feemto have been
the intention of the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven,
firif of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. When these proved more
numerous than was expe6ed, the Earl employed a

* Winw. i. 156.

ftra-

fRratagem in order to separate them from the King, B o o sK
by pretending that he had rode away towards Falk- VIII.
land, and by calling hastily for their horses, that 6oo'
they might follow him. But {hutting James up,
mean while, in a dillant corner of the house, and by
attempting to bind his hands, their design seems to
have been rather to seize, than to assassinate him.
And though Gowrie had not collected his followers,
so as to have been able to detain him long a prifo-
ner, in that part of the kingdom, by open force,
he might soon have been conveyed aboard the Eng-
lilL flip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and
he might have been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many obscure
hints in his letters, some rendezvous of the confpi-
rators was to be held. Amidst the surprise and ter-
ror, into which the King must have been thrown by
the violence offered to him, it was extremely natu-
ral for him to conclude that his life was fought. It
was the interest of all his followers to confirm him
in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
to add to the importance and merit of their own
services. And thus his fear, and their vanity, aid-
ed by the credulity and wonder, which the con.
templation of any great and tragical event, when
not fully underliood, is apt to inspire, augmented
the whole tranfadion. On the other hand, the ex-
travagance and improbability of the circumltances,
which were added, detracted from the credit of
those, which really happened; and even furnilhed
pretences for calling in question the truth of the
whole conspiracy.

THE

B o o K THE account of what had happened at Perth
VIII. reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy
6oo council commanded the Ministers of that city in.

Mtany dif- tfantly to assemble their people; and after relating
account' to them the circumstances of the conspiracy formed
by tlh against the King's life, to return public thanks to
King. God, for the protection which he had so visibly as.

forded him. But as the first accounts transmitted to
Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and while the cir.
cumftances of the conspiracy were but imperfectly
known, and the passions which it excited strongly
felt, were indiftin6, exaggerated, and contradiaory,
the Ministers laid hold of this; and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's
safety, they refuted to enter into any detail of par-
ticulars, or to utter from the chair of truth, what
appeared to be till dubious and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edin.

burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public cross, in which he recited all the circum-
fiances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in
their hearing, confirmed his account; though he
commanded a narrative of the whole tanfadion to
be published; the Ministers of that city, as well as
many of their brethren, Rill continued incredulous,
and unconvinced. Their high esteem of Gowrie,
their jealousy of every part of the King's conduct,
added to some false and many improbable circum-
fRances in the narrative, not only led them to sis-
pe& the whole, but gave their suspicions an air of
credibility. But at length, the King, partly by

argu-

arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of B o o K
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they VIII.
were convinced of the truth of the conspiracy. He 6' '
could be brought no further than to declare, that
he reverenced the King's account of the tranfadion,
but could not fay that he himself was persuaded of
the truth of it. The scruples or obflinacy of a
single man would have been little regarded, but as
the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread among
the people, the example of one, in so high reputa-
tion for integrity and abilities, was extremely dan-
gerous. The King was at the utmost pains to
convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it impof-
fible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his
benefice, and after repeated delays, and many at-
tempts towards a reconcilement, banished him the
kingdom *.

THE proceedings of parliamentwere not retarded Proceed-

ins of par-
by any scruples of this fort. The dead bodies of ia°menta.

gainfl the.

the two brothers were produced there, according to confpira
law; an indictment for High Treason was preferredtors
against them; witnesses were examined; and, by
an unanimous sentence, their eflates and honours
were forfeited; the puniflment due to Traitors
was inflicted on their dead bodies; and as if the pu-
nifhment hitherto in use did not express sufficient de-
teftation of their crimes, the parliament enacted that
the surname of Ruthven should be abolished; and
in order to preserve the memory of the King's mi-
raculous escape, and to declare the sense which the

Spots. 461, &c. Cald. v. 389, &c.

nation

B o o K nation had of the divinegoodnefs, to all future ages,

VIII. appointed the fifth ofAuguR to be observed, annu.
^^T'60 ally, as a day of public thanksgiving *.

THOUGH

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King

published a difcorfe of their vile and unnatural conpiracy againf
his life. In the year 1713, George Earl of Cromertie publish.
ed an " Hiltorical account of the conspiracy by the Earl of
" Gowrie, and Robert Logan ofReftalrig, againfb King James
" VI." He seems not to have seen the account which the
King himself had given of that matter, and borrows the
whole historical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but
he has extracted from t!e public records the depositions of the
witnesses produced by the King's Council, in order to make
good the charge against the two brothers, and Logan their affo.
eiate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the mate.
rial circumRfances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence
which they contain, one would expeft to be authentic and de.
cifive. An account of a fadt, still recent, published by royal
authority, and the original depositions ofperfons examined in
presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a
degree of evidence seldom attained in historical relations, andto
exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty. But asevery thing
with regard to this tranfaaion is dark and problematical, the
King's account and the depositions of the witnefles not only
vary, but contradiA each other in so many circumstances, that
much room is lill left for hesitation, and hiflorical scepticism.
The tcftimony of Henderson is the fuller and most important,
but in several particulars the King's account and his are con-
tradiaory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr.
Ruthven was holding the dagger at his breast, " the fellow in
the Rudy flood quaking and trembling." Disc. 17. But Hen-
derfon fays that he himfclfwrefted the dagger out of Mr. Ruth-
vcn's hands. Disc. 53. Crom. So. Henderson likewise boascd
to his wife thathe hadthat day twice saved the King from being
flabbed. Disc. 54. Crom. 53. II. The King alferts thatHen-
derfon opened the window during Mr. Ruthven's absence.
Disc. 23. Henderson deposes that he was only a.ttempt-

ing

THorGH Gowrie'sconfpiracyoccafioneda sudden B o o K
and a great alarm, it was followed by no confe- VIII.
quences of importance; and having been concerted
by the two brothers, either without any aflciates, Eire,'co..

or fpiracy a-
or gainft Eli.

zabeth.

ing to open it when Mr. Ruthven returned, and that during
the struggle between the King and him, he opened it. Disc.
53, 54. Crom. 51, 5z I. IIf wemay believe theKing, the
fellow in the Rtudy flood, during the itruggle, behind theKing's
back, inaaive and trembling all the time. Dicr. 27. But Hen-
derfon affirms, that he snatched away the garter with which Mr.
Ruthven attempted tobind the King; that he pulled back Ruth-
ven's hand, while he was endeavouring to flop the King's
mouth, and that he opened the window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52.
IV. Fy the King's account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the study,
and went away in order to meet with his brother, and the
Earl came up the flairs for the fame purpose. Disc. 23. Hen-
derfon deposes, that when Mr. Ruthven left the King, " he be-
lieves that he did not pass from the door." Crom. 5 . It is
apparent both from the fituationof the house, and from other
circumstances, that there could not possibly have been any in-
terview between the brothers at this time. Disc. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the
privy council in August, and next at Edinburgh before the par-
liament in November. Not to mention some lesser variations
between these depositions, we Shall point out two which are re-
markable. In his first deposition Mr, Henderson relates themoft
naterial circumstance of the whole in there words. " Mr. Ruth.
" ven pulled out the deponent's dagger, and held the fame to
" his M.ajelty's breast, faying, remember ;ou of fmyfather's mar.
" do.; you jall now diefor it, and minting to his Highness's
"heart, with the dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of
"Mr. Ruthven's hands, and swore that as God shall judge his
"foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his
"hand, the space a man may go fix steps, he would have firic-
"ken the King to the hilts with it." Disc. 2.. But at his fe-
cond examination he varied from this in two material circum-

flancei.

B o o K or with such as were unknown, and chore to remain
V1II. so, the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But
x 601 not long after, a conspiracy broke out in England

fiances. Firft,the words which heat that time put in Mr. Ruth.
ven's mouth while he held the dagger at the King's breafd are,
" Sir,you ,muf be my prisoner; remember on myfather's death."
Secondly, when he threatened him with death, itwasonlytode.
ter him from making Jny noise," HIoldlyour tongue, or 6i Crif
. jou jh7alldie." 2. In his firfl deposition, the words ol Mr.
Ruthven when he returned to the chambcr where he had left the
King, are, " There is no remedy, y Godyjo mvuf de." L'B: in
his second deposition, " By God there is no remed , and of.
' sered to bind his Majesty's hands." Crom. 51. ''he mate.
rial words You muf die are omitted. The firll deposition seems
plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention to murder
the King. The second would lead us,to conclude that he had
no other design than to detain him as a prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contradiifons in thetef.

timonies of the other witnesses. i. In the discourse publi.hcd
by authority, it is insinuated that the tumult of the inhabitants
was raised against the King, and that it required some art to
pacify them. Disc. 32. The Duke of Lennox confirms this in
his deposition. Crom. 44. An aft ofprivy-council summoning
the Magillrates of Perth to answer for that riot is itill extant,
And yet Andrew Roy, one of the baillies of the town, deposes
that he himself raised the people, and that they took arms in
order to aliill the King. Crom. 66. z. Henderson deposes that
he gave an evasive answer to Mr. John Moncrief, who en.
quired where he had been that morning, because the Earl had
commanded him not to let any man know that he had been at
Falkland. Disc. 54. Moncrief deposes to the fame purpole.
Crom. 64. And yet George Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul,
and Chancellor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose that the
Earl, in their presence, afced Henderson, " Whom he found
with the King at Falkland?" Crom. 70, 71. Which quetion
seems to prove that he did not aim at keeping that journey a
secret, g f

againit

against Elizabeth, which, though the firfl danger B 0 0 K
was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effects, VIII.
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal ---a
and unhappy. As James was deeply interefled in lóo6.
that event, it merits our particular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided
between two powerful factions, which contended
for the supreme dire&tion of affairs. The leader of
the one was Robert D'Evreux, Ear of Effex; Sir
Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the
most accomplished, and the most popular of all the
Englilh nobles; brave, generous, affable; though
impetuous, yet willing to liften to the counsels of
those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an im-
placable enemy; a friend no leTs constant, than
warm; incapable of disguising his own sentiments,
orof misrepresenting those of others; better fitted
for a camp, than for a court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the adminifRration,
with a spirit which scorned the second, as below his
merit. He was soon diftinguiihed by the Queen,
who, with a profusion uncommon to her, conferred
on him, even in his earliest youth, the highest ho-
nours. Nor did this diminish the esteem and as-
fefion of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity,
he was at once the favourite of his Sovereign, and
the darling of the people. Cecil, on the other
hand, educated in a court, and trained under a fa-
ther deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infi-
nuating, industrious; and though pofferfed of ta-
lents, which fitted him for the highest offices, he

VOL. II. T did

B o o K did not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them;
VIII. but availed himself of every advantage, which his

6 '
o own address, or the mistakes of others, afforded him,

Two such men were formed to be rivals, and ene.
mies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil, as low and
base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity appeared
to be presumption and folly. All the military men,
except Raleigh, favoured Effex. Most of the cour.
tiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners more nearly
resembled their own.

11;3 corre. As Elizabeth advanced in years, the struggle be.
fuitdle tween these factions became more violent. Effex, in
scotijl order to tfrengthen himself, had early courted the

friendship of the King of Scots, for whose right of
fuccenion he was a zealous advocate, and held a
close correfpondencc both with him and with his
principal Ministers. Cecil, devoted to the Queen
alone, rose daily to new honours, by the affiduityof
his services, and the patience with which he expect.
ed the reward of them. While the Earl's high fpi
ri t and impetuosity sometimes exposed him to checks
from a Mistress, who, though partial in her assec
tion toward him, could not easily bear contradico
tioin, and conferred favours often unwillingly, and
always slowly. His own solicitations, however, fe-
conded maliciously by his enemies, who wished to
remove him at a distance from court, advanccd him
to the command of the army employed in Ireland,
againfl Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieutre
nalnt of that kingdom, with a commiiffon almost
unlimited. His success in that cxpedition did not
equal either his own promises, or the cxpecaations

of

of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevish from her difap- B o o a
pointment, and exasperated againR Effex by the ar- Vlll.
tifices of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full 6o
of accusations and reproaches. These, his impa-
tientfpirit could not bear, and, in the first transports
of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part
of his army into England, and, by driving his ene-
mies from the Queen's presence, to reinifate him-
self in favour, and in power. But upon more ma-
ture thoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and
letting fail with a few officers, devoted to his per.
fjn, landed in England, and posted direfcly to court.
Elizabeth received him, without any symptom either
of affection or of displeasure. By proper complian.
ces and acknowledgments, he might have regained
his formerafcendantover the Queen. But he though t
himself too deeply injured to submit to these. Eli-
zabeth, on the other hand, determined to subdue
his haughty temper; and though her severity drew
from him the most humble letters, she confined him
to the Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commis-
fioners to try him, both for his conduct during his
government of Ireland, and for leaving that king--
dom without her permission. By their sentence, he
was filperded from all his offces, except that of
Master of the horse, and continued a prisoner du-
ring the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied with having
mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not sus-
fcr the sentence to be recorded, and soon after al-
lowed him to retire to his own house. During thele
tranfa;cions, which occupied several months, Effex
fluAuuated between the allegiance he owed to his So-
vereign, a a;d the desire of revenge and Iforetinies

T 2 leaned

B o o K leaned to the one, and sometimes to the other. In
VIII. one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he

sent a messenger into Scotland toencourage the King
to afiert his own right to the fuccelfion by force of
arms, and to promise that, besides the assistance of
the Earland all his friends in England, Lord Mount.
joy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join
him with 5000 men from that kingdom. But

ane James did not chufe to hazard the loring a kingdom,

cautious which was just ready to fall into his hands, by a
conduct,

premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, de-
ciined the enterprise, and Effex adopted more duti-
ful schemes; all thoughts of ambition appearing
to be totally effaced out of his mind.

The wi'd THIS moderation, which was merely the effet of
etterpts of disgust and disappointment, was not of long conti-

nuance. And the Queen, having not only refused
to renew a lucrative grant, which she had formerly
bestowed, but to admit him into her presence, that
new injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and
now much fretted, to absolute despair. His friends,
initead of soothing his rage, or restraining his impe-
tuofity, added to both, by their imprudentandin-
terefled zeal. After many anxious consultations, he
determined to attempt to redress his wrongs by vio-
lence. And conscious how unpopular such an enter-
prise would be, if it appeared to proceed from mo-
tives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to
give it the semblance of public utility, by mingling
the King of Scotland's'intereft with his own. He
wrote to James, that the facion which nowpredomi-
nated in the English court, had resolved to fupportthe

pre.

pretensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown; B o o K
that the places of the greatest importance in the VIII.
kingdom were put into the hands of his avowed ene- 6r.
mies; and that unless he sent ambafladors, without
delay, to insist on the immediate declaration of his
right of succession, their measures were so well con-
cer ed, that all his hopes would be desperate. James,
who knew how disagreeable such a proposal would
be to the Queen of England, was not willing rashly
to expose himself to her displeasure. But Effex,
blinded by resentment, and impatient for revenge,
abandoned himself to these paflions, and ated like
a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or
three hundred followers incompletely armed, he at-
tempted to assault a throne, the belt eflablifhed in
Europe. Sallying at their head, out of his own
house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wilhed to preserve the king-
dom from the dominion of the Spaniards, to take
arms, and to follow his tfandard. He advanced
towards the palace, with an intention to drive Cecil
and his facion out of the Queen's pretence, and to
obtain a declaration of the Scottish King's right of
succession *. But, though almost adored by the ci-
tizens, not a man would join him in this wild enter.
prise. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted by
some of his own attendants, and almost surrounded
by the troops, which marched under different lead-
ers into the city, he retreated to his own house; and
without any bold effort, suitable to his present con.

' Birch. Mem. ii' 477,

T 3 dition,

B o o K dition, or worthy of his former reputation for cou.
VIII. rage, he surrendered to his enemies.

6 As soon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he

appointed the Earl of Mar, and the abbot of Kin-
loss, to repair as his ambassadors to the Court of
England. The former of these was the person, by
whose means Eflex had carried on his correspond-
ence with the King. He was a paflionate admir-
er of the Earl's character, and disposed to attempt
every thing that could contribute to his safety.
Bruce, united in a close friendship with Mar, was
ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the
purpose of the embafly k-ss friendly to Effex, than
the choice of his ambassadors; they were command-
ed to solicit, in the warmest manner, for the Earl's
life, and if they found that the King, by avowing
his friends, could either promote their designs, or
contribute to their safety, they were impowered to
lay aside all dilfuie, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due
to him by force of arms*. But before the ambaf-
ifdors could reach London, Effx had suffered the
i dd:h. punirhlentl he merited by his treason. Perhaps the

fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his par-
don, haltened his death. Elizabeth continued, for
fuoe time, irresolute concerning his fate, and could
not bring heri:lf to consign into the hands of the
executioner, a man, who had once possessed herfa-
your to entirely, without a painful Rruggle between
her relentment againit his late misconduct, and her
gncient afi'cion towards him. The dilrefs to

Johnll. z89. Birch. Mcm. ii. 5:o.

which

which he wasnow reduced, tended naturally to soft- B o o K
en the former, while it revived the latter with new VIII.
tenderness; and the interceflion of onefaithful friend, -
who had interest with the Quteen, might perhaps
have saved his life, and have procured him a reinif-
sion, which, of herself, Ahe was ashamed to grant.
But this generous nobleman had at that time no
such friend. And Elizabeth, solicited incessantly
by her Minifiers, and offended with the haughtiness
of Effex, who, as lhe imagined, scorned to sue for
pardon, at last commanded the sentence to be put
in execution. No sooner was the blow struck, than
Ihe repented of her own rashness, and bewailed his
death with the deepest sorrow. James always con-
fidered him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his
service, and after his accellion to the English throne,
reltored his son to his honours, as well as all his as-
fociates in the conspiracy, and distinguished them
with his favour*.

THE Scottish ambassadors, finding that they had James con,

tinucs his

arrived too late to execute the chief business corn- inrrgs in
mnited to their charge, not only concealed that part En" il"'
of their inftrucions, with the utmost care; but con-
gratulated the Queen, in their Malter's name, on
her happy escape fromiich an audacious confpira-
cy. Elizabeth, though no firanger to the King's
correlpondencewith Ei:fx, or to that nobleman's in-
tentions of aferting James's right to the Crown, was
not willing that there should be known to the peo-
pile, and, for that reason, received the congratula-

* C'nd. Spotfw. 464.

T 4 tions

B o o K tions of the Scottish ambassadors with all possible
VIII. marks of credit and good will; and in order to

f ooth James, and to preserve the appearances of
union between the two courts, increased the subsidy
which she paid him annually. The ambassadors re.
iided for some time in England, and were employ.
ed, with great success, in renewing and extending
the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly entered in.
to with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advanced
in years, the Englith turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
each other in courting the favour of their future
Monarch. Assurances of attachment, professions
of regard, and promises of support, were offered to
James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil
himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had founded
on the friendship of the Scottish King, and what
advantages he might have derived from it, thought
it prudent to stand no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his master. But
being sensible at the fame time, how dangerous
such an intercourse might prove, under a Mifirefs
naturallyjealous, and whofejealoufy grew fironger
with old age; though he entered into a correspond-
ence with him, he carried it on with all the fecrefy
and caution necessary in his situation, and peculiar
to his character. And James having gained the
man whose opposition and influence he had hitherto
chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfe6t security, till that
event ihould h'appen, which would open his way to
the throne of England. It was, with tome diffi-
culty, that he refrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who, labouring to di-

3 Itinguilh

ginguilh themselves by that officious zeal, with B o o
which a Prince, who has a near profpet of mount- VIII.
ing the throne, is always served, urged him to al- 6''
low a motion to be made in parliament for declar-
ing his right of fucceflion to the Crown. James
prudently discouraged that design; but it was with
no small fatisfaeion that he observed the ascendant
he was acquiring in a court, whose dicates he had
been so long obliged to obey; and which had ei-
ther prescribed or thwarted every ftep he had taken
during the whole course of his reign *.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent firuggles of the 1602.

political fations which divided the court, and the Attempt,
frequent revolutions which had happened there, CthHigl.
since the King firit took the reins of government into '
his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tran-
quillity, being undisturbed by any foreign enemy,
and free from any intestine commotion of long con-
tinuance. During this period, James endeavoured
to civilize the Highlands and the Isles, a part of his
dominions almost totally negledted by former Mo-
narchs, though the reformation of it was an object
highly worthy of their care. The long peace with
England had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of restrain-
ing their depredations, often no less ruinous to their
countrymen, than to their enemies. The inhabit-
ants of the Low Country began, gradually, to for-
get the use of arms, and to become attentive to the
arts of peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their
natural fierceness, averse from labour, and inured

Spotfw, 467. 47 i, Brch. Mem. ii. 514.

to

B o to rapine, infested theirmoreinduftrious neighbours,

VIII. by their continual incursions. James, being folici.
i6o2. tous not only to repress their inroads, but to render

them useful fubjeEs *, had at different times enadted
many wife laws extremely conducive to these ends.
All landlords, or chiefs of Clans, were enjoined to
permit no persons to reside in their estates, who
could not find sufficient surety for their good beha.
viour; they were required to make a lift of all fu.
picious persons under their jurifdition, to bind
themselves to deliver them up tojuftice, and to in,
demnify those, who flould susser by their robberies;
and, in order to ascertain the faithful performance
of these articles, the chiefs themselves were obliged
to give hostages to the King, or to put pledges in
his hands. Three towns, which might serve asa
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts
and commerce, were appointed to be built in diffe-
rent parts of the Highlands; one in Cantyre, ano-
ther in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewis;
and in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all
the privileges of Royal Boroughs were to be con-
ferred upon them. Finding it, however, to be no
easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those coun-
tries with the love of industry, a resolution was
taken to plant among them, colonies of people from
the more industrious counties. The first experi-
ment was made in the Isle of Lewis ; anid as it was
ad vantageoufly situated for the fishing trade, a source
from which Scotland ought naturally to cerive great
wealth, the colony traniported -thither was drawn
put of Fife, the inhabitants of hi-ch Were well

* BafGl. Dor. 139.

7 FilH

Ikilled in that branch 'of commerce. But before B o o r
they bad rnemained there lorg enrough to 'manifest VIII.
the good effects of this institution, the ifanders, en. 60a
raged at feeing their country occupied by those in.
truders, took arms, and furiprifing them in the
night-times murdered some of them, and compel-
led the reft to abandon the fetttemerrt. The King's
attention being ofon after turned to other objecfs,
we hear no more of this salutary projet. Though
James did not purflue the design with that steady
application and perseverance, without which it is
impoflible to change the manners of a whole peo-
pie, he had the glory, however, not only of havy.
ing firit conceived the thoughts, but of having first
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the Island*.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of Elizlbeth

health, the effec of a found constitution, and the land delnt
reward of uncommon regularity and temperance,
Elizabeth began this winter to feel her vigour de.
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old
age. Having removed on a very stormy day from
\efitminfler to Richmond, whither she was impa-
tient to retire, her complaints increased. She had
no formed fever; her pulse was good; but she eat 160.
little, and could not seep. Her distemper seemed janury 3.
to proceed from a deep melancholy, which appear.
C'' both in her countenance and 'behaviour. She
elilghted in solitude, Ihe fat contlantly in the dark;
and was often drowned in tears,

Padr. 15 '7. 591. 1597. Spottv. 468.

B o o K No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known,
VI11. than persons of all ranks, and of all different sects
1603' and parties, redoubled theirapplications to the King

of Scots, and vied with each other, in profeflions
of attachment to his person, and in promises of
filbmiffion to his government. Even omne of her
own servants, weary of the length of her reign,
fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of the burthen
of gratitude for past benefits, and expecting to ihare
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to deferr
her. And crowds of people hur.eid towards Scot.
land, eager to pre occupy the favour of the fuc.
ceffor, or afraid of being too lace in paying homage
to him.

MEANWHILE, the Queen's lilicafe increased, and

her melancholy appea:-cd to tb icttled - nd incurable,
Various conjeEtures vwecn tormed coacerning the
causes of a disorder, frorn which she seemed to be
exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper,
Some imputed it to her bting forced, contrary to
her inclination, to pardon the Earl of Tyronne,
whose rebellion had for many years created her
so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose
from obfcrving the ingratitude of her courtiers, and
the levity of her people, who beheld her health de.
cining with most indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the acceflion of the Scottilh King, with
an impatience which they could not conceal. The
mnoft common opinion, at that time, and perhaps
the most probable, was that it flowed from grief for
the Earl of Efflx. She retained an extraordinary
regard for the memory of that unfortunate noble.

nIfan;

man; and though ife often complained of his ob- B o o K
ftinacy, seldom mentioned his name without tears*. VIII.
An accident happened soon after her retiring to t.-
Richmond, which revived her affection with new
tenderness, and embittered her sorrows. The
Countess of Nottingham, being on her death-bed,
desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, she could
not die in peace. When the Queen came into her
chamber, she told her, that while Effex lay under
sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen herself had
,refcribed, by returning a ring, which during the
height of his favour the had given him, with a pro-
mile that if, in any future distress, he sent that back
to her as a token, it ihould intitle him to her pro-
teftion; thatLady Scroop was theperfon he intended
to employ in order to present it; that, by a mistake,
it was put into her hands initead of Lady Scroop's;
and that she having communicated the matter to
her husband, one of Essex's moit implacable ene-
mies, he had forbid her either to carry the ring to
the Queen, or to return it to the Earl. The
Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged
the Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now
saw both the malice of the Earl's enemies, and how
unjustly Ihe had fufpeted him of inflexible obfti-
nacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I ne-
ver can ;" and left the room in great emotion -.

From

Birch. Mem. ii. 505.
t This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was firlt publilhed by
Osborne, Mem. of Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony
of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and by the traditional evidence of

Lady

B o o K From that moment, her fpiric funk entireiy; l he
VIII. could scarce taste food; she refused all the medicines

prescribed by her physicians; declaring that fie
wished to die, and would live no longer. No in.
treaty could prevail on her to go to bed; she fat on
cushions, during ten days and nights, pensive, and
silent, holding her finger almost continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground.
The only thing to which the seemed to give any at.
tention, were the acs of devotion, performed in
her apartment, by the Archbishop of Canterbury;
and in these he joined with great appearance of ser.
your. Wafted, at last, as well by anguish of mind,
as by long abstinence, ihe expired, without a ftrug
gle, on Thursday the 24th day of March, in the

Lady Elizabeth Spelman published by Dr. Birch, Negoc, 1r.,
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death as oneof
the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers remain
which prove that this was commonly believed at the time. Birchl
Mem. ii. 506. Eflex, however, had been beheaded twoyears
before her death, and there seems to have been no other reason,
but that which we have afligned, why herforrow fliould eire
with so much violence at so great a diflance of time. As the
death of the Countess of Nottingham happened about a fort.
night before the Queeu's death, thecoincidence of these events,
together with the other evidence mentioned, adds so much pro.
bability to the flory related by Olborne, as will entitle it toa
place in hiflory. The only objefion to the account we hare
given of Elizabeth's attachment to Effex, arises from her great
age. At the age of 68, the amorous paflions are conmionly
abundantly cool, and the violence of all the paflions, except one,
is much abated. But the force of this objection is entirely re.
moved by an Author who has illuflrated many paffagcs in the
Englifla Hiflory, and adorned more. Catalogue of RQyal aud
Noble Apthors, Article Eflix.

0tlh

7oth year of her age, and in the 45th of her B o o K
eign*. VIII.
FOREIGNERS often accuse the Englilh of indiffe- ' 6°3.

Her cha-

rence and difrefpet towards their Princes. But with- raacr.
out reason; no people are more grateful than they to
those Monarchs who merit their gratitude. The
names of Edward III. and Henry V. are mentioned
by the Englith of this age, with the fame warmth,
as they were by those who shared in the blessings
and fplendourof their reigns. The memory of Eli-
zabeth is still adored in England. And the hifto-
rians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of
her people; her sagacity in discerning their true in-
terest; her steadiness in pursuing it; her wisdom in
the choice of her Minilters; the glory The acquired
by arms; the tranquillity she secured to her sub-
jeets; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of
commerce, which were the fruits of all these
jutly rank her among the most illustrious Princes.
Even the defects in hercharacter, they observe, were
not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her ex-
ceffive frugality was not accompanied with the love
of hoarding; and though it prevented some great
undertakings, and rendered the success of others
incomplete, it introduced economy into her admi-
niftration, and exempted the nation from many
burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse or more
enterprising, muff have imposed. HIer slowness in
rewarding herfervants sometimes discouraged useful
nierit; but it prevented the undeferving from ac-
* Cmnd. Birh. Mere. ii, S6. irch. Negoc. zo6. Strype,

quiring
quiring

B o o K quiring power and wealth, to which they had nc
VIII. title. Her extremejealoufy of those Princes, who

pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led her
to take such precautions, as tended no less to the
public safety, than to her own; and to court the
affections of her people, as the firmest support of
her throne. Such is the picture the English draw
of this great Queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the Hiitoryof

Scotland finds himself obliged, frequently, to view
her in a very different, and in a less amiable light.
Her authority in that kingdom, during the greater
part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which
she possessed in her own. But this authority, ac-
quired at firil by a lervice of great importance to
the nation, she exercised in a manner extremely per.
nicious to its happiness. By her indufsry in foment-
ing the rage of the two contending fa&ions; by
supplying the one with partial aid; by feeding the
other with sa!fe hopes; by balancing their power
so artfully, that each of them was able to distress,
and neither of them to subdue the other; she ren-
dered Scotland long the feat of discord, confusion
and bloodIhed: And her craft and intrigues, effect-
ing what the valour of her ancestors could not ac-
complifh, reduced that kingdom to a state of de-
pendance on England. The maxims of policy, of-
ten little consonant to those of morality, may, per-
haps, jufify this conduct. But no apology can be
offered for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene
of difnpmulation without necessity; and of severity
beyond example. In almost all her other ations,

Eliza-

Elizabeth is the obje& of our highest admiration; B o o K
in this, we must allow that she not only laid aside VIII.
the magnanimity which became a Queen, but the 603.
feelings, natural to a woman.

THouoHElizabeth would never permit the quefion James pro-
concerning the right of succession to the Crown to Kingof
be determined in parliament; nor declare her own Egland.
fcintiments concerning a point, which she wished to
remain an impenetrable mystery; the had, however,
formed no design of excluding the Scottish King
firom an inheritance, to which his title was undoubt-
ed. A Ihort time before her death, Ihe broke the
silence, which she had so long preserved on that sub-
jet, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That
her throne was the throne of Kings; that fle would
have no mean person to ascend it, and that her Cou-
fin the King of Scots ihould be her successor."
This fheconfirmed on her death-bed. And as soon
as she breathed her last, the lords of the Privy
Council proclaimed James King of England. All
the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
the Infanta, all the cabals formed within the king-
dom, to support the titles of Lady Arabella, and
the Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment;
the nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof-
tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the do-
minion of firangers, testified their fatisfadtion with
louder acclamations, than were usual at the acceflion
of their native Princes. Amidfl this tumult of joy,
a motion made by a few patriots, who proposed to
prcl ribe some conditions to the successor, and to
cxacf from him the rcdrcfs of some grievances, be-

VOL. I1. U fore

B o o K fore they called him to the throne, was fearce heard'
VIII. and Cecil, by ftifiing it, added to his stock of me.
160v rit with his new matier. Sir Charles Percy, bro-

ther of the'Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas
Somerset, the Earl of Worcester's son, were dif.
patched to Scotland, with a letter to the King,
signed by all the Peers and Privy Counsellors then
in London; informing him of the Queen's death,
of his accefiion to the throne, of their care to re-
cognize his title, and of the universal applause,
with which the public proclamation of it had been
attended. They made the utmost haste to deliver
this welcome message; but were prevented by the
zeal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord H unfdane's youngest
Ion, who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's
death arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night,
just as the King had gone to bed. He was imme.
iiately admitted into the royal apartment, and kneel-
ing by the King's bed, acquainted him with the
death of Elizabeth, saluted him King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, and as a token of
the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented him a ring, which his sifter Lady Scroop, had
taken sio:n the Queen's fingerafter her death. James
heard him with a decent composure. But as Carey
was only a private meflenger, the information he
brought was not mtade public, and the King kept
his apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somer-
set. Then his titles were solemnly proclaimed;
and his own Ilbbjets expressed no lefsjoy, than the
Lnglifh, at this increase of his dignity. As his
)prieince was aibolutely necelfry in England, where
the people were extremely impatient to fee their

new

tiew Sovereign, he prepared to set out for that king- B o o K
dom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to VIII.
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the T _J
government of Scotland to his Privy Council. He t63
intrufed the care of his children to different noble-
men. On the Sunday before his departure, he re.
paired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing
a lermon, in which the Preacher displayed the great-
ness of the divine goodness in railing him to the
throne of such a powerful kingdom wichout oppofi-
fition or bloodshed, and exhorted him to express
his gratitude, by promoting to the utmost, the hap-
piness and prosperity of his fubjets; the King rose
up, and addressing himself to the people, made
many professions of unalterable affeEtion towards
them; promised frequently to visit Scotland; as-
fured them that his Scottish subje&s, notwithftand-
ing his absence, should feel that he was their native
Prince, no less than when he resided among them
and might still trust that his ears should be always
open to their petitions, which he would answer with
the alacrity and love of a parent. His words were,
often, interrupted by the tears of the whole audi-
ence; who, though they exulted at the King's pro-
fperity, were melted into sorrow by there tender de-
clarations *.

ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, T,nc.po.

with a splendid, but not a numerous train ; and ithl't'ie,
next day he entered LIerwick. Wherever he came,
immenle multitudes were assembled to wclcone hi m;
and the principal pcrlbns, in the different counties

Spotfiv. ,76.

U z through

B o o K through which he passed, displayed all their wealth
VIII. and magnificence in entertainments prepared for
16>3. him, at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so long

in England, that noft of her fubjeóts remembered
no other court but her's; and their notions of the
manners and decorums suitable toaprince were form.
ed upon what they had observed there. It was na.
tural to apply this standard to the behaviour and
actions of their new Monarch, and to compare him,
at first fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he
was to be placed. James, whose manners were ex-
tremely different from her's, suffered by the corn
parison. He had not that flowing affability, by
which Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her peo-
pie; and though easy among a few whom he loved,
his indolence could not bear the fatigue of render.
ing himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no less a stranger to that dignity, with which
Elizabeth tempered her familiarity. And instead
of that well judged frugality, with which she con-
ferred titles of honour, he beltowed them with an
undiftinguilhing profusion, that rendered them no
longer marks of diftinstion, or rewards of merit.
But these were the refletions of the few alone; the
multitude continued theiracclamations; and amidst
these, James entered London on the 7th of May,
and took peaceable pofrelfion of the throne of Eng-
land.
conclurfon. THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from

the earliest accounts of time, but destined, by their
situation, to form one great monarchy. And by
this j unction of its whole native force, Great Britain

hath

hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe B o o K
which England and Scotland could never have at- VIII.
tained.

1603.
TrE Scots had so long confldered their Monarchs A view of

the Revo-

as next heirs to the English throne, that they had utionsin
full leisure to reflect on all the consequences of their tutio of
being advanced to that dignity. But, dazzled with inc~' h
the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful jcCCibO If
enemy, relying on the partiality of their native
Prince, and in full expectation of sharing liberally
in the wealth and honours he would now be able to
bestow, they attended little to the most obvious con-
Iequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his
accession to the throne of England, as if it had been
no less beneficial to the kingdom, than honourable
tothe King. They soon had reason, however, to
adopt very different sentiments; and from that pe-
riod, we may date a total alteration in the political
conlitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been subvert-
ed in most nations of Europe by the policy of their
Princes, or had been undermined by the progress of
commerce, still subsisted with full force in Scotland.
Many causes had contributed gradually to augment
rhe power of the Scottish nobles; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it
prevailed added to the authority of the Monarch,
had increased their wealth and influence. A King,
pollelTed of a small revenue, with a prerogativeex-
trememy limited, and unsupported by a standing
irny, could not exercise much authority over such

U 3 potent

B o o K potent subje&s. He was obliged to govern by ex,

VIII. pedients; and the laws derived their force not from
L-^~~ his power to execute them, but from the voluntary

fubiiflion of the nobles. But though this produced
a species of government feeble and irregular beyond
example; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was
really subject to an Aristocracy, the people were not
altogether unhappy; and even in this wild form of
a constitution, there were principles, which tend.
ed to their security and advantage. The King,
checked and overawed by the nobles, durst venture
upon no aft of arbitrary power. The nobles, jea-
lous of the King, whose claims and pretensions were
many, though his power was small, were afraid of
irritating theirdependants by unreasonable exa&ions,
and tempered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny,
with a mildness and equality to which it is naturally
a firanger. And while the military genius of the
feudal government remained in vigour, thevaffals
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not only
free from oppression, but courted by their superiors,
whose power and importance were founded on their
attachment and love.

BUT, by his acceflion to the throne of England,

James acquired such an immnenfe acceflion of wealth,
of power, and of splendour, that the nobles, afto-
nifhed and intimidated, thought it vain to struggle
for privileges which they were now unable to defend.
Nor was it from fear alone that they fubmitred to
the yoke; James, partial to his countrymen, and
willing that they flould partake in his good for-

tiii)e,

tune, loaded them with riches and honours; and B o o K
the hope of his favour concurred with the dread of VIII.
his power, in taming their fierce and independent
spirits. The will of the Prince became thefupreme
law in Scotland; and the nobles strove, with emu.
lation, who should most implicitly obey commands,
which they had formerly been accultomed to con-
temn. Satisfied with having subjected the nobles
to the Crown, the King left them in full poffclion
of their ancient jurifddicion over their own vassals.
The extensive rights, velted in a set .al Chief, be-
came in their hands dreadful inftrumenrs of oppref-
sion, and the military ideas on which these rights
were founded, being gradually loft or disregarded,
nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the ri-
gour with which they were exercised. The nobles,
cxhau(ting their fortunes by the expence of frequent
attendance upon the English court, and by attempts
to imitate the manners and luxury of their more
wealthy neighbours, multiplied exactions upon the
people, who durst scarce utter complaints which
they knew would never reach the ear of their Sove-
reign, nor move him to grant them any redress.
And, from the union of the Crowns to the Revo-
lution, in i68;', Scotland was placed in a political
situation of all others the most singular, and the
most unhappy; subjeCted at once to the abfclute
will of a Monarch, and to the opprcflve jurifdilion
of an Ariltocracy, it suffered all the mifcries peclliar
to both thel-e forms of government. Its Kings were
dclipotic; its nobles were slaves and tyrants; and
the people groaned under the rigorous domination
of both.

U 4 DURING

B o o K DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made

VIII. one effort to shake off the yoke, and to regain thei1
.-', ancient independency. After the death of James,

the Scottifil nation was no longer viewed by our
Monarchs with any partial affetion. Charles I.
educated among the Englifl, difcovcred no peculiar
attachment to the kingdom of which he was a na-
tive. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be
now in hands less iriendly, and swayed by a Prince
with whom they had little connexion, and over
whole counci's they had lirtle influence, no longer
submitted with the fame implicit obedience. Pro.
voked by tome encroachments of the King on their
order, and apprehensive of others, the remains of
their ancient spirit began to appear. They com-
plained, and remonltrated. And the people being,
at the fame time, violently disgusted at the innova.
tions in Religion, the nobles secretly heightened
this disgust; and their artifices, together with the
ill conduct of the court, railed such a spirit, that
the whole nation took ar-ns against their Sovereign,
with an union and animosity of which there had
formerly beenno example. Charles brought againit
them the forces of England, and notwithflanding
their own union, and the z.al of the people, the
nobles must have funk in the itruggle. But the
difaffelion, which was growing among his Englilh
fubjets, prevented the King from adting with vi-
gour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are
well known, the Scottilh nobles, who first began
the war, were involved in the fame ruin with the
throne. At the Restoration, Charles II. regained

ful

full poffeftion of the royal prerogative in Scotland; B o o s
and the nobles, whose estates were wafted, or their VIII.
spirit broken by the calamities to which they had
been exposed, were less able and less willing than
ever to resist the power of the Crown. During
this reign, and that of James VII. the dictates of
the Monarch were received in Scotland with molt
abject submission. The poverty to which many of
the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The
people, always neglected, were now odious, and
loaded with every injury, on account of their at-
tachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into

the government of Scotland. To increase the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole object
of our laws. T'he rights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfare of the people. By the claim of right, their
liberties were secured. And the number of their
representatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in parliament.
As they came to enjoy more lecurity and greater
power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, ofinduftry, and
of police. But the ariftocratical spirit, which fill
predominated, together with many other accidents,
retarded the improvement and happiness of the
lation.

ANO.

B o o K ANOTHER great event completed what the Revo,
VIII. lution had begun. The political power of the no.
^-r-- bles, already broken by the union of the two Crowns,

was almost annihilated by the union of the two
Kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly,
of the supreme assembly of the nation, instead of
bearing the most considerable sway there, the Scot.
tifh nobles are admitted into the Britifl parliament
by their representatives only, and form but an in-
considerable part of one of those bodies in which
the legislative authority is vested. They themselves
are excluded absolutely from the house of Com.
mons, and even their eldest sons are not permitted
to represent their countrymen in that august asem.
bly. Nor have their feudal privileges remained, to
compentlate for this extinction of their political au.
thority. As commerce advanced in its progress,
and government attained nearer to perfection, these
were insensibly circumscribed, and at lafi, by laws
no less salutary to the public, than fatal to the no-
bles, they have been almost totally abolished. As
the nobles were deprived of power, the people ac.
quired liberty. Exempted from burdens, to which
they were formerly subject, screened from oppref-
lion, to which they had been long exposed, and
adopted into a conflitution, whose genius and laws
were more liberal than their own, they have extend-
ed their commerce, refined their manners, made im-
provements in the elegancies of life, and cultivated
the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political state of Scotland,
in which events and their causes have been mention-

ed

ed rather than developed, enables us to point out B o o l
three aras, from each of which we may date some VIII.
great alteration, in one or other of the three diffe- r
rent members of which the supreme legislative as-
fenbly in our constitution is composed. At the
Acceffon, the Kings of Scotland, once the most li-
mited, became, in an instant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic autho-
rity, which their Parliaments were unable to con-
troul, or their nobles to resist. At the Union, the
feudal ariitocracy, which had subsisted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and
tie Scottish nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and
pre-eminences, peculiar to their order, and reduced
theminfves to a condition, which is no longer the
terror and envy of other fubjecs Since the Union,
the Commons, anciently neglected by their Kings,
| and dipifed by the nobles, have emerged into dig-
|nity; and, being admitted to a participation of all
the privileges, which the Englilh had purchafzd at
theexpcnce of so much blood, mult now be etccem-
ed a body not lets considerable in the one kingdom,
than they have long been in the other.

THE church felt the effects cf the abfulute pow-

er wvhich the King acquired by his acccffion; and
its revolutions too, are worthy of notice. James,
during the latter years ot his adminiiitration in Scot-
landi, revived the name and office of Bilhops. But
they poffefled no ecclesiastical juritfdiiiion or pre.
eminence; their revenues were inconfidcrabic, and
they were lcarce dillintguiflied by any thing, but by

their

B o o K their feat in parliament, and by being the object of
VIII. the clergy'sjealoufy, and the people's hatred. The
^--- King, delighted with the splendour and authority

which the English Binfops enjoyed, and eager to
effect an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, relblved
to bring both Churches to an exact conformity with
each other. Three Scotsmen were consecrated Bi.
ihops at London. From them, their brethren were
commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were imposed. And though the Clergy,
less obsequious than the nobles, boldly opposed thele
innovations, James, long pradifed and well skilled
in the arts of managing them, obtained at length
their compliance. But Charles I. a superstitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots,
imprudent and precipitant in all the measures he
pursued in that kingdom, prefing too eagerly the
reception of the English liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of Church lands, kindied
the flames of civil war; and the people being !cf:
at liberty to indulge their own wifles, the Epilcopal
church was overturned, and the l'rebyterian go.
vernment and d ilcipline were re-established with new
vigour. Together with monarchy, Epifcopacv was
restored in Scotland. A form of government, so
odious to the people, required force to uphold it;
and though the whole rigour of authority, and all
the barbarity of perfecurion were employed in its
support, the aversion of the nation was infurmount-
able, and it fublilted with difficulty. At the Revo-
lution, the inclinations of the people were thought

wor-

worthy the attention of the legislature, the Prefby. B o o
terian government was again established, and being VIII.
ratified by the Union, is itill maintained in the ~' -1
kingdom.

NoR did the influence of the Acceflion extend to

the civil and ecclesiastical constitutions alone; the
genius of the nation, its taste and spirit, things of
a nature still more delicate, were sensibly arffcted by
that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages
were in a slate equally barbarous, devoid of ele-
gance, of vigour, and even of perspicuity. No
author thought of writing in languages so ill adapt-
ed to express and embellish his sentiments, or of
ereting a work for immortality, with such rude
and perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any
original effort of the human mind, but was excited
by admiration of the ancients, their compositions
wereefieemed not only the standards of taIte, and
of sentiment, but of style; and even the languages
in which they wrote were thought to be peculiar and
anlmoft consecrated to learning and the muses. Nor
only the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied: and, extravagant as the at-
tempt may appear to write in a dead tongue, in
which men were not accustomed to think, and which
they could not speak, or even pronounce, the fuc-
ccls of it was alloniflsing. As they formed their
flyle upon the purest models, as they were uninfed-
e'l wilth those barbarifls, which the inaccuracy of

fami-

B o o K familiar conversation, the affectation of courts, in.
VIII. tercourfe with firangers, and a thousand other cause!

-- introduce into living languages, many modernshave

attained to a degree of elegance in their Latin corn.
positions, which the Romans themselves scarce pof.
fefed beyond the limits of the Augustan age.
While this was almost the only species of compofi.
tion, and all authors, by using one common lan.
guage, could be brought. to a nearer comparison,
the Scottilh writers were not inferior to those of any
other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed to excel in prose and in verse, more
various, more original, and more elegant, than that
of almost any other modern who writes in Latin,
reflects, with regard to this particular, the greatef
lustre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the study of a dead

tongue was irksome; the unequal return for their
indufiry which authors met with, who could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learned, was mortifying; and men, infteadof
wafling half their lives in learning the language of
the Romans, began to refine and to polish their
own. The modern tongues were found to be ffll
cep:ible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal
to those of the ancient ones, were at leaf more at-
tainablc. And the Italians having firIt let the ex-
ample, Latin was no longer utcc ill the works of
taste; it was confined to books of science; and the
politer nations have banilhed it even from these.
The Scots, we may presume, would have had no

cauli

cause to regret this change in the public taste, and B o o K
would still have been able to maintain tomne equa- VIII.
lity with other nations, in their pursuit of literary '
honour. The English and Scottifl languages, de-
rived from the fame sources, were, at the end of
the sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, dif-
fering from one another somewhat in orthography,
though not only the words, but the idioms were
much the fame. The letters of several Scottihi
ftatefinen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the Engliih Ministers with
whom they corresponded. James himself was ma-
tier of a style far from contemptible; and, by his
example and encouragement, the Scottiih language
might have kept pace with the Engliflh in refine-
ment. Scotland might have had a series of authors
in its own, as well as in the Latin language, to
boast of; and the improvements in taste, in the
arts, and in the sciences, which spread over the
other polilhed nations of Europe, would not have
been unknown there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were
beginning to drop the use of Latin in works of
taste, and to make trial of the strength and com-
pass of their own languages, Scotland ceascd to be
a kingdom. The tranfportsof joy, which the Ac
cellion at first occasioned, were blon over: and the
Scots, being at once deprived of all the objeks that
refine or animate a people, of the prefencc of their
Prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the splendour
and elegance of a court, an universal dejection of

~~~~~~~5 ^~~spirit

B o K spirit seems to have seized the nation. The Court
VIII. being withdrawn, no domestic standard of propriety

and corretnefs of speech remained; the few corn.
positions that Scotland produced were tried by the
English standard, and every word or phrase that
varied in the least from that, was condemned as
barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had conti.
nued diftind, each might have retained idioms and
forms of speech peculiar to itself; and these ren.
dered faihionable by the example of a court, and
supported by the authority of writers of reputation,
would have been confidered in the fame light with
the varieties occasioned by the different dialecs in
the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beau.
ties, and, in many cafes, used promiscuously by the
authors of both nations. But, by the Accession,
the English naturally became the sole judges and
lawgivers in language, and rejected as solecisms,
every form of speech to which their ear was not ac.
customed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse
between the two nations was inconsiderable *, and

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the

English and Scots before the union of the Crowns, is to be
found in two curious papers, one published by I-Iaynes, the
other byStrype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth commanded the
Bilhop of London to take a survey of all the ilrangers within
the cities of London and Weflminrter. By this report, which is
very minute, it appears that the whole number of Scots at that
time was 58. Haynes 455. A survey of the fame kind was
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor, A. D. 1568. The
number of Scots had then increased to S8. Strype iv. Supple-
ment No. 1. On the acceflion of James, aconfiderable number
of Scots, cfpecially of the higher rank, rcforted to England;
but it was not till the Union that the intercourse between the
two kingdoms became great.

ancient

ancient prejudices were fill so violent as to prevent B o o K
imitation, possess the means of refining their own VIII.
tongue according to the purity of the English stand- '"
ard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scot-
land, in that age, were more eminent for piety than
for learning; and though there did not arise many
authors among them, yet being in poffeflion of the
privilege of discoursing publickly to the people,
and their sermons being too long, and perhaps too
frequent, such hafly productions could not be ele-
gant, and many slovenly and incorrect modes of
expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccu-
rate, and that profession having furnished more au-
thors, and the matters of which they treat mingling
daily in common discourse and business, many of
thole vicious forms of speech, which are denomi-
nated Scotticifrns, have been by them introduced
into the language. Nor did either the language or
public taste receive any improvement in parlia-
mnent, where a more liberal and more correct elo-
quence might have been expected. All business
was transacted there by the Lords of Articles, and
they were so servilely devoted to the court, that
few debates arose, and none were conducted with
the spirit and vigour natural to a popular assembly.

'H US, during the whole seventeenth century, the

Englifl were gradually refining their language, and
their taste; in Scotland the former was much de-
based, and the latter almost entirely loft. In the

VOL. II. X begin-

B o o K beginning of that period, both nations were emer
VIII. ging out of barbarity; but the distance betweei
L"rJ- them which was then inconsiderable, became, be

fore the end of it, immense. Even after fcienct
had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed tc
be finking back into ignorance and obscurity; and
aEtive and inrclligent as they naturally are, they
continued, while other nations were eager in the
puriuit of fanme and knowledge, in a Hfate of lan
guor and ftupefaEticn. This, however, must be
imputed to the unliappinefs of their political situ.
ation, not to any delfed of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other
began to display itself. The aft abolishing the
power of the Lords of Articles, and other salutary
laws pafied at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottifil Parlianlent,
eloquence, with all the arts that accompany or
perfect it, became immediate objees of attention;
and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone ii
sufficient to shew that the Scots were fill capable
of generous sentiments, and, notwichlfanding son e
peculiar idioms, were able to express thclmfdclv
with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the

two nations, and rendered them one people, the
diffinftions which had subsisted for many ages gra-
dually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the
fame manners prevail in both parts of the island;
the fame authors are read and admired; the fame
entertainments are frequented by the elegant and

politei

polite; and the fame standard of tafe, and of pu- B o o K
rity in language, is established. And the Scots, VIII.
after being placed during a whole century, in a
situation no less fatal to the liberty than to the
taste and genius of the nation, were at once put
in poffelion of privileges more valuable than those
which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and
every obstruction that had retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquifitiorrof literary fame, was
totally removed,

X 2 APPEN-

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D I X

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 210.)

A M EMORIAL of certain points meet
for refdoring the realm of S C 0 T L A ND
to the antient weale.

IIPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly feli- 5th Augur,

city that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a 1559. Cot-
perpetual peace with thekingdom of England, or to ton. Lib.

be made one monarchy with England, as they both make Col.B. 1FIr
but one island, divided from the reft of the world. a copy in

IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace fecetIaryCe"
with England, then must it necessarily be provided, that cil's hand.
Scotland be not so subjeE to the appointments of France,
as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England,
feeketh always to make Scotland an instrument, to exer-
cili, thereby, their malice upon England, and to make
a foot-stool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland fhallcome into the hands
(o a mere Scottish mal in blood, then may there be hope
of luch accord, but as long as it is at the commandment
ot tlhc French, there is no hope to have accord long be-
twixt thcfe two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French King's corn-4
mandment by reason of his wife, it is to be confidered for
the wcale of Scotland, that until the have children, and
during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to
the crown, being the house of the Hamiltons, ihould have
regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown be imposed
nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobility and con-
monllty ought to force that the laws and the old customs
ofthe realm be not altered, neither that the country be not
"lpovcrithed by taxes, empreft, or new imposts, after the

X 3 man-

manner of France; for provision wherein, both by the lai
of God and man, the French king and his wife may b
moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobilij

and commons joined with the next heir of the crown, t;
seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to thl
ruin of their country, which must be done before tht
French grow too firong and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by content of the

three estates of the land, that the land may be free from all
idolatry like as England is, for juffification whereof, if
any free general council may be had where the Pope of
Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may offer to
shew their cause to be most agreeable to Christ's religion.

NEXT, to provide that Scotland might be governed,in

all rules and offices, by the antient blood of the realm,
without either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all
other Princes govern their countries, and cfpecially that
the forts might be in the hands of mere Scottish men,

'HIRDLY, that they might never be occafionedto

enter into wars against England, except England fhuld
give the first cause to Scotland.

FoURTHLY, that no nobleman of Scotland should re.

ceive pension of France, except it were whilst he did fern
in France, for otherwise thereby the French would fhortll
corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, that no office, abbey, living, or commodity,

be given to any but mere Scottish men, by the afflentof
the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, that there be a councel in Scotland appointed

in the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in
those cafes not to be direted by the French.

SEVENTHLY, That it be by the said three eftatesap.

pointed how the queen's revenue of the realm shall be ex-
pended, how much the queen shall have for her portion
and estate during her absence, how much shall be limited
to the governance and defence of the realm, how much
yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points if the French king and

the queen be found unwilling, and will withstand thete
provisions for the weale of the land, then hath thethree
ectates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimatet0
the said king and queen their humble requeits; and ifthe
iulc be not effcdually granted, then humbly they may

cow.

comnmit the governance thereof to the next heir of the
crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and an-
tient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen hall be unwilling to this, as it is

likely she will, in respect of the greedy and tyrannous assec-
tion of France; then it is apparent that Almighty God is
plcafcd to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for
the weale of it, and this time must be used with great cir-
cunmpccionj to avoid the deceipts and tromperies of the
Frencil.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being

once made free, what means may be devised by God's
goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for time to
coine at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands
the hearts of all princes be.

No. Ii. (Vol. I. p. 220.)
A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus di-

reted,
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.
T UNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, 20,h Ja.

that discoursing with zour countrymen upon the mat- nuary

ter of Scotland, and commoditeys may ensew to that 1559-60.
realm, hereafter giffzc presently assist ws with zour forces, Cott. Lib
z find a nombre of the contrary advi te, doubting that we lall From ith
not t Ictngth be found truftr firiends, nor mean to conty- original in
new in constant ametyc, albeit we promise, but only for hidown
avoyding the prcfent danger make zow to serve our turne,
and after being delivered, becum enemies as of before. For
profequhaeof, they alledge things have palt betwixt ws
heretolore, and a few prcfumptiones tending to the fam
end, all grounded upon mistrust; quhilks, at the first ficht,
h lve some fleweofapparence, gifmen wey not the circum-
if;nces of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyme
pafi with the present, confider the nature of this caus,
aild citate of our contrey, I doubt not butjugement fal be
able to banish mifirult. And first, I wad wish ze flould
exa.myne the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the
tclahls of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our

X 4 anceftours

anceltours to enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhilkk
by our iforeys and regifires offantiquiteys appear to be
these. The princes of Englartd, some tyme, alledging a
certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm; some tyme
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bor-
dourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterpri-
fed the conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force
off armes, that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by
lots of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our
cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that ourowne frength
was fcarfe sufficient to withstand the force of England.
The Frenche zour auncient enemies, confidering well how
nature had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na na-
tion was able fa to annoye England as we being enemyes,
foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that
meane to detourne zour armyes from the invasion of
France, and occupy zow in the defence of zour country
at hame, offering for that effeE to beftowe some charges
upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purpos, choyfed a
tyme to propone the matter, quhen the frefche memoryof
injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depelypren-
ted on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how
to be revenged, and arme ourselfes with the powar off a
forayne prince againfi zour enterprises thereafter.

TH IS wes the beginning offour confederacywith France.

Atquhilk tyme, ourcronicles maks mention, thatfomeoff
the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and small frute lhould re-
dound to us thereof at lenth: zit had affeaion fa blinded
jugement, that the advise of the maiff part overcame the
belt. The maift part of all querells betwixt ws since
that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came on our
fy'e, hcs ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather
than any one caus off our selfes: and quhenfaever we brack
the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to
cfchew the conquest intendedFby that realm. But now hes
God's providence fa altered the cafe, zea changed it to
the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfiche taken zour
place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous to have
zow in theyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we espy how
uncareful they have been of our weile at all tymes, how
they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maiit
dangerous weys for theyr commodite, and nevertheles
wad not ftyck, oft tymes, against the natour of the ligue,
to contrak peace, leavingws in weyr. We scc that their

support,

support, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affecion
they bare tows, for pytie they had off our eflate, for re-
compenfe of the lyke friendship fchawin to theym in tyme
off theyr afflitiones, but for ambition, and infaciablecu-
pidite to reygne, and to mak Scotland ane accessary to the
crown of France. This was na friendly office, but mer.
cenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of
theyr deserving; a hale realm for the defence of a part.
We fee theym manifeflly attempt the thing we suspected
off zow; we feared ze ment the conquest off Scotland,
and they are planely fallen to that work; we hated zow
for doubt we had ze ment evill. towards ws, and fall we
love theym, quhilks bearing the name offfrends, go about
to bring ws in maifr vile servitude ? Gif by zour frendly
support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not only fute ze
not the ruyne of our country, but will preserve the liber-
tie thereof from conquest by firangeares, fall not the oc-
cafion off all inimitie with zow, and ligue with theym,
be taken away ? The causes being removed, how fall the
cffeLces rcmane ? The fear of conquest made us to hate
zow and love theym, the cais changed, quhen wc fee theym
planely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw ws friendship,
fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ? Gif we have
fchawne fa great conflance, continuing fa mony zeares in
amity with theym, off quhome we had fa small commo-
ditc, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all
nationes may do ws greatest plefour ?

BUT ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyled, and

then trends as off before. I think weill peace is the end
of all weyr, but off this ze may be aflured, we will never
fa far trust that reconciliation, that we wil be content to
forgo the ametye of England, nor do any thing may bring
ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we wold, at any tyme
to please theym, break with zow, should we not, bet'des
the lose off estimation and discrediting off ourlelfes, per-
petually expone our common weill to a maift manifest dan-
ger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny? Quhais aid
could we implore, being destitute of zour fiiendflip, gif
they off new wald attempt theyr formar enterprise ? Quhat
nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald gift they
might ? and it is lykeeneuch, thay will not stick hereaf-
ter to tak theyr tyme offws, quhen difpletour and grudge
lies taken depe rute on baith fydes, feeing ambition has fa
inipyrit ower theyr realon, that before we had ever done

any

any thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary peai.
fed theym by right and wrang, they did not tfick to at
tempte the subversion of our hale slate. I wald ze should
not efteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot
foresee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will not
Rfudy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may be
our fafetye; quhilk consistes in all the relaying of zour
friendlhips. I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the
days of zour princes off maift noble memory king Henry
the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes were opened off
amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the
difference of religion the onley stay they were not em-
braced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
theyr adherents subvert the devircs of the better fort?
But now has God off his mercy removed that block furth
off the way: now is not theyr practice lyke to tak place
any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off do6rine,
and profes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to
be the ftrayteft not off amitye can be deviled. Giff it
may be alledged, that iome of our countrymen, at ony
tyme, violated theyr promis? giff ze liss to way the cir-
cumftances, ze fall fynd the promis is rather brought on
by neceflite, after a great overthraw off our men, then
comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great in-
commodite and decay off our haill ifate, at leift fa taken.
But in this cafe, fall the preservation of our libertie be
infeperably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the
violation of our fayth cart ws in maift miserable fcrvi-
tude. Sa that giff neyther the feare off God, reverence of
man, religion, othe, promise, nor warldly honeflye wes
lufficient to bynd us, yet fall the zeale of our native
countrey, the maintenance off our own estate, the safety
of our wyfies and childrelc fiom slavery, compell ws to
kepe promifie. I am assured, it is trewly and sincerely
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametye with
zow; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be
as defyrous of it as we ar, afluranccs may be devyfed,
quharby all partyes will be out of doubte. There be
gode mcanes to do it, fit inftruincnts for the purpos, tymo
lervcs weill, the inhabitants of baith realms wish it, God
hes wrought in the peoples harte's on bayth parties a cer-
taine still agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, so
mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the difpo-
fition off a few, luliais harts are in Godis hands, may mnal

ir~~~ "U~~~B~

up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun his work, and
mainteyned it quhile now, by the expectation of man,
fall perfyte it.

I PRAY zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confulta-

tion, quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seyng the mater
fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the defence
off our caus, giff ze have aly respect for zour awne weill.
Their preparatives in France, and levying of men in Ger-
many, (quheyroff I am lately advertised) ar not altogyd-
der ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at; they
tike our rcalme, but for ane entrey to zours. Gift they
fliould directly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they knaw zo wald
malk redy for theyme, therefor they do, by indirect meanes,
to blind zow, the thing, they dare not as zit plancly at-
tempte. They feme to invade us to th' end that havilng
assembled theyr hayle forces fa nere zour bordours, they may
unlok it to attack zow: It is ane of theyr aid fetches, mak-
ing a fchew to one place, to lyght on ane other. Remem-
ber how covertly zour places about Boulougne were aflai-
zeit, and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How
the entcrprife of Calais was fynely dillembled, I think ze
have not fa lone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent
theyr policy by prudence. Giffze fe not the lyke difpofi-
tion presently in theym, ze fe nathing. It is a grosse igno-
rance to minfnaw, what all nations planely fpeks off. Tak
blcde ze zay not hereafter, " Had I wist;" ane uncomely
cntence to procede offa wyfe man's mouth. That is on-
wares chanced on to zow, quhilk zow commonly wisTed,
that this countrey myght be divorfed from the Frenfche,
Rnd is fa comme to pass as. was maiff expedient for
zow. For gift by your intyfement we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpeEed we would
have been untrufly frends, and na langer continued
ftedfafle, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen
off our fils, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked
by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing with
ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man dobte but
they fall fynde ws ennemyes in erncft, that fa ungent-
ly hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands
we can look for nathing but all extremityc, giff ever
they may get the upper hand. Let not this occasion,
sia h;ppely offered, escape zow: giffze do, neglecting the
prleent opportuiiitie, and hoping to have ever gode luk
comnue fleaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemye

waxe

waxe to great, and fa firang, that afterwards quhen ze
wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to
zour smart, after the tyme, ze Will acknowledge zour
error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat harme cometh
ofoverfight, and trufling to zour enemyes promeffe. We
ofFer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour former loftes may
be repayred. Quhilk gif ze let over flyde, suffering ws
to be overrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall stay the
Frenfche, that they fall not invade zow in zourown
boundes, sick it is their lust to reygne, that they can nei-
ther be content with thevr fortune present, nor reft and be
satisfied when they have gode luck, but will still follow on,
having in theyr awne brayne conceaved the image of fa
great a conquest, quhat think ye fal be the end? Is ther
any of fa small jugement, that he doth not foresee al-
ready, that theyr hail force fall then be bent against
zow ?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the

Frenfche be presently. Theyr estate is not always fa
calme at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it
wes not theyr great redines for weyr made theym to tak
this mater on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayne trust
in theyr awne policy, thinking to have found na resist-
ance, their opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes
them now amafed. The estates off the empire (as I
heare) has futed restitution off the' Imperial townsMetz,
Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to fomc befynes;
and all thing is not a calme within theyr awne-countrey,
the less fit they be presently for weyr, the mare opportune
efteme ye the time for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were
offered to the Frenfche againit zow, wey, how gladly
would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamcd of zour
sleuth, to spare theym that hes already compassed zour
deflruction, giff theym wer able ? Confider with zour
self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against them out
with zour rcalme or within ? Giff quhill ze fleape, we
fal be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to fute zow in
zour awne countrcy, and use ws as a fote stole to overloke
zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not.
It is foly to think they wald not giffthey wer able, quhen
before hand they stick not to giffzour armes, and ufurpe
the style of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to
camp within zowr awne bounds or without, it is manifest.
Gift twa armyes should camp with in zowr country, but a

monctlh
2

.moneth; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit should
zowr loffe be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede to
beflow on our support will draw to, befydes the diiho-
nour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or arnot

for particular refpeas weill affeced to the caus, move zow
to fubtrad zour helping hand, by alleging things not ap-
parent, for that they be poflible. It is not, I grant, un-
possible that we may receave conditiones of peace; but I
fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws fik as
will remove allmiftruit, and giff we wald have accepted
others, the mater had bene lang or now compounded.
Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles,
and diffames our juIt querell with the name ofconfpiracy
against our foverayne. It is hir hyenes right we mane-
tayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we study to pre-
serve, with the hazard of our lyves. We are not (God
knaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as
men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake of the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by necef-
fitc, to avoyde the tyranny of ftrangeares, feaking to
defraude ws of lawful government. Giff we should
susser itrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all
the ftrenthes of our realme, fortify the feyportes, and
maift important places, as aneentre to a plain conquest,
now in the minoritie of our foverane, beyng furth of the
realme, fiould we not be thought oncareful off the com-
mon weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill
subjeCts to hir majefte.? Quhat other opinion could fche
have off ws ? Might Ihe not justly hereafter call ws to
accompt, as negligent ministeres? Giffftrangeares flluuld
be thus suffered to broke the chcfc offices, beare the hail
rewll, alter and pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr ple-
four;. myght not the people esteem our noblemen iunwor-
thy the place of counfalours ! We mean na wyle to sub-
trak our obedience from our foverane, to defraud hir hye-
nes off her dew reverence, rents and revenues off'hir
crown. We fcke nathing but that Scotland may rcmane,
as of before, a fre realme, rewlit by hir hycnes and hir
minifercs borne men of the fam ; and that the ficceflion of
the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not la lyttil cfteme the fricndthip

of Scotland, that zejuged it not worthy to be embr.lced.
It fall be na small commodite for zow to be delivered off

the

the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye mna
more trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyf
as puissant, not lyeng dry marche with zow. Befydes that
ze fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackying
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our land. Con-
fider quhat superfluous charge ze beftowe on the fortifi.
cation and keping of Barwick; quhilk ze may reduce to a
mean fowme, having ws to frendes. The realme of Ire.
land being ofnatour a gode and fertill countrcy, by rea.
son off thecontinewalld unquietnes and lak of policy, ze
knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great advan.
tage; and gift it were peaceable may be very commodious.
For pacification quhayroff, it is not onknowne to zow
quhat service we ar abill to do. Refuse not theyr corn
moditcys, besides moiny ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks
albeit I fludy not to amplify and dilate, yet is na other
countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to
be embraced, for that zour aunceitors, by all meanes, maift
erneftly futed our amity, and yet it was not theyr hap to
come by it. The mater hes almaift carryed me beyond the
boundes of a lattre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow
after I have geven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and
they that ar learned, fould rede the twa former orations
of Demosthenes, called Olynthiacxe, and confidere quhat
counfall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his coun.
trymen, in a lyke cafe; quhilk hes so great affinite with
this cause of ours, that every word therof myghtbe ap.
plyed to our purpos. There may ze learne of him quhat
advise is to be followed, when zour nyghtbours hous is on
fyre; Thus I bid zow heartily fareweill. From Sant An,
drews, the zoth of January, I559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 228.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, from the camp before Leith, 29th
of April, 1560,

An Orig'nal r WT I I L only, for this time, discharge myself of rn
in heapePr 1 promire to the earl of Huntly, who so defyreti to
Oti ce. be recommended to you, as one, who with all his hcart

favoureth this caufc, to the uttcrmofi of his power. Half
the words that come out (if his mouth were able toper-
fuade an unexpcricnced man to speak farthcr in his be.

hllf_

half, than I dare be bold towrite. I leave it to your ho.
pour to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you,
and will myself always measure my thoughts, as he fiall
deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great
persuasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords
to join with them in this acion; whatfomever he can in-
vent to the furtherance of this cau'se, he hath promised to
do, with solemn proteflation, and many words; he trust-
eth to adjoin many to this cause; and faith furcly that no
man flall lie where he taketh part. He hath this day sub-
Icribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith,
that there was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 242.)
Randolph to Cecil, icth August 156o. From

Edinburgh.

'l INCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last AnOrigina
^ to your honour, I have heard of nothing worth the n Firh'dper
reporting. At this present it nay please you to know, that Offic
the most part of the nobles are here arrived, as your ho-
nour fhail receive their names in writing. The earl of
Huntlyexcufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen
fpcakcr of the parliament, or harangue maker as these men
term it. The sirs day of their fitting in parliament will
be on Thursday next. Hitherto as many as have been
prefcnt of the lords have communed and devised of certain
heads then to be propounded, as, who fliall be sent into
Fraince, whio into England. It is much easier to find them
tlhan tlic other. It lcemeth almost to be resolved upon
that tbr England the Master of Maxwell, and laird of
Lidingron. For France, Pitarrow and the Justice Clerk.
AMfo they have consultcd whom they think meeteft to
nlame for the XXIV. of the which the XII. courniellors
nulft be choren. They intend very flortly to scend away
l)ingvwall the herald into France, withi the names of thole
I tlhle 11i;all chufe ; and allo to require the king and queen's
COnllillt unto this parliamnct l t. They have dcvifed how to
h.iv thle conltrlait with England confirmed by authority
f' pairlianmen t; how als o to lave the articles of the agree-
fljlt bctwcenl tl:emi and their king and queen ratified.

'l [eCa

These things yet have only been had in communication
For the confirmation of the contra& with England]
have no doubt; for that I hear many men very like the
fame, as the Earl of Athol, the Earl of Sutherland, the
L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with L. James. The
Lord James requested me this present day to bring the
contrad unto him. r intend also, this day, to speak un.
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he pro.
mifed in my hearing to subscribe, and then presently
would have done it, if the contrac could have been had,
For the more assurance against all inconvenients, I would,
besides that, that I trufl it shall be ratified in parliament,
that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and
set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monu.
ment, tho' the at of parliament be hereafter difannulled,
If it might, therefore, fland with your advice, that the
lords might be written unto, now that they are here pre.
sent to that effect, or that I might receive from your Hon',
some earnef charge to travel herein, I doubt not but it
would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known
with whatfubftantial and effetious words or chargeyoudc-
fire to have it confirmed, I think no great difficulty would
be made. The Earl Marshal has oft been moved to sub.
scribe, he ufeth mo delays then men judged he would,
His son told me yefferday, that he would speak with me
at leisure, sodid also Drumlanrick; I know not to what
purpose: I have caused L. James to be the earnester with
the L. Marshal, for his authority's fake, when of late
it was in consultation by what means it might be wrought,
that the amity between these two realms might be
perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion, one said
that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done,
than would otherwise have ever been granted; theearl
of Argyll advised him earnestly to flick unto that, that he
had promised, that it should pass his power and all the
crafty knaves of his counsel, (I am bold to use unto your
H. his own words) to break so godly a purpose
This talk liked well the affiflers, howsomever it
pleated him to whom it was spoken unto. The barons,
who in time pat have been of the parliament, had
yesterday a convention among themselves in the church,
in very honest and quiet fort; they thought it good to
require to be refRored unto their ancient liberty, to hav

vltCc

voice in parliament. They presented that day a bill
unto the lords to that effct, a copy whereof shall be
i¢nt as soon as it can be had. It was answered unto
cently and taken in good part. It was referred unto the
io'ds oi the articles, when they are chosen to resolve
theretl pon --- Here follows a long paragraph concern-
;i,; the fortifications of Dunbar, &c. --- This prefcnt

i1imlLt, v'iz. the 9th, I underflood, that the lords

ilntcnidcd to be at the parliament, which caused me fomc-
wh.,t to stay my letter, to fee what I could hear ur learn
wiwoth the reporting unto your 1on . I 'he lords, at ten
of the clock, aflirnbled therr.ftlves at the palace, where
tihe (idke lieth; from whence they departed towards the
'l';,ooth, as they were in dignity. Each one being set
i; !i. f:eat, in such order as your H. shall receive them
i iis tcroll. Tih crown, the mace, the tword, were
].ij the queen's iat. Silence being commanded, the
].. or Lidington began his oration. He cxcufcd his in-
;'ii':jnc- to occupy that place. He made a Lrief- dif-
c':::: of things past, and of what neccfity men were
- !c.'i unto for the defence of their country, what remedy

.;ii ;,;oit it pleased God to fend them in the timc of their
nc. ci:li, how much he were bound heartily to acknow-

,:, 2, id to requite it. He took away the perilafion

t ;;,-.i, in many men's mind thatlay back, that mifdeccm-
i :t;llr ithings to be meant than was attempted. He ad-
i:\ all cf!ats to lay all particulars apart, and to bend them-
fil'cs wholly to the true service of God and of their coun-
try. Ht willed them to remember in what flaic it had becn
c tloii time for lack of governmcnt, and excrcif ofjtiftice.
In tile cend, he exhorted them to mutual amity aid hearty
fi'i.inl;iip, and to live with one another as nmmclers all
of one hody-He prayed God long to maintain this peace
ail amity with all princccs, vfi)ecially betwixt the realms of
].1nl;aai ;lnd Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended.
'Il'e clerk of register immediately itood up, and i fked
th'll ti, what matter they wutild proceed: Itwas thlurit
ncc.'il.r\, that the articles of the peace llhouil be confirmed
with'tlhe common contfnt, for that it was thought ncccllth.
.' to 'cled thein away with li)ccd into Fraiic, a;nd to re-
ct.i: the ratification of them as IOon as migiht be. Th.
;liilcs bcing read, were immediately agr cd unto: A day

. l:ipploiiited to have certain of the nobles fubfclibe tit-
to lcn, nd to put to
pt their lials, to be i(ent away by a

Voi.. 11, Y herald,

herald, who shall also bring the ratification again w;tl
him. The barons, of whom I have above written, re.
quired an answer to their request, somewhat was said un-
to the contrary. The barons alledged for them cuflom
and authority. It was in the end resolved, that there should
be chosen fix to join with the lords of the articles, and
that if they, after good advisement, should find it right
and ncceffary for the commonwealth, it should be ratified
at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceed.
ed immediately hereupon, to the chufing of thelordsofthe
articles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chute the
temporal, and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgeflcs
their own. There were chosen as in this other paper I
have written. This being done, the lords departed and
accompanied the duke, all as far as the Bow, (which is
the ;gate going out of the high street) and many down into
the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour, the
trumpets iounding, and other mufick such as they have.
Thus much I report unto yourhonour of that I did both
hear and fee. Other fblemnities have not been used saving
in times long past the lords have had parliament robes,
vhich are now with them wholly out of use.

THFE names of as manv earls and lords spiritual and
temporal as are aiTcmblcd a: this parliament.

The duke of Chatclhcrault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erskine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawiord. Somervill. The bishop of the Isles.
CafiIls. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors, I
l:Malhali. Flume. know not how many.
Morton. Livingston.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Cathnefs. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fleming.
Moni^:ith. Glamis.

Gray.
Ochil treed
Gordon.

YThto

The Lords of the Articles.
Spiritual. Temporal. Barons elected to be

of the Articles.

Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.
Isles. Argyll. Tillibardine.
Lord James. Marihall. Cunninghamhead.
Arbroath. Athole. Lochenvar.
Newbottle. Morton. Pittarrow.
Lindoris. Glencairni Lundy.
Cowpar. Ruthven. Ten Provosts of the
Kinross. Erskine. chief towns, which
Kilwinning. Boyd. also are of the Ar-

Lindsay. tides.

So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole
is 36.

ITwere too long for me to rehearse particularly the

disposition, and chiefly the affeccions ofthefe men, that are
at this time chosen lords of the articles. May it satisfy
your Honr. for this time to know that, by the common
opinion of men, there was not a fubftantialler or more sus-
ficient number of all forts of men chosen in Scotland these
many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good
to ensue. This present morning, viz. the ioth, the L.
of Lidington made mc privy unto your letter; he intend-
eth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some
hard points there are. He himself is determined not to
go into France. He alledgeth many rcafons, but fpcakethi
lcaft of that, that movcth him most, which is the ex-
amplc of the last, that went on a more grataful meflage
than he flall carry, and stood on other terms with their
prince than he doth, and yet your honour knowcth what
the whole world judgeth.
Petition of the LelTer Barons to the Parliamenti

held Aug. i560.

Y lords, unto your lordships, humbly means and Incldrd in
flows, we the barons and frechiolders of tl:is RandoiplIh'
realm, your brethren in Christ, That whereas tlic catifcs ofl' l'"r to "-

Ci-, Isth

true religion, and common well of this realm, are, in thius Au 56If
plrccllt parliament, to be treated, ordered, and cfablifh-

Y 2 cd,

ed, to the glory of God, and maintenance of the common.
wealth ; and we being the greatest number in proportion,
where the said causes concern, and has been, and yet are
ready to bear the greatest part of the charges thereuntil,
as well in peace as in war, both with our bodies and
with our goods ; and feeing there is no place where we
may do better fcrvicc now than in general councils and
parliaments, in giving our best advice and reason, vote
and councell for the furtherance thereof, for the mainte.
nance of virtue, and punifiment of vice, as use and cuflto
had been of old by ancient ads of parliament observed
in this realm; and whereby we undersland that we ouht
to be heard to reafbn and vote in all causes concernin,
the commonwealth, as well in councils as in parliaments,
otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and fta-
tutes be made concerning us and our clate, we not being
required and fuf-'ered to reason and vote at the making
thereolf that the fame should not oblige us to sand therc-
to. Therefore it will please your lordships to take con-
fideration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be born
by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our eflate, that ye will, in this
prcfent parliament, and all counfells, where the common
well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, coun-
fell and vote, so that, without the fame, your lordships
would susser nothing to be passed and concluded in par-
liament or councils aforesaid ; and that all acs of par-
liament made, in times past, concerning us for our place
and estate, and in our favour, be at this present parlia-
ment, confirmed, approved and ratified, and ad of par-
liament made thereupon. And your lordships answer
humbly befeechcs.

Of the fucefi of this petition, the following account is giv~e

by Randlolph ; Lett. to Cecil, 19. Aug. 1560. The matters
concluded and past by common content on Saturday lad,
in such solemn fort as the first day that they afelnbled, are
thefc. Firfi, that the barons according to an old ad of
parliament, made in the time of James I. in the yealr o
God, 1427, ihall have free voice in parliament, this act
pafled without any contraditioi.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 252.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Englift refi.

dent, to the right worshipful Sir Wiiliaml Cecil,
knt. principal lecretary to the queen's majelty.

HAVE received your honour's letters of the firit of this 9 Au^.
month, written at Ofyes in Eflex, and also a letter un- Li6,. Ctt'

to the lord James, from his kinsman St. Crne out osso, 3.
France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland
is nothing changed of her purpose in horne coming. I
afiTre your honour that will be a stout adventure for a
sick crafcd woman, that may be doubted as well what may
happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily she
n;ay be received when she cometh to land of a great num-
her, who are utterly persuaded that she intendeth their
ulttc: ruin, come when she will ; the prcparance is very
im;ial whenfbcver that fie arrive, Icarcely any man can be
prrflildecl that she hath any such thought in her head. I
i;av. nIown your honour's letters unto the lord James, lord
AIorton, lord Ledington, they wiss as your honour doth,
that fllh might be flayed yet for a space, and if it were
not for their obedience fake, some of them care not tho'
th'y never law her face. They travel what they can to
prcvient the wicked devices of tlhee mifchicvous purposes
us her minitcers, but I fear that that will always be found
tha;t filij hujus feculi, they do what they can to fland with
the religion, and to maintain amity with their neighbours;
they have also need to look unto themfclves, for their ha-
za;r' is great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor
Jlticty for them ielves, but to repose themfelvu s upon the
queen's majeftl, our fovereigni's favours and support.
Friedls abroad they have none, nor many in whom they
may trufl at home. There are in mind shortly to try what
the ny ay be aflired at of the qucen's majcefiV, and what
they may atfuredly perform of that they intend to ofitr for
their parties. This the queen of Scotland above all other
thillns doubteth ; this tle feeketh by all means to pre-
vent ; and hiatli cased St. Come, in her nam e, carnefIly to
write to char': c 11im that no tbch things be attempted bc-
fore her coming home; tso that it is ilid, that trhey too
:ilrhi(ly arrived here out of Eng land Ibr the ipurpoli, what
uiI[bla;t foimevcr the noblemen do make, that they are

Y 3 g.ricvcil

grieved with their quecn's refusal, that cometh far from
their hearts. They intend to expofiulate with me here.
upon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If (he
thrust all Englithmen out of this country, I doubt not
but there will be lorne of her own that will bear us some
kindness. Of me fil shall he qtiit, so soon as it pleafeth
the queen's majefry my mistress no longer to use my service
in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had, with
the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that
they are of mind that imr ed :tely of the next convention,
I ihall repair towards you with their determinations, and
refolutio;., in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice
is carneitly :quired, and [hortly looked for. Whatfom-
ever i defi-e i:ayfe!t, I know- mny will ought to be subject
unta) the queen my fovcrcign's pleafire, but to content
mvi- if, vould God I were so happy as to serve her majesty
in a; mean a f'.ae as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit
of this .' e.; not tha, 1 do in my heart wax weary of
her mn,.'ji,;' fIcr.'ice, but because my time and years re-
quire I<,:nc piace of ;iore repose and qricetnefs than Ifind
in thl country. I ('oubt allb my insufficience when other
trouble: in this country arise, or ought shall be required of
me to the advancement of her majesty's fcrvice, that ei-
ther my will is not ab!c to compass, or my credit fuffi,
cient to work to that efec'c, as perchance shall be looked
for at my hands. As your honour hath been a means of
my continuance in this room, so I trucf that I shall find
that continual favour at your hands, that so loon as it ihall
fland with the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this
place unto some far worthier than I am myself, and in the
mean f a;ln, have my course dirceted by your good ad-
vice how I may by my contrivance do some such fervicc,
as may hc agreeable to hecr ni.jcfty's wil and pleasure.

T^'i. i: i w wiords, I an b),ld to write unto your ho-

noulr ol' ,;,vliiif. For the Icrc, where that is wilhed that
tihe lords \;Vi'l Il-litly continue yct for one month, I alfure
your lionour that tlhci: is yet nothing omitted of their old
ind ac(uflomed mii:i Jncr of doing, and feeing that they
have brought that unto this point, and flmould now prevail,
they were unwIo: thy of their lives.

1 'IND not that they alre purpoced so to leave the mat-

ter. 1 doulibt norc lei tironey than I do her fair words;
;'rtl yvt e'; c 1 not conceive what great things can be
w;ouuglt with fully tthoufand crowns, and treasure of hr

3~8 ~ OWII

own here I know there is no sure or ready means to get
it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this time
unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to satisfy your
desire, in knowledge of the present state of things here.
Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever belt, that
fhc come not; but if she do come, to let her know, at
the first, what fle flall find, which is due obedience,
,mid willing service, if she enbrace Christ, and dcfire to
live in peace with her neighbours. By fuchletters as you
have last received, your honour somewhat underfbndeth
of Mr. Knox hinifelf, and also of others, whac is dlter-
mnind!, he himfclf to abide the uttermofit, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus to-
:ether with what comfort fornevcr it will plcafe you to
,ivc him by your letters, that the queen's majcfty dolh not
utterly condemn him, or at the lcat in that point, that he
is so fore charged with by his own queen, that her majesty
will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a
-rcat comfort unto him, and will content Iany others;
his dily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with Eng-
land, and that God will never susser men to be lb ng-rate,
as by any pertuafion to run headlong unto the defPtrution
of themn, that have saved their lives, and refrored their
country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble
your honour, deiiring God to fend such an :amity between
thee two realms that God may be glorified to them of this
ivorld.-At Edenburgh the 9th of Augufl, I561.

No. VI. (Vo!. I. p. 26..)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Quecn M\ary.
To ti-, ri-ht excellent, right high and mighty princefie,

our right dear and weli-b.loved fietcr and cousin the
queen of Scotland.

I G H T excellent, right high, and mighty princesse, ,6th of
our right dcear and right woll-beloved sifter and cou- Aig. i56r.

fin, we greet you well. The Lord of St. Cofime brought Par Of-
to us your letters, dated the 8th of this present at Ab- Coy.
hevilc, whereby ye signify, that although by the anlwer
brought to you by Monficur Doyzcll, ye might havehad
vccaiion to have entered into some doubt of our anity, ypt

Y 4 Iafter,

after certain purposes passed betwixt you and our ambaf-
Cador, you would aflure us of your good meaning to live
,.th us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require
us to give credit to tlh said St. Coline. VWe have there.
unto thought good to answer as followeth. The fame
St. Cofne hath made like declaration unto us on your part,
for your excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as vourfelf
made to our ambassador, and we have briefly anfwe-cd to
every the ;lme points, as he can 'hew you: and if he
shall not so do, yet lcaft in the mean season you might be
induced to think that your reasons hasfatisfied us, fomer-
ally we aflure yoi, that to our rcqlicils your answer can-
nnt be rcputedi fr a f atisfact;on. For we require no be-
nelit of you, thut thl;t you will perform your p,-omile where-
unto you are bounid ty your f1;c and your hand, for the
rcfufal whereof we fee no rea'obn alledced can ILrvc. Nei-
ther covet we any thing, but that which is in your own
power as queen ot Scotland, that wil c' yourfelt in words
and speech doth couicl;, that which your late husband's
our igood brother's amlb, flidors and you concluded, that
which your own nobility amid people were made privy un-
to, that which indeed made peace ;and quietness betwixt us,
yea that, without wlich, no perfet amity can continue
betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt
not buty'c will pirceive, allow and accompiiiil. Never-
thelefs. perceiving iby the report of the bringer, that you
mean furtlhwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the ad\ice ofyour council in Scotland, we are content to
fuliicnd our co-ncecpt of all unkindncts, and do aflure you
that we be fully resolved, upon this i'eing performed, to
unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood
with you as quietly, friendly, yea as affliredly in the knot
of fricndfhip, as we be in the knot of nature and blood.
And herein we be focarncfily determined, that the world
flould fee if the contrary Lhould follow, (which God for-
bid) the very occasion to be in you and not in us; as the
story witnelleth the like of the king your father, our uncle,
with whom our father fought to have knit a perpetual
bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of which
matter we know there remain with us, and we think
with you, sundry witnefles of our father's earnest good
meaning, and ol the error whereunto divers evil council-
lors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that
report had been made unto you, that we had sent our

2 admiral

admiral to the seas with our navy to impeache your pas-
sage, both your servants do well underhand how false
that is, knowing for a truth that we have not any more
than two or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost com-
pelled, by the earnest complaint of the ambassador of
our good brother the king of Spain, made of certain Scot-
t;,flil1: haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of
letters of marque, of which matter also we earneitly require
you at your coming to your realmc, to have some good
confidetition, and the rather for refpedl that ought to be
btwixt your realme and the countries of us, of France,
of Spain, and of the house of Burgundy. And so, right
exccllent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend
as to you with molt earnest request, not to neglect these
aor friendly and sisterly offers of friendihip, which, before
God, we mean and intend to accoimp!iih. Given under
our figet at Heyningham the 6th of August, in the third
year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. 1. p. 295.)
. letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's majesty.

F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had I°th of

0 nothing worth the writing unto your honour.-Be- paperOfice,
fore his coming we had so little to hint upon, that we f;om the
did nothing but pass our time in feafis, banquetting, Original.
mafkinii, and running at the ring, and such like. He
hlrought with him such a number of letters, and such abun-
d.uncc of news, that for the fpacc of three days, we gave
o(lrflvcs to nothing else but to reading of writings, and
ilearing of tales many so truly reported, that they might
b! compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris
r.i;itionib)us. Among all his tidings, for the most as-
;l1'J, I Iend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is that the cardinal of Lorrainc, at his being with
tlie cmperor, moved a marriage between his youngcflt on,
the duke of Aflruche, and this queen; wherein he hath
lo far travailed, that it hath already come unto this point,
tl;lt if (he find it good, the said duke will out of hand fend

hither

hither his embaflador, and farther proceed to the confum;
mation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and
to the intent her mind may be the better known, la Croch
is Tent unto her with this meflage from the cardinal, who
hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again be.
fore the end of May; and for this cause la Croch is ready
for his departure, and his letters writing both day and
night. This queen being before advertized of his toward.
ness, by many mean3 hath fought far off, to know my
lord of Murray's mind herein, but would never so plainly
deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is,
or how she is bent. She ufeth no man's council, butonly
this man's that last arrived, and assuredly until the L. of
Lidington's return, she will do what file can to keep
that secret; and bccaufe resolution in his absence, cannot be
taken, file will, for this time, return la Croch with rcquefi,
to have longer time to devize; and after, with the mod
f)eed fie can, lhe fully purpofeth to advertize him, I mean,
her uncle the ca:-din:;l, of her mind. Of this matter the
L. of Lidington is made privy. I know not whether by
fore intelligence that he had before his dcparture, or since
his arrival in France, divers letters have passed between
her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was commuinicated to fomc,
as much as was written in sypher, is kept unto themfelvc..
Whcther also the L. of Lidington hath had conference
with the Spanish ainbaffador in England of this mattcr,
or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means,
to get true knowledge thereof. Gueffcs or furmizes il
-n grave matters, 1 would be loth to write for verities.
This also your honour may take for truth, that the cm-
peror hath offcred with his son, for this queen's dower,
the county of Tyroll, which is said to be worth 30,oc0
franks by year. Of this matter als), the rhingrnve wr:te
a letter unto this queen, out of France not long since.
This is all that prclbntly I can write unto your honour
hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your ho-
nour shall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scot-

tifh man, that last came into there parts, he brought also
letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of Franct.
J perceive, divers ways, that Newhaven is forre clold,
but 1 am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know

V , o 0^,~~~~~~ty

tIcy will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as
the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' 'From
hence I do assure them, what means fomever they make,
or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to re-
ceivc but small comfort, for all their long allie. We
stand daily in doubt what friendship we flall need our-
self, except we put better order unto our mifiuled papifls,
than yet we do, or know how to bring to pass that we
may be void of their comber.

To-MORROW, the i5th of this initant, the queen de-
parteth of this town, towards Edenborough. If my hap
be good, you shall thoroughly hear some merry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wcdnefday next he
ihall be arraigned, and five other priefrs, for their malirng
at Easter last. Thus most humbly I take my leave ; a;
St. Andrews the i5th of May, I563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 304.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to the
queen's majesty.
T. AY it please your honour, the 7th of this instant, ,oh o

V.Rowlet, this queen's secretary, arrived here; he April, i56;.

rciporteth very honefily of his good usage, he brought PaerO)rti-e,
with him many letters unto the queen that came out of r,. ';hn 1."
F'rance, full of lamentation and sorrow. She received owi;,, ,,'i.
r'orn the queen mother two letters, the one contained
onhl the rchearfal of her griefs, the other signify the
ir.::b of France as then it was, as in what fort things were
acco;dead, and what farther was intended for the appeasing
(c the discords there, not mifiruf-ing but that if rcafon
could not be had at the queen of England's hands, but
that the realn of France ihould find her ready and will-
in1' to fl)port and defend the right thereof, as by friend-
Ihi) and old alliance between the two realms she is
bound.

lHow well there words do agree with her doings, your

Ihotlr can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
Ulto this queen, (which I allure your honour is true) you
;niv .iflilrcdly know, that nothing thall be left undone

of

of her part, that may move debate or controverfie be.
tween this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much muted at by the queen herself, how this

new kindness came about, that at this time she received
two long letters written all with her own hand, faying, all
the time since her return she never received half so many
lines, as were in one of the letters, which I can myself
testify by the queen's own faying, and other good afu-
rance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can
also farther aflure your honour, that this queen hath fayed
that she knoweth now, that the friendship of the queen's
majefry my sovereign may frand her more in stead, thal
that of her good mother in France, and as she is defir.
ous of them both, so will she not lose the one for the
other. I may also farther assure your honour, that what-
fomever the occasion is, this queen hath somewhat in her
heart that will burfr out in time, which will manifest that
some unkindness hath pafied between them, that will not
be cafy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, she faith
that the queen mother might have used the matter other-
wife than she hath done, and doth much doubt what (hall
be the success of her great desire to govern alone, in all
things to have her will. Seeing then that presently they
fland in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better
to confirm her in that mind, (this queen I mean) than
to fpcak any word that might cause her to conceive bet-
ter of the other. And yet I am assured she (hall receive
as friendly letters, and as many good words from this
queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the
queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Ly-
dington of that purpose, (he did write unto this queen
of, I know not, but if she do, I think it hard if your ho-
nour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I per-
chance by tome means here. It may, perchance, be writ-
ten only by that queen, to try what anfwcr this queen
will give, or underifand what mind (he bearcth unto the
queen's majesty our sovereign. The queen knoweth now
that the Earl Bothwell is sent for to London. She cau-
fed a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I anfwcred
that I knew none other, but that his takers were in con-
troverfy who took him, and that it should be judged
there. I know that she thinketh much that he is not sent
into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were
here, he would be reserved for an evil inflrument. If

the

the ,ord of Lidington have not been plain with your ho-
nour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his
friends here, but mofi of all to himself. There comes
a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into
credit.

No. IX. (Vol. L p. 313.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Le-

thington, younger lecretary for the time, in the
parliament holden by our sovereign the king's
mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
time of the restitution of Umquile Matthew
Earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be

I/I. that it has pleased her majesty most graciouflv to
utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuffici-
cntly conceived the cause of this your prefcnt aflembly;
vet having her maje{ty's commandment to supply my
Lor3 Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee de-
ccafed, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more
at large.

NorouR it is, how in her Highness's minority, a

proccfs of forfaltour was decreed against my Lord of Lcn-
nox, for certain offences alledgcd committed by him,
specified in the dome and cenfcl-lent of Parliament gi-
ven thereupon; by reason whereof he has this long time
been exiled, aed abfcnt forth of his 1lntive couIntry, how
grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
hy divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her Ma-
jefty's knowledge, not only containing most humble and
due submission, but always bearing witncrs of his good
devotion to her Majesty, his natural princess, and carncft
:frcction he had to her Highnels most humble fcrvice, if
it should please her Majesty of her clemency to make him
·ble to enjoy the benefit of a fubjscit; many efpcr)cts
might have moved her Highnes favourably to incline to
his rcqueft, as the anciency of his houif:, and the fir-
naime he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her
niajcfly by affinity, by reason of my lady Margaret her
highnlfs's aunt, and divers other his gcod confil'ra-
tions, as allo the effeltuous requcft of her good fisCer the

(K ';e '

Queen's Majesty of England, whore earnefft commendation
was not of least moment, besides that of her own natu.
ral, her majesty has a certain inclination to pity the de.
cay of noble houses, and as we heard, by her own report,
has a great deal more pleasure to be the infirument of
the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antient
blood, than to have matter miniftred of the decay or
overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, her
majesty the more tenderly looked upon his requeff, and
her good sifter the Queen of England's favourable letter
written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration
whereof not only has fle granted unto him her letter of
restitution, by way of grace, but also licensed him to pu-
sue, by way of reduction, the remedies provided by the
law for such as think themselves grieved by any judgment,
unorderly led, and to have the proccfs reversed; for exa-
mination whereof, it has pleased her majesty presently to
aflemble you the three estates of this her realme, by
whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her majefly's
mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the cause, laws of the realme, and practice ob-
served in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus
as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter
we have in hand give me not occasion to fay a few more
words, not far different from the fame subjec, wherein
I would extend the circumstances more largely. If I
feared not to offend her highness, whose presence and
modest nature abhors long lpeaking and adulation, and
so will compel me to fpca.l such things, as may seem to
tend to any good and pertifc point; and least it should
be compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I should
omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may ac.
cept this, and the like demonstrations of her gentill na-
ture; whose gracious behaviour towards all her fubjets,
in general, may serve for a good proof of that felicity,
we may look for under her happy government, to long
as it shall please God to grant her unto us; for a good
harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be-
tween the prince and the fuiibjcs lmuft be reciproquc;
as by her majcfly's prudence we enjoy this present peace
with all foreign nations, and quictnefs among yourselves,
in such fort, that I think justly it may be affinned Scot-
land, in no man's ;ge, that prcrcntly livcs, was in greater

trail

tranquillity; so is it the duty of all us her loving subjects
to acknowledge the fame as a most high benefit, proceed-
ing from the good government of her majesty, declaring
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her ma-
iefly such due obedience, as a just prince may look for
at the hands of faithful and obedient subjects. I mean
no forced nor unwilling obedience, which 1 know her
nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the con-
templation of her modest kind of regiment, will for love
and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good proof
have we all in general had of her majcfty's benignity
these three years, that she has lived in the government
over you, and many of you have largely tafted of her large
liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her high-
ness has had large appearance of your dutiful obedience,
so it becomes you to continue, as we have begun, in con-
fideration of the many notable examples of her clemency
;bove others her good qualities, and to abhor and detest
all false bruites and rumours, which are the most pestilent
evils that can be in any common weill, and the lowers and
inventors thereof. Then may we be well aflured to have
of her an most gracious princesse, and she most faithful and
loving fubjeds; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of
the politic bodies, whereof I made mention before, as
the glory thereof shall partly appertain to her majesty,
so fiall no finall praise and unspeakable commodity re-
dound therethrough to you all universally her fubjedts.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 324.)
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue,

and in time to come follow, to the Qicen's ma-
jefty of England, and slate of this realm, up-
on the marriage of che Qieen of Scots to the
Lord Darlcy.
rIRST, the minds of such as be afficted to the Queen

of Scots, either for herself or for the opinion of

sr pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have
change of the forme of religion in this rcalh, or for the
dii:olltcntation they have of the Q(ueen's mnajtfly, or her
fucccflion, or of the fuicceliion ot any other belide the

Quecc

Queen of Scotts, (hall be, by this marriage, ereted,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring
their desires to pass; and to make fosie estimate what
persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the dan-
ger may be weighed; the fame may be compassed in those
forts either within the realme or without.

THE first are such as are specially devoted to the Queen

of Scotts, or to the Lord Darley, by bond of blood and al-
liance; as sirss all the house of Lorrain and Guise for her
part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such in
Scotland as be of their blood, and have received difplea-
fures by the Duke of Chatelherault and the Hamiltons.
The second are all manner of persons, both in this realme
and other countries, that are devoted to the authority
of Rome, and mislike of the religion now received; and
in there two forts are the fubfiance of them comprehended,
that shall take comfort in this marriage.

NEx'r therefore to be confidercd what perils and troubles
there kind of men shall intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their desires

is, and always shall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to
have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devisees may vary amongif themselves for the
compassing hereof, according to the accidents of the times,
and according to the impediments which they shall find by
means of the Queen's majesty's actions and governments,
yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and praaices, ihall
wholly and only tend to make the queen of Scotts queen of
this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; and
in their proceedings, there are two manners to be confider-
ed, whereof the one is far worse than the other; the one
is intended by them, that either from malicious blind-
ness in religion, or for natural affection to the queen of
Scotts, or the lord Darley, do persuade themselves that the
said queen of Scotts hath presently more right to the crown
than our fovcrcign lady the queen, of which fort be all
their kindred on both fides, and all such as are devoted to
popery, cither in England, Scotland, Ireland, or clfe-
where; the other is meant by them, which, with less
malice are persuaded that the queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majelty
and her iffuc, of which fort few are without the realm,
but here within, and yet of them, not so many as are of
the contrary, and from these two Ibrts shall the peril de-

v res

vires and praLcices proceed. From the first, which ima-
gine the queen of Scots to have perpetually right, are to
be looked for there perils. Firfi, is it to be doubted the
d.vil will infcc some of-them to imagine the hurt of the
life of our dear sovereign lady, by such means as the de-
vil lall fiuggeft to them, although it is to be afliredly
ho;ed, that Almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, gra-
cioufy protec& and preserve her from such dangers. Se-
cnJliy, there will be attempted, by persuasions, by bruits,
by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good
fabjc(ts from the queen's majesty, and to conciliate them
tu ti:e queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers
an:d the north will be much solicited and labored. Third-
lv, there will be attempted causes of obme tumults and
rebeilions, especially in the north towards Scotland, so as
thercupoon may follow tome open enterprize set by vio-
lence. Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's coun-
cil and friends, a new league made with France, or Spain,
that fildl be ofenlfivc to this realm, and a furtherance
to their title. And it is also very likdy, that they will
fIt a ioot as many practices as they can, both upon the
frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majelly
to increase and continue her charge thereby, to retain her
from being mighty or potent, and f'ir the attempting of
all ti: cc things, many devises wiil be imagilncd, fioni time
to time, and no negligence will tiherein appear.

Ftlini the second fort, which mea'n n! other favour to

the (ucen of Scotts, but that fle fihould fuccced in title
to thle quecn's majesty, is noti much to te feared, iut
t-at thc vil;11 content them lelves to fee not only the queen's
nmajclit no: to marry, and lo to impeach it, but to hope
ti;art i'c queen of Scot's (hall have iiiwe, which they will
thai;,'; to c) more pleaGTblC to all men, bccaufe thereby the
ctl.s:, If England ;and Scotland Ih.ll be uniteid i: one,
anid i!ih.ic the occasion of war haill ceale ; with which
p'1 l",il; 1 ml:ny people may be seduced, and abuscd to
in in t ihni lc!v;s to the part of 1he queenCC of Scoit:.

'J1 i: lcmndics againiit thclf perils.
\'L. I1. Z A I)u-

A Duplicat.

4th of Jone A uminary of the consultation and advice given
1565. Cott. i r
Lib. Cal. by the lords and others of the privy council
B. 0o. f. Collete.l our of the sundry and several speeches

of the said counsellors.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller.
Lord Treafurcr, Mr. Vice Chamberlain

f Derby, Mr. Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Leicester, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

Questions propounded were these two.
i. IRST, what perils might ensue to the Queen's

majesty, or this realm, of the marriage betwixt
the Queen of Scotts, and the Lord Darn!ey.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy
the fame.

To the First.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced
by some counsellors into only one.

i. Firit, that by this marriage, the Queen of Scotts,

(being not married) a great number in this realm not of
the worst fubjeacs m ght be alienated in their minds from
their natuial duties to her majesty, to depend upon the
success of this ma! riage of Scotland, as a mean to eflablifh
the succession of both the crowns in the issue of the fame
marriage, and so favour all devises and practices, that
should tend to the advancement of the queen of Scots.

2. Secondly, that confidering the chief foundation of

them, which furthered the marriage of the Lord Darnley,
was laid upon the trust of such as were papifis, as the
only means left to rcflore the religion of Rome, it was
plainly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papists would nmoft favour, maintain, and fortify this
marriage of the Lord Darnley, and would, for furtherance
of faction in religion, devise all means and practices that

could

could be within this realm, to diflurb the estate of the
queen's majesty, and the peaceof the realm, and confe-
quently to atchieve their purposes by force, rather than
fail. By some other, there perils having indeed many
branches, were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, in-
to two forts, and these were in nature such as they could
rot be eafi!y fevered the one from the other, but were
knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the
cne with the other. The first of these fort of perils was
thit, by this marriage with the Lord Darnley, there was a
plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen
ofSc-tts, not only to succeed the Queen's majesty, as in
her b:ft amity he had profcffed, but that to occupy the
queen's estate, as when file was in power, she did mani-
kil}]' dcclare.

THE fccond was, that hereby the Romish religion

fliould lb ereEted, and increased daily in this realm, and
thafi two were thus knit together, that the furtherance
and maintenance of the title staid, in furthering of the
ri;gi.n of Rome within this realm; and in like manner
the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the title,
for otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves of the first.) And to prove that the intention to
advance the title to disturb the queen's majesty, muff
needs ensue, was confidered that always the intention and
will of any person is most manifeff, when their power is
grcateft, and contrary when power is finall, then the in-
tention and will of every person is covered and less seen.
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatest, by
her marriage with the dauphin of France, being after-
wards French king, it manifefily appeared of what mind
file, and all her friends were, using then manifestly all
the means that could he devised to impeach and difpoflefs
the queen's majesty, first by writing and publiihing her-
self in all countries queen of England ; by granting char-
ters, patents, and commifions, with that style, and with
the arms of England, both the French and Scotts, which
charters remain still undefaced; and to prosecute it with
effec', it is known what preparations of war were made,
and efnt into Scotland; and what other forces were assem-
bled in foreign countries; yea, in what manner a shame-
ful peace was made by the French with king Philip to em-
ploy all the forces of France to pursue all the matters by
force which by God's providence, and the queen's ma-

Z 2 jeRy

jefty contrary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by
her husband's death, her fortune and power being chan.
ged, the intention began to hide itself, and although by
the Scottish queen's commiffaries an accord was made at
Edenbrough, to reform all those titles, and claims, and
pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations,
the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And
so now, as soon as flTe hall feel her power, fle will set
the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such errors
as were committed in the first, her friends and allies will
amend the fame, and proceed substantially to her purpose.
By some it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a fulject
of this iealm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for
by this, he being of this realm, and having for the cause
of religion, and other refpecrs, made a party here, should
encrcafe by forcewith diminution of the poweroftherealm,
il that whatsoever power he could make by the sac-
tion of the papifl, and other discontented persons here,
flould be as it were deducted out of the power of this
realm ; and by the marriage of a flranger, {he could not
be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage flle
should have a portion of her own power to serve her turn,
and a small portion of adversaries at home in our own bow-
els. always seem more dangerous than treble the like
abroad; whereof the examples are in our own flories ma-
ny, that foreign powers never prevailed in this realm,
Lut with the help of some at home. It was also remem-
bered, that feing now before this attempt of marriage, it
is found, and manifefily seen, that in every corner of the
realm, the fjction that molt favoureth the Scottish title,
is grown flout and bold, yea fecn manifeitly in this court,
both in hall and chamber, it could not be but, (except
guud heed wcei speedily given to it) by this marriage,
and by the prafcice of the fautors thereof, the fame sac-
tion would shortly encrcafc, and grow so great and danger-
ous, as the redielf thereof would be almost desperate. And
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in per-
using ot the (ubfEancc of the juflices of the peace, in all
the countries of the realm, scantily a third was found fully
afblred to be trufled in the matter of religion, upon which
only t ring the' qutcn of Scotts title doth hang, and rome
dot !t nIight be, that the friends of the earl of Lennox,
and hiL ld imore knowledge hereof than was thought, and

thereby

thereby made avant now in Scotland, and their party was
so great in England as the queen's majesty durst not at-
tempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was
the fum of the perils declared, being notwithetanding more
largely and plainly set out, and made so apparent by ma-
ny sure arguments, as no one of the council could deny
them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Quetion.

THE question of this consultation was what were meet

to be done to avoid these perils, or else to divert the
force thereof from hurting the realm ;' wherein there were
a great number of particular devises propounded, and
yet the more part of them was reduced by some into three
heads.

i. THE firit thought necessary by all persons, as the

only thing of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy
all these perils, and many others, and such as without
it, no other remedy could be found fufficicnt, and that
was to obtain that the queen's majefly would marry, and
make therein no long delay.

2. THE second was to advance, establish, and fortify

indeed the profession of religion, both in Scotland and in
England, and to diminish, weaken, and feeble the con-
trary.

3. 'iTE third was, to proceed on sundry things, either

to disappoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the
least, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful to
this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE first of there three hath no particular rights in

it, but an earnest and unfeigned desire and suite, with all
humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majesty, that she would differ no
more time from marriage, whereby the good fubjecs of
the realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
jefv, and the iflhe of her body, without which no surety
can be deviled to ascertain any person of continuance of
their families or pofterities, to enjoy that which othcrwife
flioiil come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein

both truth and policy were joined together, had tlihef
particulars.

Z 3 IR ST,

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion, in

the realm, have taken occasion to comfort and increase
their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad, with
a rumour and expectation that the religion shall be Ihort-
]y changed in this realm, by means that the biflops, by
the queen's majefly commandment, have of late dealt
ftreightly with some persons of good religion, because they
had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like things,
being more of form and accidents, than of any fubtianccc
for that it is well known that her majefly had no meaning
to comfort the adversaries, but only to maintain an U',ll.
formity as well in things external, as in the fubfiance, nor
yet hath any intention to make any change of the reli.
gion, as it is eflablifhed by laws. It was thought by all
men very necessary, for the fupprefling of the pride anid
arrogancy of the adversaries, indirectly hereby to notify,
by her special letters to the two archbishops, that her
former commandment was only to retain an uniformity,
and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of
her majesty, in the change of any part of religion, but that
Ihe did determine firmly to maintain the form of her reli.
gion, as it was eftablithed, and to punish such as did
therein violate her laws. And in there points, fomealtb
wished that it might plrafe her archbishops, that if they
should fee that the adversaries continued in taking occa-
sion to fortify their fcdion, that in that cafe they should
use a moderation therein, until the next parliament, at
which time, some good, uniform, and decent-order might
be devised, and established, for such ceremonies, to as
both uniformity and gravity might be retained amongst
the clergy.

1THE second means was, that the quondam bishops,

and others, which had refuscd to acknowledge the queen's
majef) 's power over them, according to the law, and were
of late dispersed in the plague time to sundry places
abroad, where it is known they cease not to advance their
faiconi, might be returned to the tower, or some other
prison, where they might not have such liberty to seduce
and inveigle the queen's majcfly's fubjeds, as they daily
do.

THE third means was, that where the bishops do

complain that they dare not execute the ecclcfiaftical laws,
to the furtherance of religion, for fear of the preniunire
whcrewith the judges and lawyers of the realm, being not

bcft

bes affeCfed in religion, do threaten them, and in many
cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
cafes opened, some convenient authority might he given
them, from the queen's majefly, to continue during her
pleasure.

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudi-

cious and unlawful books in English brouglit from beyond
seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and efpe-
ci.llyin the north, seducing of great numbers of good sub-
jec,, the like boldness whereof was never suffered in any
other princess's time, that some freight order might be
given to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by
the judges, what manner of crime the fame is, to maintain
such books, made directly againfl her majtfiy's authority,
and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of
the realm.

THE fifth wa-, that where a great number of monk°,

fryars, and such lewd peifons are fled out of Scotland,
and do serve in England, especially in theNorth, as curates
of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest
and conformable, may be banifled out of the realm, for
that it appeareth they do f,;w sedition in the realm, in
manvs places, and now will increase their doings.

TIiE sixth, where sundry having ecclefiaflical livings,

are on the other fide the sea, and from thence maintain
Lfdition in the realm; that livings may be better bestowed,
to the commodity of the realm, upon good subjects.

ITHE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having

no small authority in this realm in governance of all pro-
pcity of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's ma-
jclt, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby
they should for conscience fake maintain the queen's ma-
j.fty's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and

avoid this marriage, or to divert the perils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can

likely do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by
some that these means following might occasion the breach
of the marriage.

I. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge. ;
2. THIAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.

Z 4 4. THAT

4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in ord
vvith specd, to bc ready at an hour's warning.

5. IHtAT some noble person, as the Duke of Norf'!;l

or the earl of Salop, or such other, be sent into Yo;|
hlire, to be lieutenant-general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to hei

readincfs to lerve, either at BSerwick, or to invade Sco1
land.

7. THAT presently lady Lennox be committed to fom

place, where the may be kept from giving or rcceivin[
of intelligence.

(j. That the earl of Lennox and his fonl may be fen

for, and requiied to be lent home by the queen of Scol,
according to the treaty ; and if they flall not come, the,
to dencunce to the queen of Scots the breach of the tro.
ty, and thcreupon to enter with h(ftility ; by which pro.
ceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in deed!
znd not in shews) that the marriage will be avoided, a
at the Icaft that it may be qualified from many perils; ,nj
whatsoever is to :e done her-in, is to be executed wi:
speed, whilst lhe has a party in Scotland that favourcte
not the marriage, and before any league made by th
queen of Scots with France or Spain.

SOxME other allows well of all these' proceedings, saving

of proceeding to hoflilitv, but all do agree in the reh,
and also to these particularities following.

10. TIHAT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son'

refusing, should be seized, and bellowed in gift or cuflod,
as shall please her majesty, upon good fubjeds.

Ii. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the

North, or elsewhere, be enquired for, and that they be,
by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have the

stewardship of the queen's majesty's lands there, and that
no person, deserving mistrust, be suffered to have gover.
nance or rule of any of her fubjeds or lands in the North,
but only to retain their fees, and more trusty person hare
rule of the fame people's lands.

13. THAT all frequent passages into this realm, toand

from Scotland, be rcitrained to all Scottish men, saving
such as have fafe-condutl, or be especially recommended
from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

J4. THAT some intelligence be used with such in

4* Scot.

Scotland, as favour not the marriage, and they comforted
from time to time.

15. That the queen's majelty's houfhold, chamber,

and pensioners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and
uncomely speech used by sundry against the state of the
real m.

16. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lennox, Mr.

Charles, be remembered to some place where he may be
iurth coming.

17. TIHAT confidering the facion and title of the queen

of Scotts, hath now of long time received great favour,
and continued, by the queen's majeffy's favour herein to
the queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Ca-
tharine, whom the said queen of Scotts accompted as a
coimpeor unto her in pretence of title, it may please the
queen's majesty, by some exterior aat, to shew some re-
miflion of her displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of
Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find some
change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceed-
ing therein.

I8. THAT whosoever {hall be lieutenant in the North,
Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. T'HAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be
committed to a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that there advices being confidered by

her majesty, it may please her to choose which of them
she liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and not
to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use

all means to put their intention in execution. Some by
piaclice, some by force, when time shall serve, and no
tirne can serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt
the perils, as now at the first, before the queen of Scotts
purposes be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 335.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicefler, from Edin-

burgh the 3ift of July 1565.
M AY it please your lordship, I have received your Cott. lb.

lordlhip's letter by my servant, sufficient teflimo- cal. n. 9.
iy of your lordlhip's favour towards me, whereof I think so. ,i6.

my nal.

my self always so assured, that what other mishap soever
befal me, I have enough to comfort myself with;
though I have not at this time received neither according
to the need I Hand, nor the necefiity of the service that I
am employed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with pa.
tience, than trouble your lordship to be further futer for
me, when there is so little hope that any good will be
done for me. I doubt not but your lordship hath heaid
by such information as I have given from hence, what
the present state of this country is, how this queen is now
become a married wife, and her husband, the self-same day
of his marriage, made a king. In their desires, hitherto,
they have found so much to their contentment, thatifthe
reft succeed and prosper accordingly,they may think them.
selves much happier, than there is appearance that they
shall be, so many discontented minds, so much mifliking
of the fubjets to have these matters thus ordered, and in
this fort to be brought to pass; I never heard of any
marriage, so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk,
was never seen, at any time, when men should most have
shewed themselves to rejoice, if that consideration of her
own honour and well of her country had been had as ap-
pertained in so weightya cafe. This is now their fear, the
overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with the
queen's majesty, and the destruction of as many of the no-
bility as fle hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a
qu.irrel unto. To fee all there inconveniencys approach-
ing, there are a good number that may sooner lament
wi:h thcnfelves, and complain to their neighbours, than
be able to find remedie to help them, some attempt with
all the force they have, lut are too weak to do anygood,
what is required otherways, or what means there is made
your lordihip knoweth ; what will be answered, or what
will be (lone, therein, we are in great doubt, and though
your intent be never ob good unto us, yet do we so much
fear your delay, that our ruin hfall prevent your support
whei council is once taken. Nothing so needful, asfpeedy
execution. Upon the queen's majeify, we wholly de-
pend, in her majefly's hands it standeth to save our lives,
or to sifter us to periih ; greater honour her majesty can-
not have, than in that which lyeth in her majesty's powerto
do for us; the fums are not great, the numbers of men
are not many that we desire; many will daily be found, tho'
this will be some charge i men grow dayly, though, at

this

this time, I think her majefly shall loose but few; her
friends here being once taken away, where will her ma-
j;fv find the like; I speak least of that which I think is
most earnefily intended by this queen, and her hulband,
when by him it was lately said, that he cared more for
the papists in England, than he did for the proteflants in
Scotland; if therefore, his hopes be so great in the papists
of England what mayyour lordship believe that he think-
eth of the proteffants there; for his birth, for his nurri-
tour, for the honour he hath to be of kine to the queen
ni miiflrefs, if in preferring those that are the queen's ma-
jcrties wotft fubjeEts to those that are her betl, he declareth
what mind he beareth to the queen's majeities self, any
man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil
forgotten; he would now seem to be indifferent to both
the religions, she to use her mass, and he to c.inie sone-
t;mes to the preaching; they were married with all the
folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not
the mals; his speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet
would he fain seem to the world that he were of some re-
ligion; his words to all men, againit whom he coneeiv-
eth any displeasure how unjust soever it be, so proud and
fpitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of the world,
titan he that, not long since, we have fcen anrd known
the lord Darn!ey ; he looketh now for reverence of many
that have little will to give it him ; and some there are
that do give it, that think him little worth of it. Ail ho-
nour that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, he
lath it wholly and fully; all praises that may be fpokicn
of him, he lacketh not from herself; all digniti's that
fli.an indue him with, which are ai eady given and gnrni t-
c; no man pleafcth her that contentcth not him ; and
wha: mav I fay more, she hath given over to liin hier
whole will, to be ruled and guided as hinifif bell likith ;
sic can as much prevail with him, in any thinil Iliat is
againll his will, as your lordflip may with me to persuade
that I fliould hang myself; this last dignity out of hand
to have been proclaimed king, she would have it deferred
uiiiil it were agreed by parliament, or he had been him-
felt 21 years of age, that things done in his name might
have the better authority. He would, in no ca!e, have
it deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon
this doubt is rifcn amongst our men of law whether fie
bcijlg clad with a husband, and her husband not twenty-

one

one years, any thing without parliament can be of
strength, that is done between them; upon Saturday at
afternoon, these matters were long in debating. And be-
fore they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night,
by three heralds, at found of the trumpet he was proclaim.
ed king. This was the night before the marriage; this
day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that
were in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of him
again, where no nan said so much as Amen, saving his fa-
ther, that cried out aloud God save his queen. The man.
ner of the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the
morning between five and fix, she was conveyed by divers
of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourn.
ing hood, not unlike unto that, which she wore the doul.
full day of the burial of her husband: she was led into
the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there
was she left untill her husband came, who also was con-
veyed by the fame lords, the minister prieffs, two, do
there receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and
an instrument taken by a Notour that no man said againfl
them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not
proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which w-re
three, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her fin-
ger; they kneel together, and many prayers said over
them, she tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kifs, and
leaveth her there, and went to her chamber, whither with-
in a space she followeth ; and being required, according
to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those
forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant
life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for manner
fake than grief of heart, she fuffcreth them that flood
by, every man that could approach, to take out a pin,
and so being committed to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that
it was not lust that moved them to marry, but only the
neccffity of her country, not, if God will, long to leave it
destitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given
of all things to make the worst, would that it should be
believed, that they knew each other before that they came
there; I would gpt your lord(hip (hould so believe it, the
likelihoods are ij great to the contrary, that if it were
possible to fee such an a6t done, I would not believe it.
After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and

dancing:

dancing; to their dinner they were conveyed by the whole
nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried ; mony
thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as
were happy to get any part; they dine both at one table,
she upon the upper hand, there serve her there earls Athole
Sewer, Morton Carver, Craufoord Cup- bearer; there serve
him in like offices, earls Eglington, Cassels, and Glen-
cairn; alter dinner they danced a while, and then retired
themselves till the hour of supper; and as they dined so
do they sup, some dancing there was, and so they go to
bed; of all this I have written to your lordship I am not
Oculatis testis, to this, but of the verity your lordship
ihali not need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was
font for to have been at the supper, but like a currish or
uiccurtly carle I refused to be there; and yet that which
vour lordflhip may think might move me much, to have
had the fight of my mistress, of whom there eighteen days
by just account I got not a fight, 1 am my lord taken by
all that fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I
do well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can
I not sird either honeit or good that liketh their doings.
I leave at this time further to trouble your lordlhip, crav-
ing pardon for my long silence, I have more ado than I
am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad by night
than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of
th:at which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your
lor.flhip, I am sure, is partaken of such letters as I write
to Mr. Secretary, so that I trust that he shall be to this,
to fax c me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most
humnbly I take my leave at Edinburgh, the last day of
July 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 339.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable

Sir William Cecil knt. her majesty's principal
secretary, and one of her highness's privy count
cil.
AS TER rry hearty commendations, this day at noon id of Spt.

' ..ptain Brickwell came hither, who brought with '565.

hilil lilt qtl el's I ajetLi's letters containing her full re- froPrnthe c
fob l':;, alnd pleasure for all things he had in charge toriginal,
git'c information of, saving that for the aid of the lords

of

of the congregation, there is nothing determined, or at
the leaf expref'ed in the fame letters, and for that pur.
pose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the
duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving
to be holpen with 3co harquebufyers out of this garri.
son, for ticir better defence. And albeit, I know right
well the goodneIs of their cause, and the quecn's majefRy
our lbver ign's good will, and care towards them; and
do also undridtalnd that it were very requisite to have them
holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner
decided, and that it now flandeth upon their utter over.
throw and undoing, since the queen's part is at the least
5000, anJ they not imuch above 1oo ; besides, that the
queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do
yet want the p iwr that the earl of Arguyle should
bring to them, Who is not yet joined with theirs; I have
thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
leat n her niajefy's pleasure in this behalf, what, and how,
I shall answer them, or otherwise deal in this matter,
now at this their extreme ncceffity. For, on the one
fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow,
and the miserable subversion of religion there; and, on
the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty a mat-
ter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a small
time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, per-
adventure, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the
mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the
whole but 800) without any grant of new supply for the
fame; and by that means also, to leave the marches here
the more fubjeEt to invasion, while in the mean season
new helps are preparing; to this know not I what to fay
or how to do. And fu much more I marvel thereof, as
that having so many times written touching this matter,
no refolutc determination cometh. And so between the
writing, and looking for answer, the occasion cannot pass,
but must needs proceed and have success. God turn it to
his glory; but surely all mens reason hath great cause to
fear it. Such a pufl it is now come unto, as this little
supply would do much good to advance God's honour, to
continue her majefly's great and careful memory of them,
and to preserve a great many noblemen and gentlemen.
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good
will and aflection that way, I do nothing mistrust, and
herein Ihall take such good advice as by any means I can.

3 I re

I received from these lords two papers inclosed, the effecl
whereof shall appear unto you. For those matters that
captain Brickwell brought, 1 thall anfweryou bv my next,
and herewith fend you two letters from Mr. Randolph,
both received this day. By him you shall hear that the
proteflants are retired from Edenborough, furth'r off.
So as I hope your resolution for their aid (hall come in
time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now
so presently need them ; and tb with my hearty thanks
commit you to God. Fiom Berwick, this 2d of Sept.
1565.

No. XIII, (Vol. T. p. 339.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

PON the advertisements lately received from you, r- Spnt.
with such other things as came also from the lord s565

Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole mat- I
ter well confidered, we have thus determined. We will,
with all the fleed that we can, fend to you 30cC]. to be
thus used. If you shall certainly underfand that the earl
of Murray hath luch want of money, as the imprefiingL to
him of ilool. might stand him in fiead for the help to
defend himself, you shall presently let him secretly to un
derifand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so
much, and so we will that you let him have, in the molt
fccret fort that you can, when the said fum shall come to
you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him
tome part there beforehand.

THE other 2oool. you shall cause to be kept whole,

unfpenr, if it be not that you (hall fee necefliry cause to
imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
6oo footmen and ico horsemen; or to the casting out of
wages of such workmen, as by sickness, or otherwise,
ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl of
Murray and his afibciates, that they might have, at the
Icaft, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also
write, that tho' we would not command you to give them
aid, yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and
seem to blame you for attempting such things, as you
with the help of others should bring about, you doubt

niot

not but things would do well ; you shall underfhand for a
truth, that we have no intention, for many refpets, to
maintain any other princes fubjets, to take arms againit
their sovereign; neither would we willingly do any thing
to give occasion to make wars betwixt us and that prince,
which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any
power to let them be aided with any men. But now,
confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwith-
fianding their humble submission, and offer to be ordered
and tried by law andjuftice, which being refused to them,
they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our wcft
marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and
adding thereunto the good intention that presently the
French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to join
with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that
queen, and to induce her to forbear this manner of vio-
lent and rigorous proceeding against her fubjeas, for
which purpose, the French ambassador here with us has
lately written to that queen, whereof answer is daily
looked for, to the intent in the mean time the said lords
should not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some help
to defend them, we are content and do authorize, if you
filall fee it necessary for their defence, to let them (as of
your own adventure, and without notifying that you have
any direcion therein from us) to have the number of 300
soldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to be
drawn out of all your bands, as you (hall fee cause. And
to cover the matter the better, you shall fend there num-
bers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time that such powers are on the
other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence
as you hnall fee cause to direc of, the fame numbers or
any of them may most covertly repair to the said lords,
when you (hall expressly advertize, that you fend them that
aid only for their defence, and not therewith to make war
agiinft the queen, or to do any thing that may offend her
perlon, wherein you fliall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it should
otherwilf appear, your dancer (hould be so great, as all
the fricnds you have could not be able to save you towards
us. And fb we aflure you our conscience moveth us to
charge you, so to proceed with them; for otherwise thaii
to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield to give them
aid of money or men : And yet we would not that either

of

of these were known te be our aft, but rather to be co.
cered with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 330.)
Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

1565-6.

.» Y humble duty confidered; what to write of the An Origl-
IV. present slate of the country I am so uncertain, by "al
r'aion of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it
maketh me much flower than otherwise 1 would. Within
thee few days, there was some good hope, that this queen
would have flewed tome favour towards the lords, and
that Robert Melvin ihould have returned unto them with
comfort, upon some conditions. Since that time, there
are come out of France Clernau by land, and '1 horneton
by tea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the
bishop of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither can there
be go;d word gotten, nor appearance of any good in-
tended them, except that they be able to perfwade the
queen's majelty our sovereign to make her heir apparent
to the croun of England. I write of this nothing less
than I know, that (he hath spoken. And by all means
that [he thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pars.
There is a band lately devised, in which the late pope, the
emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
rves princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpeted to
be of the fane confederacy to maintain papifiry through-
out Chriltiandom ; this. band was sent out of France by
'IThorieton, and is subscribcd by this queen, the copy
thereof remaining with her, and the principal to be re-
turned very fhortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon, a
fit minifler for such a devilish devise ; if the coppie hcro-
of may be gotten, that flhall be sent as I conveniently may.
Alonfieur Ramnbollet came to this toun upon Monday, he
fioke that night to the queen and her hufland, but not
long; the next day he had long conferences with them
Lth, hut nothing came to the knowltdge of any whereof
they intrcated. I cannot speak with any that hath any
hpel that there will be any good done for the lords by
him, thinigh it is said that he hath very good will to do so
to the utter molt of his power. He is lodged near to the
:Otit, and liyeth upon the queen's charges, Upon Sun-
VoL. 11. A a day

day the order is given, whereat means made to many t
be present that day at the mass. Upon Candlemas da
there carried their candles, with the queen, her hufbanc
the earl of Lennox, and earl Athol; divers other lord
have been called together and required to be at the mat
that day, fume have promised, as Cassels, Mongomerie
Scton, Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fleming, Le
vingfton, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel ; and of them al
Bothel is the tfouteft, but worst thought of; it wa
moved in council that mass (hould have been in St. Gile
church, which I believe was rather to tempt men's minds
than intended indeed: She was of late minded again t(
fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such as {he truflet
in amongst the queen's majesty's fubjets, of whofegooc
willis this way I trutl that the bruit is greater than the
truth, but in these matters, her majesty is too wife not
in time to be ware, and provide for the worst; some in
that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, where of I am sure
there is some things, tho' perchance of all I have not
heard the truth ; in this court divers quarles, contentions,
and debates; nothing so much fought as to maintain mif-
chief and disorder. David yet retaineth tlill his place,
not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly
refused to do any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is
said that fhail be the first voyage that she will make after
she is delivered of being with child; the bruit is com-
mon that fie is, but hardly believed of many, and of this,
I can aflure you, that there have of late appeared some
tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 359.)
Part of a letter fiom the earl of Bedford and Mr.

Tho. Randolph to the lords of the council of
England from Barwick, 27th of March, 1566.
An Original in the Cotton Library, CaligulaB.
1o. fol. 372.

Maay it please your Honours,

-"1, E A R 1 N G of To maynie matters as we do, and
,r1l- .I[I fyndinge such varietie in the reports, we have
,15j6. mnyche ado to decerne the vcriti : which maketh us the

flower

flower and loother to put any thing in wryting, to the
entente we wold not that your honours, and by you the
queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, should not be advertised
but of the verie trothe as we can possible. To this end
we thought good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in
Edinbourge at the tyme of the last attemptate, who spoke
there with diverse, -and after that with the queen's self
and her husband conforme to that, which we have learn.
ed by others, and know by this reporte, we fend the fame,
confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
aflyfters unto thele that were executors of the aaee.

THIS we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband

being entered into a vehement suspicion ot David, that by
hym ofme thyngewas committed, which was moR agaynfte
to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte,
fyrrle communicated his mynde to George Duglas, who
fynding his sorrows so great fought all the means he
coulde to put fume remedie to his griefft; and communi-
cating thl fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's conm-
mandment, no other waye coulde be found then that
David Thould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he
was so earneff and daylye pressed the fame, that no refte
could be had untyll it was put in execution. To this
that wasfoundgood, that the lord Morton, and lordLind-
faye should be made privie toth' intente that theie might
have their friends at hande, yf neade required; which
caused them to aflemble so mayny, as theie thought sus-
ficient against the tyme, that this determination of theirs
should be put in executione; which was determined the
ixth of this inftante 3 daies afore the parliament should
begync, at which time the fayde lords were assured that
the erles Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and their complyccs
sholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not be per-
fuaded through this means to be their fiiends; who for
the defyre he had that this intent should take effect th'
one waye, was content to yielde, without all difficultie
to t'other, with this condition, that theie should give
their consents, that he might have the crowne matrimo-
nial. He was so impatient to fee these things he saw, and
were daylye brought to his eares, that he dayly presscd
the (aid lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer de-
ay; and to the intent that n yght manifcfe unto the
world, that he approved the ate, was content to be at
the doing of that himself.

A a 2 UPON

UPON Saturdaye at night neire unto viii of the clock

the king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George
Duglafs, and two others, throwe his own chamber by
the privy slayers up to the queen's chamber going to
which there is a cabinet about xi foot square; in the
fame a little low reporing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady Ar.
gile, and David with his capp upon his head. Into the
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who
willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place
for him. The queen raid, that it was her will. Her
howfband anfwerede, that yt was against her honour,
The lord Ruthen said, that he [hould lerne better his
deutie, and offering to have taken him by the arm, David
took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and put
himself behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved
him: But the king having looted his hand, and hold.
ing her in his arms, David was thruit out of the cabi.
net throw the bed chamber into the chamber of pre.
fens, whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who in-
tending that night to have reserved hym, and the next day
to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore him
evil will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger,
and after hym a great many others, so that he had in his
bodie above wonds. It is told for certayne, that
the kings own dagger was left flicking in him. Whea-
ther he stuck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He
was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as was said, but
going down the ftayres out of the chamber of prefens.

THERE remayned a long tyme with the queen her hows-

band and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great
intercession, that he shold have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her howfband that was thee acor of so foul a
deed. It is said, that he did answer, that David had
more companie of her boddie than he for the space of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own con-
tentment he gave his content that he (hould be taken
away. " Ir is not," (faythefhe) ' the woman'spart to seek
L' the husband," and therefore in that the fault was his
own. He said that when he came, she either wold not
or made herself sick. " Well," faythe (he, " you have
taken your last of me and your farewell." Then were
pity, fayth the lord Ruthen, he is your majesty's hus-
band and must yield dutie to each other. "' Why may

sI

' I not," faythe the, " leave him as well as your wife
,, did her husband ?" Other have done the like. The lord
Ruthen said that she was lawfully divorced from her hus-
band, and for no such cause as the king found himself
greve. Befydes this man was mean, base, enemie to the
nobility, /hame to her, and deflruaion to herself and
country. " Well, faith the, that shall be dear blude to
,, some of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the
lord Ruthen; for the more your grace fhowe yourself of-
fended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself conti-

nually weepeth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and
weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This I must do
' with your majeflies pardon," and perfuadeth her in
the bset fort he could, that The would pacify herself.
Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court;
to pacify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who
went firayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl to
quiet them, and to aflure them from the king that no-
thing was intend against them. These notwithstanding
taking fear, when theie heard that my lord Murray
wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Hunt-
ly and Bothwell both get out of a window and to depart.
Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and Glandores
(who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to
go where they wold, and bring concordie out of the court
by the lord of Lidington. Theie went that night to such
places, where they thought themselves in mott faiftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the her-

ing of the lord Ruthen the was contents that he flould lie
with her that night. We know not how he

l § himnfil,

but came not at her, and excused hvnifelf to his f, iends,
that he was so fleepie, that he could not wake in duc
Icalbn.

THERE were in this companie two that came in wi:h
the king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom
the queen fayth would have froken her with a dagger, and
one Patrick Balentine, brother to the juflice clerk, who
allo her grace fayth, offered a dag againfl her belly with
the cock down. We have been earnestly in h nd with
the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he allbureth us
of the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber
the lord Robert, Arthur Arlkin, one or two others.

A a 3 They

They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord
Ruthven drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that
were not drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this
lord aflured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight

to Dunbar Cafile, whither resorted unto the lords Huntley
and Bothwell : That the earl of Morton and lord Ruth-
ven find themselves left by the king for all his fairpromifes,
bonds, and subscriptions. That he had protested before
the council, that he was never consenting to the death of
David, and that it is fore againfl his will: " That of
' the great substance David had there is much spoken,

f' ome fay in gold to the value of 1 mi . His apparel

' was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose.
" His chamber well furnished, armour, dagger, pyfio-
" letts, harquebuses, 22 swords. Of all this nothing
" fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the
' custody of all the queen's letters, which all were deli-
" vered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that he had

hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be
b" heard of. He had upon his back, when he was flayn,

"a night gown ofdamafk furred, with a fatten doublet,
" a hose of rustet velvet."]

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 368.)
Part of a Letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. i6,

1565-6.

CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there
hath been between her grace and her husband,

he prefTeth earneitly for the matrimonial crown, which
fle is loth hastily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat
in flore, until the know how well he is worth to enjoy
such a sovereignty: and therefore it is thought that the
parliament for a time ihall be deferred, but hereof 1 can
write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil.

4 April, T H E juftice-clerk in hard terms, more for his bro-
166. Pa- ther's cause than any desert, and as far as I can hear
per )fficc, the king of all other in world, for neither hath the queen
from the god
Original.

good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that
was against her will, nor the people that he hath denied
o manifest a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pur-
suer of them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
was executed, and Murray that was yesterday arreigned,
were both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
tain, by one, that upon Monday last spoke with the queen,
that she is determined that the house of Lennox shall
be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continu-
eth sick, fore troubled in mind; he itaith in the abby,
his son hith been once with him, and he once with the
queen, since she came to the catle. The queen hath now
seen all the covenants and bands that pafled between the
king and the lords, and now findeth that his declaration,
before her and council, of his innocency of the death of
David was false; and grievously offended that, by theW-
means, he should seek to come to the crown matrimo-
nial.
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Ber-

wick, 25 April, 1566.
:- -T -"HERE is continually very much speech of the

_ discord between the queen and her husband,

fn for that, that is commonly said and believed of himself,
that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue for a
divorce between them. It is very certain that Malevafier
had not spoken with him within these three days. He is
neither accompanied nor looked upon of any nobleman:
a:tended upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or
seven of the guard; at liberty to do, and go where and
wiht he will, there have no hope yet among themselves
of quietness.

--DAVID's brother named Joseph, who came th's
way with Malevafier, unknown to any man here, is be-
come secretary in his brother's place.

A a 4 No. XVII.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 372.)
The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d Augufl, I566.

HE queen and her husband agree after the old man.
ner, or rather worse. She eateth but very seldom

with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him, nor
loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her books,
as at her going out of the Castle of Edinburgh, to re-
move abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot for mo.
defly, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported
what she said of him. One Hickman, an English merchalt
there, having a water spaniel which was very good, gave
him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the plea-
sure, which he saw the king have in such kind of dogs,
gave him to the king. The queen thereupon fell marvel-
lufly out with Melvill, and called him dissembler and
flatterer, and said the could not trust one, who would give
any thing to such one as she loved not.

The earl of Bedford tp Cecil, August 8.
T HE difagrecment between the queen and her hus-

band continueth, or rather increafeth. RobertMel.

vill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of Edin-
burgh, could not tell where to find the queen; flth
which time the is come to Edinburgh, and had not twelve
horses attending on her. There was not then, nor that I
can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in
her company. The king her husband is gone to Dum-
fermling, and pafleth his time as well as he may; having
at his farewell, such countenance as would make a hul-
band heavy at the heart.
Sir John Softer to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

H E q,'een hath her husband in small eflimation,
and the earl of Lennox came not in the queen'i
fight since the death of Davy.

Si$

Sir John Forfier to Cecil, I ith Dec.

H E earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the
ambafTadors, and all things for the christening

are at his lordship's appointment, and the fame is scarce-
ly well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and
queen is presently at Craigmillar, but in little greater fa-
miliarity than he was all the while past.
Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of

Bedford.
T HAT the king and the queen agreed well together Augut,

two days, after her coming from -, and after 566. Pape

my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, Ibme new tOffice ro
lifcord has happened. The queen hath declared to my
lord of Murray that the king bears him evil will, and
has said to her, that he is deteimined to kill him, find-
ing fault that she doth bear him so nuch company : and
in like manner hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere
it at the king, which he did a few nigh:s since in the
queen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The
king confeftfd, that reports were made to him, that
my lord of Murray was not his friend, which maui, hin
speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed,
that the king had spoken such words unto her, and con-
fefled before the whole house, that fie could not be con-
tent lhat either he or any other should be unfricnd to my
lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
floutly, and used his speech very modeffly, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved ; he cannot bear t.at
the queen flould use familiarity either wilh man or wo-
man, and elpecially Ihe ladies of Arguilc, Murray, and
Marre, who keep most company with her. My lord of
Murray and Bothwell have been at evil words for the L.
of Ledington, belore the queen, flr he and Sir James Bal-
soule had new come fronm Ledingrli, with his antiwer up-
on fuich heads or articles as Bothwell anid he (llould agree
upon, which being reported to the said call in the queen's
presence, made aiifwer, that ere he partle with I;tch
alids as was desircd, he should part with his life. My

1o0id

lord of Murray said stoutly to him, that twenty as hones
men as he flould lose their lives ere he reafte Leding.
ton. The queen spake nothing, but heard both; in there
terms they parted, and since, that I hear of, have not met.
The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
carryeth the prince thence to Stirling with her. This
last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruth.
ven's, who confessed that he was in the cabinet, but not
of council of the sac. The queen hath also opened to
my lord of Murray, that money was sent from the pope,
how much it was, and by whom, and for what purpose
it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. 389.)
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20,

1569. A copy interlined by Cecil. It contains
an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bishop of Ross.
-- A FTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland]

A- how patiently did I bear with many vain de.

lays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your own comn
missioners, whereby I received no small unkindness, be-
fides the manifold causes of fulpicion that I might not
hereafter trust to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice my subjet and near
kinsman, the lord Darnly, under colour of private suits
for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty
of marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to con-
clude the fame without my aflent or liking. And how
many unkind parts accompanied that satI, by receiving of
my fuljects that were base runnegates and offenders at
home, and enhancing them to places of credit against my
will with many such like, I will leave for that the re-
membrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you.
And yet all these did I as it were suppress and overcome
with my natural inclination of love towards you; and
did afterwards gladly, as you know, christen your son,
the child of my laid kinsman, that had before so unloyally
offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other un-
dutiful usages towards me his fovcreign. How friendly
also dealt 1 by meffnges to reconcile him, being your hus-

band,

band, to you, when others nourished discord betwixt
you, who as it seemed had more power to work their pur-
poses, being evil to you both, than I had to do you good,
in refpea of the evil I had received. Well I will over-
pass your hard accidents that followed for lack of follow-
ing my council. And then in your most extremity, when
you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from
your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was
the remembrance of any former unkindncfs you had shew-
ed me. Nay how void was I of respect to the designs
which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown,
and the security that might have ensued to my state by
your death, when I finding your calamity to be great,
that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft
your life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threat-
tncd some as were irritated against you, that I only may
fay it, even I was the principal cause to favc your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 408.)
Letter of Q Elizabeth to Q. of Scotts. Thus

marked on the back with Cecil's hand.-Copia
Literarum Regi ajeati

adegi Ijeatid ginam Scolorum.
VI1I A.prilis.

ADAM E, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de Paper

V Crocq, je n'euffe eu si peu de consideration de vous Office.
flcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les ruinez,
et les pieres des miserables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je en-
telis que un edit a etedivulgue de par vous, madame, que
ujIgchafcun, que veultjuftifier que ons efitles meurtriers
de vctre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire
lc xiin:e de ce mois. La quelle chore, comme c'eft plus
honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, ne
y eflant cache quelque miftere ou finefne, ainfi le pere et
amis du mort gentelhomme m'ont humblemcnt requis,
que je vous priaffe de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ilz
cognoifient que les iniques fe font combines par force de
faire ceque par droi& ils ne pourront pas faire; partant,
je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour de vous meme, a qui il
tuuche le plus, et pour la consolation des innoccns, de
vous exhortcr le leur conceder cette requefle, laquelle, si
Lile Ics leroit nic, vous tourncroit grandemcnt en fouplon,

de

de plus que j'erpere ne pensez, et que ne voudriez volon.
tiers ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu. madame, usez de telle
fincerite & prudence en ce cas qui vos touche de si pres,
que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in.
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chofeque si ne siftes, feriez
dignement eibloyi hors de rancz de princesses, & non fans
cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une fepultute honorable,
qu'une vie maculee; vous voiez madame, queje vous traite
comme ma fille, et vous promrts, que si j eneuffe, neluy
fouhaiterois mieulz, que je vous desire, comme le Seign.
eur Dieu me porte tefinoignage, a quije prie de bon ceur
de vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera plus a honneur, ec
a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles
recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus
de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde aveoir. Ue Wet,
ce 8 jour de Janvier * en haste.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 423.)
A letter from England concerning the murder of

king Henry Darnley.

EefMar- HAVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark,

ton'* Ar-
chiev'ts I tho't good to write a few words unto you. I have
Bundle B. recd. some writs from you; and some 1 have seen lately
No, 25- sent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of

the 16th of May. I have participat the contents thereofto
such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure you; the
intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for
there was not one papist nor protestant which did not con-
lent that juRtice should be done, be the queen my fov"'.aii
and support, againfi such as had committed that abomin-
mble ill murder in your country; but to fay truth, the lack
and coldness did not rife from such as were called to coun-
cil, but from such as should give life and execution
thereunto. And further, I assure you, I never knew no
matter of estate proponed which had so many favourers of
all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fay unto you,
no man promoted the matter with greater affedion, than

* A miflake in the date correcied with Cecil's hand Vll0.
Aprilis. th

the Spanish ambaflador. And sure I am that no man dare
openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whoso-
ever is guilty of this murder, handfafled with advoutre,
is unworthy to live. I ihall not need to tell you, which
be our letts, and itayes from all good things here. You
are acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I mutt con-
fess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, ho-
nour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and
namely such as before, and after the murder, were deemed
to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword andjuftice
the punishment of those abominable acts, though we lend
you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both
honourable and hones, be well known to me, and fun-
dry others here, to be juflifiable in all their adion» and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation
is blcmifhed and infamit by there doings which lately pafied
among you. What we (hall do 1 know not, neither do I
write untoyou affuredly,for we be subjec' untomany muta-
tions, and yet I think we shall either aid you, or conti-
nue in the defence and safeguard of your prince, to as it
;ppear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not
to ruin the fortune of France, which will be your own
deflruion, if you be unadvised. I know notone, no not
one of any quality or eflate in this country, which does
allow of the queen your sovereign, but would gladly the
world were rid of her, so as the fame were done without
farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary justice. This
fend the 23d of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 434.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton

to Cecil, iith of July, 1567, from Berwick.
-SIR, your letter of the 6th of July, I received the An Origi.

0 joth at Berwick, I am sorry to fee that the nal.

queen's majesty's disposition altereth not towards the Pape Of-
lords, for when all is done, it is they which mull f and c
her more in Rlead, than the queen her cousin, and will
be better inflruments to work tome benefite and quiet-
ness to her majefly and her realm, than the queen of Scot-
land which is void of good fame.

A A let-

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cec

from Faftcaftle, 12th of July, 1567.

Pper Of- I I R, as you might perceive by my letter of the 1it
sce. S0 July, 1 lodged at Fatlcaftle that night, accompanye

with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and Jane
Melvin, where I was intreated very well, accordingtoth
slate of that place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners thar
folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is very strong
By the conference I have had with the lord of LedingtoC
I find the lords his aflbciates and he hath left nothing un.
thought of, which may be either to thir danger, orworl
them surety, wherein they do not forget what goodand
harme France may do them, and likewise they confide
the fame of England ; but as farr as I can perceive, to
be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto
them through the queens majestys dealing than either they
do by the French, or by any contrary faction amongelt
themselves, for they assure themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though
they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them, asto
the realm of England by her majefly's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majefly and both the realms
have received great fruit: yet upon other accidents which
have chanced since, they have observed such things in her
majestys doings, as have ended to the danger of fucha
she hath dealt withal, to the overthrow of your own design.
ments, and little to the surety of any party: and uponthefe
considerations and discourses at length, methinketh Ifind
a diSposition in them, that either they mind to make their
bargain with France, or else to deal neither with France
nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for their
iate and surety, and to use their remedys as occasion shall
move them; meaning neither to irritate France nor Eng,
land, untill such time as they have made their bargain as.
furedly with one of yow; for they think it convenient to
proceed with yow both for a while pari paffu, for that
was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take the mnatter very unkindly, that no better answer is
made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her majefly
and likewile that they hear nothing from yow to their fa
tisfadlion, I have answered as well as I can, and have al.
ledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with the queen,

3 "and

and their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet hap-
pened, and therefore her majefly hath sent me to the end
I may inform her throughly of the state of the matters, and
upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such
purposes as shall be by me proposed on their majestys be-
half unto them, they (hall be reasonably and resolutely an-
fwered. At there things the lord of Ledington smiled and
shook his head, and said it were better for us yow would
tel us alone, than neither to do us noryourfe!ves good, as
I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if there be any
truth in Ledington, la Crocq is gone to procure Ram-
boilet is coming hither or a man of like quality, and to
deliver them of their queen forever, who shall lead her life
in France in a abby reclufed, the prince at the French
devotion, the realm governed by a council of their elec-
tion of the Scottish nation, the forts committed to the
custody of such as shall be chosen amongst themselves, as
yet I find no great likelihood that I Lhall have access to the
the queen, it is objeced they may not so displease the French
king, unless they were sure to find the queen of England
a good friend; and when they once by my access to the
queen have offended the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the
queen's liberty, which was the first head that I proposed,
they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it
was but folly to talk of them the liberty going before;
but said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for our selves. In the end they said,
we should refute our own commodity, before they con-
cluded with any other, which I flould hear of at my
coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the
band concluded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntly, and that
faction, not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr,
asthat which was sent into France; thus having no more
leasure but compelled to leap on horseback with the lords
to go to Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from Fait-
cafile the 12th of July 1567.

To

To Sir Nicolas Thrbgmorton being in Scotlahd

By the queen, the x4th July 1567.

RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, thoigl
we think that the causes will often charge upon va

riety of accidents, yet we think for sundry refpeas, no
amiss, that as yow shall deal with the lords havingchargC
of the young prince for the committing of him into out
realm, so shall yow also do well, in treaty with the queen,
to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be fubjedl
to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it is
manifest) her Ton cannot be free, if the shall be contented
that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this
our realm, being To near as the knows it is; we shall not
faill to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, as
can be devised for any that might be our child born of
our own body, and flall be glad to shew to her therein
the trew effec of nature; and herein (he may be by yow
remembered how much good may ensue to her son to be
nourished and acquainted with our country; and there.
fore all things confidered, this occasion for her child;
were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him,
than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
shall so deal with her, both to flay her indeed from in-
clining to the French practice, which is to us notorious,
to convey her and the prince into France, and also to
avoid any jufl offence, that she might hereafter conceive,
if she flould hear that we ihould deal with the lords for
the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, i4th

July 1567, from Edinburgh.

Anorginal. T may please your majefly to be advertifed,Idid figni-
frice i fie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the i rth and

i2th of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the
causes of my flay, my lodging at Faflcaflle, a place of the
lord Hume's, where I was met by the said lord and by the
lord Lidingdon, and what had pafled in conference be-
twixt us, whil(f-r was at the said Faficafile. Since
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and
with 4co horfcs by their appointment for my better con-

u,q

duct, I came to Edinr the 12th of this present. The 13th
being Sunday appointed for a folemne communion in this
tiwn, and also a folemne fast being published, I could
not have conference with the lords which be a.fembled
within this town as I desired,- that is to fay the earls of
Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liding-
tonl, Sir James Balfour captain of the caflic, Mr. James
M'Gill and the prelident of the fcfiion.

NEVERTHELESS I made imens by the lord of Iiding-
ton that they would use no protrade of time in mine au-
dience, so did I likewise to the earle of Moi ton, who:n I
met by ch;ance; I was answercd by them both, that albeit
the day were deflined to sacred exercises, such as were
thereof the council would consult upon any moyen touch-
ing my access unto them and my conference with them,
and said also that in the afternoon either they would come
to me, or I should hear from them. About 4 of the clock
in the afternoon, the said 13th day, the lord of Liding-
ton came to my lodgings, and declared unto me on the
behalf of the lords and others, that they required me to
have patience though they had defferred my conference with
them, which was grounded principally upon the absence
of the caries of Mar, and Glencairn, the lords Semple,
Crighton, and others of the council, faying also that they
did confider the matters which I was on your behalf
to treate with them of, were of great importance, as they
could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor
give me answer without the advice of the lords, and others
their associates ; the lord of Lidington also faid.unto me,
that where he perceived, by his private conference with
me in my journey hitherwards, that I prefld greatly to
have speedy access to the queen their sovereign, he perceiv-
ed, by the lords and others which were here, that in that
matter there was great difficulty for many refpe&s, but
specially because they had refused to the French ambaffa-
dor the like access, which being granted unto me, might
greatly offend the French, a matter which they desired
and intended to eschew; for they did not find by your ma-
jeftys dealings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to
irritate the French king, and to loose his favour and good
intelligence with him: I answered that as to their refusal,
made unto the French ambassador, monsieur de Ville
Roye was dispatched forth of France before there acci-
dents here happened, and his special errand was to impeach

VoL.II. B b the

the queen's marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for Co in.
deed since my coming hither I learned his commission ten.
ded to that end, and to make offer to the queen of an.
other marriage) and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could
have no order forth es France concerning these matters
since they happened ; and therefore they might very well
hold them fufpeted to have conference with thequeen,leaft
they might treate of matters in this time without initrufi.
ons, and so rather do harm then good; but your majesty
being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent
me hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm,
for the conservation of their honors and credit, and for
their surety; and I might boldly fay unto him, thatyoyr
majefly had better deserved than the French had. He
said, for his own part, he was much bound uuito your ma-
jefty, and had always found great favour and courtesy in
England, but to be plain with you, Sir, fayed he, thereis
not manyof this affcmbly that have found so great obliga-
tion at the queen your fox creigns hands, as at the French
kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be the only
persons which took benefit by the queens majestys aid at
Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the action,
and we think, said he, the queens najefty your sovereign,
by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotland,
or any particular person; and not to talk with yow as an
ambassador, but with Sir Nicolas Throgmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie,
found but cold favour of thequeens majestys hands, when
they were banished forth of their own country; but I
would all our whole company were as well willing to ac-
complifh the queen your sovereign intents and desires as
I am ; for mine own part, I am but one, and that of the
rrcancft fort, and they be many noblemen and such as
have great intereftin the matter, mary yow fliall be assured
I will imploy myeclf to imploy my credit, and all that I
may do, to fatisfie thequeen your iiftrefs, as much asly-
eth in me, and for your own part you have a great many
friends in this assembly, wiili many other good words.
But for conclusion I muff take this for an answer to flty
untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I thought
meet to advertize your majetfy what hath pfled, apd how
far forth I have proceeded; your expectation being great
to hear from hence.

~~~~3 SsAND
3

AND now to advertize your majelty of the state of all

things, as I have learned since my coming hither, it may
pleale vour majefly to underitand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the

castle of Lochleven g,.arded by the lord Linfay and Loch-
leven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed in another commiflion, because he began to /how
great favour tothe queen and to give her intelligence. Sle
is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewomen, and
2 chambcrers, whereof one is a French woman. T'he
earle of Buchan, the earl of Murray's brother, hath also
liberty to come to her at his pclafure; the lords aforcfrtid,
which have her in guard, doe keep her very firaitly, and
as far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their
order from these men, because that the queen will not by
any means be induced to lend her authority to profCcute
the murder, nor Will not confRnt by any perwftvion to
abandon the loid Bothell for her hufbind, but avowecth
conRfantly that she will live and die with him; and faith
that if it were put to her choice to relinquifl her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, {he would leave her
kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple damnfell with
him, and that she will never consent that he shall fare
worse or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her

detentin is, for that there lords do fee the queen being of
so fervent affedcion towards the earle Bothell as she is, and
being put at, as they should be compelled to be in con-
tinuall arms, and to have occasion of many battles, he be-
ing with manifcft evidence notoriously deteced to be the
principall mfiurderer, and the lords meaning prosecution of
jufice against him according to his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and
him, as a marriage not to be fifuRred for many refpecs,
which separation cannot take place if the queen be at 11.
berty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoin'd
with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can perceave,
they intend not either to touch the queen in fuerty or in
honor, for they do speak of her with refpea and reve-
rence, aid do affirm, as I do learn, that the conditions
aforesaid accdmplifled, they will both put her to liberty,
and reftote her to ier cftate.

B b a TiHES

the queen's marriage with the earle of Bothel, (for so in.
deed since my coming hither I learned his commiflion ten.
ded to that end, and to make offer to the queen of an.
other marriage) and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could
have no order forth t.f France concerning these matters
since they happened ; and therefore they might very well
hold them fufpecEed to have conference with thequeel,leaft
they might treate of matters in this time without inftrufi.
ons, and so rather do harm then good; but your majetly
being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent
me hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm,
for the conservation of their honors and credit, and for
their surety; and 1 might boldly fay unto him, thatyopr
majesty had better deferred than the French had. He
said, for his own part, lie was much bound ulito your ma-
jetly, and had always found great favour and courtesy in
England, but to be plain with you, Sir, fayed he, thereis
not manyof this affcmbly that have found so great obliga-
tion at the queen your so ctreigns hands, as at the French
kings, for the earles of Morton aind Glencairn be the only
persons which took benefit by the queens majestys aid at
Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the acion,
and we think, said he, the queens majefRy your sovereign,
by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotland,
or any particular person; and not to talk with yow as an
ambassador, but with Sir Nicolas Throgmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death ofDavie,
found but cold favour of the queens majefRys hands, when
they were banished forth of their own country; but I
would all our whole company were as well willing to ac-
complifh the queen your fovercign intents and desires as
I am ; for mine own part, I am but one, and that of the
rrcaneft fort, and they be many noblemen and such as
have great interest in the matter, mary yow flall be assured
I will imploy myself to imploy my credit, and all that I
may do, to fatisfie the queen your mistress, as much as ly-
eth in me, and for your own part you have a great many
friends in this assembly, with many other good words.
But for conclusion I muff take this for an answer to stay
untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I thought
meet to advertize your majesty what hath passed, apd how
far forth I have proceeded; your expectation being great
to hear from hence.

~~~~~3 AND
3

AND now to advertize your majefly of the slate of all

things, as I have learned since my coming hither, it may
pleale vour majesty to understand as followeth,

THE queen of Scorland remaineth in good health in the

castle of Lochleveti guarded by the lord Linfay and Loch-
leven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed iii another commiflion, becaure he began to {how
great favour tothe queen and to give her intelligence. Slie
is waited onl with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewomen, and
2 chambcrers, whereof one is a French woman. T'he
earle of Buchan, the earl of Murray's brother, hath also
liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the lords aforefid,
which have her in guard, doe keep her very straitly, and
as far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their
order from these men, because that the queen will not by
any means be induced to lend her authority to piofccute
the murder, nor Will not conflnt by any perfv;fion to
abandon the lord Bothell for her hufbiiid, but aloweth
constantly that she will live and die with him; and saiih
that if it were put to her choice to relinquish her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, file would leave her
kindom and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with
him, and that she will never consent that he shall fare
worse or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cause of her

detenti,,n is, for that there lords do fee the queen being of
so fervent affection towards the earle Bothell as The is, and
being put at, as they should be compelled to be in con-
tinuall arms, and to have occasion of many battles, he be-
ing with maniftlt evidence notorioully deteced to be the
principall mfiurderer, and the lords meaning prosecution of
justice againit him according to his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorce betwixt the queen and
him, as a marriage not to be suffered for many refpcCts,
which separation cannot take place if the queen be at li.
berty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not also forget their own perill, conjoin'd
with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can perccave,
they intend not either to touch the queen in fuerty or in
honor, for they do speak of her with refpea and reve-
rence, anid do aflirm, as I do learn, that the conditions
aforesaid accdnoplifhed, they will both put her to liberty,
and reftote her to her estate.

B b a THESE

THESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 Har.

qubulhers which be in every good order, for the entertain.
ment of which companys, untill all matters be compound.
ed, they did sue unto v'our majefly, to aid them with such
furn of money as hath been mentioned to Mr. Secretary
by the lord of Lydingtons writing, amounting as I per.
ceive to ten or twelve thousand crowns of the

TI'Hr v.ere latcly advertized that the French King

doth mind to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell des Ur.
fine, a knight of the Fiench order, and always well assec.
tionate to the house of (uyfe, and howfocver la Forcl,
Vi!laroy, and du Cro;q have used language in the queens
favour and to these lords difadvanrage there, to yourma.
jelty; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as shall
be little to the queen's advantage; so as it is thought the
French King, upon his coming to his presence, will rather
fatibfie the lhrds, than p!cafure the ciecen ; for they have
their party fio well made, as the French will rather make
their profit by them. than any other way.

HEREW'ITH I fend your majesty the lass bond agreed

on, and si nedd by the Haniltons, the earl of Argyll,
Huntl,, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, the

Hamiitons have sent unto me a gentleman of their fur-
name named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the
bishop of St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbroth, tile
copy whareof I fend your majefly and mine answer unto
them, referring to the bearer the declaration of foale
things, as thele did by him unto me.

THE earl; of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another

unto me with a letter and c;cdit, I have used him as I did
the others, the copy of both which letters I fend your
irajcfty also. Thi. lord H-arrys hath also sent unto me
but not written, and I have returned unto him in like
fort.

AGAINST the 20th day of this month there is a generall

aflcmblyofall the churches, flires, and boroughs towns of
this realm, namely of fitch as be contented to repair to
thcfc lords to this town, where it is thought the whole
hatei of this matter will be halideled, and 1 fear me much
to the queen's diladvantage and darnger; unless the lordof
Lidington and some others whicn b c ft affcEed unto her
do provide obme remedy; for I perccave the great num-
ber, and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,

which

which have affinel in tl:efe doings, do greatly diflionailr
the queen, and mind seriously either her deprivation, or
her deftrufion ; I used the best means I can (confid-ring
the furie of the world here) to prorogue this ailembly, for
that appearcth to me to be the best remedy: I may not
speak of difloluti(n of it, for that may not beabiden, and
I fliould thereby bring myself into great hatred and peril.
The chiefeft of the lords which be here present at this time
dare not show lb much lenity to the queen as I think they
could be contented, for fear of the rage es the people.
The women be molt furious and impudent againfl the
queen, and yet the men be mad enough ; so as a firanger
over bufic may loon be made a facruli( e amonoit them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons w;th

theiradherents would put their force into the fields agailo ft
the 24th of this month, but I do not find ti:at inte;it lo
true, as the comnmon hruit goeth.

'THE eirle of Argll is in the highlands, where there
is rntiuble among his own countrymen

1'tE earle of L.cnnox is by thele lords much desircd

hcre, and I do believe your m;ijcftv many f ulc him, and
di;,'t him, as he ihall be able to promote your purpofc
with there men.

'T'iE earle of Argyll, the HIamiltons and he he incom-

latible.--1 do find amnongft the Hamil:ons, Argyll and
the company two flrange and sundry humours.

HAMILTONS do make show of the liberty of the queen,

and prosecute that with great earnefinef, because they
wotul, have thele lords deltroy her, rather than flie fliould
be recrvered from them by violence; another time they
Ieem to dtfire her liberty, and Bothwell's deftriuioll,
becaufc they would compals a marriage betwixt the quccn
and the lord of Arbroth.

TH}t carle of Argyll doth affect her liberty, and Both-

weil's dciliruction, because he would marry the queen to
his brother.

ANx yet neither of them, notwithflanding their open

rolcuraice, (ds appeareth by their bond) doth discover
thlir minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox is
no: here, but in theweft parts, he and the reit of the mi-
uiiietrs will be here at the great affimbly, w.os auflerity
:igainft the queen I fear as much as any man's,

liv fIme conference which I had with some of this
counlciil, me thinketh that they have intelligence that there

Ub 3 is

is a dif,.ofition in thequeen of Scotland,to leave this realm
and to retire herrelf into either England, or into France,
but most willingly into England, for fucb--and mif.
likeings as she knoweth hath been, and is meant unto her
in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of
persons deleagued, and authoiized by her, or to some one
or more.

AND it please your majesty, I think it not amiss to

put yow in remembrance, that in cafe the said queen come
into England by your allowance, without the French
king's consent, she Ihall loose her dowery in France, and
have little or nothing from hence to entertain her; and
in cafe she do go into France with the king's content.
ment, ihe may be an infirument (if he can recover fa.
vour, as time will help to cancell her disgrace) either by
matching with some husband of good quality, or by some
other devise, to work new unquietness to her own con-
try, and so consequently to your majefiy's.

THEREFORE it may please your majesty to confider of

this matter, and to let me know your pleasure with con.
venient specd, how 1 shall answer the fame, if it be
propounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the coun-
cill, as a piece of the end and composition. For I am sure,
of late, she hath seemed very desirous to have the mat-
ter brought to pass, that (he might go into. England,
retaining her estate and jurifdiaionin herself, though [he
do not exercise it; and likewise I underltand.that some of
this council which be least affected. to her safety do think
there is no other way to save her. Thus Almighty God
prcferve your majesty in health, honour, and all felicity;
at Edinr the 14th July 1567.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth the

18th of July I567, from Edinburgh.

Ancrir.ind,. IT may please your majesty, yow might perceave by my
l'pcr Of- I, letters of the 16th, how far I had proceded with these
hits. lords, and what was their answer; since which time I

have fpokcn particularly with the earle Morton, the lord
of Lidington, and Sir James Balfour captain, of this catle,
at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet access to the
queen to Lochleven will be granted me, staying themselves
itill by the absence of the lords and others their aflbciates,
which (they fay) they look for within two days; and for

that

that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that
mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have
thought good not to defer this dirpatch untill I have a re-
solute answer in that manner.

MIlAY it therefore please your majefly, to understand Ro-

bcrt Melvin returned from the queen in Lochlevin, to this
town the 6th of July, and brought a letter from her writ-
ten of her own hand to there lords, which doth contain as
I underfland matter as followeth-A request unto them
to have consideration of her health, and if they will not
put h.r to liberty, to change the place of reflraint to the
cafle of Stirling, to the end [he might hlave the comfort
and company of her son, and if they will not change her'
from Lochleven, fle required to have some other gentle-
women about her, naming none.

To have her Apothecary, to have some modest minifRer.
--To have an inmbroiderer to draw forth fiuch work as
she would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
chamber.--Touching the government of the realm the
maketh two offers, which are but' generally touched in
her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but referred
to Robert Melvin's cred;t, the one is tocommit it only and
wholly to the earle of MIirray, the other is to the lords
whole names ensue, aiflted with such others, as they fiall
call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault,
the earls of Morton, Muira), Marr, and Olencairn.

SHE hath written unto them that 1 might have access
unto her.-She requireth further, that if they will not
treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to use her as
the king their sovereign's daughter, (whom many of themr
knew) and as their prince's mothei.-She will by no means
yield to abandon Bothell for her husband, nor relinquish
him; which maitte'r will do her mbtflharm of all, and
hrdeleth thefe'lords to great'feverity againff her.

SHiE yieldeth ini words to the prosecution of the mur-
der.

I HAVE the means to let her know that your majefly
hath isnt me'hitherfor her relief.

1 HAVE also perfwaded her to conform herself to re-
nounce Bothell 'for her husband, and to be contented to
ftfif'r a divorce to pafs'betwixt them; flie hath tIent me
word that The will in no ways consent unto that, but ra-
ther die; grounding' herself upon this reafori taking her-
self to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing

B b 4 Bothell,

Bothell, she Ihould acknowledge herself to be with
child of a baflard, and to have forfeited her honour, which
she will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to
save her own life and her child, to chooie the kla[t ha:d
condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this

month, with whom I have had forne conference, and
with Mr. Ciaig also, the other minister of this town.

1 have perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad le-

nity, I find them both very austere, in this conference,
what they fl(all do hereafter I know not, they are fur-
nifhed with many arguments, some forth of the Scripturc,
some forth of hiflories, some grounded (as they fay) up-
on the laws of this realm, some upon praatices (ild in
this realni, and sone upon the conditions and oth made
by their prince at her coronation.

THE bilhop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley

hath sent hither to there lords, that his nephew the earle
and some others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at
Stirling, have fonie communication with fonie appointed
on this fide, assuring them that there is a good difpofi-
tion in the lords of the other party to concurre with there,
afluiing further that they will not dissent for triflies or
unnecessary things, and (as I am given to underfand)
they can be p!eased the queen's restraint be continued,
untill the murder be pursued in all pcrfons, whereby the
separation of the queen and Bothell is implyed, theprefer.
vation of the prince, the security for all men, and a
good order taken for the governance of the realm in
tranquillity.

CAPTAIN Clerk. which hath so long served in Dennark

and served at Newhaven, did the 16th of this month (ac-
companyed with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier
as the greater fame goeth) kill one Wilson a feamian, andl
such a one as had great estimation with these lords both
for his (kill, his hardyners, honesty, and willingness in this
ac'ion; whereupon Clerk hath retired himself their
quarrel was about the ship which took Blacketer, whiih
ihip w.s appointed by there lords to go to the north of
Scotland to impeach the paffige of the earle Bothell, in
cafe he went either to the ides, or to any other place; by
the death of this man this enterprize was dalhed.

THE biflop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and
doth desire to speak with the lord of Lidington.

THE

TiHE abbot of Kilwinning hath Cent for Sir James Bal-
four, captain of the castle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majcety in my lalt, the Hamiltons

now find no matter to difever these lords and them afun-
dcr, but would concur in all things (yea in any extremi-
ty against the queen) so as that they might be afblred the
prince of Scotland were crouned king, and should die
without iflue, that the earle of Lenox's son living should
not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his
nephew.

ISND although the lords and councelors speak reverent-

ly, mildly, and charitably of their queen, lb as I cannot
dather by their fpcech any intention to cruelty or violence,
crt I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very
arcat peril of her life, by reason that the people asem-
bled at this convention do mind vehemently the dtfiruc-
tion of her.

lr is a public speech amongst all the people, and

amonglt all estates, (saving of the counfellois) that their
q:ce!n hatih no more liberty nor privilcdge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private pcrlio, neither
by God's laws, ror by the laws of the realm.

THE earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and affoci-

ates, lie put to the horn by the ordinary jultice of this
town, named the lords of the session i and commairnment
given to all fhirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend
him, and all other his followers and receiptors-The cail
es Bothell's porter, and one of his other servitors of his
chamber, being apprehended, have confefltd such sundry
ci:cumrfances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the laid
c.rl was one of the principal executors of the mlurder, in
I:: own person accompanyed with sundry others, of which
number 1 cannot yet certainly learn the lnn..es but of thcce
or thcen, that is to fay, two of the Ormiflors of Tivot-
dall, and one Hayborn of Boltoi ; the lordb would be
glad that none of the murderers flould have any favour
or receipt in England, and hereof their defie is, that the
(fficers upon the border may be warned ; Bothell doth still
r:nain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fle-
ning, which have been there, have utterly abandoned
liii, and do repair hitherwards -The intelligence doth
grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held of;
;nii notwithltanding there lords have sent an hundred and
silty hlarqubullcrs to Stirling, to keep the town and pas-

sage

sage from furprize; and so have they done in like man.
ner to St. Johnston, which be the two passages from the
north, and weft to this town, I do underfiand the captain
of Dinbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do
mervile the carriages be not impeached otherwise than
they be.

OF late this queen hath written a letter to the captain

of the said castle which hath been furprized; and there.
by matter is discovered which maketh little to the queen's
advantage.

THUS, having none other matter worthy your maje.

fly's knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your majesty
with long life, perfent health, and prosperous felicity.
At Edinburgh the 18zh of July, 1567.
Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right

honourable the earl of Leicester, knt. of the or-
der, and one of the lords of her majesty's most
honourable Privy Council.

54th Or J-. BY my former dispatches sent to her majesty, and Mr.
Ply, ape7. Secretary, since the 12th of July, your lordship
from the might have perceived the state of this country, and to
Original. what end there matters be like to come: so as not to

trouble your lordship with many words; this queen is like
very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her son to
be crowned king, and she detained in prison within this
realm, and the fame to be governed, in the young king's
name, by a councel, consisting of certain of the nobility,
and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be
seen that the power and ability to do any thing to the
commodity of the queen's majesty, and the realm of Eng-
land, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the
hands of these lords, and others their associates, aflcmbled
at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's mtajefty will (till per-
silt in her former opinion towards the queen of Scot-
]and, (unto whom she shall be able to do no good) then
I do plainly fee that these lords and all their accomplices
will become as good French, as the French king can wifll,
to all intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons,
the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that faction, they be
already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this
i s the slate of things so come to pals of this country, that

France

France has Scotla.n now as much conjoined unto them,
to all purpo£(s, as ever it was; and what an instrument,
the young prince will prove, to unquiet England, I report
me to your lordflips wiod.opms and therefore confidering
the weight of the matter, and all the circumfiances, I
trust your lordsiips will well bethink you in time, (for'tis
high time) how to advise her majefly, to leave nothing un-
done tbat may. b;ing the prince of Scotland to be in her
pofleflion, or, at the leaj, to be at her devotion. And
amongst other things, that I canr imagine, for the firtf
decree, nothing is more meet to bring this to effect, than
to allure thiscompany here assembled, to bear her majesty
their favour. Some talk hath passed between the lord of
LiJdiligton and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty flall have
won there men to her devotion, the principal point that
will make them conformable to deliver their prince into
England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms en-
abling him to the fucceifion of the crown of England,
for fault of iflhue of the queen's majesty's body, some other
things will also be required, as.the charge of the said prince
and his train, to be at the charge of England. I do well
perceive that there men. will never be brought to deliver
their prince into England, without the former condition,
for the succession of England; for (faith Liddington) that
taking place, the prince shall be as dear to the people of
].ngland as to the people of Scotland; and the one will
be ns careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise,
he faith, all things confidered, it will be reported that the
Scottifhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as
those which commit the sheep to be kept by the wolves.
,o as for conclusion, your lordships may perceive here
will be the scope of this matter. As unto the delivering
of him upon hostages, he fayeth, let no man think, that
the condition of the fucceflion not being accomplished,
the nobility and the gentry will never content to leave
themselves destitute of their sovereign, upon any hostages,
neither upon any promises, nor likelihood of good to illue.
in time to come. It were notgood for. yourlelves. (faith
he) that the matter were so handled ; for then you (hould
adventure all your goods in oe, fbip, which might have
a dangerpus effea, confidering the. unwillingness of the
quctn your sovereign to consent. to efiabliflhing any fuc-
ciflbr to the crown. And then, how. unmete were it, that

her

her majesty having in her polleffion already all such per.
sons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown,
to have our prince also in her cuflody. For so there
might follow, without good capitulations, a ffrange arnd
dangerous issue, tho' the queen your mi;nrefs do think
that such imaginations could not prc,c.:i but from bury
head., as you lh. (

itLcrc;' tno Uto: or: hir behalf. What

is come to pals ii::c .v !ati .i.i.at:,. and how far forth
things are proceeded, 1 re : r y 1Ur lordflip to be informed
by ry letters sent unto nci Inajell , at this time. And
so i pr.:v ;l;nigiht God, prrfcsrve your lordship ;i ;ii,
honour dnd ieliht y. At Ednburgih his 2til u)ir lju,,
1507.

It may placre vni,:r good lorciti) to m.lki n;i' o:d Stu-
ard partner ot thlii letter.

The queen to Sir 'Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.
6th Aug. r RUSTY and rihit well beloved, we greet you

;367. well, .or as :nuch iaswe do con'.Lr :h.: you have

now a l1:' tinie rcma3nei. in those piarts, Vw.'.ijut expe-
dition in tii. .har«-e c' ...;nit ..d unto you, we think it not
meet fteing there !;.::., iot followed the good acceptation
and fruit of our ;iell meanin, ilwards that slate, which
good realon would h4ve rcitiir .', that you should conti-
nue there ;.ny longer, our .: ',,.;c, i ere-fore, is, that you
thall, ;limm.;iate!y upoin th: receipt hereof, fend your ser-
vant Mliddlemore unto the lords and effates of that realm,
that are aflcmrblcd together, willing him to declare unto
them, that it cannot but seem very flrange unto us, that
you having been sent from us, of such good intent, to deal
with them, in matters tending so much to their own
quiet, and to the benefit of the whole estate oftheircoun-
try, they have so far forgotten thlemfelves, and so flight-
ly regarded us and our good meaning, not only in delay-
ing to hear you, and deferring your access to the queen
their sovereign, but also, which is firangef of all, in not
vourhlifin~r to make any anfwver unto us. And altho'
these dealings be such, indeed, as were not to be looked
for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and pro-

ceediiig

ceeding toward their Soveraign and queen, to overpals
all the reft, in so frange a degree, as we for our part, and
we suppose the whole world besides, cannot but think
them to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of sub-
je6ts, as must needs remain to their perpetual tauche for
ever. And therefore ye fnall fay, that we have tho't good,
without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you
to our presence, requiring them to grant you lifcence and
pafport so to do, which when voui hall have obtained,we
will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as
convenient speed as you may. Given, &'c.

Indorfed 6th August, 1567.
Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William

Cecil, knight, one of her majesty's privy coun-
cil and principal secretary, give these.

SIR,
jXV H AT I have learned, since the arrival of my l:th Aug.

lord of Murray, and Mlon. de Linnerd, you 1567.
lhall understand by my letter to her majefly, at this time. Paper Of-

'tice, from

The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their the'Origi-
drink, put water to their wine. As I am able to fee into nal.
their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether fle be
at liberty or in prizon. The mark they shoot at, is, to
renew their old league; and can be as well contented to
take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the
fame by the order of thete lords, as otherwise. Lyncroll
rcane but yesterday, and me thinketh he will not tarry
long; you may guess how the French will feck to dfll
please these lords, when they changed the coming of La
Chapelle des Ourfins for this man, becaute they doubted
that de la Chapelle should not be grateful to them,
bcing a papist. Sir, to speak more plainly to yoai, thin
I will do otherwise, me thinketh the earl of Murray
will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bit-
terly againit the tragedy, and the players therein, than
he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an iik-
linig that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as
miuch mislike, as any thing, for our purpose. I can aflure.
you the whole proteflants of France will live and die in

these

there mens quarrels; and, where there is bruit atnongn
you, that aid should be sent to the adverse party, and
that Martigues should come hither with some force;
Mons. Baudelot hath assured me of his honour, that in.
head of Martigues coming against them, he will come
with as good a force to fuccuur them : And if that be
sent under meaner condut, Robert Stuart shall cone with
as many to fortify them. But the conflable hath alfured
thefl lords, that the king meaneth no way to offend them,
Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, un.
less it be to kindle these lords more against us. Thus I
do humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the
12th of August, 1567.

Yours to uCe and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.

T RUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well.
T We have, within these two days, received three

sundry letters of yours, of the 2oth, 22d, and 23d, of
this month, having not before those received any seven
days before; and do find, by there your letters, that you
have very diligently and largely advertised us of all the
hasty and peremptory proceedings there; which as we
nothing like, so we trufi in time to fee them wax colder,
and to receive some reformation. For we cannot per-
ceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the
doubts moved by the Hamiltons, whohowfoeverthey may
be carried for their private refpeds, yet those things which
they move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. For
if they may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered
to hear the queen their sovereign declare her mind con-
cerning the reports which are made of her, by such as
keep her in captivity, how should they believe the reports,
or obey them, which do report it ? and therefore our
meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly under-
fiand, that we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far
forth as the fame doth cohcern the queen their sovereign
for her relief) and in such things as fhal appear reaton-
able for us therein to, do, for the queen our fifler, we
will be ready to perform the: fame. And where it is so
required, that upon your Coming thence, the lord ScrOope

should

should deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings
to us, and ours to them, we are well pleased therewith,
and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof
by your letters, and to will him to siew himself fa-
vourable to them in their acions, that may appear
plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and mainte-
nance of her authority. And as we willed our secretary
to write unto you, that upon your meflage done to the
earl of Murray, you might return, so our meaning is you
shall. And if these our letters shall meet you on the
way, yet we will have you advertise both the lord Scroope,
and the Hamiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. 1567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 372.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbishop of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe.
A FTER my good commendations to your good lord- l;th Ag.

flhips, this shall be to advertize you, that the queen's 1567

majefly my sovereign having sent me hither her ambaffa- fm fice
dor to the queen her filler your sovereign, to communi- copy which
cate unto her such matter as she thought meet, confider- Slr Nicholas
ing the good amity and intelligence betwixt them, who qCen the
being detained in captivity (as your lordships know) con-
trary to the duty of all good fubjedts, for the enlargement
of whose person, and the restitution of her to her dignity,
her majesty gave me in charge to treat with these lords
assembled at Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable con-
ditions and means as might be, for the safeguard of the
young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder,
the diflolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the
earl of Bodwell, and lastly for their own sureties. In the
negotiation of which matters 1 have (as your lordihips
well know) spent a long time to no purpose, not being
able to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the queen
my fovc:cign's fatisfacion. Of which strange proceed.
ings towards her majtfly, and undutiful behaviour towards
their fovcrcign, I have advertised the queen's majefly she
(not being minded to bear this indignity) hath given me
in charge to declare her further pleasure unto them, in
such fort as they may well perceive hex majefiy doth difal-

low

low of their proceedings, and thereupon hath revoked me
And further hath given me in charge to communicate the
fame unto your loidfhips, requiring you to let me know,
before my departure hence, (which shall be, God willing
as loon as I have received answer from you) what you
and your confederates will afluredly do, to set the queen
your sovereign at liberty, and to reflore her to her former
(i nity by force or otherwise; feeing there lords have re.
iufcd all other mediation, to the end the queen's majelty
my sovereign may concur with your lordships in this ho.
I:ourable enterprize.

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your aflociates,

your lordships can neither communicate this matter
amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so
many of you as may confer together, within two or
three days, so as I may have your answer here in this
town by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, beint
the Igth of this August; for I intend.(God willing to
depart towards England, upon Wednesday followinr
Thus I most humbly take my leave of your lordships at
Edenburgh, the 13th of Aug. I567.

Indoried the 13th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.
24th Ag. /' OUR good lordship's letter of the 13th of AuguR

1567. I have received the i9th of the fame. For answer

PRiproffice, whereunto it may like your lordship to underfland, that I
frhnl Sipy will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already
Nicholas thoroughly inftruated of the queen's majesty my sovereign's
lent to picafure, concerning the detention of the queen your so.
eclreary vereign, and concerning her relief.

To the firit her majesty hath given in charge, to use all

kinds of pcrfuafion in her name, to move thefelords aflem-
bled at Edcnburgh to desist from this violent and undutiful
behaviour, which they used toward their sovereign. And
in this part, besides the flew of many reasons, and fun-
dry persuasions of amicable treaty with them, her maje-
fly hath willed me to use tome plain and severe speech un-
to them, tending so far forth, as if they would not be bet-
ter advised, and reform there their outrageous proceedings
extrcifcd against their fovcrcign, that then they might

be

be assured her majesty neither would nor could indure
such an indignity to be done to the queen, her good cou-
fin and neighbour.

AND notwithitanding there my proceedings with them,

they have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as
yet neither will they conftnt to the enlargement, neither
susser me to speak with her. So as it leemeth to me,
it is superfluous to treat any more with them after this
manner. Whereupon I have advertised the queen's ma-
jeivy my sovereign, expecting daily her majcity's furthcr
order; and as 1 shall be advertised thereof, lo will not
fail to signify the lame to your good lordihip ; and in the
mean time will advertise her majesty also, what yourlord-
ship hath written unto me. Thus with my due commen-
dations to your good lordship, I commit the fame to al-
mighty God, refling alwa;s to do you the pleasure and
le\ice that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfcd 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p.450.)
Account of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Par-

liament held December 15, 1567.

IHE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the p:,
T name of the duke and himself their friends and ad-

hcre'us, (the duke himself, the earl of Caflil; s, and the
abb,,t of Kilwinning being aloi present) to pci tuade the
uiiirn of the whole realm in one mind. Vli hr.in he did
not spare to set forth solemnly the great pr:i fe that p art of
ihis nobility did defeive, which in the be.iirting took
meancs for punilhinent of the eail Botliwell, as allo Ic, ing
the queen's inordinat affection to that wicked man, and
that she could not be induced by their pcrfu;lioil to leave
him, that in fequeftriing her person witliin Iochlceil,
hcey did the duty of noblemen. That their hoiinourblc
dlings, which had not sparcd to hazard their lives and
lands, to avenge their native country fioni the flanderou;
n'ports that were spoken of it amonl., other naii nl;, had
well deferred that all their h cthrcn Ilioull join with them
in iO good a cause. That he and they, in wholc riames
hc did fpcak, would willingly, and witlh'ut any compril-
sion, cnter thcmfclves in the fame yoke, and p.it their

\VU,. 1 . C c liVre

lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
cause. And if the queen herself were in Scotland, ac.
companied with 20,000 men, they will be of the fame
mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder
noblemen of their party, Huntley, Arguile, and others
which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame corformity, whereunto he would also earnest
ly move them. And if they will remain obflinate, and
refuse to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to corre& them, that other.
wile will not reform themselves. So plausible an oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord re.
gent, by the name of regent, (there was no mention at all
of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at every word,
when his speeches were direced to him, accompanying
all his words with low courtesies after this manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 472.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

8th Aug. 1568, from Bolton.

An origi;l. - TuUT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not
i'peroffice. 1] only to favour the form, but also the chief ar-

ticle of the religion of the gospel, namely jutfification by
faith only: and (he heareth the faults of papistry re-
vealed, by preaching or otherwise, with contented ears,
and with gentle and weak replys, and she doth not seem
to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

21 Sept. 1568, from Bolton.
- T came to this queen's ears of late that she was

bruited to be lately turned to the religion of the

gofpcll, to the great disliking of the papists hereabouts,
wich thing she herself confessed unto me, and yefenlray
openly in the great chamber, when the assembly was full,
anl some papilts present, she took occasion to speak ot
religion, and then openly he profeflid herself to be of the
pdpiIt religion, and rook upon her to patronize the fame,
more carneftly than she had done a great while afore, al-

the'

tlho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that the
efect of her speech was only to shew her zeal; and as-
terwards to me alone, when I mifliked to fee her become
foconfidently backward in religion, Why, said she, would
you have me to lose France and Spain, and all my friends
in other places, by seeming to change my religion, and
yet I am not assured the queen my good fifier will be
nmy allured friend, to the satisfaction of my honour and
cXpeatation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 474.)

Q(teen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.
R IGHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, we Paperoffie.

greet you well. Where we hear fay, that certain Frmn acopy
reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that wh.rt- correead by

feretrcary

foevcr flould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen Cecil.'
of Scotts cause, in any proof to convince or to acquit the
iaid queen concerning the horrible murder of her late hus-
hand our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mislike hereof,
as we cannot indure the fame to receive anysredit: and
therefore we have thought good to assure y6u, that the
fame is untruly devised by the authors to our dishonour.
For as we have been always certified from our said fifler,
both by her letters and meflages, that she is by no means
guilty or participant of that murder, which we wifli to be
true, so surely if ihe ihould be found juflly to be guilty
thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it should behove us to con-
fider otherwise of her cause than to satisfy her desire in re-
fiitution of her to the government of that Kingdom.
And so we would have you and all others think, that
should be disposed to conceive honourably of us and our
adtions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

C c No. XXVI.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 48 .)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of Odtobir

1568, from York.

Anroi nal.
--; /_ Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to

p~r utce . Bolton, to attend upon him here Thurfda

I: f, I made my repair hithcr accordingly, mea::inlit
Da a; here unti! AMainday next; as touching the natters f
thei commifion, that his grace and the reli have from her
hiolhncls, his 2racc hath imparted unto me of all thin;s
ti:Lreiito app:rtaining, and what hath hitherto palitd,
and altho' the matters be too weighty for my weak capa-
city, to preftume to utter any opinion of mine own there.
of, }ct I lee that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious
accutiftions ; Iy lord of Ledington also faith to me, that
he could wish these matters to be ended in dulce maner,
fb that it mi ht be done with safety ; of the reft you can
conceive, by the advertifcments and writings, sent up by
our commissioners.
A letter from the bishop of Rols to the queen of

Scots, from York, OEtober 1568.

Cots. ]:1. LE IS your majesty I conferred at length with A,
c.lig.. t. J ane great part of a night, who affurit me th!t he

'' had rcafoned with 13. this Saturday C. on the fielJ, whc

dettrminate to hiim h.it it was the I). determinit pir-
poic not to end your cause at this time, but to hold the
fame in fufpcncc, and did that was in her power, to maki
the E. pursue extremity, to the effect F. and his adhe
rents night utter all they could to your diflionour, t(
the clffict to cauf: you come in disdain with the hail sub
jeCt; of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to
atliemit any ihing to her disadvantage. And to this clifi
is a1l her in:cntion, and when they have produced all t!lce
can a ainft y( u, I). will not appoint the matter itifl;n i
but tranllnPrt you up in the country, and retain you rlic'
till fllc think time to Ihcw you favour, which is not likcly
to be halLiy, becauft of your uncles in FlInce, and til

'c.ir

fear fie has of yourself to be her unfriend. And there-
fore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to the D.
inlcaing that ye are informit that your subjects which has
orri'edit you-This in effetl that your majesty hearing
tile efate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was
informed that her majesty was informed of you, that you
could not gudely remit your subje&s in such fort as they
night credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the
flay of this controversy to be ended. And therefore per-
fiJading her D. effeetually not to trust any who had made
fich narration. But like as ye had rendered you in her
hinds, as most tender to you of any living, lb prayit her
take na opinion of you, but that ye wauld uef her coun-
fell il all your affairs, and wald prefer her ficendlhip to
all others, as well uncles as others, and afture her to keep
that thing ye wald promise to your fubjels by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her
in that point be removing within her realm in secret and
quiet manner, where her G. pleated, until the time her
(;. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit re-
iiuved from her. So that in the mean time your realm
were holden il quietness, and your true fubjeas restored
and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things
tcilding to this efleSt. And affirms that they believe
that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that ye
)ol.r io far; and it may come that within two or three
months fie may become better-minded to your grace,
for now she is not well minded, and will not shew you
any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the
following key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioners,
F. The earl of Murray.

C c3 No. XXVII.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 492.)
Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scot.

land, Dec. 21, 1568.
Paperffice. T H E befl way for England, but not theeafiefi, that

1 the queen of Scots might remain deprived of her
crown, and the state continue as it is.

THE second way for England profitable,and not fohard.

---That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some
perfwafions, to agree that her son might continue king,
becauCe he is crowned, and herself to remain also queen;
and that the government of the realm might be committed
to such persons as the queen of England lhould name,
so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered,
that a convenient number of persons of Scotland should be
first named to the queen of England, indifferently for the
queen of Scots, and for her son, that is to fay the one
half by the queen of Scots, and the other by the earle
of Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the child; and
out of those, the queen's majesty of England to make
choice for all the officers of the realm, that are, by the
laws of Scotland, disposable by the king or queen of the
land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's majefly,

the government remain in the hands of the earle of Mur.
ray as it is, providing he flall not dispose of any offices
or perpetuals to continue any longer but to there offered
of the premises.

THAT a parliament be summoned in Scotland by fe-

veral commandments, both of the queen of Scots and of
the young king.

---THAT hostages be delivered unto England on the

young king's behalf, to the number of twelve perfonsof
the earle of Murray's part as the queen of Scots (hall
name; and likewise on the queen's behalf to the like num-
ber as the earle of Murray shall name ; the fame not to be
any that have by inheritance or office cause to be in this
parliament, to remain from the beginning of the summons
of that parliament, untill three months after that parlia-
ment; which hostages shall be pledges, that the friends
ps either part shall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this

4 par'

parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
queen of England shall devise for the government of the
realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland,
nor contrary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheri-
tance, as the fame was before the parliament at Edinr. the
Dccem' 1567) shall be eftablilhed to be kept and obeyed,
under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

--That by the fame parliament also be established

all executions and judgments given against any person to
the death of the late king.

--THAT by the fame parliament, a remiflion be
made universally from the queen of Scots to any her
contrarys, and also from every one fubjeat to another,
faring that reflitution be made of lands and houses, and
all other things heritable, that have been by either fide
taken from them which were the owners thereof at the
committing of the queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

THAT by the fame parliament it be declared who shall

be successors to the crown next after the Q of Scots and
her iflue; or else, that such right of the D. of Chatelhe-
rault had, at the marriage of the Q. of Scots with the
lord Darnley, may be conserved and not prejudiced.

THAT the Q of Scots may have leave of the queen's

majesty of England, twelve months after the said parlia-
ment, and that the shall not depart out of England, with-
out special licence of the queen's majesty.

THAT the young king shall be nourished and brought
up in England, till he be years of age.

IT is to be confidered, that in this cause the compofi-

tion between the queen and her fubjeas may be made with
certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world for
her honour, as though all the parts should come of her,
and yet for the surety of contrarys, that certain betwixt
her and the queen's majesty are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 494.)
The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan.

1568-9.

E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, Ppceru.ce.
by any writing, to renew that which it hath

pleated God to make grievous to us and forryfull toyow;
but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having

C c 4 occa-

occasion to command you in our service, and yow allo
whilefi you are to serve us. We require yow to con.
fdt.r of this that followeth with like consideration and
diligence, as hitherto yow have accuftumate in our ser.
v ife; at the time of our lafl letters written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of
Scots, we had understanding out of Scotland of certain
writ:nis sint by her from thence into Scotland, amongf
the which one is found to contain gre.:t and manifest un.
truths touching us and others alob, as shall and may plain.
3 a!ppear unto, yow by tlhe copy of the fame, which
likewise we fendi (yw, and becaufeat the fametime we were
aivjcrtifed, rh ;t it flould be shortly proclaimed in Scotland,
tihouiii then it was not. we thought good first to remove
the queer, before we would difclo!e the fame, and thenex.
peil the' fiue ih rc(;f; .rditd now, this day, by letters from
our cousin of 1l-!iflJon we aie alcertained, tlat since that
time ti'e famen matters cont.iine l in the wi iing, are pub-
]iiiced ii (iiverfc pa:t.s of Scotland, whereupon we have
thbcught it very meet, for the difCiliarge of our honor, and
to con:found the fal chood contained in that writing, not
only to have the fame repioved by open proclamation

p,"n c;ur frontiers, the copy whereof we do herewith
fend yow, but also in convenient fort to charge that queen
therewith, to as she may be moved to declare the authois
t!here(cf, and pcrfuaers of her to write in such slanderous
fort fuich untruths of us ; and in the mean season, we have
i:cic ftived her ccmmiffioners, knowing. no other whom
we may more probably presu-me to be parties hereunto,
than they, unti'l the queen llall name some other, and
acquit them; who being generally charged, without ex-
prefling to them any particularity, do use all manner of
Spceches to dilrharge themselves; wherefore our pleasure
is, that ye lhall, after ye have well perused the copy
of this viliting fcnt to yow, speedily declare unto her,
that we have good undlerfianding given us of diverse let-
ters and wriitings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by
hler own hand, amongst which, one such writing is sent
with her commandment exprcfly as now it is already
lub'ilhcd, as we are much troubled in mind that a prin-
ccfs as ihe is having a cause in our hands so implicated
with difficulties and calamitys, (hould either conceave in
her own mind, or allow of them that (hould devise such
false, untrue, and improbable matters against us, and our

honror,

honor, and specially to have the aventure to have the fame
bcing known so untrue to be publiihed ; and you shall
all1j ay, bccaufe we will not think so ill of her, as that it
should proceed of her self, but rather she hath been coun-
fellcd thereunto, or by abuse maJc to think some part
thereof to be true, we require her, even as ihe may look
for ony favour at our hands, that she will disburden her-
self as much as truly (he may herein, and name them
wliich have been the authors and perfwaders thereof,
and lo flhe (hall make as great amends to us as the cafe
may require; after you have thus far proceeded, and had
forie afwver of her, whether fie shall deny the writ-
ing ablb utely, or name any that have been the advisers
th;:cof, you shall fay unto her that we have flayed her
comliiliioners here, untill we may have some answer here-
of, bccaufe we cannot but impute to them some part of
this evil dealing, untill by her anfwcr the authors may
be known ; and as Coon as you can have direct answers
from her, we pray you to return us the fame; for as the
cafe Ilanidth, we cannot but be much disquieted with it,
having c ur honour so deeply touched contrary to any in-
ten:i(ni in us, and for any thing we know in our judg-
ment, the earl of Murray and others named in the fame
writing void of thought for the matters, to them therein
imputed; you may impart to the queen of Scots either
the contents of the flandclous letter, or (hew her the co-
py to read it, and yo-u may also impart this matter to the
lord Scroop, to join with you there as you shall think
nleet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from We-

therby the 28th January, 1568.
- WILL fupprcfs my own griefss, and pass them Anoriginal.

over with silence, for the prefi'nt learning of your Paperofice.

majefly-and for this queen's answer to the coppie of her
supposed letter sent unto Scotland, I must add this unto
my brother's letter, sent unto Mr. Secretary yefiernight
late; in process of time, (he did not deny but that the
first lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to
a letter that she had sent unto Scotland, which touched
my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her son into your
niajcfiy's hands, and to avoid that the fame (lould not be

done

done without her consent, made her, ihe faith, to write
in that behalf; the faith also, that she wrote that they
should cause a proclamation to be made to stir her people
to defend my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for
delivering of her said son, and impunge his rebellious go.
vernmenr, as she termed it, but ihe utterly denyeth to
have written any of the other slanderous part of the said
letter touching your majefly; she said also, that she sus.
peded that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the
author of some Scotch letters devised in her name, but (he
would not allow me to write this for any part of her an.
fwer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 503.)
SirNicholasThrogmorton to the right honourable

the Lord of Liddington.

o2th of Ju. OUR letter of the 2d of July, I have received the
ly, 1569. [ 15th of the fame. For answer whereunto you Ihail
From the understand, that friends here to my lord regent and you

in. do wish such a concurrence in all doings, as in matterand

circumstances there arise no dissention, or at the Iclaf,
no more nor other than the difference of countries doth
neceflarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be used as may be, for the consummation of the
matter in hand, which principally to advance, your al-
lowaice, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland,
is most requisite, for you are Co wife, and well acquainted
with the irate of the world, and with all our humours, as
you know that rome do allow and disallow for reafon,fome
for refpea of multitude, some for refpe&t of persons, and
so the cause is to go forward as men do like to set it for-
ward. You are not to seek that Come will use cautions,
some neutrality, some delays, and some will plainly im-
punge it. And yet all and every of these forts will alter
their doings, when they ihall fee the regent and his fa-
vourers accord with the best and greatest part there, and
agree with the wisest and strongest party here. Tho' the
matter hastaken its beginninghere, upon deep and weigh-
ty considerations, for the weil of both the princes and their
realms, as well presently, as in time to come, yet it is
thought molt expedient, that the regent and realm of

Scot-

Scotland, by you, ihould propose the matter to the queen
our sovereign, if you like to use convenience, good order,
or be disposed to leave but a scar, and no wound of the
hurts pait. I would be glad that this my letter should
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it
icems your queen's restoration and marriage to the duke
of Norfolkfhould be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejecion. To which proceedings, be-
caife you pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus,
me thinketh you use a preposterous order, to demand the
conlent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds
t, a good end hath rather been felt or prepared, and
thereftre there must needs follow either a universal refu-
Ial, or facious division amongst you, whereby a bloufter-
ing intelligence must needs come to queen Elizabeth of
the intended marriage from thence, which ought to have
been Iecretly and advisedly propounded unto her high-
ness; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by thisdealing,
her majesty shall be made inexorable and so bring the
mater to such passe, as this which should have wrought
surety, quictnefs, and a flay to both queens and their
realms, (hall augment your calamity, and throw us your
helt friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy divi-
sion amongst ourselves; for you may not conjecture that
the matter is now in deliberation, but expeaeth good
occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge Co
flanderly of the managing this matter, as to think we
have not cast the worst, or to enter therein so far with-
out the afliftance of the nobility, the ablest, the wisest,
and the mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth:
from whom it hath been concealed untill you, as the fittest
minifler, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the
regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far master
Woddes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's
affections, and master secretary's, to affit the regent and
to suppress the queen of Scots, I know not, nor is it not
mate ial ; but I do assuredly think, that her majesty will
prefer her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and the
conservation of her people, before any device, which may
proceed from vain discourse, or imperfe&tions of passions,
and inconsiderate affections. And as for Mr. Secretary,
you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too faR
afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and fpe-
cially when the rcliqucs be of no great value or power.

If

If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and
constancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay con.
fidently, you may rcpofe as well of him in this matter
as of the duke ot Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem.
broke, Leicefler, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft of the
nobility; all which do embrace and protefle the accorn.
pliflimcnt of this cafe. I have, according to yourad-
vice, written presently to my lord Rcgent, with the fame
zeal and care of his well doing that I owe to him, whom
1 love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath aflured unto
him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion,
wherewith lhc ccmcth to be well fatisfy'd. If your cre.
dit be, as i trust, haflcn your coming hither, for it is
very necneflry that you were hereprcfcntly. Q2 Elizabeth
both doth wite to my lord Regent in such fort, as lie may
perceive Mr. Wood's difcou fes of her majesty's aflfecion
to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he
conjetureth of him, the efiet of which her majefty'slet-
ter you fliall understand, by my lord Leicester's letter unto
you at this dilpatch. At the court, 20th July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 504.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B,

probably Lcrd Burleigh.

s 9. -. ECAUS E I fee that great advantage is taken

Harl. Li'i. ,B on fmal! occasions, and that the mention of the
so. 439 marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother, and

the D. of Norfolk, hath this while paftbeen very frequent
in both the realms, and then I myself to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her
miajefly's ears; I will, for fatisfaCion of her highness,
and the discharge of my duty towards her majesty, mani-
fcifl unto you my interest, and medling in that matter,
from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju-
dicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king
my sovereign, this his realm, and me. What conferrences
was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able
to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that
pafled betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end her Majclty may underltand how I have

bcen

teen dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled to touch
lon e circumflinces, before there was any mention of her
niarri:ige. In York, at the meeting of all the commission..
crs, 1 found very- and neutral dealing with the duke, and
others her highness's commiffioncrs, in the beginning of
the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed fin-
cerely, and so further. During which time, I entered
into general speech, flicking at our just defence in the
matters that were objected against us, by the raid queen's
commifiioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but
summary cognition in the cause of controversy, with a
fmali dec!aration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to
Howvard, what purpose they had I cannot fay, but that
ni2ht Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence
vith me upon the tfate of our atcion, I was advised by him
tn pass to the duke, and require familiar conferreice, by
the which I might have some feeling to what ifiue our
matters would tend. According to which advice, having
l"tten timeand place convenient in the gallery of the hottie
wl:ere the duke was lodged, after renewing of our firfl-
a(quaintance made at Berwi( k, the time before the as-
iize of Leith, and rome speeches passed betwixt us ; he
bea.n to fLy to me, how he in England had favour and
credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of many,
it was to be thought there could be none more fit infiru-
ments, to travel for the continuance of the amity betwixt
tle realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the
present late of both, and how I was entercei in that action
tre:diilr so far to the queen's diflhonour, I ws willed by
himn to confider how matters flood in thir, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inlconveni 'ncies her
Lcfimation in the matters laid to her clha'ge mi!ht breed
t( her posterity. Her reflpect was not little to the crown
of England, there was but one hcir. The 1-;mi.tons my
unfriends had tie next refpeil, and that I iholld efleern
the illue of her body would be the more afecciionate to
nie and mine, than zny other tha: could att:iin to that
crnwn. And so it IthoulJd be mectelt, that hie ;:fiirnlcd her
dci;linli made in Loclilevin, anl vwe to abilratt hlic let-
terb of her h;;nd write, tha;t fle ihould not be defm.ed in
I':nglaiid. My reply to that wa,, hlow the matter had pas-
(fed in parliament, and the lettcis 'fcil to rm;ny, so that the
abilra'ing of the famec could not thten fIccure he;- to any

1'ir""po

purpose, and yet lhould we, in that doing, bring the ig.
nominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for us
that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of Eng.
land was not made privy to the matter as she ought to be,
to be in refpet we were purposely come in England for
that end, and for the-of the grants of our cause. The
duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle mat.
ters well enough at the court. After this, on the occa.
sion of certain articles, that were required to be resolved
on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very
ground of our acifon, we came up to the court; where
some new commiflioners were adjoined to the former, and
the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parlia.
ment house at Westminster, in pretence of which corn
mirlioners of the said queen, and --- through the--.
rebuking of the queen of England's own commiflioners, we
uttered the whole of the action, and produced such evi-
dences, letters, and probations, as we had, which might
move the queen's majesty to think well of our caule.
Whereupon expecting her highnefsdcclaration, and feeing
no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given, but
daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean sea-
son, standing in hazard and danger, we were put to the ut-
termoft point off our wit, to imagine whereunto the mat-
ters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone
for justification of our causes, yet appeared no end, but
continual motions made to come to some accord with the
queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no
other anfwcr to give them, but that I should neither do
against conscience or honour in that matter. Notwith-
itanding feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor
dispatch to us, and that 1 was informed that the duke be.
gan to mislike of me, and to speak of me, as that I had

Pretably reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her---
·,,li .. and murderer, I was advised to pars to him, and give

him good words and to purge myself of the things ob-
jckcd to me, that I fliould not open the sudden entry of his
evil grace, nor have him to our enemy-----confider
ing his greatncfs. It being therewitha! whispered, and
flihwed to me, that if I departed, he flanding discontented
and not satisficd, I might peradventure find such trouble
in my way, as my throat might be cut before 1 came to
Berrick. And therefore finct it might well enough ap-

pear

pearto her marriage, I ihould not put him in utter despair,
that my good will could not be had therein. So few days
before my departing I came to the park in Hampton court,
where the duke and I met together, and there I declared
unto him that it was come to my ears, how some mifre-
port should be made of me to him, as that I should
speak irreverently and rashly of the said queen my fove-
reign's mother, such words as before exprefled, that he Probably
might --- thereby my affection to be so alienate from ls'&'
her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her
preferment, howbeit he might perfwade himself of the con-
trary, for as she once was the person in the world that I
loved best, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
having received such advancement and honour by her, I
was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to wish her bo-
dy harm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of
me, (howsoever the truth was in the self) and as to the
priefrvation of her son, now my sovereign, had moved me
to enter into this cause, and that her own pressing was
the occasion of that was uttered to her -- whensoever Probably
God should move her heart to repent of her bypast beha- di'"nolr.
viour and life, and after her known repentance, that she
should be separate from that ungodly and unlawful mar-
riage that fbe was entered in, and then after were joined
with such a godly and honourable a personage, as were
affiEcioned to the true religion, and whom we might trust,
I could find in my heart to love her, and to shew her as
great pleasure, favour, and good will, as ever I did in my
life and in cafe, he should be that personage, there was
none whom I could better like of, the queen - in --
of England being made privy to the matter, and {he allow-
ing thereof, which being done, I should labour in all things
that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that'were not
prejudicial to the king my sovereign's estate, and prayed
him not to think otherwise of me, for my affeflion was
rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God
should direct her to know herself, than utterly alienated
and abflrated from her; which he seemed to accept in
very good part, Iaying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me
tlat thing,whereunto I will make nonein England or Scot-
land privy, and thou haft Norfolk's life in thy hands.
So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way,
and all night, J was in continual thought and agitation
of mind, how to behave mylelf in that weighty matter,

fili,

firfl, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were at.
tempted without the queen's majesty of England's know.
ledge and good will, this realm and I myself in particu.
lar having received such favour and comfort at her high.
ness's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietnei',
since God pofleflfd her majesty with her crown. And on
the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to ne,
proefting, none other were or lhould be privy to our
speech, 1 tho't 1 could not find in my heart to utter any
thing, th:t might endanger him; moved to the uttermoit
with these cogitations, and all desire offleep then remov.
ed, I prayed God to fend me some good relief and out.
gate, to my discharge, and satisfaction of my troubled
mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or with.
in a day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with
my lord of Leiceftcr, in his chamber at the court, where
he began to find firange with me, that in the matter I
made so difficult to him, standing so precisely on confer-
rence, and how when I had in my communication with
the duke, come so far- and there he made some dif.
course with me, about that which was talke betwixt us,!
pr B.ih:y perceiving that the duke had -- the matter to my lord

;- of Leiceller, and thinking me thereby discharged at the

duke's hands, therefore 1 repeated the fame communi-
cation in every point to my lord of Leicester, who desired
me to flew the lame to the queen's majefly, which 1 re-
fuscd to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her
highness any thing, that he as one -- by her majelty,
and for many benefits leceived at her hithnefs's hands is
obliged to wish her well, should make declaration of the
fame to her majeffy, as I undcrfiand by some speech of
her highness to me, he did. This my declaration to the
duke was the only cause, that staid the violence and trouble
prepared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways un-
dcrltand. 'lhe lame declaration J was obliaed to re-
new since in writings of---- sent to my servant John
¥VVod, The Cum whereof, I trust, he flihwed the dike,
and Something also 1 wiote to himlclf, for it was tho't this
ih.)uld redeem fame time, that the duke should nut fuid-
denly declare him our enimy,v for his greatness was oft
laid before me, and what fricndfhip he had of the chief of
the nobility in England, so tlat it might appear to the
queen's majesty of England-. so cold towards us,and doing
nothing publickly that might seem favourable for us, we

2 had

had rome cause to fufped that her highners (hould not be
contrarious to the marriage when it should be prGpored to
her. The sharp message sent by her majesty with the lord
Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the due tending
so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing
one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that
her highners had been foreseen in the duke's dcfign, and
that (he might be induced to allow thereof. But howbe-
it it was devised in England, that the lord of Lethington
fMould come as from me, and break the matter to her
highness, as her majesty in a letter declared that she
looked for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of
me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife ac-
cord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but
,ltooether mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great in-
cinveniencies to the surety and quietness of this whol;ifle;
f.r our proceedings have declared our mifliking and Jiifal-
I i.ance of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had
pleased, he was ready for the journey. And in likewise
i: was devised to give content, that the -- between d'r.c
tle said queen and Bothwell, inould be fufired to p;o-
cQ:d in this realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boy 1,
by reason we could not underfiand what was the queen's
mijcfty's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf---
A;d whereas ye mean, that her highness was not made
prvvyof any such intention, the fault was not in me. The
irlt nrotion being declared, as I have written, to my lord.
ofLcicefler, and by him imparted to her majesty, fb far
as I could perceive by some speech of her highness's to me,
before my departing. Thus 1 have plainly declared how I
Lae been dealt withal for this marriage, and how just ne-
ccufi:y moved me not to require directly, that which the
duke appeared so ---- unto. And for my threatnings,
to afl-nt to the fame, I have exprefled the manner ; the
pcrfons, that laid the matter before me, were of my own
company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In con-
clulion I pray you persuade her majcfty, that flhe let no
speeches nor any other thing pafled and objected to my
prejudice, move her majesty to alter her favour-towards
me, or any ways to doubt of my allured conftincy to-
',ilds her highness; for in any thing which may tend
\' c. 11. ) d to

to her honour and surety, I will, while I live, beflot
myself, and all that will do for me, notwithstanding my
hazard or danger, as proof should declare, when her ma.
cfty finds time to employ me.

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

A P P E N D IX
TO THE SECOND VOLUME,

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 9.)

i'illiam Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of
Liccfter, March 2oth, 157e, fiom Lccington.
T rE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, An Origi.

be the divisions thereof in dangerous factions, doth "''
prels me to frame my letters to your lordship, in

o'ier fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other
rp:l)ct, but only to maintain my private credit; therefore
J a:] driven to furnish them with matter, which I know
not to be plauliblc,whereupon my miiconftruing my mean-
in¥, onie there may take occasion of offence, thinking
tni.: I rather utter my own passions, than go about to in-
frnl your lordship truly of the fate ; but I trust my plain
dealing, hall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning;
to n:,.ke the fame sensible, I will lay before your lordship's
c;cs, the plat of this country; which first is divided into
two fadions, the one pretending the maintenance of the
k in's reign, the other alledging the queen to have been
cludlly dealt withall, and unjuitly deprived of her slate
the! lirner is conpofed of a good number of nobility, gen-
ticnicn, and principal burroughs of the realme, who ihall
hiav, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the queen's
niljety your sovereign's allowance and protection; the

.tllir hath in it some moit principall of the nobility, and
lhcrcwithall, good numbers of the inferior fort, through-
nut the whole realm, which also look afiuredly that all
kiiis do allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
). What consequence this division will draw after it, I
leave it to your lordship's consideration; there is fallen out
otller division, accidentally, by my lord regent's death,
Avhich is like to change the state of the other two factions,
o nclrcafe the one, and diminifl the other, which is

D d 2 gioundcd

grounded upon the regiment of the realm. Some num.
her of noblemen aspire to the government, pretending
right thereto by reason of the queen's demiflion of the
croun, and her commiflion granted at that time for the
regiment during the king's minority; another faction doth
altogether repine against that division, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort
amongst the earls, shall presume to challenge to themselves
a rule over the whole realme, the next of the blood, the
first in rank, the greaterf alway both for the antientry of
their houses, degree, and forces, being negleckted; this
order they think preposterous, that the meaner fort shall
be placed in publick function to command, and the greater
shall continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commiflion had in the beginning been valew.
able, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not
be cxtended to the present, for that the conditions there.
unto annexed are ceased, and so the effec of the whole
void ; the latter part of this division hath many preten.
ccs, for besides the queen's fahlion, which is whollyon
tha fife, a great number of these that have heretofore pro-
sessed the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will
not yicld to the governme nt of the other, whose preferment
for refpeRcs they miflikc, when the queen's faction fliall
be increased, with a part of the king's, and these notof
leAit fibfiance, and yow may judge what is like toenfue;
;n other incident is like to move men to enter in further
disc ourses, it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's
m.nicftv is fcttiin forth some forces towards the border,
which shall enter this realm, to countenance these, thataf-
pire to the regiment, and fuppiefs the contrary faction,
and bruts are spread, that the fame shall be here out of
hand ; these that think themselves of equal force withtheir
contrary faction at home, or rather an overmatch to them,
yet not able to encoun ier with the forces ofanother prince,
rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take ad-
vice of necefity, and evil councillors, and feck also the
maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby her majefly
(altho no further inconvenient were to be fearcd) mult be
driven to exceflive charges: and it would appear there
were a conspiracy of all the elements at one time to Iet
us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of
your fotics coming towards the border is spread abroad,
even at the fame time is ai ived at lDunb.trton, a g, lzeon

S with

with a meflenger sent exprefly from the king of France,
to that part of the nobility, that favours the queen, to
learn the state of the country, and what fuipport they lack
or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; assuredly this message will be well received,
and suffered accordingly, this is the present state of Scot-
land. Now if your lordfhipwould also know my opinion,
how to choice the best, as the cafe standeth ; I will in
that also fatisfie your lordship, 1 am required from them to
deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge whether I do so
or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter
my judgment, and go not about to disguise my intents.
I truss the queen's majesty hath a desire to retain at her
devotion the realme of Scotland, which she hath gone
about to purchase, with bellowing great charges, and
the loTs of some of her people; this desire is honourable
for her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and
of none to be disallowed ; specially if it be (as I take it) to
have the amity of the wholerealm, for it is not a portion
of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove commo-
dious for her to suit the friendship of a facion of Scotland,
for in so doing, in gaining the best, she may lose the
more, and the fame would bring all her acfions with us
in suspicion, if she fliould go about to nourish factions
amongst us, which meaning I am sure never entered into
her majefly's heart; then if it be the friendship of the
whole the doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one
part, gn about to overthrow the remnant, which will not
befo faifable, as some may give her to underfmand; brt:
rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the
whole Rate, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all
by good means to an uniformity, so iall t]ei give us alloc-
c,,fion to think well of her doings, that (he tendeth our
wealtih, and provokes us universally to wish unto her ma-
jnfy a molt prosperous continuance ; by the contrary, if,
for the pleasure of a few, the will fend forces to suppress
there whom they mislike, and so consequently offend ma-
ny; men be not so faint hearted, but they have courage
tu provide for their own fafty, and not only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will also procure further, at
the hand of other princes. This for mine own part,
I do abhor, and protest I desire never to fee forces of
itrangers to set foot within tlhisland, yet I know not what
Point necfflity may drive men into, as if men in the middle

Dd 3 of

of the tea were in a ship, which suddenly flhould be fetor
fire, the fear of burning would make them leap into thh
lca, and soon after the fear of the warter would drive their
to clive again to the fired ship, so for avoiding prefen
evil, men will many times be inforced to have recourfetc
another, no lets dangerous. Trust me forces will nio
bring forth any good fruit to her majelty's beh ive, i
nmult be fime way of treaty shall serve the turn, wherein
by my former letters your lordflip doth know already
what is my judgment; you fee how plainly I do write,
withcut consideration in what part my letters may he tak-
eii, yet my hope is that such as will favourably interpret
them, shall think that I mean as well to her majesty, and
that realme, as these that will utter other Lnguage. I
wifli the continuance of the amity betwixt the twocon-
trys, without other refpe(, and will not conceal from hir
mnajefty any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the pre.
julice thereof; if I lhall perccave her majesty taking trank
dealings in evil part, I ihall from thenceforth forbear;
in the mean fea/on I will not cease to trowble your lord.
ship, as I shall have occasion to write, and so I take my
leave of your lordlhip.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 9.)
A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffcks,

July 2d, 1570.

Cn'crr .
M. S. I if- ~ IGHT trufly and well beloved cousin we greet ycu
iIv, sV. Rjl. well, this day we have received your letters of 28

. the lait month, with all other letters, sent from Scot-

land, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto anfweris
desircd to be given before the tenth of this month; which
is a very fliort time, the weightiness of the matters, and
the distance of the places confidered ; nevertheless we
have, as the {hortnefs could fiuffr it, relolvcd to give this
answer following, which we will that yow, by warrand
hereof, flall cause to he given in our name to the earl of
Lennox and the reft of the noblemen convcened with him.
Where it is by them, in their letters, and writings al-
ledged, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning the
etlablifhing of the regiment of the realm under their young
king, great inconveniencies have happened, and therefore

they

they have deferred now at their last convention to deter-
mine of the famine, who ihall have the place of gover-
nour, untill the 21ft this month, beforewhich time they
require to have our advise, in what person or persons the
gavernment of that realm shall be eftablifled, we accept
very thankfull the goodwill and reputation they have of
us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our advise
in a matter, that toucheth the state of their king, their
fclves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
our former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
taken some discomfort, as though that we would not have
regard to their atate and surety, so on the other part, they
ot their wisdoms ought to think, that it might be by the
whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form
of government, or a governour by name, for that howfo-
ever we should mean well if we ihould do lb, yet it could
not be without Come jealousy in the heads f the estate, no-
bility, and community of that realm, that the government
thereof should be by me Spccially named, and ordained;
foasfinding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking most
that they Ihould take any discomfort by our forbearing
to show our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for
to proceed, confidering with ourselves how now that realm
had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their
king, and by reason of his base age, governed heretofore
b; a very careful and honourable person, the earle of Mur-
ray, untill that by a mischievous person, (an evil exam-
ple) he was murdered, whereby great dirorder and con-
fusion ofneceffity had, and will more follow, if determin-
ation be not made of some other special person, or per-
sons, to take the charge of governor, or superior ruler
fpeciall, for administration of law andjuftice, we cannot
but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
Ipccial governor to be chosen; and therefore being well
afllrcd, that their own understanding of all others is
bcet to confider the slate of that realm, and to discern
the abilities and qualifies of every person meet and ca-
pable for such a charge, we shall better fatisfie ourselves,
whom they by their common content flall first choose,
and appoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us afore-
hand uncertainly named, and that because they shall per-
ccave that we have care of the person of their king, who
by nearness of blood, and in refpce of his so young years,
ought to be very tender and dear to us, we shall not hide

D d4 our

our opinion from them, but if they shall all accord to name
his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox to be
governor alone, or jointly with others, (whom we hear to
be in the mean time by their common consent appointed
lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none
can be chosen in that whole realm, that lhall more desire
the preservation of the king, and be more meet to have
the government for his safety, being next to him in blood
of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere ; and yet
hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to them this choice,
except they hiall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured,
that whatfcever reports ofdevifes, are, or shall be spread
or invented, thit we have already yielded our mind to
alter the hate of the king or government of that realm,
the ahme are without just cause or ground by us given,
for as we have already advertifrd them, that although we
have yiclded to hear, which in honour we could not re-
fuse, Jwh.i the queen of Scots on her part fliall fay and
offer, not only for her own assurance, but for the wealth
of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be,
that fia!l be offered, we mean not to break the order of
law and jiiRicc, by advancing her cause, or prejudging
her contrary, before we flall deliberately and assuredly
fee, upon the hearing of the whole, tome place necef-
Ihry, and just cause to do; and therefore finding that
r-alm rulcd by n king, and the fame affirmed by laws of
I r:.-: 'e;alm, aid theecof invested by coronation and oilier
iol.innities tufed and rcquifite and generally so received be
the whole eltates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the
t.onmpaints or informations of the queen againl her son,
to do any act whereby to make conclusion of governments,
but as wae have found it, Co to susser the fame to continue,
yea not to fufnr it to be altered by any means that we
nay impeflic, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your
late acions hath manifcfly appeared,untill by Ibmejuliicc,
and clear caufc, we fhail be dircc!y induced otherwise to
declare our opinion; and this we would have them to
know to be our dctermination and course that we mean
to hold, whereon we trust they for their king may fee
how plainly and honourably we mean to proceed, and
how little caule they have to doubt of us, whatolever to
the contrary they have or thall hear; and on the other
part, we pr.iy them of their wifdorms to think how unho-

nourable,

iourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us,
when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require
to hear her cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in
the fame, as well for matters betwixt ourselves and her, as
betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm,
againit which offers no reason could move us to refuse to
give ear, that we should aforehand openly and directly, be-
fore the causes be heard and confidered, as it were, give a
judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them
whom (he maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye shall
admonish them, that they do not, by misconceiving our
good meaning towards them, or by indirect assertions of
their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in such fort, that our good meaning to-
wards them shall not take such effect towards them,as they
fliall desire, or themselves have need of. All this our an-
f'ecr ye i(hall caufebe given them, and let them know, that
fr the shortness of time, this being the end of the fccond
of this month, we neither could make any longer decla-
ration of our mind, nor yet write any several letters, as if
time might have served we would have done. 2 July,
J570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p.g.)
The bishop of Ross to secretary Lidington from

Chattiiworth.

THAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, rth J.-e

here at Chattifworth, the Io of January, but on i57o.

the receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like as
the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which you
will be resolved of many points contained in your taid
letter. I writ to you that I received your letter and cre-
dit from Thomas Cowy at London, and sent to Leicefler
to know the queen of England's mind whether if you
lhould come here or not. Hfe ent me word, that ihe will
no ways have you come as one of the commiflioncrs,
bccaufc the is yet offended with you ; and therefore it ap-
p(ars good that ye come not hither, but remain where
you arc, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may bcft
advance the queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and
fil4cty depends thereon, in refpet of the great feid and

enIni-

ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the
great heirship taken of your father's landis ; both were sure
demonstrations of their malice. Yet I am encouraged hy
your flout and deliberate mind. Afllure yourlelf no dili-
gence shall be omitted to procure ftiuports forth off all
parts where it may be had. We will not refuse the aid
neithcr of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice; and
to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well pre-
pared. And secing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into
Fl.inders, the queen thinks it very necessary that he so do.
for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the
king of Spain to give support, and I am sure that there
he shall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it
abides only on the coming of some men of countenance,
to procure and receive the fame. He must needs tarry
there, on the preparations thereof, during the treart,
which will be a great furtherance to the sarre here. The
queen has already written to the duke D'Al''a for this
effect, advertizing of his coming ; there is c,!: ''.: rurs
of money coming for support of the , '.E:hi: . n, as ,.;nte
to you before , ,m nhe .

hV hci i: '! 'ln I would he

had a general commifilli) to deal for thl.i , and receiVe
such fiums as flill bie given. The means btlel be fou:i
to ciaufe you be anlfucrit !.f the fums you writ for, to be
difp n:it uFonI the furniflli ! f

of the catleofEdenburgh,

so bi.;ig finme hlonerl .i d true nman were sent to Slanders
to ecc ivc it, as said is, which I would you prepared and
font. (Ord'rs fliall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
iV c ih; e proponit your avyce in entering to treat with the
qucen of England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for
aick of aid. Your answers to the Englifimen are tho't
very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands,
in that caf;l, eftote pru:icntes ficut serpentes. You may
tl.l cCxpcritnce with the hard dealing with me, howye
v.would be ulfd if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of
(in:ser, being in mnedio nationis prav e; always no fear,
wi:h G od's grace, flall make me llrinle from her majclly's
fcrvice. Since the queen of England has rcfufed that you
come here, it appears to me (luod nondum eft fedata ma-
litia amorreorunm, &c. and therefore if Athol or Cathenes
might by any means be procured to come, they were the
nmot fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet, if heand
I were not both of one firname; so the treaty would get
t uc less cicdit either in Scotlend or here. Therefore avys,

and

and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert
lelvil come with them, whoever comes, for so is the
queen's pleafur ; in my last packet, with James Fogo, to
you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the
quecn's own hand writing to him, which I trufi ye receiv-
ed. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to
have had by your presence, for you could well have hand-
led the queen of England, after her humour, as you were
wont to do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom,
praying God to fend you health. From Chattifworth
the 15th of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 30.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of

Grange and Lethington zoungare upon the 8th
cay of Oa. 1571.

ó/7 I-Hereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's

pleasure, what the will do fir appeasing of there

contioverfics, and therewith has offered yourselves to be
at her commandment, touching the common tranquility
of ilh whole isle, and the amity of both realms ; her plea-
sure is in this behalf, that ye should leave off the mainte-
nance of this civil discord, and give your obedienceto the
king, whom file will maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and

the king's party, to receive you into favour, upon reason-
able conditions for security of life and livings.

ALSO she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she

has prEtilfcd with the pope and other princes, and also
with her own fubjets in Fngland, great and dangerous
t!eafons againit the ltate of her own country, and also to
the defiruition of her own person, that fle shall never
bear authority, nor have liberty while she lives.

IF ye refute there gentle offers, now offered unto you,

she will presently aid the king's party, with men, am-
munition, and all neceflary things, to be had againt you.

WHEREUPON her majefly requires your answer with
4ccd, without any delay.

No, V.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 40.)
Articles sent by Knox to the general Affcmbly,

August 5th, I572.

Cald-ew. TIRST, desiring a new a&c to be made ratifying all
MS. Hir- l things concerning the king and his obedience that
tory, Vol. were enacted of before without any change, and that the
:' 35 ' miniflers who have contraveend the former aas be cor.

reded as accordeth.

THAT fute be made to the Regent's grace and nobi.

lity maintaining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceed.
eth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be
not prcjudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they efpeciallyof
the minifiers, that have been robbed of their poffeflions
within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or other.
wife dung and injured, may be reflored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any biflhoprickor

other benefice be given to any person, contrary to the te-
nor of the ads made in the time of the first regent of good
niemory, and they that are given contrar the said ads, or
to any unqualified person, may be revoked and made null
be an aA of secret council, and that all bilhopricks, so va-
cand may be presented, and qualified persons nominat
thereunto, within a year after the vaking thereof, accord-
ing to the order taken in Leith be the commifioners of
the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January laftl
and in special to complain upon the giving of bifloprick
of Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, great or small, be

given be simple donation of any lord regent, without con-
lent of the possessor of the said benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admiflion of the superintendent or com-
missioners of the province where this benefice lyeth, orof
the biflops lawfully eleded according to the said order
taken at Lcith ; and desire an at of council to be made
thercupon, until the next parliament, wherein the famine
may be specially inaded, with inhibition to the lords of
fefion to give any letters or decrcets, upon such simple
gifts of benefices or pentions not bcinggiven in manner a-
bovc rchearfed, and that the kirk presently aflimbled de-
clare all such gifts null so far as lyeth in their power.

T HAT

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which

were in the first and second regent's time be not changed
as now it is commonly; but that this clause be contained
in the presentation, that if the persons presented make
not refidance, or be slanderous or found unworthy either
in life or docrine be thejudgment of the kirk (to which
alwife he hall be subjet) or meet to be transported to
another room at the fight of the kirk, the said prefenta-
tion and all that (hall fall thereupon {hall be null and of
no force nor effea ; and this to have place also in the no-
mination of the bishops.

THAT an aa be made in this assembly that all things

done in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third,
either by papifis or others, by giving of fews, liferents,
urtaks, or any otherwise difponing the said affiumed
thirds, be declared null with a solemn protestation the
whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an act be made decerning and ordaining all bi-

flhops, admitted to the order of the kirk now received, to
give accountof their whole rents, and intromillions there-
with once in the year, as the kirk hall appoint, for such
causes as the kirk may easily confider the fame to be most
expedient and neceflar.

ANENT the jurifdidtion of the kirk, that the fame be

determined in this assembly, because this article hath been
clng postponed to make fute to the regent and council for
icmndy against mefiengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken anent the procurers of the

kiik, who procure against ministers and minifiry, and for
futting ofjuftice of the kirk's ations in the iieion.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 46.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, by there presents, that I
1 Henry Killegrewe, Efq; ambaflador for the queen's

imajefty of England. Forasmuch as, at the carneft motion
and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's be-
h.ilf,there is accord and pacification of the publick troubles
and civil war within this realm of Scotland agrccd and con-
cluded,and the fame favourably extended towards tle right

honour-

honourable George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baid.
zenuch, and the lord John Hamilton, son to the duke's
Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of
Abirbrothock, for the surety oftheir lives,livings,honours,
and goods of them, their kinsfolks, friends, servants, and
partakers, now properly depending on them ; in treating
of the which said pacification, the murders of the late earl
of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather,
late regent to the kiiig'b majesty of Scotland his realm and
lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the
frutis or moveable goods, which the said persons have
taken fra perlfnis profefling the king's obedience, be for
the damages done or committed by them, since the iSth
day of Junij, 1567, and before the penult day of July
last by pafllt, by reason of the common cause or any thing
depending i hereupon, being thought by the king's commi.
farics mattcris of such wecht and importance, as the king's
present regent could not conveniently, of himself, remit
or dif;hargc the fame. Yet in respect of the neceflityof
the prcfent pacification, and for the weil of the king, and
common quietness of this realm and lieges, it is accorded,
that the matters of remiflion of the said murderers, and
of the discharge of the said fruclis, moveable goods, and
other damages, moved by the persons desiring the said re-
miflions and discharge to the queen's majesty my fove-
xei.n, as to the princcfs nearest both in blood and habi-
tation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever her majesty
shall advise and councel touching the said remiflion and
discharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the king
and univcrfal quietness of the realm of Scotland, shall
perform, observe, and fullfil the fame. And in likewise,
the laid earl Huntly, and commendatour of Abirbro-
thock, being urged to have delivered pledges and hostages
lor observation of the conditions of the said accord and
pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her
majdely's name, by virtue of my commiflion, to promise
for theni that they (hall truly and faithfully observe and
keep the said pacification, and all articles and conditions
thereof, for their parts, and that it would please her ma-
jefty to interpose herself, as surety and cautioner for them
to that effcdt, to the king's majesty of Scotland their so-
vereign and his said regent, which I have done and pro-
mise to do, by virtue of his majesty's commiflion, as by
the honourable and plain dealing of the said earl and lord,

their

their intention to peace well appears, the fame being most
agreeable to the mind of the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, which so long by her ministers hath travelled for
the said pacification, and in the end, at her motion and
felicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majelty's
desire, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that the
noblemen and others now returning to the king's obedi-
ence shall have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. Therefore in her majesty's nalme,
and by virtue of my commission, I promise to the afore-
laid earl Huntly and commendator of Abirbrothock, that
by) her majesty's good means, the said rem:ffion and dif-
charc shall be purchased and obtained to them, their kin-
iolks, friends, iervants, and partakers, now properly de-
pending upon them, (the persons specified in the first ab-
Itinence always excepted) as also that the said pacification
ihall be truly observed to them, and that her majesty shall
interpose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour
lic fclf to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in
all points and articles thereof accordingly. In witness
lvhereof, I have to this present subscribed with rny hand,
and fealed the fame with mine own feal the 13th day of
'cb. Anno Domini 1572. And this to be performed by
me, betwixt the date hereof, and the parliament which
lhall be appointed for their restitution, or at the furthest
before the end of the said parliament. Sic fublcribitur.
The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the

queen of Scotland's dowry.

HE queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for ,76.
T her dowry, betides other pofieffions, the dukedom of Cot. lib.

Turene, which was solemnly contraSted and given toher c'llis B. 4.
by the king and efiates of parliament; which dukedom (he
polle:fed peacefully till 1567, and then, upon the pacifi-
cation betwixt the king and Monl; his brother, to aug-
ment whose appenage this dutchy was given, to which the
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who
were her near relations, provided the equivalent which
was promised her should be faithfully performed. So
that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that
dutchy, she had granted her the county of Vermaudaife
with the lands and bailiwicks of Seulcy and Vetry ; tho'

'tis

'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of
equal value with Turene, but was promised to have an
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
Upon this letters patent were granted,which were confirm-
ed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court
of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others necessary;
upon which the entered into pofleffion of that county, &c.
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commiflioners of the
chamber of accompts, it was found that the revenue of
that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene, by
3000 livres. But inflead of making up this deficiency
according to juflice, some of the privycouncil, viz. M. de
Cheverney, the presidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay and
St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of
her aforesaid loses, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
lis, and the dutchy of Eftaimpes, to Madam de Montpen.
sier, from whom the king received money; of which sale
the counsellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guaran-
tees, which hath hindered the aforesaid queen to have
juflice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfier hath
been put in pofleffion of these lands of Senlis, contrary
to all the declaration, protcefation, and assurances of the
king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that the
queen of Scotland is difioflc'fld of her dowry, contrary
to all equity, without ar.y rcgard to her quality.

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 503.)
A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the re-

gent IMortoun.

31 M.,.clI T will please your graie, I receive your grace's let-
:577. E.os 1 ter, and has confidercd the lame. The parson of
Ar'i01ivus Camsey was here at me before the receit thereof, dire&-
Bund. B. ed fra my lord of Mar, and the mailer anent my last
N. 19. written, which was the answer of the writing that the

mailer lent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
me to come to Sterling to confer with them. 1 had given
mv anifwcr before the rcceit of your grace's letter, that I
behuiffit to be bcfyd SanEt Androis, at ane friends tryst,
which I might not omit: I undcrftald by my said cousin,
that the king's majesty is to write to divurs of the nobility
to come there, anent your lordship's trial, and that he

had

had written before his departure to my lord Monthrois.
I understand, likewise, he will write to your grace to
come there for the fame effedt, which I tho't good to
make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your
grace, for the love of God almighty, to look upon the best,
and not to sleep in security, but to turn you with un-
feigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that
when the king's majesty was very young, God made him
the instrument to divelt his mother from her authority,
who was natural princess, for offending of his divine ma-
jefly, and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame
is as largely in you, except to that your grace condefcen-
ded not to the destruction of your wife. For as to har-
lotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offend-
ed God, and far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God
never left unplagued, except speedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace
can never have the love of God nor man. I pray your
grace flatter not yourself; for if your grace believes that
ye have the good will of them that are the king's good
willers ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfecaly that
your own particulars are not contented, lat by the reft,
and that most principally for your hard dealing. I pray
your grace, beir with me that I am thus hamlie, for cer-
tainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very as-
section of my heart towards your grace, which has con-
tinued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because
the matter stands in your grace's handling with the king's
majefy, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, I fee not how ye shall meet hereafter; pray I your
grace to call to God, and look on the best, and cast from
your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and avari-
tioufnefs. I am riding this day to Sand Androis, and
tiuft to return on Wednesday at the farthest. If your
grace will command me in any offices that are honest,
that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise
of your grace's mind, and flall do to my power and
knowledge, and this with my hcartlie, &c. &c.
YoL, II. E To

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.

From the RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commenda.
Original. J tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March,
E. ,ss Mor- and as we take your p.lainness therein in good part, as pro:
r.,inc, ceeding from a friend and kinsman, in whose good as.
Bund. B. fcclion toward us we never doubted, so ye may not think
No. 31. it strange that we purge ourself so far of your accusation,

as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended
in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not to
excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition
surely we think none can jufily accuse us; for in our
private eflate we could, and can live as well contented, as
any of our degree in Scotland, without further aspiring,
The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm,
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that (hall occupy that
place,not simply to refpea ourfelf,but his majesty's rowme
which we supply, and therein not transcending the bounds
of mcafurc, as, we trust, it shall not be found we have
done, it ought not to be attributed to any ambition in us.
For as soon as ever his majcfly thall think himself ready
and able for his own government, none shall more willing-
ly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think never
to set my face against him, whose honour, safety, and pre-
servation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never be-
lieve to find ctherwife at his hand than favour, although
all theunfriends I have in the earth were about him,to per.
fuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is
not thankfully acquit; as we trust yourself confiders,
but because the ambalfadors of England, my lord of An-
gus, the chancellor, treasurer, and Come noblemen rides
weft this day to fee the king, we pray you heartily ad-
dress yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye
lhall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr. Hay, whom we
have tho't good to lend weft, feeing my lord of Angus
f:om Sterling tides to Douglas. And so we commityou
in the priotctlion of God. At Holyrood house, the 4th
of ilarcli, 1577.

.tFoi tle avariciouficfs laid to our charge, indeed it lies

not in us lb liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satis-
iy all cravers, nor ncever shall any sovereign and native

born

born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of
such, as thinks them judges to their own reward ; in ma-
ny causes I doubt not to find the afiftance of my friends,
but where my aEtions shall appear unhoneft, I will not
crave their affifance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 97.)
The copy of the king of France his directions

sent to Scotland with Seineur de la Motte Fe-
nelon. Translated out of the French.
F IRST, on their majeffys molt christian part, he Calderv.

shall make the molt honourable salutation and visit- '. S. Hir-

ins to the most serene king of Scotland, their good bro- 31y. p. s.
ther and little son, that in him is poffable.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such

like as they have written to him with their hands, and to
lhow cxprefly the perfet friendship and singular assec-
tion, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back
the anfwcr.

To take heed to the things which touch near the most

serene king, to the effec that his person may be in no dan-
ger, but that it may be most surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindered in the honest liberty that
he ought to have, and that no greater, or straiter guards
be about him than he had before.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the autho-

rity, that God hath given to him of king and prince so-
vereign above his fubjeas, to the effect he may as freely
ordain and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of
his country, with his ordinary council, as he was used to
io of before.

THAT his nobility, barons, and commonality of his
country may have their free liberty to retort to his serene
mi jjjly without suspicion of greater guards or more armed
men about his person than the use was, that they be not
al: aii d hindered to rcfort; and further that the IfLg-
nicij dti la Mo te Fcnelon fall liberally and freely speak
to the laid serene king and council, requiring the rc-efla-
blinlil,. us that that may or hath been changcd or al-
Ic;CAl,

Ee 2 AND

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven.

From the r RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commenda.
Original. J tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March,
r;. ' Mor- and as we take your 1.lainnefs therein in good part, as pro-
c!,ics, ceeding from a friend and kinsman, in whose good as-
Bund.. B. fcation toward us we never doubted, so ye may not think
No. 31. it strange that we purge ourself so far of your accusation,

as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended
in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not to
excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition
surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in our
private efate we could, and can live as well contented, as
any of our degree in Scotland, without further aspiring.
The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm,
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that shall occupy that
place,not simply to rcfpet ourfelf,but his majesty's rowme
which we supply, and therein not transcending the bounds
of mcafure, as, we trust, it (hall not be found we have
(bone, it ought no: to be attributed to any ambition in us.
For as soon as ever his majcfiy shall think himself ready
and able for his own government,none shall more willing-
ly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think never
to set my face against him, whose honour, safety, and pre-
servation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never be-
lieve to find rtherwife at his hand than favour, although
all the unfriends I have in the earth were about him,to per.
fuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mar is
not thankfully acquit; as we trust yourself confiders,
but becaufc the ambalFadors of England, my lord of An-
gus, the chancellor, treasurer, and some noblemen rides
weft this day to fee the king, we pray you heartily ad-
dress yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye
hlall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr. Hay, whom we
have tho't god to tend weft, feeing my lord of Angus
f!om Sterling lidcs to Douglas. And so we commityou
in the piotcLtion of God. At Holyrood house, the 4th
of iiatcli, 1577.

U'oit the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies

not in us bs liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satis-
fv all cravers, nor ncvcr shall any sovereign and native

born

born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of
such, as thinks them judges to their own reward ; in ma-
ny causes I doubt not to find the assistance of my friends,
but where my actions shall appear unhonefi, I will not
crave their afliflance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 97.)
The copy of the king of France his directions

sent to Scotland with Seineur de la Motte Fe-
nelon. Translated out of the French.

IR ST, on their majestys most christian part, he Calderv.
shall make the molt honourable salutation and visit- M. S. H'r

tory, Vol.

ing to the most serene king of Scotland, their good bro- 31, p. 2Co.
ther and little son, that in him is poffable.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such
like as they have written to him with their hands, and to
show exprefly the perfect friendship and singular assec-
tion, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back
the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the most
serene king, to the effe& that his person may be in no dan-
ger, but that it may be most surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindered in the hones liberty that
he ought to have, and that no greater, or itraiter guards
be about him than he had before.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the autho-
rity, that God hath given to him of king and prince so-
vcicign above his fubjeats, to the effect he may as freely
ordain and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of
his country, with his ordinary council, as he was used to
do of before.

THAT his nobility, barons, and commonality of his
country may have their free liberty to retort to his serene
InijWfly without suspicion of greater guards or more armed
mel a'-nut his person thai the use was, that ihey be i:ot
al} aid and hindered to retort; and further that thue (cg-
"iicllr tdc la 1Moltc Fcnclon fall liberally and freely fpieak
to the a.id serene king and council, requiring the rc-efla-
bliliin us that that may or hath been changcd or al-
c;cjl,

E e 2 AND

.420APPE N DIX.

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobili.

ty, and other men of good behaviour of the towns and
commonality of the contry conveens, and are content with
the form of government presently with the said serene
king, to the end that if there be any miscontent he may
travaile to agree them together, and that he return not
without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may understand that there be any who have

not used them so reverently towards the said serene king
their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re.
quired, that he may pray on this behalf of his majeftymof
christian the laid serene king his good brother, givinghim
councill wholly to forget the fame, and exhortingthem to
do their duty towards his majefly, in time coming, in all
refpe&s with the obedience and true fubjeaion they ought
him.

AND if the said seigneur de la Motte, perceves the said

serene king to be in any manner constrained of his person,
authority, liberty, and disposition of his affairs, than he
used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as
the sovereignty of a prince does require, that he use all
moyen lawful and honest to place him in the famine, and
that he imploy as much as the credit of his most chriflian
majesty may do toward the nobility, and fubjeds of that
contry, and as much as may his name, with the name
of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they were proper French.
men.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his

estates, of his content, and to all the nobility and princi-
pall personages of the contry, that his most Christian ma.
jeftie will continue on his part in the moRt ancient alli-
ance and confederacy, which he hath had with the said fe-
rene king his good brother, praying his nobility and con-
try, with his principall fubjeats, to persevere in the famine,
in all good understanding and friendship with him; the
which, on his part, he ihall do, observing the famine mod
inviolable.

FURTHER his most christian majefiy underfRanding

that the serene king his good brother was contented with
the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said fignieur De
la Motte had charged to pray his serene majefly that he
might lenaine beside him to his contentment, believing
that he should more willing intertain the points of love

and

and confederace, betwixt their majestys and their contrys,
because he was a good fubje& to them both; and if he
might not remain,, without some alteration of the tranqui-
lity of his estate, that he might retire him to his own
house in the said contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to
return to France that he might surely- and if it pleases
his serene majesty, to cause cease and flay the impeach-
ments, that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the
effe& that the natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into
the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor

no speech but honourable of the most Christian king, in
that contry, but such like as is spoken most honourably
of the serene king of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed

till a little before his departure, to wit, that the queen,
the king's mother, was content to receive her son in affo-
ciation of the kingdom.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 115.)
Lord Hunfdane to Sir Francis Walsingham, the

i4th of August, 1584, from Berwick.

SIR,
CCORDING to my former letters, touching my CJlde.w.

A meeting with the earl of Arran upon Wednesday M. S. Hir-
last, there came hither to me from the earle, the justice tory, Vol.
clerk, and Sir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, .
both of the king's privie council, to treat with me about
the order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to ap-
point tile hour, and the number we should meet withal;
so as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to
be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be 13 of
: fide; and the reft of our troops to fland each of them a
mile from the town; the one onthe one fide, the other on
the other fide, To as our troops were two miles asunder; I
was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmens
where I had 0oo shot on horse, but they were very near
500 horse well appointed: According to which appoint-
lent, we met yesterday, and after rome congratulations,
the carle fell in the like proteflations of his good will and
iadincfs to serve the queen's majesty, before any prince

Ee 3 in

in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto.
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earned
vows, as unless he be worse than a devil, her majesty may
dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I en.
tered with him touching the cause I had to deal with him,
and so near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, thatl had
to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing toward
her mnijerty, according to my instructions, which without
any d Jay) he answered presently, as ye shall perceive by
the laid anfwcr,, sent herewith; but I replying unto him,
he amplified them with many moe circunftances, but to
this efTfft. Then I dealt with him touching the point
of her majesty's satisfaction, for the uttering such praclices
as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
n-Tajefty and her eflate, who thereof made fundrydifcourfe.,
what marriages have been offered to his majesty by fundrie
princes, and by what means the earle has fought to divert
them, and fjr what causes; the one, for that be marriage
with Spain or France, he muff also alter his religion,
which as he is sure the king will never doe, so will he
never susser him to hearken unto it, so long as he has
any credit with him ; he denys not but the king has been
dealt withal be practices to deal against her majesty, which
he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as they
have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king orhe
knoweth therein there shall be nothing hidden from her
majefly, as her majesty shall know very'fhortly; surely it
seems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded
thereunto there had been no small company of French in
Scotland ere now to disquiet her majefty.---This be.
ing ended, I dealt with him earnestly for the flay of this
parliament, which now approacheth; or at the least that
there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudiceof
these noblemen and others now in England, for the for-
faulting of their livings and goods; hereupon he madea
long discourse to me, first of the earl of Angus dealing
about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwith-
fianding of fundr;e gracious offers the king had made him,
then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after they
had the king's majesty in their hands, they impriloned
himself, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out
cf the realme, the king refused so to do, they told him
plainly that if he would not he should have the arle
of Arran's head in a dih.; the king asked what offencc tile

cad

earl had made ? and they answered it mu[R be so, and
Ihould be so; hereupon for the safeguard of Arran's life,
the king was content to fend away the duke, and yet Ar-
ran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life; I alled-
ged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and
his ads in council, that they had done nothing but for
his fervife, and with his good liking and contentment,
who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not
do anything butthat which pleased them, with such anum-
ber of other their dealings with the king whileft he was in
their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if
they were true; I said theking might have let the queen's
majesty's ambassador have known his mind secretly, and
her majesty would have relieved him ; he answered, that
the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that
manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's praoticc, and thereby
durfl not impart so much to him, and yet the king was
content, and did give remission to as many, as would ac-
knowledge their faults, and afl remiflion, and such as
would not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further
loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's second
apprehension, and the killing of the earle, and others,
and seduced the ministers to their facion, and yet not
satisfied with these conspiracies and treasonable dealings,
(as he terms them) are entered into a third, being in Eng-
land under her majesty's protection, to dishonour her ma-
jelly as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king
conceave some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring
of them; I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the
taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and
some others, the taking of the caflle of Edinlr. and bring-
ing home the earles, to take the charge of the king; all
which (fays he) is by Drummond confeflWd, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con-
itable of the castle thereupon fled ; the earl brought Drum-
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay, to have
confelred the conspiracy before me, but having at his light-
ing, received a blow on his leg with a horse, so as he could
bring him no further, I replied that I thought verily they
would not work any such practices in refpc&t of the
queen's majesty, abiding within her realme, and if there
Ib any such practices, they have proceeded from others,
and they not privie unto them : and that if it be not ap-
parintly proved against them, that it will be thought to

Ee 4 be

be Come pracice to aggravate the fault, and to make them
the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it
should be proved so sufficiently, that they flould not be
able with truth to deny it, for their own hands is to be
ihowed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if
her majesty should so press the king for them at this time,
that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty, nor
further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides
he aflured me, that if he would, he dare not, this las{
matter being fallen out as it is ; and surely if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the reftor.
ing of the earl of Mar very Ihortly, if her majesty would
have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus, I
perceive the king is persuaded that both he, and thereft
of the Douglasses, have conceived so mortall an hatred
againfi him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the
earl of Morton, as if they were at home, to-morrow next,
they would not leave to practice and conspire the death of
them both, and therefore a hard matter, to do any thing
for him: finally, he concluded and required me to assure
her majesty from the king, that there shall nothingbe hid
from her, nor any thing left undone that may fatisfie her
majesty with reafun, and that the king shall never do any
thing, nor content to have any thing done in her prejudice,
so long as he had any credit with him, or authority un-
der him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to ihow
me his commission, which is under the great feal, to him-
self only, which is as large as may be, and yet fundrie of
the privie councel there with him, but not one in corn-
mission, nor present, nor near us all this time having
spent almost five hours in there matters; he presented to
me the mailer of Gray, who delivered to me a letter from
the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the
king means to fend to her majesty, and therefore requires
a safe conduc for his paflage, which I pray yow procure,
and to fend it so soon as you may. 1 let him underhand of
the lord Seaton's negociation with the French king. He
swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave, and that it
was partly againfi his will, that he should be sent thither.
But his commifion and infiruction being of no great im-
portance, he yielded the sooner; and if Seaton has gone
beyond his inftruaions, which Arran drew himself, he
will make Seaton smart for it. Touching William New-

gate,

gate, and Mark Qolgan, he protested he never heard of
any such; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black
beard, come thither a begging, who said he was an ene-
my to Defrnond, to whom he gave a croun, but never
heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into
Ireland, he fays there is no such matter; if there be,
there maybe some few rafkals that he knows not of; and
touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays
it is but the slanderous devise of the kings enemys, and
such as would have the world believe the king were ready
to revolt in religion, who the world shall well fee will
continue as constant therein, at what prince soever pro.
felled it most; and the earle himself dos protest to me,
that to his knowledge, he never saw ajefuit in his life,
and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they
should not do fomuch harm in Scotland, astheir ministers
would do, if they preach such doctrine as they did in
Scotland; and touching one Ballenden, of whom I wrote
to yow, I heard from Mr. Colvil, the earle avows con-
fiantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any such
man, but hewould inquire at the justice clerk, and would
inform me what he could learn of that; thus I have made
yow as short a discourse as I can of so many matters, so
long discoursed upon, but there are the principal points
of all our talk, so near as I can remember it, and for
this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick,
the x4th of Auguit, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have
my Ton Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majefly's pleaifue.

Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed
to the lord Hunfdane, let down in another form.

S to the firait and revere persecution of all such, as

A have been noted to have been well affected to the
queen's majefly, it cannot appear they were either for
that cause punished, or hardly dealt with, since his ma-
jefly of late has been so careful and diligent to choice out
good infiruments to deal betwixt her majefly and him,
as his majelty has done in elescing of your lordflip and
me; betides that in all their accusations, their good will

and

and affeEtion born to her majesty was, at no time, laid
to their charge, but capital acions of treason many way
tried now be the whole three etfates, and more than ma-
nifeft to the world.

As far his majesty inhibiting, by publickproclamation,

such as were banished, not to repair in England; the
bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn the ac-
complifhed, to far as in them lay, moved his majesty to
inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majesty's
realm, left thly flould have attempted these things, which
lfhlotly they did attempt, being farther off, and more dif.
tant both by fca and land.

As for reception of jcfuits, and others, her majesty's

fugitives, and not delivering them according to his pro-
mile, as your lordship propones, his majesty would be mors
g;:d that so it might fall out by your lordship's traviles,
ti.it no fugitive of either realme should be received of ei-
ther, and when so ihall be, it ihall not fail on his majesty's
part, albeit in every deed this time bygone his majesty has
been constrained to receipt her majesty's mean rebellsand
fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since her majefly
h.ith receipt, in eflRcc, the whole and greatest rebells
and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had; as
for the agreement with his majesty's mother anent their
aflbciation, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of
your lordship's servant, to aflure her majesty and your lord-
ship, in his majesty's name, that it is altogether falfe,and
an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majefly has also commanded me to assure your

lordflip, that it is also false and untrue, that his majesty
has, by any means direct or indiret, sent any mefage to
the pope, or received any from him; or that his majesty
has dealt with Spain or any foreigners, to harm her ma-
jefty or her realm, which his majesty could have no ho-
nour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope
in God it fliall.

As concerning the contemptuous ufageof her majefly's

minifcers, sent unto his majefly, his majesty used none
of them o ; and if his majesty had, sufficient cause was
given by them, as some of their own writs do yet testify;
as I more particularly showcd your lordship at Foulden at
our laIc mceting.

No. X,

No. X. (Vol. II. . 129.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

adame ma bonne Seur,
'Afleurant que vous avez eu communication d' une Cott. Lib,
lettre de Gray que voftre homme Semer me livra Col. B.

hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoiflant quasi de 1

, l.

mot a la mot less mefmes raisons, que le dit Gray m'efcrivit A u original.
en chifre eftant dernierement pres de vous defmontrant la
fuffifance & bonne intention du personage je vous prieray
feulcment fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant inftan-
tcment importun6 que vous me permettiez defclaircir li-
brement & ouvertement ce point de l'aflbciation d'entre
moy & mon filz & me defierles mains pour proceder avec
lui comme je jugeray eftre requis pour son bien & le
mien. Et j'entreprendzquoy que 1'on vous die & puifle
en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit bruillon qui perfuadd
par aucuns de vos minifires a enterpris cette separation
entre moy et mon enfant, & pour y commencer je vous
fupplie m'ocroQyer qui je ptiffe parler a cc juflice clerk
qui vous a efle nouvellement envoy6 pour mander par luy
a mon filz mon intention fur cela, ce quije me promis que
ne me refuserez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demontrer
en effec la bonne intention que vous m'avez afleurce
avoir a l'accord & entretien de natural devoirentre la mere
& I'enfant qui dit en boines termes eftre empelche pour
vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrcz
mieux defmnentir & faire paroitre voftre bon defir a notre
union que me donnant les moyens d'y proceder, & non
m'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos minis-
tris prctcndent a fin de laifler toujours lieu a leur mairvais
& finifires praaiques' entre nous. La lettre porte que l'as-
fociation nc'ft pas paflue, auffi ne luy ai-jejaniais dit, bicn-
quieion filz avoit acceptc; & que nous en avions convcnl
cnfemble, conmme l'acle fignc de fa main. & ccs Icttrcs
tant a moy, quc en lrancc en font soy, ayant donne cc
mncme tenio!inagc de fa bouche propre a plulieius ambafl'-
dciurs & perfonne de credit, s'excufal)t de ne l'olcr fiire
publicr par craint de vous feulcim'tiit, dcmniandat forces
pour vous resister d'avant de ce decla er si ouvertcment
llant journtlrlcment persuade au cuntraiic par vos minis-

trcs

tres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck
le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand
Jnon enfant feroit fe malbeureux que de s'opiniafirer en
cette extreme impiet6 & ingratitude vers moy, je nepuis
penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la
Chretiente ]e voulifiez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir
pour luy fayre acquerir ma maledicion ains que plutos
introviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop
juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & en.
cores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays donner avec droit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commisea
vous, & fidelement faites si il vous pleft que je ne en foye
pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale def.
vant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la
plus grande affliction qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en cas
qu'i] perfifte en cette m'efconnoiffance de son devoir, que
de luy ou de moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittimeroy
ou royne d'Ecofle, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre
avec :noy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoyje
vous requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce mal
gouxerne enfant vous en requerrant avec autant d' assec-
tion que je fens mon coeur opprefe6 d'ennuy. Pour Dieu
fouvenez vous de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me
prendre en votre prote&tion me raportant de tout a vous,
& fur ce prian. Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver detouts
vos ennemys & diirnimulez amys, comme je le desire de me
consoler & de me venger de ceulz qui pourchaffent un tel
malheur entre la mere & I'enfant. Je cefferay de vous
troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque
consolation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le sup.
plie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xii Mars.

Voftre fidelement vouee fceur

& obeiffnte coufine,

A le reyne d'Aiigleterre A R E Q:

madamc ma bonnc fceur
& coufine.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. I30.)

A Teflament by Q, Mary.
N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Cott. Lib,

Mr. Crawford late regius professor of church history LVp as.
in the university of Edinburgh.: Part of this paper, p. 4
according to him, is written by Nau6, Mary's fecre-
tary, the reft with the queen's own hand. What is
marked " is in the queen's hand.
COnfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eftat de vie

humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft,

ou doibt affeurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
fericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre
tous les dangers et accidens, qui me pourroient in opine-
ment furvenir en cettecaptivit6, mefmes a cause des grandes
et longues maladies, ou j'ay et6 detenu6 jufques a present;
j'ay advise tandis que j'ay la commodit6, ou raison en ju-
gement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ame, en-
tcrrement de mon corps et disposition de mon bien, eftat,
& affaires, par ce present mon testament et ordonnance de
mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit.

Premierement, me recongnoiffant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de satisfaction par
routes les adverfites quej'ay fouffert; dont je la oue fa
bontc. Et m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Re-
demptcur Jefis Christ. Je recommende mon ame a la be-
noifte et individue Trinit6, et aux priercs de la glorieufc
Vicrge Marie, et de tous les anges fainEts & fainctes de
paradis, efperantparleur merites et intercession, eftre ayde6
a obtenir de efre faiEte participante avec eulx de felicit6
cternelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et
cntier, defpouillant des a present tout ressentiment des in-
jures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me
pourroient avoir este fadtes durant ma vie, par mes fubjets
rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retriet la vengeance a
Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mermc affetion,
queje luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls
et cclics quc je puis avoir offcnfe de faias ou de parolles.

5 Je

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphl
coatain direlions concerning the place and circumJlance of her
burial. ]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conferva.

tion de 1'Eglife catholique, apofiolique et Romaine, en la
quelle je veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe mon
fiiz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture,
qu'il a prise a mon tres grand regret en I'herefie de Calvin
entre mes rebelles, je le !aisle leul et unique heritier de
mon royaume d'Efcoffe, de droic que je pretende juste-
ment en la couronne d'Angleterre et pays que en depen-
dent, et generallement de tous et chacun mes meubles et
immeub!es qui refieront apres ma mort, e execution de
ce present teltament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite

herefie, Je cede, tranfporte, et fai&te don " de touts et
"' chacuns mes droias, que je pretende et puis pretendre
" a la couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres droids, feig-
" neuries, ou royaulmes en dependantz,au roycatholique,
s ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, con-
" fentement de fa faintete; tant pour le voyr aujourhuy

c
le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique, que pour

" rcconoiflance de gratuites faveurs que moy, et les miens
' recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma
' plus grande neceifit6; et refguard aufi au droi& que
" luy mefine peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,
"je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la

n maifon de Lorraine, et si il ce pleut de-celle de Guise,

"pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie an
" coite de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que
" mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours
" voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de l'accep-
" ter, ou faillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fillc.

t Je layfle mon filz a la protection du roy, de prince,
" et dues de Lorraync et de Guise, et du Mayne, aux

quelz je recommende et son eftat en Efcoffe, et mon

·' droid en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, et quclle le
" parlie de ceflc rosnc."

Je fautz don au" compte de Lenox" dc comte dc Lc-

nox tenu par fcu son pere, et commande mon filtz, comnie
mon heretier ct fucccciFeur, d'obeyr cn celt en droit a mon
volontc.

Je

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe

troveront par moys deues, tien mis cause de droicl efire
aits " a Lohliven" etre promptement payee et acquittes,
ettout tort et griefs repares per lefdits executeurs defquelz
J'en charge la conscience. Oultre, &c. [Follow two sr
three paragraphs concerning particular legacys, and then is
Iadded] Faic au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour
de- Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

After a blank pagefollows in the queen's hand:

c Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, au Claude

" Hamilton lequel fe montrera le plus fidelle vers moy, et
" plus conitant en religion, aujugement de-- Ducs
" de Lorraine et de Guyfe, ouje le rapport fur ce deceulx
" a que j'auray donnay le charge de trayter avefque eux
"' de par moy et ceulx, a condition de ce marrier ou allier
" en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Follow near two pages of particular legacys.

" Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droic quelle peut
"pretendre a la conte d'Angous avant 1'acort fait par mon
"commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et le
" comte de Morton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu roy
" mon Mary et moy, fur la promeffe de fa fiddle assist-
" ance, si luy et moy encourions dangler et befoing d'ayde,
" ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos en-
" nemis rebelles, qu' attemtprient contre fa vie, et pour
"ceft effect pris les armes, et ont port6 les bannieres def-
" ploiees, contre nous, je revoque aufi toute autre don
"queje luy ay fait de conte de Morton fur promiices
" de fes bons services a advenir, et entends que la dite
" Conte foit reunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y par-
" tenir, comme fes trahifons tant en la mort de mon feu
" Mary, que en mon baniflement, et pourfuit de la mien
" ne l'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de cc jamays ser-
" vire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye a fes pa-

rents, la quelleje crains ne s'eftende jufques a luy, le

"connoifrant du tout affedionne aux ennemis (de mon
" croitc cn ce royaume, du quel il eft pencuiiiairc.

4' Jc recommendc mnon ncpvcu Francois Stu.,rt ; mon
" filz, et luy commande detcnir prcs de luy et s'enfcrvit,
" c je luy layffe le bien du conte de Boduel son oncle,

" en

c en respect qu'il eft de mon fang, mon filleul, et rna
'c eflR laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

c" Je declare que mon frere baflard Robert Abbe de St.

cc Croix na'en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le
" ne fut jamays mon intention, comme il apret par la re.
" vocation que j'ay fayte depuis, et ete auffi faite d'avant
" la afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois deliberer si il ne
' m'euffentprenner par prison de fe dedefayre aulxeftats
" je veulx donc que Orkenay foite reune a la couronne
a' comme une de plus neceffaires pour mon filz, & fans
" la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Les filles de Morra ne parvient accefli heriter, ains
' revient la conte a la Couronne, si il luy pleit luy don.
" ner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome l'enfienne
" ligne."

No. XII. (Vol. I I. p. 142.)
A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen

of Scots.

AprilLE A S E your majefly, I received your letter of the

Harl. Lib. .P date the 12th of Nov. and in like manner has seen
37. B. 9. some part of the contents of one other of the fame date,
to. zs6. direced to Mons. de Movifir, ambassador for his majesty

the most Christian king,both which are agreeable to your
princely dignity, as by the one your highness desires to
know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto me
all favour if I should be innocent of the heinous fats com-
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory, so
by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare unto
me, if your husband's murder could be laid justly against
me, that you could notfollicit in mycaufe, neither yet for
any person that was participant of that execrable fat,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you should
have any means to do it; your majesty's offer, if I be in-
nocent of that crime, is most favourable, and your de.
fire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable; and
therefore that I should with all my fimplicity,fincerityand
truth answer thereunto is most reasonable, to the end that
your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence
shall sufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation,
if 1 be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledge of

the

the evil disposed minds of the mos part of your nobility
againlt your said huiband, and not revealing of it, which I
am allured was sufficiently known to himfelf,and to all that
had judgment never so little in that realm; which also I
was constrained to underfiand, as he, that was Specially
employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
of your nobility, that they might with all humility inter-
cede at your majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters
as are more specially contained in the declaration follow-
ing, which I am confirained for my ownjuftification, by
this letter to call to your majesty's remembrance. Not-
withstanding that I am assured, to my grief, the reading
thereof will not finally offend your princely mind. It
may please your majesty to remember, that in the year of
God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other
nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majesty,
and banished your realm for insolent murder committed in
your majesty's own chamber, which they alledged was
done by command of your husband, who notwithftand-
ing affirmed that he was compelled by them to subscribe
the warrant given for that effect, howsoever the truth of
that matter remains amongst them: it appertains not to me
at this time to be curious; true it is that I was one of that
number, that heavily offended against your majesty, and
passed in France the time of our banishment, at the desire
of the reft, to humbly pray your brother the Most Chris-
tian king to intercede that our offences might be par-
doned, and your majeRty's clemency extended toward us,
albeit divers of no small reputation, in that realm, was
of the opinion, that the said fa&t merited neither to be re-
quifite for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the care-
ful mind ofhis majesty towards the quietnefsof that realm,
that the dealing in that cause was committed to Mons.
de Movifir, who was directed at that time to go into Scot-
land, to congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom
Almighty God of his goodness may long preserve in happy
estate and perpetual felicity; the careful travail of the said
de Movilir was lo effecual, and your majesty's mind so
inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I
was permitted to repair ti Scotland, to deal with earls
Murray, Athol, Bodvcl, Arguile, and fecrctary Ledington,
in the name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Re-
ven, Liiidfay, and reinanent complcfis, that they might
make offer in the names of the said earl, of any matter that

VOL. II. Fs might

might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your cle.
mency to be extended in their favours; at my coming to
them, after I had opened the effet of my message, they
declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband
had been the occasion already of ereat evil in that realm,
and if your husband should be suffered to follow the ap-
petite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effeats; for help.
ing of such inconvenience that might fall out by that kind
of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join them.
eflves in league and band with some other noblemen, re.
solved to obey your majesty as their natural sovereign, and
have nothing to do with your husband's command whatfo.
ever, if the laid earl would for himfelfenter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to
humbly rcqueft and travel by all means with your majesty
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed,
they delired to know the said earl's mind herein ; when I
had anfered, that he nor his friends, at my departure,
could not know that any such like matter would be pro.
ponit, and therefore was not inftruaed what to answer
therein, they desired that I should return sufficiently in-
Itru(ted in this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of
your son, whom God might preserve; this message was
faithfully delivered to me at Newcastle in England, where
the said earl then remained, in pretence of his friends and
comrany, where they all condescended to have no far-
ther dealing with your husband, and to enter into the
said band. WVith this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the request of the Most Christian King and
the qu-en's majesty of England by their ambafiadors pre-
sent, your mrajefty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under condition always that they hould remain banilh-
cd forth of the realm, the space of two years, and farther
during your majesty's pleasure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the'humble request of your own nobility, so
that immediately after the said earl of Morton repaired in-
to S-otland to Quhittingainie,where the earl of Bodvell and
fecrctary Ledington come to him; what fpcech passed
there amlnn1tl them, as God ihall be my judge, I knew
nothing at that time, but at their departure I was request-
cd hy the said earl Morton to accompany the earl Bod-
vell and fIcretary to Edcnburgh, and to return with such
aufwcr as they flould obtain of your majesty, which be-

ing

ing given to me by the said persons, as God shall be my
judge, was no other than there wordss " Schaw to the
" earl Morton that the queen will hear no speech of that
c matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit that the
answer might be made more sensible, secretary Ledington
said, that the earl would sufficiently underfand it, albeit
few or none at that time understand what passed amongst
them. It is known to all men, als veill be railling let-
ters pawed betwixt the said earl and Ledington when-they
become in divers faEtions, as also ane buck sett furtht by
the ministers wherein they affirm that the earl of Mor-
ton has confefled to them, before his death, that the earl
Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling
away off the king your husband, to the which propofi-
tion the said earl of Morton affirms that he could give no
answer unto such time he might know your majesty's
mind therein, which he never received. As to the abo-
minable murder, it is known too by the depositions of ma-
ny persons that were executed to the death for the commit-
ing thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcri-
vit band for that effect; by this unpleasant declaration,
the most part thereof known to yourself, and the re-
mainder may be understood by the aforesaid witnesses that
wasexamined in torture, and that are extant in the cufiody
of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency so
tar as may concern any fa&t does appear sufficiently to your
majesty. And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no other-
wife charged therein, but as what would accuse the veffl
that:preferves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy
of such as immoderately use the fame. As for the fpe-
ial cause of my banishment, I think the fame has pro-
ceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to ac-
cufe the earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge
himself to have confessed before he died, and would not
be induced, for lots of reputation, to perform any part
thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I sup-
pofc it is, what punishment I (hould deserve, I remit me
to your majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentleman flould be of his fame, reputa-
tion and honour, and how far ever ilk man should ab-
hor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
hIave been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so
rear of hi: kitn, notit'iihRanding all the injuries I was

1 f z con-

V

constrained to receive at his hand all the time of his go
vernment, and for no other cause, but for {hewing of par,
ticular friendship to particular friends in the time of the
last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accufC
him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being
on lyff, be such kind of dealing obtained that name oa
Ingrate. Always for my own part I have been banified
my native country those three years and four months, liv.
ing in anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which
were not small, intermittit and deponit upon, and has
continually since the time I was relieved out of my las
troubles at the desire of Monfr. de Movifir, attended to
know your majesty's pleasure, and to wait upon what
service it should please your majesty for to command. Up.
on the 8th of Apiil init. your good friend secretary Wal.
finghame has declared unto me, that her highness tho't
it expedient that I (hould retire myself where I pleased, I
declared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform
that desire, till such time as I should receive it from your
majesty. Neither knew I where it would please your high.
nels to dire& me, until such time as I should have received
further information from you. Upon this occasion, and
partly by permilTion, I have taken the hardrefs to write
this present letter, whereby your majesty may underhand
any part of my troubles pafl, and firait present. As to
my intention future, I will never deny that I am fully re.
solved to spend the reft of my days in your majesty's ser.
vice, and the king your fon's,wherefoever I shall be direl-.
ed by your majesty, and for the better performing there.
of, if so shall be her majesty's pleasure, to recommend
the tryal of my innocency, and examination of the verity
of the preceding narration, to the king your son, with
request that I may be pardoned for such offences as con.
cerned your majesty's service, and var common to all men
the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, except to
me, I should be the bearer thereof myself, and be direA&
ed in whatsoever service it flould please your majefly for
to command. Molt humble 1 bclecch )our majesty t
confider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order,
that I may have means to serve your majesty according t(
the sincerity of my meaning, and so expecting your mia
jefty's answer, after the kifling your hand with all humi.
lity, I take lease from London.

4. No. XUI

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 163.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald

Douglas his ambassador in England, October,
1586.

ESERVE up yourself na langer in the earnet dealing Cot. Lib.
for my mother, for ye have done it too long; and Calig. C. 9.

tink not that any your travellis can do goode if hir lyse An Origi.
be taking, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that king's
are the special inftrumentis thairof; and theirfore, gif ye hand.
looke for the contineuance of my favour towartis you, fpair
na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but redde my letter
wrettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie
to the contentis thairof, and in this requeift let me reap
the fruicis of youre great credit there, ather now or
never. Fairwell. OEtober, 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in Eng-

land, probably from secretary Maitland. Nov.
27, 1586.
BY your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concern- A copyin

nrg no pleasant subjed) his majesty conceives well the collet.

of your earnestness and fidelity in your negotiations, as oDi. ol.
also of Mr. Archibald's activity and diligence, whom you A. fol.g9.
to greatly praise and recommend. I wish the ifliue cor-
respond to his Majefly's opinion, your care and travell,
and his great diligence as you write. His majesty takes
this rigorous proceeding againfi his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in honour
and otherwise. His highnefles aaions and behaviour utter
plainly not only how far nature prevails, but also how he
apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of what mo-
ment he efleems it. There is ambaflade shortly to be
dircced, wherein will be employed an earl and two coun-
fellors, on whose andfwer will depend the continuance or
dissolution of the amity and good intelligence between
the princes of this isle. In the mean fcalbn, if farther ex-
tremity be used, and his majesty's suit and request disdain-
cd, his highucfs will think himself dishonoured and cop-

F f 3 temned

temned far besides his expeaation and deserts. Ye mna
perceive his majefiy'S disposition by his letter to you,
which you fiall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal
according thereto. I need not to recommend to your care
concerning your matter's service both in weill and in ho.
nour. As you and your colleague shall behave yourself
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your
affection to your master. I am glad of that I hear of
yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Archi.
bald, whose friends here make great account of his pro.
feleed devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes
to the king's majesty her son. Farther I am confirained
to remit to next occasion, having scarce time to feribble
there few lines (which of themselves may bear witnels of
my haste). Wifling you a prosperous iflue of your nego.
ciation, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Novr. 27th,
1586.

THE people, and all eflates here are so far moved by

the rigorous proceedings against the queen, that his ma-
jefty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations against them, and i...
precations against the queen of England.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. i67.)
To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald

Douglas.

60,o. "n LEASE your majefly, I received your letter of tr.
TS,6. j date the 28th of September, the 5th of O&ober,
From the which was the fame day that I direced Wm. Murray to.
the colle. wards your highness; by such letters as he carried, a:n
of fir A. others of fevcral dates, )our majesty may perccive that I
Dick. Vol. had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach un-
B. tol. 324 to, anent the performing of the two chief points contain-

cd the said letter befor the receit thereof, which by theie
presents 1 must repeat for answering of the faidis. As to
the filft, so far as may concern the interceding for the
queen your m.ijefty's mother her life, I have divers times
and in every audience travelled with this queen in that
matter, fpccially to know what her full determination
niuft be in that point, and could never bring her to any
further anfwcr, but that thisproceeding againfi her by or

cer

derofjuftice was no less against her mind, than against
their will that loved her best: as towards her life she could
give no answer thereunto, untill such time as the law hath
declared whether she was innocent or guilty. Herewithall
it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a
number of the affociants that earnestly prested her that the
law might proceed against her, giving reasons that so long
as the was suffered to deal in matters, so long would
never this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this
tfate in alfurance, and in the end they used this protefta-
tion that if the would not in this matter follow their ad-
vice, that they flould remain without all blame whatfo-
ever ihould fall out; whereupon she had granted them
liberty to proceed, left such as had made the request,
might hereafter have charged herself with inconvenience
if any should happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, be-

cause both papiit and protestant has behaved them, as it
hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers re-
Jpefs, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was con-
ceived against them, the other upon zeal, and care that they
will be known to have for preservation of their sovereign',
life and ltate in this perilous time, upon consideration
whereof, I have been constrained to enter into some deal-
ing with both, wherewith 1 made her majesty acquainted;
the protestants, and such as in other matters will be known
to bear no small favour unto your rnajefty's service, hath
prayed that they may be excused from any dealing in the
contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowe(l,
and by their speech to their sovereign requested for, and
that before my coming in this country ; if they should now
otherwise do, it would produce no better effe't but to
make them subjed to the accusation of their sovereign,
when it should please her to do it, of their incontfancy,
in giving councell whereby they might incur the danger
of ill councellors and be consequent worthy of punishment.
Such of the papists, as 1 did deal with, went immediate-
!y, and told her majesty what 1 had fpokcn to them, who
albeit she u. derftood the matter of before, sent for me
and declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to
them, willing me for the weil of my mailter's fcrvice to
abfliin from dealing with such, as were not yet fufici-
einly moved to think of my mafier as (he did. I craved.
!cave of her majefly, that I might inform them of your

Fs mi

majesty's late behaviour towards her, and the state of this
realm, whereunto with some difficulty ihe gave her con.
sent. At my late departure from court, which was upon
the 5th of this instant, and the day after that the lordsof
this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majesty to
go northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to pro.
mise to have further speech in this matter at the returning
of the said lords, and to give full answer according to your
majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I
had proponit in name of your majefly. As to the 2d
part concerning the association, and desire that the pro.
mise made to the master of Gray concerning your majesty's
title may be fulfilled; it appears by the said letter, that
the very point, whereupon the question that may bring
your majesty's title in doubt hath not been rightly at the
writing of the said letter confidered, which I take tohave
proceeded for lack of reading of the a& of parliament,
wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to
the said makfer, and nothing may now cause any doubt to
arifc against your said title, except that an opinion flould
be conceived by there lords of this parliament that are to
vehement at this time against the queen your majesty's mo.
ther, that your majesty is, or may be proved hereafter
assenting to her proceedings, and some that love your ma.
jefty's service were of that opinion that too earnest request
might move a ground, whereupon suspicions might grow
in men so ill affected in that matter, which I tho't might
be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of
your majesty's innocence at this time, and by reason that
good nature and public honefly would constrain you to in.
tercede for the queen your mother, which would carrywith
itself, without any further, Come suspicion that might move
ill affreted men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly
craved of your majesty that some learned men in the laws,
might be moved to advise with the words of the afbocia-
tion, and the mitigatioi contained in the a& of parlia-
ment, and withall to advise what suspicious effleas your
majcfty's request might work in thefecholerick men at this
time, and how their minds might be belt moved to re-
ceive reason ; and upon all theft considerations they might
have formed the words of a declarator of your majefly's
innocence to be obtained in this parliament, and failing
thereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame es-
leCt that might belt serve for your najefiy's service, and

for

fa. my better information. Albeit this was my simple opi-
nion, I shall be contented to follow any direction it shall
please your majefly to give; I have already opened the sub-
stance hereof to the queen of this realm, who seems not
to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to deal
therein with such of the parliament as may remain in any
doubt of mind. This being the fum of my proceedings
in this matter, besides the remainder, contained in other
letters of several dates, 1 am confirained to lay the whole
open before your majesty, and to humbly pray that full
information may be sent unto me what further to do here-
in, in this middle time, while I (hall receive more ample
dircaion I shall proceed and be doing according to such
direcion as I have already received. And so, most gra-
cious sovereign, wishing unto your majesty all happy fuc-
cess in your affairs, I humbly take my leave from London,
16th of Otr this 1586. Your majesty's most humble
subject and obedt servant.
A memorial for his majesty by the mailer of

Gray.

T will please your majefly, I have tho't meeter to set ,a Jan.
down all things as they occur, and all advertisements 53s6. An

Original in
as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre. his o.wn

I CAME to Vare the 24th of Decr, and sent to Wm. hand in the

Keith, and Mr. Archibald Douglas to adverrife the queen ^,rllA;i ok
of it, lik as they did at their audience. She promiscd VoiA.
the queen your majefly's mother's life should be spared fl. z22.
till we were heard. The 27th they came to Vare to nwe,
the which day SirRobt. came to Vare, where they (hewed
us how far they had already gone in their ncgocidtion,
but for that the discourse of it is set down in our general
litter, I remit me to it, only this far I will teflify unto
!our majesty that Wm. Kcith hath uscd himlelf right ho-
nclfly and jufily till our coming, relpetiing ll cuicum-
flances, and chiefly his colleague his de.il1,g, which in-
d-ed is not better than your majefly knows already.

i HE 29th day of Decl. we came to London, where

vc were no ways friendly received, nor alter the honeit
I,:: i had pleased your majesty use her ambafladors, never
lnim f ent to welcome or convey us. The amne day we
,:)lerftuod of Mr. de Bel:ievie his leave taking, and for

that

that the cuffom permitted not we sent our excuses by Mr,
George Young.

THE ift day of Jany. Win. Keith and his colleague

according to the custom sent to crave our audience. We
received the answer contained in the general letter, and
could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done
that day your majefly has it in the general, yet we was
not out of expectation at that time, albeit we received
hard answers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where

our conference was, as is set down in the general. I re.
marked this, that he that day said plainly the detaining
of the queen of Scotland pifloner was for that the pre.
tended a fuccefion to this crown. Judge then by this,
what is tho't of your majesty as ye shall hear a little
after.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambassador,

whom we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse
of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thank.
ed him in your majelty's name and opened such things as
we had to treat with this queen, save the last point, as
more largely set down by our general.

IT is tho't here, and Tome friends of your majesty's ad.

vised me, that B3ellievie his negotiation was not effecual,
and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk
of this Chaftcauneuf his servants taken with his whole pa.
pers and pacquets, which he was fending in France for
that they charge him with a conspiracy of late againli the
queen here her life. It is alledged his servant has con-
ftlFed the matter, but whom I ihall trust I know not,
but till I fee proof I flall account him an honest mnn,
for indeed so he appears, and one (without doubt) who
hath been very inflant in this matter. I flew him thatthe
queen and carl of Leicfcer had desired to speak with me
in private, and craved his opinion; he gave it freely that
he tho't it mectcet, I flcw him the reafbn why I commu-
nicate that to him, for that 1 had been fufpet'ted by forne
of her majcft 's friends in France to have done evil oflicci
in her service, that he flould be my witneCs that my earnc.l
dealing in this flicild be a sufficient tefiimony that all was
yecs, and that this knave Naut who now had betrayed her,
h;ld in that done evil offices ; he definrd me, feeing he sa'v
only with other folks eyes, that I should no ways impute

is

it to her, for the like he had done to himself by Naue his
perfuafon. I answered he should be my witness in that.

THE gth day we sent to court to crave audience, which

we got the ioth day; at the firif, she said a thing long
looked for should be welcome when it comes, I would
now fee your mafler's offers. I answered, no man makes
offers but for some cause; we would, and like your ma-
efty, first know the cause to be extant for which we offer,
and likewise that it be extant till your majcfty has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promifc for an
hour, but you think to ihift in that fort. I answered we
niind not to (hist, but to offer from ourfovereign all things
that with reason may be; and in special, we offered as is
set down in our general, all was refilfed and tho't nothing.
She called on the three that weic in the house, the earl
of Leiceficr, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very
defpitcfully repeated all our offers in presence of them all.
I opened the last part and said, Madam, for what rcfpe& is
it that men deal against your pcrfon or eflate for her cause ?
She answered, because they think fe shall succeed to me,
and for that lfe is a papist; appearingly said I both the
caures may be removed, she said she would.be glad to un-
derfland it. If Madam, said I, all that she has of right
of fucceflion were in the king our fovereigri's person, were
not all hope of papists removed ? She answered I hope
lb. Then Madam I think the queen his mother shall
willingly demit all her rights in his person. She anfwcred
she hath no right, for she is declared unable. Then I
Laid- if she have no right, appearingly the hope ceases al-
ready, so thnt it is not to be feared that any man attcipt
for her. The queen answered, but the papilts allow not
our declaration ; then let it fall, fays I, inthe king's per-
son by her assignation. The earl of Leice(tcr answered,
flie is a prifoncr, how can she demit. I answered the de-
niiflon is to her son, by the advice of all the friends she
has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that alny at-
tempt conttit the queen here away, who shall party with
her to prove the demission or assignation to be ineffidtu.il
her fan being opposite party and having all the princes her
flicnds for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with
his majcfly of before. The queen made as fte could not
comprehend my meaning, and fir Robt. opened the matter
a' lin, the yet made as tho' she understood not. So the
cul of Lciccflcr answercd that our nmeaning was, that

the

the king Thould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the
queen answered, then I put myself in a worse cafe than of
before; by God's pailion, that were to cut my own throats
and for adutchy, or an earldom to yourself, you or fucl
as you would cause some of your desperate knaves kill me.
No, by God, he shall never be in that place. I answered
he craves nothing of your majesty but only of his mother,
The earl of Leicefler answered that were to make him
party to the queen my mifirtfs. I said, he will be far
more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She
would flay no longer, but said Ihe f(ould not have a worse
in his mother's place. And said, tell your king what
good I have done for him in holding the crown on his
head since he was born, and that I mind to keep the league
that now stands between us, and if he break it shall be
a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us
a farewell ; but we cfcheuit. And I speak craving of her
that her life may be sparcd for 15 days; Ihe refused. Sir
Robt. craved for only eight days, ihe said not for an hour;
and so geid her away. Your majesty fees we have deli.
vered all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for he
and her counccl has laid a determination that they mind
to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather ps her council
than herself, which I like the worse; for without doubt,
fir, it (hall cut off all friendship ye had here. Altho'it
were that once they had meaned well to your majefly, yet
remcmbiing thcmrnfeles, that they have medled with your
mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope great good of
youriclf, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further your
mijelty may perceive by this last discourse of that I pro.
ponit, if they had meaned well to your majefly, they had
used it otherwise ihan they have done, for reason has
bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something
to speak in this matter, because i e look (hurly our letteis
shall be troucit by the way.

FOR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter

their determination, altho' the queen again and the earl of
Leiceficr has ddired to speak with me in particular; I
mind not to speak, nor flall not; but afhiredly {hall let
all men sec that I in particular was no ways tyed to Eng-
land, but for the relpec of Tour majefly's feivice. So al-
beit, at this time, I could not effetuate that I desired,
yet my upright dealing in it ihall be manifested to the
world, We are, God willing, then to crave audience,

where

where we mind to use iharply our inftruEtion%, which hi-
therto we have used very calmly, for we can, for your ho-
nour's cause, fay no less for your majefly, than the French
ambassador has said for his matter.

So I pray your miajefly confider my upright dealing ir

your service, and not the effect, for had it been double by
any I might have here had credit, but being I came only
for that cause I will not my credit liall serve here to any
further purpose. I pray God preserve your majesty and
fend you a true and sincere friendflip. From London
this i2th of Jan. 1586.

I underhand the queen is to fend one of her own to

your majesty.
Tothe right hon, my lord vice-chancellor and fecre-

tary to his majesty, from the matter of Gray.

M Y
Y lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to rith Jar.

his majesty, whereby your lordlhip (hall underifand 1586, an

Original In

how matters goes here. And before all things I pray your the collet
lordship move his majesty to refpeq my diligence, arid of fir A.
not the effeet in this negotiation, for I iwear if it had Dick. Vol.
been for the crown of England to myself I could do no A' fol. 19
more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for
the world (hall fee that I loved England for his majesty's
service only. I look shortly to find your lordship friend as
ye made promise, and by God I shall be to you if I can.
WiV. Keith and 1 desired, if matters had gone well, to have
run a course that your lordship might have here been in
credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for you
as for myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in
conscience they mean not honefily to the king our fove-
reign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is
gone or shortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind
of scruple I pray you to advise him the belt is not this way.
They fay here, that it has been said by one who heard
it from you, that ye desired not the king and England to
agree, because it would rack the noblemen, ~nd gave
an example of it by king James the fourt, I answered in
your name that I was allured you never had spoken it. Mr.
Archibald is the speaker of it, who I aflure your lordship
has been a poison in this matter, for they lean very mickle
to his opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the

king

king will be fain to deel this way, either by fair means o
neceflity, ol that when he deals this course he is assured to
be welcome; to set down all that is past of the like pur.
polcs, it would consume more paper than I have here, o
I defer it to meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledged
against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambafnador resident three of his men taken, but I think
in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr. Stafford who is
ambaflador for this queen in France, is touched with it, his
brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our
negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to meddle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till
this invention was found forth. I remit all other things
to the inclosed. We minded to have sent to his majcRy
a difcourie, which we have set down of all our proceed.
ings lince our hither coming, but we are surely advertized
that the bearer is to be truffant by the way for our pac-
quets, so that we defer it till our own coming ; this I have
put in a privy part bcfide the pacquet. We hall .I think
take leave on Fryday the 3th day, where we mind ex-
atly to follow the rigour of our inftrucions, for it can-
not stand with the king's honour that we fay less then
the French ambaflildor, which was, le roy mon maifireire
peult moins faire que fe refentir. So that about the 24th
I think we lhall, God willing,be at home, except thatfome
flav come which we look not for. The queen and the
earl of Lciceftcr has desired to fpcak with me. I refufel
favc in presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter-
n:inatiotn which particclar credit cannot help, and I crave
no cicdit but for that cause. It will please your lordfliip
retire the inclosed fiom his majelly and keep it. So after
my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I com-
mit you to God. From London the 12th of Jan. tSS6.

To the ki:g's majel;i, from fir Robert Melvill.

-ot'. J.n. T may pleafc your majefy, since the direcion of our

li6. in jL forlnC letters, we had audience, and her majcfy ap-
i''1l" '1'1peared to take our overtures in good part in presence of
Ji.i.!,in tliL her council; albeit no offence would take place with them,
c,:l,it ,,f lhaving taken resolution to proceed with extremity, not the
',.1 A. Ilefs it pleased her majefly to delire us to flay for twodays
fl. isi. on taking our leave, until she had advised upon our pro-

8 positions;

positions; since which time, her majesty is become more
hard by some letters (as we are informed) has come from
Scotland, making ofme hope to believe that your majesty
takes not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary
in effect, and had of before removed the like opinion out
of her majesty's mind, which by inifter information was
credited, their reports has hindered our commiflion, and
abused this queen, fearing in like manner we shall be stay-
ed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well
enough known to all men how heavily your majesty takes
these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they have
bythis occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to
hinder our negotiation. As also Allynour Steward is to be
directed in their party, by our knowledge, who has awan-
tyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform,
and we willed him to desist from this dealing, faying it
does harm, and he is not meet for that purpose, remitting
to your majesty's good direction to take order herein aswe
shall be answerable to your majefly not to omit any point
we have in charge, as the truth is, the master of Grhaye
has behaved himself very rightly and discreetly in this
charge, and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who
were of before his friends. We have been bchalding to
the menfirals who has born us best company, but has
not been troubled with others. Wylzeme Kethe hath
left nothing undone that he hath in charge. As for mas-
ter Arcbihald he has promised at all times to do his de-
woyr, wherein he shall find true report made to your ma-
jelty, craving pardon of your majefly that I have been so
tedious, after I have kissed your majesty's hand I hum-
bly take my leave. Praying God to grant your majesty
many good days and happy, in whose protection I commit
your majesty at London, the 20th of Jan. 1586.

SIR,
ALBEIT Master George has not been in commission

he is not inferior in his service to any of us, as well by
his good advice and diligent care he takes for the ad-
vancemnent of your service, wherein wc have not. been a
little fuithered.

To

and fir Robert Melvill.

i(l JAn. p LEASE it your majefly in the lafi audience we had
1s6. An since our last advertisement, by Wn. Murray, w
the~ ¢ilea. find her maiefly at the resuming our offers something miti.
of fir A. gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, be.
Dick Vol. fore we got our leave, at our reasoning, certain of thn
A. fol. S. council, namely my lord of ,Licefter, fir Chrifiopher Ha

ton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart being present
in the chamber, gave little share of any great contentmcni
to have her from her former resolution, now caffin in per.
plexirer what she fhbuld do, always we left her in tiha
irate, and since have daily pieffed conferrence with tte
whole council, which to this hour we have not yet obtain.
ed. This day we have sent down to crave our leave,
The greatest hinder which our negotiation has found hi.
therto is a perfiralion they have here that either your ma.
jefty deals luperficially in this matter, or that with time
ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great dif.
ficulty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters
written to them of late from Scotland has found some
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that refolr.
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special message,
they have made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try
your highness's meaning in it, and to perfuadeyour majeRl
to like of their proceedings, wherefrom no terror we can
fay out unto him is able to divert him, he has given out
that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts
not to help this matter at your highness's hand. If he
come there that errand, we think your majesty will rot
oversee the great disgrace that his attempts shall give u
here, if he be not tane order with before that he be further
heard, and if so be that any other be direaed (as our
intelligence gives us there Lhall) our humble suit is to
your maiefty, that it may plcafe your highness to hear of
us what we find here, and at what point we leave this
matter with her majesty, before that they find accidence,
the causes whereof remitting to our private letters. We
commit your majefly for the present to God's eternal
protection. From London this 2ift of Jan. 1586.

No. XV

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDITIONAL

A P P E N D IX.
I had no opportunity, of feeing fivcral of the following

papers, till thof/ JCeets of the hiJtoy, to which they re-
late, were printed off. For this rclnfn no references
are made to themnz there; but I have fijpplied that cfctI
by marking the particular pafages in the kifory which
they serve to illjirate.

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 419. Line 19.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the

earl of Bothwell and lady Jean Gordon his wife,
From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455.
UPOUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt

hon. Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Aberdene,

Mr. Edward Henryson docor in the laws, two of the
linators of the college of justice, Mr. Clement little,
and Mr. Alexander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edn r;
compecred Mr. Henry Kinrofle, procurator for Jean Gour-
dounc countes of Bothwell, conflitute be her for purlcw-
ing of ane proces of divorcement, intcndit by her contra
James erle.Bothwel her husband for adultry, committed be
him with Bessie Crawfurde, the purfucrs fcrvant for the
time; and ficklyke, for the said erlc, compeared MIr. Ed-
mond Hay, who efter lie had pursued and cravcd the pur-
fucr's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had iult caus
to purfcw the said action, and ontained it, denried til li-
bcll, and the said Mr. Harrie took the nic i inc, ri e lalL day
of Apryle, to prove the .lame pro prima. 'Itc iiuilk d;,
l;Ivinbg produced fume witnesses, he took the lcext da'y,
1Iing the I of May, to do farther diligence. Upon the
Suhllk I of May, he produced tome mue witnclfes, aand

VOL!. II. G g re-

rcnounc d fiarther prubatioune. After quhilk, he deired
a t.-::n to be afiTgncd to pronounce fcntcnce. To whom
th! ft.id conmiitil aifigned Sattcrday next, the 3 of
hMays, to proinucllle fentcncc thercin, fecundum alligata ct
probat.a, Iquilk accordingly was given that day in favour
of the puifewar.

Ar the fainc time there was another proces intendit be

the ell of Botlhwell contra his lady, for to have their nmr.
ri; -r dccla.rcd nul, as being contrated against the canonw,
without a dlitpenlation, andl le and his lady being within
degrees dcfindand, vizferdis a kin, and that wyfe for cx.
pediln of this proces, there was a commiflioune grantit
to the Airchbifhop of St. Androis to cognofce and determine
it, and Rot. bishop of Dunkcld, William bishop of Dun.
hlaine, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow, and
p.r bon of Egelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and Mr.
G-orce Cooke chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne
l\Ianderfloune chanon in Dunbar and prebendar of Pcl.
toune, or any ane of them. This commiflione is datit
27 Aprile 1567, was prcfented to two of the saids corn
niffioners, viz. Mr. And'. Crawfurd and Mr. John Man-
derfloui:e on Sattcrday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne,
parlon of Auldhamftocks, procurator for the crle of Both-
well, who accepted the delegatioune, and gave out th(ir
citation by precept, direced, Dccano Chriftianitatis de
Hadinltone, nec non vicano feu curato eccle. parochi2 de
Crcichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri cappellano debite requi!i-
t.is, ser summoning, at the said erles inftancc, both of the
lady personally if she could be had, or otherways at the
par,-(che kerk of Crcichtoune the time of service, or at her
dwelling place before witnefles, primo, fecundo, tertio et
peremptoriC, unico tamen contextu protuplice edico.
And likeways to be witnefies in the lhid matter, Alex,
bishop of Calloway, who did marry the laid erle and his
ladv, in Halerud-houfe kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Ban-
ntvlinc of Auchnoule juflice clerk, Mr. Robert Creich-
toun of Elliot the qucln's advocatc, Mr. David Chrallers
lprovcl of Crcichtoun and chancellor of Ross, M\iclhail-
ahliot of Mclrofs, and to co;npear before the said judges
o0 ain o:ic of them in St. Geil. kirk in Edr. on Monday
the 5 o1f M.i\y, he thalinclvcs, or their procurators. Upoa
the s.lid 5 (iday, Mlr. John Manderftoun, one of the judges
dclcgat oi:lv hbing )rcf<.nt compeared the fame procura-
tors tor both the 1yarti that were in thl forlner proce,

M1r,

Mr. Edmond Hay ( articulatlie ) and Two Words
some of the witnesses filmmoned produced, and received in the parn.
for proving of the fame. The said procurator renounced ble.
farder probatioune, and the judge assigned the morne, the
6:h of May, ad publicandum produea, nempe depofi-
tioncs ipforum teftium. The quhilk day, polt publicatas
depositiones prsdidas, Mr. 'Hen. Kinrofle, procurator for
the lady inifanter objecit objetioncs juris generaliter,
contra pro duae, infuper renunciavit ultcriori defenfio-
ni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hinc inde
caufa, judex praedi&us itatuit craftinum diem pro termina,
ed pronunciandam fuam fententiam definituram, cx de-
ductis coram eo, in prefenti caulh et procefa. Con-
form hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said
judge gave out, his sentence in favour of the erle, declar-
ing the marriage to be, and to have been null from the
beginning, in refpet of their contingence in blood, which
hidered their lawful marriage without a dispensation ob-
tained of befoir.

No. XXXII. [Vol. 1. p. 471. Line 25.]

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.
M ADAM,

Lthough the neceflity of my cause (which maketh me Cott. Libi
to be importune to you) do make you tojudge that cal. i. A

1 am out of the way ; yet such as have not my paflion, pro-lly" a
nor the rcfpecs whereof you are persuaded, will think that Tranflnatio
I do as my cause doth require. Madam, I have not accuf-
ci you, neither in words, nor in thought, to have uscd
vourielf evil towards me. And I believe, that you have
no want of good underfianding, to keep you from per-
fwafion against your natural good inclination. But in the
mec:n time I can't chute (having my senses) but perceive
rcry evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hi-
tilcr. I thought that I had fufficicntly difcouiicd unto
you the diloommodities, which this delay briiin:th unto
me. And cfpecially that they think in thlis cX n: month of
Auguit, to hold a parliament against me an llil my lfr-
vants. And in the mean time, I am flaycd hcrc, and yet
will you, that I flould put myfclf forther into your coun-
ray, (without fieing you) and remove me further from

G g 2 milne

mine; and there do me this dishonour at the request of ry
rebels, as to fend commilfioners to hear them against me,
as you wold do to a mere fubje&, and not hear me by
mouth. Now, madam, I have promised you to come to
you, and having there made my moan and complaint of
these rebels, and they coming thither, not as possessor,
but as fubjcóCs, to answer. I would have besought you
to hear my juitification of that which they have falfly);et
furth againit me, and if I could not purge myself thereof
you might then discharge your hands of my causes, and
let me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if I
were culpable I would be better adviscd; but being not
so, I can't accept this dishonour at their hands, that be.
ing in poleffion they will come and accuse me before your
commiflioners, whereof I can't like: And feeing you think
it to he againfl your honour and confignage to do other-
wife, I befecch you that you will not be mine enemy, un-
till you may fee how I can discharge myself every way.
and to fiffcFr me to go into France, where I have a dowry
to maintaini me; or at the least to go into Scotland, with
anlilrance that if there come any firangers thither, I will
bind myself for their return without any prejudice to you,
or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protest that I will not
impute it to ialfllood, If I receive strangers in my country,
0without making you any other discharge for it. Do with
my body as you will, the honour or blame shall be yours.
For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants
may be succoured (tho' you would not so) by firangers,
than to susser them to be utterly undone, upon hopeto
receive, in time to come, particular commodity. There
be many things to move me to fear that I shall have to
do, in this country, with others than with you. But for.
afmuch as nothing hath followed upon my last moan, I
hold my peace, happen what may hap. I have as lees to
atide } my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further,
it plcafed you to give license to my fubjeas to go and
come. This has been refuted by my lord Scroop and
Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, becaulc
I would not depart hence to your charge, untill I had
anflvcrof this letter, tho' I (hewed them that you required
my .illvcr, upon the two points, contained in your let-
tcr.

THE
5

THE one is to let you briefly underhand, I am come

to you to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
I would declare unto you mine innocency, and then require
your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan
and complaint to God, that I am not heard in my just
quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have refped
thereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, madam, first
of all, when you shall have examined your confcicnce be-
fore him, and have him for witness.-- And the other,
which is to come further into your country, and not to
come to your pretence, I will esteem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing
forced. In the mean time, I beseech you, to return to
me my Lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having
none of my counfal here, and also to fuffcr me, if it please
you, without further delay, to depart hence whitherfo-
ever it be out of this country. I am sure you will not de-
ny me this simple request for your honour's fake, feeing
it (loth not please you to use your natural goodness to-
wards me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own accord,
I am come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And
if God permit my causes to succeed well, I shall be
bound to you for it; and happening otherwise, yet I can't
blame you. As for my Lord Fleeming, feeing that upon
mv credit you have suffered him to go home to his house,
I warrant you he shall pass no further, but /hall return
when it shall please you. In that you trust me, I will not
(to die for it) deceive you. But from Dumbarton I an- Perhapsfcr
fiwer not, when my L. Fleeming ihall be in the Tower.
For they which are within it, will not forbear to receive
succour, If I don't aflure them of yours; no, tho' you
would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge,
to have more refpet to my servants and to my eflatc, than
to my life. Good fitter, be of another mind, win the hcarr,
and all shall be yours, and at your commnaldmtntit. I
thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have fccnr you.
Alas! do not as the serpent, that ftoppctli his hlaring,
str I am no inchanter, but your sifter, lnd natural cousin.
If C:elar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint
of an advcrtifer, he had not so died; why should princes
cars be flopped seeing that they are painted so long; Mean-
ing that they should hear all and be well adviscd, before
thc'i anwecr. I am not of the nature of the bafiliff;, and
1-1s of the ch.uaeion, to turn you to my likcncls, and

G g 3 thui

tho' I should be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are sufficiently arm'd with constancy and with justice
which I require of God, who give you grace to use it weil
with long and happy life. From Carlisle, the 5th of July,
1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 473. Line ult.)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop,

and fir F. Knollis, September 3d, i568.

Cott. Lib. 7 Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordships, I am
Cal. C. An JV informit by James Borthwick, lately come from
iOiginal in the queen's majesty your foverane, that is fchawin to her
his own
hand. highners, I fhuld have ridden in Crafurdmure, fen my

last cuming into this realm, upon the Earl of Murray's de.
pendants. And that I fuld have caufit, or been of coun.
fall to Scottilmen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or
fpulzie her majesty's fubjels.

MY lords, I thought it right needful because your lord-

ships is, be your foverane, commanded to attend upon the
queen's majesty my mistress, so having daily access in thir
mat:ers, to declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that
your lordships will, for God's cause, certificate the queen
your fovcrane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither conrented, nor any wife

had knowledge of ony Scottifman's riding in England, to
do the fubjelts thereof hurt in bodies or goods, lene the
siege of Lcith; and as I understand it shall be fund true,
that gif ony sic open hurt be done, it is by the queen my
sovereign's difobcdients, and that I have not ridden nor
hurt no Scottifhman, nor commanded no hurt to be done
to them, fen my coming from the queen's majesty of ENg-
land, it is well kend, for that never ane will complain
of me.

I HAVE done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the

c.rl of Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them
any harm than he will. Except the queen's majesty youl
fovcrcign, commald sic faife reports to be tryit, quherco
this is altogidder an inventit leafing, her grace fall bt
trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men here, quhon 0
sic report fall be made, that baicth would fcrve hir, ant
may, better than they unworthy liars.

' I\'i~~~~~~{

vIY lords, I understand the queen's majesty your so-

vereign is not contented of this bruitc, that there ihould
ony Frenchman come in this rceilm, with the duke of
Chattelherault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the
counfall of their cuming, nor has no fie certainty thereof,
,s I hear by Borthwick's ecport from the queen's majefly
your fovcreign. And gif I might as w e! fay it, as it is
true indeed, her gracefelf is all the wyitt, and the counfall
that vill never let her take order with n;y mai-tress cause.
For that our sovereign havand her majc/t.'s promise, be
writing, of luff, friendship, and a!ERfal;c gif need had
so r.uairit, cnterit that realm-, upon the 16 day of AMay,
fen that time the queen's majcfly has commanded me di-
vcrfe times to declare {he would accept her cause, and
do for her, and to put her in peaceable pofcffiaon of this
rcahnc, and when I required of her majesty, in my maif-
trcl' name, that her highncfs would either do for her, (as
her special trust was she wold) according to her former
promises, or otherwise give her counfal wold not consent,
(as I show her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then that
fie would permit her to pass in France, or to some other
prince to ieck support, or failing hereof, (quhi!k was
agains all reason) that she would permit her to return in
her awin countric, in sic fempil manner as she came out
of it, and said to her majesty ane of thir, of her honour,
would not be rcfufit, fecand that fle was comed in her
realm upon her writings and promises of fricndfhip. And
ficklike, I said to her highinci, gif my maiftrefs had the
like promie of her nobility and eflates, as flhe had of
hcrfclf, I should have reprovit them highly, gif they had
not condefcendi to cne of thir three, and so I fay, and
so I write, that in the warld it shall be maift reprehend-
able, gif this promilf taketh not other good eci'cct, nor
yet it does. Notwithstanding, I get gud anfwcr ot thir
promises of fricndihip made to my fovcreign, and to put
her grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we l.lve
fund the contrary working by Mr. Middlcmo(re dircctit
fiom her highness to stay the army that cuift down our
houfls. And alftia, in the l.rocecding of thij late prcten-
dit parliament, lpromilfcd twenty days before t' c time to
inyllf to have causcd it been dlifchargit. And ytt con-
trary to this promise, have they made their prtctcedit i:in-.
icr of forfaujture o31 ms
3 guid rcp.ut.tion, bifllps,

J C 4. itbWL::~is.,

abbottis, and barronis, obedient fubjeas to your sovereign
only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause wa;

taken upon hand be the queen's majesty of that realm, an
hundred thousand pounds Scots worth of her awin true
fubjecs geir, under the color of the law, groundit up.
on their false, treasonable, ftowin, authority.

THE murders, the opprefliions, the burnings, the ra.

viffhing of women, the dcftruation of policy, both eccle.
fiaftical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my for.
mer writings I said it was lamentable to ony christian
man to hear of, except God gif grace, the profeflion of
the evangile of Jesus Chrill profcflit be your prince, coui.
fall and realmc, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamnit
that has sand betwixt the realms, many of my countrymen
will doubt in this article, and their proceedings puttis my
self in fanA Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majesty of that rea!m,

upon quhais promifr and honour my maiitrefs came there,
as I have laid, will leave all the French writings, ani
French phrafcs of writings, quhilks amongis them is over
meikle on baithl the fides unfit, and plainly, according to
the auld true cullom of Tngland and Scotland, quherein
be a word promift truth was obferv'd, promise, in the
name of the eternal God, and upon the high honour of
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
quhercof she is defcendit, and presently wears the dia.
dem, that {he will put my maiftrefs in her awin country,
and cause her as queen thereof in her authority and
strength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an
certain day within two months at the farthest, as we
understand this to be our weil, fua will we, or the maiff
part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen,
and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefore,
and for the true perpetual friendship of that realm, will
condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty
God, keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble
and wife men can condescend upon, for the weill of this
haill island. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen your fovcrcign, quhilk I thew to your lordships
felfis both in religion, in the punishment of the earl Both-
wile, for the queen's last husband's flaughtcr, and for a
rmutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

PovET-

DoUBTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find fie

time and friendly working, as may gif us occasion baith
to forgette Middlemore and his late pretendit parliament,
we will turn the leaf, leaving our fovercign agains our
will to reft where she is, under the promise of friendship.
As I have baith said, and will ever affirm, made be your
oIvereign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coming in
that realme, and seek the help and moyen of French, or
Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable and false pretendlit
authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MY lords, I desire your lordships confider, that it is
ie, that maift desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scot-
land to continue, and of a poor man best cause has, that
writ this.

MY brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in
your lordships communing with him, it appearit to him,
'our mind was we shold susser the earl of Murray to
work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain
thereof to the queen's majesty, and her highness wald fce
it reformit. My lords, her majesty will be over meikle
troublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit already.
lFor I am sure, gif reason and justice may have place, our
maiftrefs, and we her fubjetts, have received cxprefs
wrangll far above two hundred thousand pounds fcerling,
in the time of this unhappy government, feeing the refor-
mation of fa great causes, comes, now a days, so flowlie
and the ungodly law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle
pradis'd, I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor
our weill, your lordlhips would fua mean, nor that it is
good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your so-
vcreign sic advertisement thereof, as your good wildoms
shall find in this cause meet. It will be true and frind-
ful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases,
nor nnafting, and finding little other effect, that will cause
us to hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written,
and I (lcfire your lordships plain answer, for in truth and
plainncfs langeft continues gud friendthip, quhilk in this
matter I pray God may lang continue, and have your lord-
ihi)s in his keeping. OffDrumfrcis, the 3d day of Scp-
tcmbr 1 568.

Your lordihips at my power

to command leifully

HE R R I S.

Queen Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

o56t.
i b n V A D A M E ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vo0

Cott. Lib. My lettres, d'une mefine dete; l'une, ou vous faites
al ina An mention de l'excufe de Monfr. de Murra pour tenir son

pretendu parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obte,
nir plus de tollerance que je m'eflois perfuadee n'avoir par
voftre promeffi', quant a n'ofler donner commiflion de ve.
lir fans un parlement pour leur pcu de nombre de noblesse
alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois on quatre
d'avantage, qui cuflcnt auffi bien dit leur opinion hors
de parlement, qui n'a eflc tenu tant pour cette effeci, mail
pour faire ce qu'expreffement nous avions requis eitre em-
pefches, qui eft ]a forfalture de mes subjects pour m'a\oir
eftes fidelles, cc que je m'affurois, jufques a heir, avoirei
en promefle de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup
e Maifire Knoleis vous induire a ire contre eulx, voire,
a Ics enfayre rcfentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay mal
pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre
qu'il me montrcrnt, c t leur parole,je l'ay si divulguement
affuray que pour vengeance que j'en defiraffe, si non met-
tre difference entre leur faux dcportemens, et les miens
sinceres. Dans voffre lettre aufli datee du xome d'Aoui,
vous metties ces mots. " I think your adverse party, up.
" on my sundry former advicec, will hold no parliament,
( at all; and if they do, it ihall be only in form of an
" afcmibly, to accord whom to fend into this realm, and
" in what fort; for otherwise, if they shall proceed in man-
" ncr of a parliamcnt, with any act of judgment againlt
t any person, I shall not, in any wife, allow thereof; and
" if they flall be so o:'rfeen, then you may think the
" fame to be of no other moment, than the former pro
"' cedllrcs; and by luch their rash manner of proccedin',

r they aliall mofl prejudice thelfclves; and be aflured to
find me ready to condeiin them, in their ('oings.' iur

quov, j'ay contrcmaindc rmes ferviteurs, Ics faillant retirtr,
fouff-rant felon voitLe ronmmaiidement d'etre fauflnment
nomines traitres, par cculx, qui Ic font de vray; et cn-
core d'ctre provoqucs par efcarmons dies, et par prinfesise
mcs gens et lettres, ct au contraire vous ctes intormce
que mes suhjces ont cvahis les voflrcs, Madame qui a lait
cc rapport n'cft pas honime de bien, car aird Serford ct

son
7

fol fils font ct ont eftes mes rebelles depuis lejcommence-

enlt; enquires vous, s'ils n' efloient a Donfris avequc8
culx, j'avois offri refpondre de fa frontiere, ce qui me fut
refusd, ce qui m'endcvroit asses defchargcr, neanmoins,
pourvous faire preuvede ma fidelite, et de leur falfite, s'il
vous me fayte donner ]e nom des coulpahles, et me forti-
ficr, je commanderay mes fubjeds les pour fuivrc, ou si
vous voules que ce foit Ics voftres, Ics miens lcur aydc-
ront; jc vous prie m'en mander voftre volonte, au refta
mes fubjecs fidelles feront refponfables a tout ce que leur
feramis fu les contre vous, ni lcs voftres, ni les rebellcs,
dcfpuis que me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux
Franfois, j'efcrivis que 1'on m'en fit nullc pourfuite, car
j'cfperois tant en vous, quejen'enaurois befoion,-je ne,
fceu si le dit auraen mes lettres, maisjevous jure dcvant
Dieu que je ne fsay chore du monde de leur venue, que
cc que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
du monde, ct ne le puis croire pour ceft occasion, et si ils
si font, c'eft fans mon fceu;ni confentement, Pourquoy je
vous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je luis
prcft de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mefler Knoleis, et
vous assure que vofire amit6, qu'il vous pleft m'offrirr, sera
rcfcue avant toutes les chores du monde, quant France
fcrvit la pour presser leur retour a cefte condition, que
prenies mles affaires en mein, en foeur, et bonne ami,
comme ma France eft en vous; mais une chore feule me
rende confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre oreille, la-
quclle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toutes mes adions vous
font dcrguifees, et falfement raportces, par quoi il m'eft
impoflible de m'aflurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'ori
vous a fait, pour deftruire voftre bonne volont6 de moy ;
par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous faire entcndre
ma sincere et bonne affection, laquelle je ne puis si bien
defcrirc, que mes enemis a tort ne la deco!ore. Ma bonno
focur, gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir, n'enti6s en jea-
loufie pour faulx raports de celle que me desire q.ue votre
bonne grace; je me remettrav fur Mester Kno;eis a qui je
me fuis librcment defcouverte, ct apres vous avoir bailce
les mains, jc prieray Dieu vous donneir en faiite, longue
c, hcurcule vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, jen'cf-
pcre pcrtir, qu'aveques voftre bonne grace, quoyque l4
nimcteurs m tetent. Ce 26 d' Aoufl.

No. XV.

No. XV. [Vol It. p. 79. line 18.]
Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3

1580-I.

SIR,

Cott. Lib. T HAVE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of
alig. C. 6. your letter of the 25th of the lafi direced unto his

lordship, containing a report of your ncgotiation with the
king and his council, in your second audience, where.
with having made her majefvy acquainted, she seemed
fonlewhat to m&/iLc, that you should so long dLfer to dea!
fsr tlhe cnlagmn;ct of Empedoclcs. But I made anfwcrin
your behalf, that I thought you were directed by the ad.
vice of the said Empedoclcs friends, in the soliciting ot
that carse, who knew what time was fittest for you to
take to deal there in, with most effed, and bcft success,
with which anfver, her majefly did in the end reit very
well satisfied, touching that point.

XYOUR putting of us in hope that D'Aubigny mightea.

fily be won at her AMaiclt's devotion, was at first inter-
preted to have been iro::ic spoke by you. But finceit
leemeth you insist upon it, I could wiih you were other-
wife persuadcd of the man, or at Icat} kept that opinion
to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and re-
ccption into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the
inclosed copy, which you mIy use to good purpose there,
shall partly give you some ljihr; there is no man here can
be persuadcd that he will change his purpose, for so small
advantage as he is likely to find by it, and therefore you
shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that string,
as I have already written to you. The prince of O-
range fending, I fear will not be in time that it may do any
good; for betides that there people are in themselves
flow in their resolutions, their own affairs are, at present,
so great, their state so confuscd, and the prince's autho-
rity so small, that he cannot so soon take order in it; and
vet for mine own part, I have not been negligent or care-
icis in the matter, having, nlore than three weeks pat,

rcnt

felt one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear
nothinlg. The letters, you desire should be written thi-
ther by the French ministers, I have given order to Mr.
Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will carefully
perform it, so that, I hope, I ihall have them to fend you
by the next. And so I commit you to God. At White-
hall, the third of February I58o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WVALSINGHAM.

This letter is an original, and in fame parts of it wraote in

cyphers and explained by another hand. By Empedocles is
,nderJlood Morton, by Villenarius the king of S&ts, D'Au-
bigney is marked thus o I o

3 Feb. 158o.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given,

and in time to be better manifested, being now
thought meet to be in convenient fort used, and
laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing
the king, the nobility, and that stare.
FIRST, kt hath been informed, by credible means,

that D'Aubigney was privy and acquainted with la Cig. C. 6.

Navy the king's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, Anoriginal
and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the
king, to think and esteem it an evil president for princes,
that subjects might have power to deprive their lawful so-
cereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
by a:)y mean, to defeat him, either of the present govern-
mcint of that realm, or yet of the pofFcfiion of the crown
.nti inheritance thereof, 'but rather to assure the fame to
Ilini: and that for the accoipliflhment of that afTlrance,
the king flould have been advised and drawn to have go-
ecrniid, for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubig-
ny to rule as governor of the prince, by conmifliin frion
the queen his mother, until the king's enemies wccc sup-
prcffed; after which time, D'Aubigny /hould have power
given to clfablifh and rcfign that kingdom to the king,

by

by his mother's voluntary consent, whereby all such, s
had before been in action against the queen or her au.
thority, might be brought to stand in the king's mercy.
And for that the king might livein more surety, D'Aubig.
ny should bedeclared both second person in fucceflion of
that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and
that D'Aubigny, before his departure out of France, re.
ceived commiflion from the king's mother to the effects
remembered, or near the fame. That in this behalf he
had conference with the biflops of Glasgow, and Ross,
and with fir James Baford, with which persons, and with
the duke of Guise, he hadi and hath frequent inteili.
gence, and by fir James Baford he was advised to confer
with the lord John Hamilton before his repair intoScot.
land, whereunto he agreed, and vet afterwards he sent
one John Hamilton to the said lord John to excuse him in
this part, allcdging, that he did forbear to come to him,
left thereby he lhould marr or hinder greater cffects to be
executed by him in Scotland.

THAT before his coming into that realm, the nobili.

ty and country were well quieted and united in good con.
cord, with great love betwixt the king and nobility, and
amongst the noblefle, but he hath both drawn the king
against sundry of the chicfeft of his nobility, that have
been most ready, and have expended their blood and pof.
fcflions to preserve religion, and defend the king's per.
Iun, his government and cftate, and also hath given occa.
sions of great Iufpicions and offence to be eilgendered be.
rwixt the kiing and his nobility, and efpecialTy with luch
as have been in ac-tion against the king's mother, andher
authority, who by force and means of the said commission

indi prictice, flould have been brought into moit dan-

gerous cnndition ; and who allb may find themselves ill no
fnm.ll perill, while he poflfl'cs the king's car, abul;fth
his lpret'nce, and ho:dcth such of the principal keys and
po:ts of his realmc, as he prcfcntly enjoyeth.

'I'AT he hath drawn the king, not only to foret the

great benctits done to him and his re.,lm;c, by the quccl's
mn.ijc y of England, but also to requite the flme witil
l':idnry iigns of great unthankfuliefls, and woundinl
tlcicwvith the honour of her majcity, and thereby hath
advelntur'd to flike the happy amnity long time continued
betwixt tholic princes,

AN-»

AND whereas thete griefs were to be repaired by gentle

letters and good offers, to have pafied, and been done be-
twixt them: In which refpec&, the king and council ha-
ving relflvcd to write to her majelfy, for her highness'
bettcr litisfaction in the late negotiation of Mr. Alexander
Hume of Northberwick, had given order to the king's fe-
crltary to frame that letter: He minding to break the
bond of amity in funder, willed the iccretary to be filre
that nothing should be inserted in that letter, whereby the
king should crave any thing at her hands, Iecking thereby
to cut off all loving courtesics betwixt them, as by the
declaration of the said secretary may be better learned,
and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubig-
ny's protction, Alexander King presumed with that bold-
nl1s to make his lewd harangue, and by his means hath
hitherto elcaped chastisement and corrcion, due for his
offence.

THA'r fir James Baford, condemned of the flaughtcr

cf the king's father, hath been called into the realm by
,cnnox, without the privity of the king. And whereas
thelifid fir James found in a green velvet defc, late the
tcrl of Bothwell's, and saw, and had in his hnnrds the
principal band of the conspirators in thai niurder, and can
betl declare and witness who were authors and executors
of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to fipprefs the truth,
and to accuse such as he himself knowcth to be innocent;
and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may
have due trial, which, contrary to all justice, is by Len-
gox nmans denied.

Tlis is the charge agafni D'[tubigny, mentioned in the

f!sig letter by J/ialfinglha; but by Baford they mrean fir
j(Iiis balfour.

No. XVI. (Vol.l . . z 19. Line 25.)

Ihe Scottish queen's offers upon the eflfet of her

liberty propounded by her iecretary Naw, No-
vember 1584.
T H E qeen my nifircfs being once well assurcd of Cot Lb.

your uljcfty'y, amity, Calig, C. S,

1. WILL A Copy.

1. WILL declare openly that she will (as it is fincereli

her meaning) itraitly to join unto your mrajefty, and tothe
fame to yield and bear the chief honour and refped, be.
fore all other kings and princes in.Chriftendom.

2. SHE will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere for-

getfulnefs of all wrongs which she may pretend to hare
been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in any
fort or manner whatsoever, shew offence for the fame.

_3. SHE will &vow and acknowledge, as well in her own
paticular name, as also for her heirs and others descend.
ing of her for ever, your majesty for j ut, true, and law.
ful queen of England.

4. AND consequently, will renounce, as well for herself,

as for her said heirs, all rights and pretences whichfhe
may claim to the crown of England, during your majesty's
life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all ats and thews, by her hereto.

fore made, of pretence to this said crown to the prejudice
of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms and
fiile of queen of England, by the commandment of king
Francis her late lord and husband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as

may be expounded to turn in her favour, or for her be-
hoof, touching the deprivation of your majesty, and will
declare that she will never help and serve herself with
it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majesty's life,

by open force or otherways, any publick declaration of
her right in the fucceflion of this realm, so as secret affur-
ance be given unto her, or at the least publick promise,
that no deciding thereof shall be made in the prejudice of
her, or of the king her son, during your majesty's lif:,
nor after your deceafc, until such time as they have been
heard thereupon, in publick, free, and general aflembly
of the parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not pradtife, direcly or indirecty, with

any of your majesty's fubjets, neither within nor out of
your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or foreign,
against your majesty and your c!tate, be it under pretext
of religion, or for civil and politick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your sub-

jets declared rebels, and convited of trcafon againi
yolo S

10, SHEP

10. SHE will enter into the aflociation, which was

shewed her at Wingfield for the surety of your ma-
jelty's life, so as there be mended or right expricated some
clauses, which I will (hew to your Majesty, when I shall
have the copy thereof, as I have before time required.

11. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war or trouble against this state, and will renounce,
from this time, all enterprises made or to be made in her
favour for that refped.

12. FURTHERMORE, this realm being aflailed by any

civil or foreign war, the will take part with your majesty,
and will assist you in your defence with all her forces and
means, depending of herself and with all her friends of
Chriffendom.

13. AND to that effec, for the mutual defence and

maintenance of your majesty, and the two realms of this
isle, The will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
live, as shall be more particularly advised, and will per-
fwade as much as in her, the king her son to do the like.

THE leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and

especially the antient league between France and Scotland,
in that which (hall not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offensive, having good
aflurance, or secret declaration and acknowledgement of
her right in the fucceflion of this crown, and promise,
that happening any breach betwixt France and this realm,
(which (he prayeth God never to happen) the juil value
of her dowry ihall be placed for her in lands of the revenue
of the crown.

15. FOR assurance of her promises and covenants, she

doth offer to abide herself in this realm for a certaintime,
(better hofiage can she not give than her own person)
which, so as the be kept in the liberty here before pro-
pounded, is not in cafe to escape secretly out of this coun-
try, in the sickly slate the is in, and with the good order
which your majesty can take therein.

16. AND in cafe your majesty do agree to her full and

whole deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this
rtiilm, the laid queen of Scots the will give sufficient hof-
tage for iuch time as. will be advised.

17. IF he abide in this realm, she will promise not to

depart out of it, without your licence, so as it be pro-
mifed unto her that her state, in such liberty as Ihall be
5acorded unto her, (hall not be in any fort altered, untill
V\ L, I. H h after

after tryall to have attempted againit your life, or other
trouble of your estate.

18. IF ffie go into Scotland, flhe will promise to alter

nothing there in the religion which is now used there, fie
being fuffLrdc to have fire exercise of hers, for her and
her houflhold, as it was at her return out of France; and
further, to pull out every root of new divilion between
the subjects, tnat none of the subjects of Scotland aall
be sifted for his coneicence, nor conftraiicd to go to the
service of the contrary religion.

i9. SHE will gr.!nt a general abolition of all offcnce;

done against her in Scotland, and things shall remain there
as they aare at this pr-flnt, for the rcfpect, saving that which
hath b}en done against her honour, which fie mcalcthto
have revoked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general recon-

ciliation bctwccn the nobility of the country, and to caufc
to be appointed about the king her son, and in his coun-
cil, such as liall be fit for the entertainment of the peace
and quiet of the country, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majesty, ill

favour of the Scots lords banishcd and refuged hither,
upon their due fubmiflion to their princes, and your ma-
efty's plonlite to affilt the said queen and king of Scotland
argaini them, if they happen to fall into their former
taults.

22. SIIE will proceed to the marriage of the king her
foni, with the advice and good council of vour majeity.

2. As fice will pas;i nothing without the king her son,

to doth she desire that he intervene conjointly with her in
this treaty, for the ,reatcr and perfettcr ailurance there-
ol; for otherwise ;iy thilg can hardly be eitablifhcd to
be found and conti:l:c.

24. TH'E laid Scotch queen truflcth, that the French

ki'n', her good brother, acccrding to the good affection
which h1e hath always ihewed her, and hath been afrefi
tcltificd unto me by M; onl. die Mannifficre for this said
treaty, will ve illly intervene, and will assist her
fur the furctv ol lhr 1)romif(s.

25. AND 1'f will tile princes of the house of Lorrain,

following the will of the said king, will bind themselves
thicctiilto.

26. FoR other kings and princes of Chriftcndom, she
vill a:fli' to obtain the like of them, if for greater so-

lcmnity

l,,,ity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
;.:,, il:iry.

-. SHE. doh dcqre a fucedy anfwvr, ani final conclu-

.-,:i'c'f the prcmllil; , to the end to mce.i: in time with all
i.;:,:,',eI'cn K I's.

:',. AXD iii the mI:ln time, the n'c 'c to fil .'gtlcn the
.:'.! !:tr made b hy her of a pure and frank wisl, ile
dii!ch that dcemonftlation be made of some releafement
u; her captivity.
(0'.ieOions against the Scottifl queen, under fe-

er3tary Walfli;ghamc's hl.nd, November, 15S4.
IHE queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill

;afil'cted to her majcfty, and therefore it cannot be but

th.t hcr liberty should brin, peril unto her majef},y.

'I'ITr. her enlargement will give comfort to papils, and

,(::cr iil-aifetted fulijets, and greatly advance tie opi-.
i;,Ji had of her title as fucceflor.

'l-.rT as long asflhe shall be continued in her ma-
,cII)'ss poflfiion, file may fcrvc as it wre a gage of her
;-.i:t, 's iurety, for that her friends, for fear of the dani-
*.U !'. may be thrown into, in cafe any thing fiould be
:,ie in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in the of-
;.:ace' ' her majefly.

N ov r Whtat course were fit to be taken

o Sber
. with the queen of Scots, either to

be enlarged or nor.
r i~.1.' course to be taken with the said queen may be Coit. Lib,

, confidcred of in three degrees; cither, 8
1. I'o continue her under cullody in that fate tlhe

2. 'ro rcflrain her of the present liberty ihe now hath.
< Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. TOUCHING the firit, to continue her under custody

i iiitt IHate hie now is; it is to be confiderld, that the
l)lIIcH that favour that queen, upon the complaint file
mn;lctll of hard uftge, are greatly moved with commifera-
(:on tuw.ards her, and promiife to do their endcavour for
In liberty, for wlich purpose her miniflers solicit thcm

1 h 2 AND

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, she ac-

quainteth them with her offers made to her majesty, which
appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable for her
majesty, so as the refulal and rejecting giveth her friends
and favourers cause to think her hardly dealt withal, and
therefore may, with the better ground and reason, attempt
somewhat for the fctting of her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal,

finding her cafc dcfpcrate, will continue her practice under
hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her de-
liver), but to attain to the present poffcflion of this crown
upon her pretended title, as she hath hitherto done, as
appeareth, and is nmot manifest by letters and plots inter.
cepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland,
which hath proceeded altogether by her direction, where-
by a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majesty's
enemics, Ib as it appeareth that this manner of keeping
her, with such number of persons as she now hath, and
with liberty to write and receive letters, (being duly con-
fidered) is off;nfive to the princes, the said queen's friends;
rathcr chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and sub.
jed to all such practices as may peril her majesty's per.
Ion or frate, without any provision for her majesty's safe.
ty, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. TOUCHI.NG the second, to restrain her in a more
firaighter degree of the liberty she hath hitherto enjoyed.

IT may at firif fight, be thought a remedy very apt to

flop the course of the dangerous practices softered here.
tofore by her: For, true it i,, that this remedy might prove
very profitable, if the rcali of Scotland flood in thatfort
devoted to her nmajetly, as few years past it did; and if the
kin!I of that realm were not likely, as well for the releafc
of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pre.
tended titles, to attempt lfmewhat againit this realm ani
her majcfit, wherein he fiould neither lack foreign as
fiftance, nor a party here within this realm: But thi
king and that realm standing aftfelcd as they do, this re
ftraint, inetcad of remedying, is likely to breed there in
conveniencics followinl(:

SI sT, it will incrcaftc the offence both in him, andi

the reft of tlhe princcs her friends that mifliked of her re
ftraint.

SEcosI

SECOoNDLY, It will give them just cause to take some
'way of red refs.
LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke

some desperate ill-difpofed person, all hope of her liberty
remnoved, to attempt somewhat against her majesty's own
p.rfon, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which

cronvenicncy being duly confidercd, it will appear mani-
iittlr, that the reifraint, in a firaighter degree, is likely
to prove a remedy subjcd to vcry hard events.

TIHE latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said
queen at liberty, miniftrcth tome cause of doubt, touching
the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be
performed, whether to be continued here within the realm,
or to be restored into her own country.

BUT first, this proposition, before the particularities be
weighed, is to be confidered in generality.

FoR it is very hard for a well afcEtcd fubjcea, that ten-
dreth her majcfty's surety, and weigheth either the nature
of the Scottish queen, being inclined to ambition and
recvenge, or her former actions, what practices (he hath
ect on foot most dangerous for her majefly and this realm,
to allow of her liberty, being not made acquainted with
such caufcs, as time hath wrought, to make it less peri-
lous than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in
some fort, be devised to prevent both her ambition and
malice; and therefore to make this apparent,

Ir is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the
mother, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth
the fame title The doth: Such as do affcEt her, both at
home and abroad, do affect him; (and he is the more
dangerous for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
advance his fortune; and that he is a man, whereby he
may enter into action in his own person) where The is re-
strained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now altoge-
ther at his devotion, and the party afficted to this crown
abascd; so as the matter duly confidered, neither her li-
herty nor restraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils to-
wards her majesty, unless by fiich promises as may be made
by way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from
tile king her son to be provided for.

Bur in this behalf it may be objeced, that so long as
thc mother remains in her majcfty's hands, the king will
attimpt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

11 3 To

To this objecrion it may be answered, firfl, That th,,

hope that her majesly, being a prince of justice, and i:.
dined to mercy, will not punifli the mother fur the foi,'.
offence, unless /he shall be found, by good proof, culpa,.,
Secondarily, That men will not be over-hafty, conlfiijr.
inl in what predicament the king ftandcth touching h:s
expe.'lation of this crown, to advise any thing that in
time future may be dangerous tb the giver of such coan.
cil as may reach to his mother's peril.

A>ND iaftil, the taking away of his mother, he bce;r
flro.gr in th- field throrugh both foreign assistance, acnd

-parry hr'e v;ithin the realm, will appear so weak a rce:.

dy, (which cna; rather cxaf)lerate both hi;n, and her par.
tv, to lir'.cce(d with more courage and heat to reveneu il
a.nlv fch har d mcearlurc shou!d be offered unto her) aas t:;'
xv'ill f'rni',(;' fri the reason above lccifcd, that no i'.,
t'-::.:.'.i,' w li b:' ul"d.

1'r lm

1 ;AilIo obljctTd, that the 1feltin of her n .
IiTv; ,-vi \,; ;'r:;itly eii.iii,.;' the p:pf.. L'oth at home ;."i

.b. . . li :-;, if t.e i:',vl'on lbe duly ctiili;,

t!hi:t L:-'y be I:':.!. by lp:rliai renr both lere and there, t:.
ha'l :-ati;' ii; i ciauiC of di;fcomfoirt than otherwite.

'rll'rE t\'.'o (tiubts brinll rIcflvc;, a;nd the periis ;,:

\vwa' !; t'n ~ai'other appealuinrg otl m anuil'cfily to lb Icen
;il the fitn acclmpanie \vith :nior dainger, with ducic ro'.
id..it:o:n hlil al, i o' ficih rcimedies as i-may be prolI.di 1:
trli- llc\'enting of the doanacrs, tihat her liberty ' '.-.
iiciteri jun cautle to doubt of; there will. be good caile
iope foulid, that the f..;ne will rather breed benefit t..:

'.o;, it Ir Setlo, in whiat fort the said lib erty fl.: ',

pI-rfJor'I "l; if it lhail bc thoui;gt neet mle fliall be .:'-
liied \ ithin the reali i.-lth lomC li:nitation, eicci!Y'.
in that pIlace whenr' {-.c now cefidetl, the counltry roii:,
abount leiu'i so iinf: 'ede in religion as it is, it is greatly i
be doubted that will very much incrcale the corrup;:,;.,

iand l lliil, awav in that behalf. Beildes ihe fliould hau

commodity, xwith much more cafe, and fipecd, to cntCrtain
practiccs wiLhin this realm, than by being in her owa
cou ntry.

IF abroad freely without liimitation ceither in Scotland

or France, then fiall her majecly lore the gages of hlr
li.fety, then shall flie be at hand to give advice in furthlr-

aicr

rnce of such practices, as have been laid for to fitr trouble
in this realm, wherein fie hath been a principal plrty.

'OR the first, it is answered before, that the refpet of

1an perils that may befal unto her, will in no lbrt refirainr
h:r ibn. For the other, if it be confidreld what harm
her advice will work unto herself, in reflieci: of the vio-
lation of the treaty, and the provision that may be made
in parliament here, it is to be thought, that {he will then
l^ well advised, before the attempt any such matter, which
nov he may do without perill. eflides such princes, as
lhave interposed their faith and promilic for her, cannot
niih honour aflift her, wherein the French Kini, will not
ie tfound very forward, who, in most friendly fort, hath
itl. rc'je Ltd all lI uch rc'q its, pIrotpoutindd either by
her, or- her son's miiliters, that miight any ;l) :a o.clnd
her n,':fltv. And so to conclude, feLinig the canui of her

crl if dilli b tkc away; the Frenlh kilng gratified,
!h.) s ai mnediator for her, and wvi'l mi;;n'i!i, that, by any
S ui dh practice, ffi-h should be drawn to violate her fiaith,
t';:t the reit of the plinces fliall have nol ijunt caucfe of of-
filncc, hut rather to thi nk honltur:ably oi her m;ajeltv con-
lii;]- tihe Scottifil (uccen's carriage towards Iher, w'hich
!.tlI' de:;i''c(d l' wa.\ ;v flch favour; tlie noblemen of
S:oti n i flalli b reltore(!, who will be a good ftly of
filch cnunlls1ls as li:iy tend to the troubliil: tcf this realm,
r'. i;daily having fb good a ground of varrant as the p:ir-
li.inicnt to itand unto; the charges andl perills ;'!iich her
p;i'.tAces might have bred to this realm iihali he avoidcd;
,,nii latil, the hope of the papitis fliall be talkn a::-a., by
I'.iih oud provisions, as in both the reallms may be niade,
;,ICIebl the perills that might fall into her nma:jei's ownl
,'l;in, ( a matter of all others to be weighed) il(all be
.'.):idcd, xvhcn by the change that may gro\v by ny n such
\.iicked andl ungodly practice, they llhall fce their cafe no
I;.i) rclieved in point of religion,.
'c'aiOns to induce her majesty to proceed in the

treaty under Secretary Waliinglhainc's hand.
t -I A T fich plots as have of late years been dcvifred Cotr Lib

(tending to the railing of trouble within this realm)al

li.iv g:ro\vln from the Scots qlueen's miniifters, and favour-
tI, not without her allowance and lccking: Or,

II h 4 THAAT

THAT the means used by the Laid minifiers, to induce

princes to give ear to the said plots, is principally ground
ed upon inome commiseration had of their restraint.

ITHA'r the flay, why the said plots have not been put

in execution, hath proceeded, for that the said princes
have, for the molf part, been entertained with home a.ld
domcteick troubles.

'HAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their

realms begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempt.
ed in her favours by the laid princes.

'H.I'AT it is allo to be doubted, that fornewhat may be

atteptempd l)y lmne of- hcr fautors in an cxtraordinar-y ior;
to the perill of her majcfty.

'1'HAT for the prefcrvation thereof, it ihall be conle.

nlent for her majefly to proceed to the finishing of the
treaty, not long fithcnce begun between her and the lhid
queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 149. 1. 27.)

A letter from Sir Amias Pawlet.

SIR,

Orii;n. Cal. Did forbear, according to four direction signified in
c . 9 I your letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed to

the execution of the contents of Mr. Waade's letters un-
to you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary ser.
vants, and for the seasing of her money, wherein I was
bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (although in
vain as it now fallcth out) by my letters of the 7th of
this inflant, which I doubt not are with you before this
time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the sth
which came not unto my hands untill the 8th in the even-
ing, by reason as did appear by indorfement, that they
had been mistaken, and were lent back to Windsor, after
they were entered into the way towards me, I confider-
ed, that being accompanied only by my own servants, it
might be thought that they would be intreated to fay as I
would command them, and therefore I thought good,
for my better discharge in there money matters, to crave
the assistance of Mr. Richard Bagott, who repairing un-
to me the next morning, we had access to this queen,
whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old man-

4 ncr

n-r with a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide
of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her
haius, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her
flrmer praatifes, doubting left he would persist therein
)y corrupting underhand some bad members of this slate,
1 was exprcly commanded to take her money into my
handsis, and to reft answerable for it, when it shall be re-
ilircd ;..advising her to deliver the said money unto me
with quietness. After many denials, many exclamations,
andl many bitter words against you, (I fay nothing of her
xa;lling against myfelf)with flat affirmation that her lajefiy
nlii!,lt have her body, but her heart the should never have,
.rclling to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my lfr-
Av.ts, and sent for barrs to break open the door, where-
ulpon she yielded, and causing the loor to be opened, I
tound there in the coffers, mentioned in Mr WVaade's rc-
nm:mbrance, five rolls of canvas, containing five thousand
French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one
h:i!, in gold, one hundred and four pounds two shillings,
and the other had three pounds in silver, which bag of fil-
' r was Ilft with her, atfirming that flhe had no more mo-
ni in this house, and that she was indebtcd to her ser-
1.!uits fi.r their waes. 'Mr. WVaadc's note maketh men- Curie can
tion of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, cll you te

truth of thi»

h: was milreckoned, which is evident as well by the tefti- matter.
n;mnics and oaths of diverse pcrlbns, as also by probable
conjctulres ; so as in truth we found only two rolls, every
c; which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this
(uiecn's guifte to Curie's wife at her marriage. There is
to:ind inNaw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by
·hiination one hundred pounds, and in money, in one
b.:g nine hundred pounds, in a iccond bag two hundred
feturlcore and fix pounds eighteen flillings. All the fore-
l.iid parcells of money are bestowed in bags, and fealcd
by Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of
Naw's money, which I reserve in Wiy hands, for the use
of this houfliold, and may be repayed at London, where
her m;ajcfy fiall appoint, out of the money, received
lately by one of my lfrvants, out of the Exchequer. I
fea:rcd left the people might have dispersed this money in
all this time, or have hidden the fame in some secret cor-
liers, for doubt, whereof, I had caused all this queen's fa-
milly, from the highest to the lowcft, to be guarded in
tlc fcvcral places where I found them, so as yff I had not

found

fond n

the money, ivith quictnics, I had been forced to

have fcarched firti- all their lodgings, and then their own
p ions. tnl;ln. i (,tGod t i th all my heart, as for a finm.u
]l;; bhcsilng, tii.t that fa!lcth out Ib well, fearing ledta
contrary fuclr fs might have moved Ibme hard conceits
in her ma;,acily.

'Tou-ctIlGc; the (litei'fi.m of this quecns servants, I

t: it I ha;ce done ib imuch, as may f'tlfice to satisfy her
najiecyr tor the ti'nme wherein I could not take any ab;solute
co;:ri , until I henard an;inri frion yon 0, 1:rtly bccaufC hir
T::>; iy, by Mvlr. \Waade's letter, doth !ef:r to your confi-
':;i' iatjoi t,) reti1urn f'tch a.1 illa. be Clitch:r{'d to theji fuec-
r, dwevllings and coun; tric, wheri-cin, as i; Icmllcth, v0;
h::vc' orgotteni to (dlivcr you'r opi;ion; Fp.!tl',t for thal: a
v\l, I have reccvl xci noan ll'er f'rolm yo(,ofyour rclblution,
ulion ti'l view; of the Scottilh family flet illto you, wha:
persons y iou will appoint to he difililtl; o.lly tllis 1 h1i\x
done, I hav; btciiowcdl all such, as are I:iien'ouncd in:

.i'

bill i; cloflcd, in three or four ivvcrl I rojams, as thle f1;::e
man lufi;ice to contain them, and that their meat and dlir:k
lhall be brought unto them bv my c rvants. It may plc;ie
you, to advcrtifc me byv our next letters, in what Ifrt,
an'd f;r what course, 1 lh.ll make their pailiporss, as a;),
if they fiall fia that they arc unpaid of their wages, va:t

Thisl5,dv I flall do therein. Yt is aid tht t y

ha ave been ac-

h}a:.h.c3 cuonomcd to be paid of their wages at Chrifimas, for tih
r:, ,r. r .- whole year. Her majefey's charge will be so;mewhat d;-

riiTi (lhe mi;iflhd bh the departure of this people, and my charte

I n"'";, l\ tilli occall, will be the more eafv. But the perion,,
:,,; ... .,... aill ilvc lBaltian, are filch filly and limple fouls, as there

v,':a nI,) r"1,'.t cail e to fear their practices, and upon ti;s
,i-o :;;d, I .as of opinlion, in my tfornier lctters, that all
tii; ,ifE,,iiild train luiu d

ii li:w c fllol owcd their miftlrc,

I;1.tl tl! nii.'xt icinove, 1aml there to have been dif'cihaltr
ilol [it, (i;al i.'no, for dan I),t t t ti 1 i.i remove Ini'Clt be
dcla cd, y'd f ! itc did 1f.'r, 0'1 xpect anyex hard micafure.

( )TUi: r; a111ll: cxcufe their fooli fh pity as they may; b:u

for my part, I reniunce my pllart ol llie joys of hcavc'n, t
in any thinig that 1 have Laid, v,'ittci or done, 1 lih'e
h:;'d any otler vIfpcl 1thIall tihe fitlcrlnthlce of her mIll;-
jit 1y's i(ii vice; and so I fliall most carncitly pray you to as-
firni for ni', a:; likewiihe for the not feafinig ot the moncy
1yv N;r. M:llnc ls, the other comminliioners and myfltlf.
!.. ir.Ir. X\' sidc haI1th aiifwcrcd, in all humble dutics,
t ir

t,iC
3

the whole company, that no one of us did so much as
think that our commiflion reaching only to the papers, we
lmiglit be bold to touch the money, lo as there was no
ii)cpch of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I
w;is no commiflioner in this search, but had my hands full
at Tvxall, discreet servants arc not haffilv to deal in great
imattrs, without warrant, and eipecially vhere the cause
is fi:ch as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

Yourl advcrtifimcnt of that happy remove hath been

gr('tly comfortable unto me. 1 will not lay, in relpec&
of mylfef, bccaufe my private interei hath no measure of
colpl.l' isbn with her majesty's thfcty, and with the qui( t
of rhi:, realm. God grant a happy and tIeedy yflue to
thcfc good and godly councels; and ib I commit you to
lis imcLci t'u proltcion. From Chartley the loth of Sep-
tcn;bur 15S6.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 174. line 25.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewfburv

and Kent, &c. touching their procccdings with
regard to the death of the Scottish queen, to
her irjCefty's council.
IT mny please ycur honbid e good lordilips to be adver-

tilld, that, on Saturday the 4th of this prefcnt, l lo-

blrt l;cale came to the houife of me the earl of Kent in the
couinty of---to whom your lorldfliips letter and mci'a:e
.w, , (vij;VcrcL, a;id liCr minjcty's comimillion fiewn; whlce-
una; 1 the c.a:l forthwith fcit precepts for the i;ivino of
(ich hteis ani erie as hiad troubled the country, reiqi in i-g
the officers to make stay of all such perfoins, as hould
l uin: any fluch wailrnlts without names, as befoi-e ihad
blcll d;ic, anid to bring theni to the next juItice of peace,
tti the intent that upon their examination, the occafi(n
;n.: ctau!'s of such seditious bruites might be bolted out
ai,I known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of
IKn:t should, on the Monday following, come to LIylford
t) atMr. :lmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer with
miy lord of Shrewvfbury. Sonday at night, I Robert
i(;llc came to Fothcringay, where after the communicat-
i,: the commiflion, &c. unto us fir Amice Paulet and fir
IJ)rI IDrury, by rcafon that Sir A. Pawlet was but late re-

covered

covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury
being then at Orton, fix miles of; it was thought good
that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go unto
him, which we did on - morning; and together with
the delivery of her majefcy's commission, and your lord.
ship's letter imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent
and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying
his lordfliip hither the day following, to confer with me
the said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordship
promised. And for the better colouring of the matter, I
the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Bcale, a justice of
peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to
whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale
had under your lordlhips hands, for the flaying of the
hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to
the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the justices
of peace of Huntingdonihire, and to cause the pursuers
and bringers of such warrants to be flayed, and brought
to the next jufttice of peace; and to bring us word to So.
theringay castle on Wednesday morning what he had done,
and what he should in the mean time understand of the
authors of such bruites. Which like order, I alfofirA-
mias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town,
and other places adjoining. The fame night, the fheriit
of the county of Northampton upon the receit of your
lordihip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were lent
to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's in-
tention and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other
letters were allo sent with their lordships aflent to fir
Edward Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Bru-
denell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time it was thought meet
that the execution should be. So upon Tuesday, we the
earls came h thcr, where the sheriss met us; and upon
conference between us it was resolved, that the care for
the fending for the surgeons, and other necessary provision
should be committed unto him against the time. And we
forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the presence of
herself and her folks, to the intent that they might fee
and report hereafter that fle was not otherwise proceeded
with than according to law, and the form of the statute
made in the 27th year of her majesty's reign, it was thought
convenient that her majesty's commiflion flould be read
unto her, and afterwards She was by sundry fpecchcs

willed

willcd to prepare herfclf againfi the next morning. She
,as also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable
manner of proceeding with her, and the neceflity that was
imposed upon her majesty to proceed to execution, for
that otherwise it was found that they could not both fland
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his
being here new conspiracys were attempted, and so would
be ftll; wherefore since ihe had now a good while since
warning, by the said lord and Robert Beale, to think up-
on and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but that
flie was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept
this message in good part. And to the effect that no chri-
ftian duty might be said to be omitted, that might be for
her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that
if it would please her to confer with the bishop and dean
of Peterborough, flie might; which dean, we had, for that
purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
place. Hereto ihe replied, crossing herself in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, faying that ihe
was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her
ancetfors had professed, from which the would not be re-
moved. And albeit we used many persuasions to the con-
trary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
fhc demanded the admittance of her priest, we utterly de-
nied that unto her. Hereupon, {he demanded to under-
stand what answer we had touching her former petition to
her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and the
bestowing of her body. To the first we had none other
answer to make, but that we thought if they were not
sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's custody,
who was now in France, and feeing her papers could not
any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not but that the
fame would be delivered unto fiich as she should appoint.
For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
majesty would not make any profit of her things, and
therefore (in our opinions) she might set down what she
would have done, and the fame should be imparted unto
her majesty, of whom both she and others might expe&
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her ma-
jeyll's pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her pe-
tition should be denyed, or granted. For the pracice of
iBabington, she utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
th.it iic death was for her religion; whereunto it was eft-

soons

soons by us replied, that for many years she was no0
touched for religion, nor fllould have been now, but
that this proceeding against her was for treason, in that
fie was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for deftroyin'r
her nma.iety's person; which {he again denied, adding furl
thcr, that albeit the for hers lfforgave them that were the
procurers of her death, yet file doubted not but that God
would take vengeance thereof. And being charged with
the depositions of Naut and Curie to prove it against her,
the replied, that he accused none, but that hereafter when
the shall he dead, and they remain alive, it shall be seen
how indifftrenltly she had been dealt with, and what mea.
sure had been uscd unto her; aJd asked whether it had
been Lhard before this, that servants had been pra&ised
to accufc thair mifrlcfs, and hereupon a!lo required what
was become of them, and where they remained.

UrON our departure from her, for that it seered by the

comlmi (lion, that the charge of her was in the difpolition
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue
D)rurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
had before, and to cause the whole number of foldicrsto
watch that night, and tlat her folks ihould be put up, and
take order that only four of them ihould be at the execu-
tion, rcilaining aloof of and guarded with certain persons
so as they fioiild not come near unto her, which were
Mclvil her Iteward, the physician, surgeon, and apothe-
cary.

WVEDNESDAY mnorIn'il, after that we the earls were re-

paired unto the castle, and the sheriss had prepared all
thingrs in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to !'o into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place
\wh're were prelcnt, \we which have signed this letter, Mr.
Iltny Talbot, eciq; fir Edward Montague, knt. his fol
and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother,
fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas Brudencl, Mr.
Bei il!, IMr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forreft,
and RIayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterbo-
roI' h, anll others.

AT the Ittairfold, ihe paused to speak to Mclvil in our

hearilng, which was to this effec, " Mclvil, as thou haft
been an honcft fervalnt to me, to I pray thee continue to
my Ioni, and commend me unto him. I have not impugn'd
his religion, nor the religion of others, but with him well.
And as I forgive all that have offended me in Scotland, so

I would

T ou(ld that he flould also ; and bcfecch God, that hb
v.ould fend him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Mcl-
\il's anfwcr was, that he would so do, and at that instant
ie would befccch God to assist him with his spirit. Theic
hic demanded to speak with her priest, which was denied
Lito her, the rather for that flie camen witlh a lupcrtitiois
;lir of beads anid a crucifix. She t'.cn de'ired to have
K!'r women to help her, and upon her carnf!t requcii',
.r;d tl\ving that when other gentlewomen were executed,
41), had read in chronicles that they had women allowed
,;to them, it was permitted that ffie should have twvo na!n-
(,i by hcrfclf, which were'M\rs. Curie and Kennedy. Aftcr
i'1 calme to the fcafold, sirss, in preflelce of tihemi ;ll, her
ei,:ie:lic's comnmliion was openly read ; and afterwards
!r. ])can of Peterborough, according to a direction which
hce lial received, tihe night before, friom us the earls, wou'd
h,..: m;Ide a godly admonition to her, to repent and dJ
\ul] in the fear of God and charity to the world. Bu t ;'t
tI:K firt entry, Ihe utterly rcfuted it, faying that flc w.:s
c.;;:hlique, andt that it were a folly to move her, being
!b rcfolutely minded, and that our prayers would little
.',.il her. WVhereupon, to the intent it might appear that
.-c, and the whole all'Libly, had a chriltian deire to have
her die well, a godly pra)er, concciv'd by Mr. Dean, was
r.iul alnd pronounlc.d by us all. " Thatit would please Al-
mli ilt' (God to find her his holy fpiirit and grace, and :l-
l;, If it \wer his will, to pardon a:ll her otficncc, :and o.f
ih, nI:lrcv to receive her into his heavenly and ecvrlaifilL
klinSdoni, a;nd innally to blels her majcet', and confoulld
.. her enemies;" 'whereof Mr. Dean, riinlding to repair
1i' Ilhortly, can fhcw your lordships a co)py.

'Ilis done, flie pronounced a pr i.txr upon her knees

tothis ctflct, "l to beflech God to liend her his holy
Ipirit, and that flhe tluifted to receive her salvation iin his
b!ool, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom,
bItloliiht God to forgive her enemies, as fhi t fornave
!ml ;i alnd to turn his wrath from this land, to bless the
i;, i '1s ,najetie, that she might Ifrve him. ,lkcewifc to be
Ilcrcifiul to her son, to have compaliion us his church, anlld
:tlllo' hle was iot worthy to be lhalid, yet liec had a co;i-
idlrnce in his mniciy, and prayed all the ulints, to pray
.into her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning to-
.'.udIs her lrvants) the deIired theml to pray for her, tliat

her

her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made
by the executioners, The pardoned them; and said, she
was glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near. Then
she mifliked the whinning and weeping of her women, fay.
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her refolu.
tion, and kifling them, willed them to depart from the
scaffold, and farewell. And so resolutely kneeled down
and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down
her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her
servants were incontinently removed, and order taken that
none should approach unto her corps, but that it should
be embalmed by the surgeon appointed. And furtherher
crosse, apparell, and other things are retained here, and
not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that
might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such
as sent him hither.

THIS hath been the manner of our dealings in this

service, whereof we have thought good to advertise your
lordships, as particularly as we could, for the time, and
further have thought good to signify unto your lordships
besides, that for the avoiding of all fnifier and slanderous
reports that may be raised to the contrary, we have causcd
a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effece in writ-
ing, which we the said lords have subscribed, with the
hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen above
named that were prefcnt at the acion. And so beseech.
ing Almighty God long to bless her majesty with a mofi
prosperous reign, and to confound all his, and her ene-
mies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caile, the
8th of February 1586, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Ap-

pendix, is taken from a collcdion made by Mr.
Crawfurd of Drumfoy, historiographer to Queen
Anne, now in the library of the faculty of Advo-
cates. Mr. Crawfurd's transcriber has omitted to
mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be
found.

No. XIX.

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. 180. line 4.]
The objections againit Mr. Davison, in the cause

of the late Scottish queen, must concern things
done either, I. Before her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that session. 3. After the fame.
B.)E F O RE her trial, he neither is, nor can be Cot. Lib.

charged to have had any hand at all in the cause Cilig. c.

of the said queen, or done anything whatsoever concern-
ing the fame, direftly or indireflly.

2. DURING that feflion, he remained at court, where

the only interest he had therein, was as her majesty's fe-
cretary, to receive the letters from the commiflioners, im-
part them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commission-
ers, it is well known to all her council,

I. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting

whatsoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the
cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her nma
jeity's warrant unto the commiffiorers, by the lords and
others of her council.

2. That he was no party in signing the sentence, pas-
fed against her.

3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation

publiihing the fame, the warrant after her death, nor
any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the
fame. And,

THAT the only thing which can be Specially and truly

imputed to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto
her majesty to be signed. She fending a great counsellor
unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it
to the great feal of England, by her own special direction
and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trea.

futer, was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her
tnajflty's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when {he
thould be pleated to call for it.

VOL. I. 1 i 2. THAT

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the !e:

five or fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to car;v
it up, till fle sent a great counsellor unto him for the
fame, and was {harply reproved therefore by a great peer
in her majcfly's own pretence.

3. T-HAT having signed it, Ihe gave him an expre!i

commandment to carry it to the feal, and being fea!eid
fend it immediately away unto the commiflioners, ac.
cordiliiL to the direction. Herself appointing the hal of
l'othering:ty for the place of execution, miflikin the
court-yard, in divers reftpeds, and in conclusion abfo.
lutclv forbid him to trouble her any further, or it her
hear any more hereof, till it was done. She for her pirt,
having (as Ihe said) performed all that, in law or reason,
could be required of her.

4. WV\ ICH direrions notwithfianding, he keptthe

warrant Ifaled all that night, and the grcateft part of te
next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her miajet) withal, and finding he;
majicty rcfolved to proceed therein, according to hlerfj-.
nmer directions, and yet desirous tocarry the matter so, as
ihe might throw the burden from herself, he absolutely
resolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treafurcr'i

chamber, together with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hattun,
and in his pretence restored the fame into the handsof
the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before receised
it, who from henceforth kept it, till himself and the lc',
ot the council sent it away.

xVHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and in.

terell the laid l)avifon had in this caule, whaifoever is,
or may be pretended to the contrary.

ToUcilING the fending down thereof unto the corn

millioncis, that it was the general a& of her maictlv'
council (as is before mentioned) and not any private J
of his, mnay appear by,

I. 'I'HEIR own confeflion. 2. Their own letters fril

down thernwith to the commilioners. 3. The tcltimontes
of ihe lords and others to whom they were dircced. A
;ilfo, 4. of Mr. Bel.le, by whom they were sent. 5.1lT
tcnllr of ter mnajelty's firit commi sion for their callinsl
the (lar chlamllr for t(e ltame, and private appearance a
Ib:mriflijin al tirw.ii d illltad thereof, before the lord clh!.

Cellu

cil:or Erunmly. 6. The confcflion of Mr. Attorney-
.,ai .il op 1o r

court confirnecl. 7. By the sentence it-

i 11l p1n record. . 1Betles a common aót of council,
c(onlil1aii an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scot-
titI anmbaJlldor then remaining here, avowing and juili-
t\, gl tie fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some ex-

tl:iorc:inary furtheralice thereunto, the contrary may evi-
dr;tly appear by,

H. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of as-

f ciation, being earnestly prefled thereunto by her maje-
lii fclf.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a com-

niillioner, in the examination of Babington and his com-
p;ices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the.Bath,

g. His being a mean to stay tlhecoinmiffioners from pro-

nouncing of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferring it
til they flould return to her majefly's presence.

.. -l;s keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks un-

prcienteJ, without once offering to carry it up, till her
iniicftv sent exprefly for thc fame to sign.

5. His dcferring to fend it away after it was fealed un-

to the commiflioners, as he was specially commanded,
staling it all that night, and the greatefi part of the next
Jdy in his hands.

:. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands
of the lord treasurer, of whom he had before received
tlIe fame.

WHI-ICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said
Davison did nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary
to the duty of the place he then held in her majesty's
Iervicc.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the back is this title,

THE innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late
Scottilh queen.

li i No. XX.

No. XX. [Vol. II. p. 280. line 27.]
Letter from 0, Sir Robert Cecil, to his majesty

King James.

From the Ad OST worthy prince, the depending dangers up.
o Viginal' ilol on your affectionates have been such, as hath in.
Jur. Edin forced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your
A. 1. 34. person, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards
o. 4- ' of fortune, for the maintenance of the just regal rights,

that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is in.
vested in your royal person. Fall not then, mos noble
and renowned prince, from him, whose providence hath
in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an inftru.
rnent of his glory, and the good of his people. Some
secrets, I find, have been revealed to your prejudice,
which must proceed from some ambitious violent spirited
person near your majefiy in council and favour; no man
in particular will I accuse, but I am sure it hath nofoun.
dation from any, with whom, for your service, I have held
correspondence; otherwise, I had, long since, been dif.
abled from performance of those duties, that the thoughts
of my heart endeavoureth ; being only known to this wor.
thy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of
Christendom for his fidelity to your person and fate, and
to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal servant, my first and
faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom
I have found in all things that concern you, most secret
and assured. It may, therefore, please your majesty, at
the humble motion of 0, which jargon I dcfire to be the
indorfcment of your commands unto me, that by some
token of your favour, he may understand in what terms
you regard his fidelity, secrecy and service. My pafion.
ate affceiion to your person, (not as you are a king, but
as you ate a rood king, and have jufi title, after mylo.
vereign, to be a great king) doth tranftort me to prefuml..
tion. Condemn not, molt noble prince, the motivesol
care and love, altl:o' mixed with defeils in judgment.

r. I, therefore, first befecclh your majcfh' , that so

the good of tliofe whom (;od, ly divine Providcnce
hath cdflined to your cl;artc, ta:;t ) '.U will be pleasel

i~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~r

have an extraordinary care of all praticers or praaices.
against your person ; for it is not to be doubted, but that
in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, facion, or fear,
there are many that desire to have their sovereign in mino-
rity, whereby the sovereignty and state might be swayec
by partiality of subalternate persons, rather than by true
rule of power and justice. Preserve your person, and
fear not the praaices of man upon the point of your ri2ht,
which will be preserved and maintained against all assaults
of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protection of
your person, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of
Heaven, who bless and preserve you and all yours, in all
regal happiness to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the

conversation and secret keeping of your councells, which,
as I have said, are often betrayed and discovered, either
out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent fa(tion, or
base conception, the which your majesty is to regard with
a!l circumfpeEtion, as a matter most dangerous to your
person and fate, and the only means to ruin and destroy
all thote, that fiand faithfully devoted to your majesty's
fcrvice. Some particulars, and persons of this nature, I
make no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of
this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majefly.
may be further informed.

3. THE 3d point considerable is that your majefly, by

all means poflible, secure yourself of the good affection
of' the French king and States, by the negotiation of some.
faithful secret confident; the French naturally diftaftina
the union of the British islands under one monarch. It
Germany, I doubt not, but you have many allies and
friends, but by reason of their remote state, they do not
so much importe this affair, which must be guided by a
quick and sudden motion.

4. WI-IEN God, by whose Providence, the period of

all persons and times is determined, flhall call to his king-
dom of glory her majefly, (although I do assuredly hope
that there will not be any question in competition, yet
for that I hold it not fitting to give any minute entrance
into a cause of lo high a nature) I do humbly befcech your
mjaelty to dcfign a secret, faithful, and experienced con-
liitllt servant of yours, being of an approved fidelity and
judgment, continually to be here resident, whose negotia-
tiulv it werc convenient your majesty should fortifie, withk

I i 3 fuck,

such secret trufl and powers, as there may not need 14
days respite, to potl for authority, in a cause, that cannot
endure io hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend
least good to your establishment, will not in publick op.
pugn your title, but out of their cunning ambition will
seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of commnon
good to the itate, in propounding of good conditions for
difburthening the common weale, of divers hard laws,
heavy impositions, corruptions, opprefiions, &c. which is
a main point to lead the popular, vho are much di^;uf j
with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
convenient, that there motives, out of your majcllys puo.
vidence, should be prevented, by your free offer in thece
points following, viz.

1. THAT your majefly would be pleased to abolifi

purveyors and purveyance, being a nmatcr infinitely of-
fenfive to the common people, and the whole kingdon,
and not profitable to the prince.

2. THAT your majefly would be plcafed to dissolve the

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and an-
cient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil
education of their children, by which no revenue of the
crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, -z.

nerally repined againit by the fubjecl, in regard (,f their
uncertainty, being many times altered frorn their true
meaning, by variety of interpretations.

4. 'THAT your majesty will be pleascd to admit free

outport of the native commodities of this kingdom, now
often refirained by subalternate perlbns for private profit,
being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants,
and a plain defiruition to the true indufiry and manufac-
ture of all kingdoms, and agoailft the profit of the crown.

THF.SE, being by your majclty's confidents in the point

of time propounded, will afluredly confirm unto your ma-
jeftie the hearts and affections of the whole kingdom, and
absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of dcfigned
patriots, that, out of pretext of common good, would
seek to patronize themselves in popular opinion and pow-
er, and thereby to derogate from your majelty's bounty
and free favour, by princely merit of your moderation,
judgment and ju lice.

YOU'R

YOUR majesty's favour, thus granted to the fubje&,
will no way impeach the profits of the crown but advance
them. The difproportionable gain of some chequer offi-
cers, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle un-
lnccefrrv) clerks and attendants, will only susser some de-
triment; but infinite will be the good unto the kingdom,
which will confirm unto your majesty the universal love
and afieetion of the people, and eftablilh your renown
inl tile highest esteem to all poflerity.

'T'NE Lord preserve your majeflie, and make you tri-
umphant over all your enemies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pac-

qict, and will die before he leave to be yours, shall be no
jcef than of mine own life, and in like esteem I will hold
al! your faithful confidents, notwithstanding I will hold
mnv!cf reserved from being known unto any of them, in
my, particular devoted affections unto your majesty, only
this extraordinary worthy man, whose afociate I am in
his misfortune, doth know my heart, and we both will
pray for you, and if we live you shall find us together.

I BESEECH your majefly burn this letter, and the

others; fur altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may
be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble servant,

0.
I i 4 A CRITICAl

# A CRITICAL DISSERATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

CRITICAL
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

The Murder of King HENRY, and the Ge-
nuinenefs of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the con-
troverfies, to which the murder of King Henry,

or the letters from Mary to Bothwell, have given
rife; far less to appear as an adversary to any par-
ticular author, who hath treated of them. To re-
peat, and to expose all the ill-founded assertions
with regard to there points, which have flowed from
inattention, from prejudice, from partiality, from
malevolence, and from difhonefly, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to moif of
my readers. All I propose, is to affni others in
forming some judgment concerning the facEs in dif-
pute, by stating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and
with the fame attention and impartiality, which L
have endeavoured to exercise in examining other
controverted points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two
different systems have been formed. The one sup-

poses

poses Botlwell to have contrived and executed thli
crime. The other imputes it to the Earls of Mur
ray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted facts inhif

tory, is a matter rather of curiosity than of uli.
They stand detached; and whatever we determine
with regard to them, the fabric of the flory remains
untouched. But the fa& under dispute in this place
is a fundamental and efTential one, and accordino
to the opinion which an Hiflorian adopts with re-
gard to it, he must vary and dispose the whole of
his fublequcnt narration. An historical system may
be tried in two different ways, whether it be con-
fiflent with probability, and whether it be supportcd
by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the King's murder upon Both.

well argue in the following manner; and though
their realonings have been mentioned already 1i
different places of the narrative, it is necessary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, lav
they, was a sudden and youthful passion. The
beauty of his person was his chief merit. His ca-
pricious temper soon raised in the Queen a diiu:,
which broke out on different occaforis. His en-
gaging in the conspiracy against Rizio, converted
this disgust into an indignation, which she was at no
pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps, in its
own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted
that art and condescension which alone could have
repaired it. It widened every day, and a deep and
fettled hatred effaced all remains of affetion. Both-
well observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found it on a scheme, which
proved fatal both to the Queen, and to himself.
lie h.:d served rMary at different times with fidelity
and success. I-He insinuated himself into her favour,
by adldr-cf andby flattery. By degrees he gained her
heart. In order to gratify his love, orat lealt his am-

bition,
4

bition, it was necessary to get rid of the King.
!lary had rejeEted the propoial made to her for ob-
t:;]iiing a divorce. The King was equally hated by
ti; partisans of the houie of Hamilton, a confider-
.ble party in the kingdom; by Murray, one of the
n,oll powerful and popular persons in this country;
t-v Miorton and his associates, whom he had decciv-
ci; and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest
b a recent favour. Among the people Darnly was
icilen under extreme contempt. He expected, for
;ill thele reasons, that the murder of the King would
ifs, without any inquiry. And to Mary's love,
ani to his own address and good fortune, he trufled
ior tlie accomplifhmlent of the reft of his wishes.
\Jaut Botliwell expecled really came to pals. Mary,
if not privy herself to the design, connived at an
,'ion which rid her of a man whom she had ftch
goo(l reaobn to detest. A few months after, fe
imniried the person who was both fuipec'ed and ac-
cu(cd of committing the murder.

'TiHosE who charge the guilt upog Murray and his
party reason in this manner. Murray, they fay,
.was a man of boundless ambition. Notwithftand-
in;g t'e illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a drfign of usurping the Crown. On the Queel's
return into Scotland, he inflnuated himlelf into her
Linvour, and engronffd the whole power into his own
Lands. Ile set himlclif against every propoial of
marriage which was made toher, left his own chance
es i1ucceeding to the Crown flould be destroyed.
lie hated Darnly, and was no lels hated by him.
In order to be revenged on him, he entered into a
fulden friendflhip with Bothwell, his ancient and
mnortal enemy. I-Ie encouraged him to perpctrate
tlic crime, by giving him hopes of marrying the
Q(ceen. All this was done with a design to throw
upon the Queen herlelf the imputation of being ac-
ellury to the murder, and under that pretext, to

destroy

destroy Bothwell, to depose and imprison her, an(
to seize the sceptre which he had wrested out of he
hands.

THE former of these systems has an air of pro

bability, is consistent with itself, and solves appear
ances. In the latter, some assertions are false, ibor
links are wanting in the chain, and effects appear
of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray
on the Queen's return into Scotland, fervedherwitl
great fidelity, and by his prudent administration ren
dered her so popular, and so powerful, as enabled hei
with ease to quasi a formidable insurrection raised by
himfelfin the year 1565. What motive couldinduce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, with.
out followers, without influence over the nobles,
whom the Queen, by her neglect, had reduced to
the lowest state of contempt, and who, after a long
disgrace, had regained (according to the most fa-
yourable ii ppofition) the precarious poffeflion of her
favour only a few days before his death? It is dif-
ficult to conceive what Murray had to fear from the
King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the
Qleen had no previous attachment to Bothwell, no-
thing can appear more chimerical than a fchemeto
perluade her to marry a man, whose wife was still
alive, and who was not only suspected, but acculed,
of murdering her former husband. But that such
a fchele should really succeed is still more extra-
ord nary.-If Murray had instigatcd Bothweli to
commit the crime, or had himself been acceffry
to the commiflion of it, what hopes were there that
Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow-criminal
all the plerlcutions which he fuffrcd, without eve
retortirpg upon him the accusation, or revealing tht
whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and dcadll
feud hadl fibHflrcd between Murray and Bothwell
the Queen wilh difficulty had brought them to lon(

tcrllu

terms of agreement. But is it probable that Mur-
ray would chufe an enemy, to whom he had been
so lately reconciled, for his confident in the com-
mijffon of such an atrocious crime? Or, on the
other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination
of a wife man, firIt to raise his rival to supreme
power, in hopes that afterwards he should find
ibme opportunity of depriving him of that power ?
The moftadventrous politician never hazarded such
a dangerous experiment. The most credulous folly
never trusted such an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong there general reasonings may
be, we must decide according to the particular
evidence produced. This we now proceed to ex-
amine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's mur-
der appears, i. From the concurring testimony of
all the cotemporary hiltorians. 2. From the con-
rcflion of thole persons who suffered for aflifting at
the commifion of the crime, and who enter into
a minute detail of all its circumstances. Anders. v.
ii. 165. 3. From the acknowledgment of Mary's
own commissioners, who allow Bothwell to have
been one of those who were guilty of this crime.
Good. v. ii. 213. 4. From the express testimony
of Lefly Bishop of Ross to the fame effet with the
former. Def. of Q. Mary's Hon. And. ii. 76.
Id. v. iii. p. 3 1. 5. Morton, at his death, declared
that Bothwell had solicited him, at different times,
to concur iu the conspiracy formed against the life
of the King; and that he was informed by Archi-
bald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App.
4. The letter from Douglas to the Queen, pub-
lifhed in the Appendix to Vol. II. No. 12. confirms
Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herreis promises, in
his own name, and in the name of the nobles who
adhered to the Queen, that they would concur in

punish-

punishing Bothwell as the murderer of the Kin?
Append. vol. J. No. 23.

TliHE most direLt charge ever brought againf

Murray is in these words of Biflop Leley. S

Is;

" unknown," addrefiing himfeif to the Earl o
Murray, " what the Lord l-Ierries said to your face

openly, even at your own table, a few days after
the murder was committed ? Did he not charce

" you with the foreknowledge of the fame murder'
"did h11 not, nl/lla cilluiose utifs, flatly and plai.

vly burien you, that riding in Fife, and comn,

" with one of your moit afiired and trully servants
"the fame day whereon you departed from Edin.
' burgh, aIid to him, among other talk, This
" night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lose his
"liier?" Defence of CQ Mary, Anders. v. ii. 75.
But the affrtion of a man so heated with faEtion as
Lefly, unless it were supported by proper evidence,
is of little weight. The servant to whom Murrar
is iaid to have spoken these words, is not named;
nor the manner in which this secret conversation was
brought to light mentioned. Lord Herries was one
of the mofe zealous advocates for Mary, and it is
remarkable that, in all his negociation at the courtof
England, he never once repeated this accuiation of
Murray. In answering the challenge given him by
Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of
mentioning Murray's knowledge of the murder;
but though he openly accuits of that crime fomc of
thote who adhered to him, he industriously avoids
any insinuation againfi Murray himself. Kei:h
Plref. XII. Mary, herself, in conversation with
Sir Francis Knolles, accused Morton and Maitland
of being privy to the murdelr, but does not men-
tion Murray. And. iv. 55. When the Bishop of
Ross and Lord H1erries thernfilves appeared before
the Engli(h council, January 11, Is09, they de-
clared themselves ready, in obedience tothe Queen's

com-

command, to accuse Murray and his associates of
being accefibry to the murder, but " they being
, also required, whether they or any of them, as
" of themselves, would accuse the said earl in fpe-
,, cial, or any of his adherents, or thought them
"c guilty thereof;" they answered, " that they took
, God to witness that none of them did ever know
" any thing of the conspiracy of that murder, or

were in council and forcknowledge thereof; nei-
( ther who were devisers, inventors, and executors
"' of the fame, till it was publickly discovered long
" thereafter by some of the assassins, who suffered
(, death on that account." Good. v. ii. go8. Theli
words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and
llerries themselves, and ftem to be a direcct confu-
tation of the bishop's assertion. The bishop him-
Ielf repeats the fame thing in still itrcnger terms.
And. -ii. 31.

'ITE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Pro-

rtsfrion touching the murder of the Ki;ng of Scots,
aifter mentioning the conference at Craigmillar con-
celrling a divorce, of which we have given an ac-
rc(unt Vol. I. 330. add, " So after these premisses,

the murder of the King following, we judge in
"our consciences, and hold for certain and truth,
"that the Earl of Murray and secretary Lething-
"ton were authors, inventors, counsellors and cau-
" ers of the fame murder, in what manner, or by
" whattbmever persons the fame was executed ?"
An(erf. v. iv. I88. But, i. This is nothing more
than the private opinion or personal affirmation of
tlhlee two noblemen. 2. The conclulion which they
make has no connexion with the premisses on which
they found it. Because Murray propoled to obtain
for the Queen a divorce from her huiband with her
own conlenc, it does not follow that therefore he
committed the murder without her knowledge.
3. I luntly and Argyll were at that time the leaders

of

of that party opposite to Murray, and animated
with all the rage of faction. 4. Both of them were
Murray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account
of the treatment which his family and clan had re.
ceived from that nobleman. Argyll was desirous
of being divorced from his wife, with whom he
lived on no good terms, Knox, 328. and by whom
he had no children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Mur.
ray's sifter, and by his interest he had obftruced that
design. Keith, 55 . These circumstances would go
far towards invalidating a positive testimony; they
more than counterbalance an indeterminate fufpi.
cion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether Huntly
and Argyll everfubfcribedthis protestation. A copy
of such a protestation as the Queen thought would
be of advantage to her cause, was transmitted to
them by her. Anders. v. iv. 186. The protestation
itself published by Anderson is taken from an un.
subscribed copy with blanks for the date and place
of subscribing. On the book of this copy is pasted
a paper, which Cecil has marked " Answer of the
' Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of
" Huntly and Argyll." Anders. 194, I95. But
it can scarce be esteemed a reply to the above-men.
tioned protestation. Murray's answer bears date at
London, January g9, I568. The Queen's letter,
in which the enclosed the copy of the protestation,
bears date at Bowton, Jan. 5, I568. Nowitis
scarce to be supposed that the copy could be fe;;
into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and
be seen and answered by Murray within so Ihorta
time. Murray's reply seems intended only to pre'
vent the impression which the vague and uncertalr
;lccufations of his enemies might make in his ab
fence. Cecil had got the original of the Quel'
letter into his custody. Anders. vol. iv. 186. Thi
n t urally leacs us to conjecture that the letter itfcll
tu(,cthcr with the incloled protestation, were intrt

0
a ccp:t

cpted before they came to the hands of Huntly
and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjeture alone.
The letter to -Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib, Cal. C. i.
fol 280, and is an original subscribed by Mary,
though not wvrittcn with herown hand, because fle
ildonm clhoi to write in the inglilh language. The
protctlation is in the fame Volume, fol. 28, , and is
naniifftly written by the fame perlbn who wrote the
()jeen's letter. This is a clear proof that both
were intercepted. So that much has been founded
on a paper not fub!cribed by the two Earls, and
probably never seen by them. Besides, this method
which the Queen took of fending a copy to the
two Earls, of what was proper for them to declare
vitli regard to a conference held in their own pre-
lence, appears somewhat fufpiicious. It would have
becn more natural, and not lo liable to any mifin-
terpretation, to have desired them to wi ite the most
exat account, which they could recollect of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

THEi Queen's commifTioners at the Conferences in

England accused Murray and his afficiates of hav-
ing murdered the King. Good. ii. 28 i. But these
accusations are nothing more than loose and gene-
ral aiirmnarions, without descending to such parti-
cular circumflances, as either alcertain their truth,
or dilicover their fallfhood. The lame accusation
is repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton
Sepr. 568. Good. ii 359. And the Iame oblci-
vaiion may be made concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to
account for Murray's murdering of the King, by
lulpofing that it was done on purpose, that he
miglt have a pretence of dilturbing the QCueen's
adiiniiartation, and thereby rendering ineffei;tualher
geleral levocation of Crown lands, which would
have deprived him and his aflbciates of the best parr

VOL. II1 K k of

of their estates. Lelley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a
Scottish Monarch, will fee that such a revocation
could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo.
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power
of the nobles rendered it ineffectual. The belt vin.
dication of Murray and his party from this accufa.
tion, is that which they preiented to the Queen of
England, and which hath never hitherto been
publiflhed.

tpr. r inf-vers to the objections and alledgance of the Queen,
oti'ce al/edging, the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, tl:

Earl of Mlorton, Marr, Glencairn, Hume, Rutb.
venl, &c. to have been moved to armour, for that
tl'e abhorrcd and inight not abide her revowtio
of the alienation made of her property.
IT is answered, that is alledged but all appear.

ance, and it appears God has bereft the alledgance
of all wit and good remembrance, for thir reasons
following:

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never

had occasion to grudge thereat, in refped the
Queen made him privy to the fame, and took refo.
lution with him for the execution thereof, letting
his Lordthip know the would assuredly in the famine
except all things she had given to him, and ratety
them in the next parliament as fihe did indeed; and
for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind him
Master John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to
whom she declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it should be provided, yea of free
will did promise and offer before ever he demanded,
as it came to pats without any lett or impediment,
for all was ratified by her command, and hand
write, at the Parliament, but any difficulty.

ITye

ITEM as to my Lord of Morton, he could not
grudge thereat quha never had of her property
worth twenty dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Itemn the fame, I may lay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord R uthven.
Item ;;c rlane, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.
O'LY my Lord of Marr, h.:d ane little thing

of :!e property quilk aliua was gladly and liberally
confirmed to him, in the laid parliament preceed-
in r a yc.r; was never ane hld any cause of mif-
co(I'ent of that revocation, far less :o have put their
lives and heritage to so open and manifest ane dan-
clr :zs they did for fie nce frivole cause.
G-;, ever any did make evill colntenance, and

flhow. any miscontentment of the said revocation, it
was my Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha Ipak
largely in the time of tarliament theiranents to the
Queen herself, and did complain of the manifest
corruption of ane aft of parliament past upon her
Majeity's return, and Ia did lett any revocation at
that time; but the armour for revenge of the King's
deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time
there was no occasion given thereof, nor never a
man had mind thereof.

H.VING thus examined the evidence which has
been produced against the Earls of Miurray and
Bothwell; we shall next proceed to inquire whether
the Queen herself was accessory to the murder of
her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known,

than firong fulpicions arose, among some of her sub-
jeats, that Mary had given her content to ihe com-
milrion of that crime. And. ii. 156. We are in.
formed, by herownambaffador in France, the Arch-
bilhop of Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreign-
ers, on this head, were no less unfavourable to her.
Keith, Pref. ix. Many of her nobles loudly accused

K k 2 her

her of that crime, and a great part of the nation,
by supporting them, seem to have allowed the ac-
cufation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature, that

they scarce admit of a positive or direct proof.
Deeds of darkness can seldom be brought perfectly
to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Principals, but only of being Acceffaries to a crime;
not of having committed it themselves, but only of
giving content to the commillion of it by others;
the proof becomes fiill more difficult: and unless
when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof
by circumstances, or presumptive evidence, is all
that can be attained. Even in judicial trials, such
evidence is sometimes held to be sufficient for con-
demning criminals. The degreeof convicionwhich
such evidence carries along with it, is often not in-
ferior to that which ariles from positive testimony;
and a concurring series ofcircumftances satisfies the
underitanding no less than the express declaration of
witnefes.

EVIDENCE of both there kinds has been pro.

duced against Mary. We shall first confider that
which is founded upon circumitances alone.

So.i E of there iflpicious circumstances preceded

the King's death; others were fublequent to it,
With regard to the former, we may observe that
the Queen's violent love of Darnly was soon con-
verted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill conduct, and excesses of every kind
were lich, that if they did notjullify, at leat they
account for this ludden change of her indifpofitionto-
wards him. Tlhe rile and progress of this domellic
rupture, I have traced with great care in the history,
and to the proofs of it which may be found in
papers published by other authors, I have added
tholet contained in App. No XVI. and XVII. The
Earls of Murray, Murton, Bothwell, Argyll, and

Huntly

Huntly confidered the scheme of procuring for the
Queen a divorce from her husband, as one of the
most flattering proposals they could make to her,
and employed it as the most powerful inducement
to prevail on her to consent to a measure, which
they had much at heart, but from which they knew
her to be extremely averie. And. iv. p. 2. i88.
DO Croc the French ambafi'ador, who was an eye-
witne's of what he describes, not only represents her
diifuft to Darnly to be extreme, but declares that
there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " The Queen is in the hands of physicians, ec r:l.
and I do assure you is no: at all well; and do be- 1566.
lieve the principal part of her disease to confifl in
Ceep grief and sorrow; nor does it teem pofible to
make her forget the fame. Still ihe repeats there
words, I could wijh to be dead. You know very
well that the injury the has received is exceeding
great, and her majesty will never forget it- To
ipeak my mind freely to you, I do not expect, upon
Ieveral accounts, any good underitanding be-
tween them [i. e. the King and Queen], unless
God efsetually put to his hand.- His bad de- Dec. 23.
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any
good expeated from him for several reasons, which
I might tell you was I present with you. I cannot
pretend to foretell how all may turn, but I will fay,
that matters cannot subsist long as they are, without
being accompanied with sundry bad consequences."
Kcith, Pref. vii. Had Henry died a natural death,
at this junture, it muit have been confidered as a
verv fortunate event to the Queen, and as a season-
'blc deliverance from a husband who had become
altogether odious to her. Now as Henry was mur-
dered a few weeks afterwards, and as nothing had
happened to render the Queen's aversion to him lels
violent, the opinion of those who confider Mary as
the author of an event, which was manifestly io

K k 3 agreeable

agreeable to her, will appear perhaps to some of oui
readers to be neither unnatural nor over refined. If
we add to this, what has been observed in Lhe his-
tory, that in proportion to the incretale of Mary's
hatred of her huiband, Bothwell made progrets in
her favour, and thar he became the object not only
of her confidence but her attachment, that opi.
nion acquires new lirength. It is easy to observe
many advantages which might redound to Mary as
well as to Bochwell from the King's death; but
excepting them, no person, and no party in the
kingdom could derive the leait benefit from that
event. Bothwell, accordingly, murdered the King,
and it was, in that age, thought no violent impu.
tation on Mary's character, to fippofe that file had
consented to the deed.

THE steps which the Queen took after her hus-
band's death add itrength to that supposition.

I. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh, at the time of

the King's death, afierts that " every body suspect.
ed the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst 'peak
freely to others, laid plainly that it was He." p.
155. 2. Mary having issued a proclamation, on
the I 2th of February, offering a reward to any per-
son, -who ffiould discover those who had murdered
her husband; And. i. 36. a paper in answer to this
was affixed to the gates of the Tolbooth, February
16, in which Bothwell was named as the chief per.
son guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was
acculed of having given her consent to it. And. ii.
156. 3. Soon after, February 20, the Earl of Len-
nox, the King's father, wrote to Mary, conjuring
her, by every motive, to prosecute the murderers
with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his
own fulpicions of Bothwell, and pointed out a me-
thod of proceeding against him, and for discover-
ing the other authors of that crime, no leTs obvious
than equitable. He advised her to seize, and to

2 commit

commit to sure cuflody Bothwell himself, and those
who were already named as his accomplices; to call
an assembly of the nobles; to issue a proclamation,
inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on
that encouragement, no person appeared to accuse
them, to hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them
without farther trial. And. i. 40. 4. Archbilhop
Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March 9th, employs arguments of the ut-
most weight to persuade her to prosecute the mur-
derers with the greatest severity. " I can conclude
nathing, (fays he) by quhat zour Majelty writes to
me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve
zow to make a rigorous vengeance th reof, that ra-
ther than it be not actually taine, it appears to me
better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I
alk your Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I
can heir nathing to zour prejudife, but I man con- -;ft
firaindly writ the famin, that all may come to zour
knawlege; for the better remede mnay be put thrrto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth shaw now rather
than ever of before, the greite vertue, magnani-
mitie, and constance that God has grantit zow, be
quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this most
heavy envie and difplefir of the committing thereof,
and conserve that reputation in all godliness, ze
have conquift of lang, quhich can appear nawayis
mair clearlie, than that zow doickjuftice that thcelf,,
haill world may declare zour innocence, and give as,:
teflimiony forever of thair treason that has com-
mitted (but fear of God or man) so cruel and un- wi3oktt
godlie a murther, quhairof there is la meikle illmucb
Jpoken, that I am conflrainit to afl zow mercy,
that neither can I or will I make the rehearllil therof,
which is owr odious. But alas ! Madame, all over
Europe this day there is na purpose in head fa fre-
quent as of zour Majeftie, and of the present slate
of zour realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit

K k 4 finiltcrly.'*

finifeerly." Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as a).
pears from Append. Vol. i. No. XIX. urged the
iame thing in Itrong terms. 6. The circumflances
of the cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and
remonfirances, called for the unmotl vigour in her
proceedings. Her hufoand hid been murdered in
a cruel manner, almost in her own prelence. Her
f;ubjiets were filled with the utmolt horror at that
crime. Bothwell, one of her principal favourites,
had been publickly acculied as the author of it.
1ellec-ions, extremely difhlonourable to herlelf, had
been thrown out. If indigznation, and the love of
justice, did not prompt her to pursue the murderers
with ardour, decency, at lealt, and concern for vin.
dicating her own character, flould have induced
her to avoid any appearance of rcmiffnels or want
of zeal.

EUT infcead of this, Mary continued to discover,

in all her actions, the utinoft partiality towards
Bothwell. On the i5th of February, five days after
the murder, she bestowed on him the reversion of
the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the
year I565 flhe had mortgaged to the citizens of
Edinburgh. This grant was of much importance,
as it gave him not only the conmmand of the prin-
cipal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremc])
desirous of keeping pofiiiun or- it '. 2. Bothwell

being
4 C: fr..m tkt cnri::a! in t;he C;,a,'ter-hou/ of tie city of Eir.-

tug/h of an ! r;g)enaticn

to t,. rever/ion of the Jiiperioriij G9

Lc.'h 1y c.'nI Ml4ry, to tlhe Eari of Bclh.c/l.
r.'aria Ici gratia Rcgina Sco:orurn, omnibus probislhnliiii-

hu,. Cfi., ad quos pr cfentcs litcr.r pervencrint falutem. Sciatis,
qtl'?i :!Os ad micmoriani reducenltes multiplex bonumi vcrun et
t:leilec 'i vi:iuni, non t.anurni quonda.m nollr:' cliarifli;ma matri
Bi.,ii;.,1 gin.u regni n;lfi i pro tcmpore in noltra minoritnte
faiitI, ct i ni pt'll'n tUi , verutil cti an nobifinet ipfis, tam intrap nr-
tes eialli;c quam intra hoc nollrum regnum, ad extentionemi

noltri

being extremely desirous to obtain the command of
the castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in order to pro.
vail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young Prince to his cuf-
tody. Mar consented; and the instantly appointed
Bothwell governor of the castle. And. i. Pref. 64.
Kcith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the murder, pre-
vious to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been con-
dutied with the utmost remiffinefs. Buchanan ex-
claimsloudly against this. And, ii. 24. Nor was

noflri honoris et autoritatis in punitione furlum, malefatorum,
et tranfgrefforum infra idem, per nofirum conlifum confangui-
neum etconfiliariumJacobumcomitem Bo:huiile, dominum ITa-
lis, Creighton ctLiddifdale, magnum admirallum regni noftri,
commiflionem et onerationem ad hunc effecum habcntem, per
quas ipfc fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac
etiam, in performatione ct extcntionc nofiri dicti fervitii, fiam
hereditatem, supra fummam viginti millium mercarum hujus
noflli regni, alienavit ac Iefit. Et nos cogitantes quod, ex
noltra principali honore et devoria diEtum nostrum confifum
conlanguincum & confiliarium cum quodam accidente et grati-
tjdinc recompcnfare et gratificare incumbit qua: nos commode
fibi concedere potcrimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus as-
futuris temporibus effe potent, etad hujufmcdi performandum
in omnibus caufis-feu eventibus: In recumpenfationen quorum
pr'milbnrum, ac pro diverfis aliis notfris rationabilibus caufis
et contiderationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, &c. dictum Ja-
coblin comitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos hxrcdes mafculos quof-
cumque no'lros legittimos, &c. aflignatos in ct ad literas revcr-
foalis .aas, &c. per Symonem Prellon de codcm militem,
r potiucrm, balivos, consules, et cominunitatexn hujus noliri
,lrgi lde Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefforibus, &c. no-
!i, noltritluc heredibus, fuccefforibus, et atiignatis pro re-
dcniptionc, &c. fupcrioritatis totius villa dc Lcith, &c. im-
l:inorat. per nos ditis prapofito, &c. sub revcrfiolle alienat:e
u(lMiiicnitis fummam decem niillium mercarnim monctr pr1a-
fc'ii)t, numerandam et calculandam in parochiali ccclefia (d
l uiitluigh, super premonitione quadrigintadicrum, ut moris
c:i, vcluti in diC:is rcverfionis literis, &c. de data ;vo )Oob.
J1,;, &'c. (The reft is form, and contains a clause of abl)lute
\:irr;]ndlicc) IN CUjus REl 'I'rSTlMONUM 1prr.Tfetih s m1ag-
ruil figillurn nofirum apponi f(ciuus. Apud Edtinburgh, de.
ihlnoquinto die meniisl'ebruarii, anno Domini millefimo quin.
gcntelimo fexagelimo fixto, ct regni noltri vicefimo quinto,

The great fcal entire.

IIX

it without reason that he did so, as is evident froni
a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson
one of the King's servants, who was in the house
when his master was murdered, and was dug up alive
out of the rubbish. Being examined on the Mon.
day after the King's death, " This deponar fchew
that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the
Queenis fervandis the keyis of her (halmir. Quhilk
the Laird of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald thair,
here is ane ground. Efter quhilk words fpokin, thai
left of, and procedit na farther in the inquisition,"
And. iv. p. 2. 167. Had there been any intention
to search into the bottom of the matter, a circum.
fiance of so much importance merited the most care.
ful inquiry. 4. NotwithftandingLennox's repeat.
ed solicitations, notwithitanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the necessity of complying with
them, in order to encourage any accuser to appear
againit Bothwell, ihe not only refused to commit
him to custody, or even to remove him from her
pretence and councils; And. i. 42. 48. but by the
grants which we have mentioned, and by other cir.
curmftances, discovered an increase of attachment to
him. 5. She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to
a public trial; but she permitted him to fit as a
member in that meeting of the Privy Council, which
direEted his own trial; and the trial itself was car-
ried on with such unnecessary precipitancy, and with
so many other suspicious circumfiances, as renderhis
acquittal rather anargumentof his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. Thee circumstances have all been
mentioned at length, Vol. I. p. 403, &c. and there-
fore are not repeated in this place. 6. Two days
after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of her re-
gard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the
sceptre before her at the meeting of Parliament.
Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament, she granted him
a ratification of all the vast poffeflions and honours,

which

which she had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services
he had performed. And. i. I 17. 8. Though
lMlvil, who foresaw that her attachment to Both-
wll would at length induce her to marry him,
warned her of the infamy and danger which would
attend that action, she not only disregarded this fa-
lutary admonition, but discovered what had pafied
between them to Bothwell, which exposed Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. I56. 9. Bothwell fiz-
ed Mary as flhe returned from Stirling, April 24.
If he had done this without her knowledge and con-
lent, such an insult could not have failed to have
flled her with the most violent indignation. But
according to the account of an old M S. " The
friendly love was so highly contracted between this
great princess, and her enormous subject, that there
was no end thereof (for it was conitantly esteemed
by all men that either of them loved other carnally)
ib that fle suffered patiently to be led where the
lover lift, and all the way neither made obstacle,
impedement, clamour or resistance, as in such ac-
cicents use to be, or that she might have done by
her princely authority, being accompanied with the
noble Earl of Huntly, and Secretary Maitland of
Leihington," Keith, 383. Melvil whowas pre-
sent, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that
nothing was done without the Queen's content.
Melv. 158. ?o. On the 12th of May, a iew days
before her marriage, Mary declared that lie was
then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had
ofiended her by seizing her perifn, she was lo much
latisfied with his dutiful behaviour lince that tinme,
and so indebted to him for pait lervices, that fle
not only forgave that offence, but relolved to pro-
mote him to higher honours. And. i. 87. I l.
Even after the confederate nobles had driven Both-

well

well from the Queen's pretence, and though she saw
that he was conlidered as the murderer of her for.
merhufbandl by bo great a part of her fubjets, her
aflfction did not in the least abate, and she conti.
nued to express the most unalterable attachment to
him. "I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
that the rigour with which the Queen is kept, pro.
ceedcth by order from thele men, because that the
Qilern will not by any means be induced to lend
her authority to prosecute the murder; nor will not
c-on fentby any pertulafion toabandon the Lord Both.
well for her husband, but avoweth constantly that
The will live and die with him; and faith that if it
were put to her choice to rclinquifl her crown and
kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, flhe would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a ffmple damlel witli
him, and that fle will never consent that he shall
fare worie, or have more harm than herself." App.
p. 42. See altb p. 44. From this long enume.
ration of circumstances, we may, without violence,
draw the following conclusion. Had Mary really
been accessary to the murder of her husband; had
Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her consent, or
at hzr command; and had fie intended to stifle the
evidence against him, and to prevent the diifovery
of his guilt, fle could scarce have taken any other
fleps than those fle took, nor could her conduAc
have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary
may be clafted under two heads.

i. THE depositions of tome persons who were

employed in committing the murder, particularly
of Nicholas Hubert, who, in the writings of that
age, is called 1renlch Paris. This person, who was
Blothvell's Iervant, and much trusted by him, was
twice examined, and the original of one of his de-
rolitions, and a copy of the other, are Rill extant.

A It

it is pretended that both these are notorious forge-
rics. But they are remarkable for a limpliciry and
,,ivet1 which it is almost impossible to imitate; they
abound with a number of minute fads and parctiu-
laritics, which the molt dextrous forger couid not
have easily afTembled, and connected togetlher wirh
any alppearance of probability; and they are faled
with circunmftances, which can scarce be fippcifed
to have entered the imagination of any mnan, but
one of Paris's profeffon and character. But, at
the fame time, it must be acknowledged that his
dcpofitions contain some improbable circumnftance.
He seems to have been a foolifl talkative fellow;
the fear of death; the violence of torture; and the
desire of pleating those in whose power lie ws,
tempted him, perhaps, to feign lome circun]ifrncrs,
andl to exaggerate others. To fay that some cir-: ':;-
Itances in an affidavit are improbable or false, is
very different from faying that the whole is forged.
I fuliped the former to be the cafe here; but I fee no
appearance of the latter. Be that as it will, ftcme
of the most material fads in Paris's affidavits reft
upon his single testimony; and for that re;l.;;, I
have not in the History, nor shall I in this place,
lay any stress upon them.

2. TH'E ltters said to be written by Mary to
Bothwcll. These have been frequently pubtilhvd.
The accident by which the Queen's eng.i.ics got
them into her poflcfiion, is related Vol. I. 4^5.
When the autlhenticity of any ancient paper is du-
bious or contested, it may be alccrt.ained c.thcr tb
external or internal evidence. lioth thcfel have been
produced in the prele;' (cale.

I. LxT'E ^ NA1. proofs of tlc genuincne s of ,'ary's

letters. j. Murray and the nobles who adhered to
hiln, affirm upon their word and honour, that the
letters were written with the Queen's own hand,
with which they were well acquainted. Good. ii.

64.

64. 92. 2. The letters were publiikly produced
in the parliament of Scotland, December 167,
Good. ii. 360; and were so far confidered as ge-
nuine, that they are mentioned, in the act againat
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good.
ii. 66. 3. They were Ihewn privately to the Duke
of Norfolk, the Earl of Suffex, and Sir Ralph
Sadler, Elizabeth's commissioners at York. In the
account which they give of this matter to their mif.
trefs, they fecm to confider the letters as genuine,
and express no suspicion of any forgery; they par.
ticularly obfcrve, " that the matter contained in
them is such that it could hardly be invented and
devised by any other than herself; for that they lif.
course of some things, wihich were unknown to any
other than to herself and Bothwell; and as it is
hard to counterfeit lo many, so the matter of them,
and the manner how the!e men came by them, is
such, as it feemeth that God, in whose fight murder
and bloodshed of the innocent is abominable, would
not permit the fame to be hid or concealed." Good.
ii. 142. They seem to have made such an imprel-
lion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a fubfcquent
letter to Fembroke, Leicester, and Cecil, he has
there words, " If the matter flall be thought as
dcteftable and manifest to you, as for ought we can
perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. ii. 1i4.
4. After the conferences at York and Weftminfler
were finished, Elizabeth resolved to call together
the Earls who were then at court, and to lay before
them the whole proceedings against the Scottili
Queen, particularly that " the letters and writings
exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen of Scotslet-
ters and writings, should also be shewed, and con-
ference [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their
fight, with the letters of the said Queen's being
extant, and heretofore written with her own hand,
and lent to the Queen's majesty; whereby may be

searched

searched and examined what difference is betwixt
them." Good. ii. 252. They assembled accord-
ingly, at Hampton Court, December 14 and 15,
1568; and " The originals of the letters supposed
to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused; and
being read, were duly conferred and compared, for
tie manner of writing, and fashion of orthogra-
phy, with sundry other letters long since heretotore
written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the
Queen's Majesty.- In collation whereof no dif-
ference was found." Good. ii. 256. 5. Mary
having written an apologetical letter for her conduct
to the Countess of Lennox, July o1, 1570*, flie

tranf-

* Mary's letter has never been publilhed, and ought to have

a place here, where evidence on all fides is fairly produced.
- Madam, if the wrang and false reportis of rebcllis, enemies
weillknawin for traitouris to zow, and alace to muche trulled of
me by zoure advice, had not so far flurred you aganis my inno-
cency, (and I must fay aganis all kyndnefs, that sow have not
onelie as it were condempnit me wrangfullie, bot so hated me,
as some wordis and opene deideis hes teftifeit to all the warlde,
a manyfelt miflyking in zow aganis zowr awn blade) I wold not
have omittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow'cxcufing me
of those untrew reporties made of me. But hoping with Godis
grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to zo\v, as I trust
it is already to the maill pairt of all indifferent perfonis, I
thocht it best not to trouble zow for a tyme till that such a mat-
ter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the tranlporting
zoure littil son, and my onelie child in this countrey. To the
quhilk albeit 1 be never fa willing,l wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as inall uther thingistuiching him. I have born
him, and God knawis with quhat danger to him and me boith;
and of zow he is defcendit. So I meane not to forzet my dewtie
tozow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how unkyndlie
that ever ze have delt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt,
and refpcdt zow as my moder in law. And gif ye pies to knaw
fartherof my mynd in thatand all uther thingis betwixt us, my
ambassador the bishop of Ross fall be ready to confer with zow.
And so after my hair:lie commenda'ionis, remitting me to my
faide ambassador, and zour betterconfide-atioun, 1 commit zow
to the protetioun of Almyghty God, qulho I pray to prefcrve

zow

transmitted it to her husband then in Scotland; and
he returned to the Countess the following answer:
·' Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer the
Queen the King's mother's letters sent to you, what
can I fay but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ
the bell fle can for hirfelf, to feame to purge hir of
that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly per.
fuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my
awin knawledge, but by her handwrit, the conferli.
onis of men gone to the death, and uther infallibil
experience. It wull be lange tyme that is hable to
put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary
is fa wcill knawin. The maift indifferent, I trui,
doubtis not of the equite of zoure and my caulk,
and of the just occafioun of our miflyking. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis in-
terelt, were hir trew confeffioun and unfeyned re-
pentance of that lamentable sac, odious for hir to
be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God
is just, and will not in the end be abused; but as he
has manifested the trewth, so will he puneife the
iniquity." Lennox's Orig. Regift. of Letters. In
their public papers, the Queen's enemies may be
suspected of advancing what would be most iblser-
vient to their cause; not what was agreeable to
truth, or what flowed from their own inward con-
visCion. But in a private letter to his own wife,
Lennox had no occasion to difiemble; and it is
plain, that he not only thought the Queen guilty,
but believed the authenticity of her letters to
Bothwell.

7ow andl my brother Chailes, and caus zow to knaw my pairt
better nor ze do. From Chatifworth this x of July is7o.

To my L.die Lennox Youre natural gudeNice

my moder in law. and lovynge dochter.

II. WITH

II. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the

genuineness of the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we
may observe, i. That whenever a paper is forged
with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to eftablilh the point in view, his solicitude
to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any
appearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to
ule expressions the mott explicit and full to his pur-
po'e The passages foisted into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages; the legendary miracles
of the Romifi taints; the fuppolititious deeds in
their own favour produced by monaiteries; the
falle charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 13.
are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim
fecmns to be more certain than this, that a forger is
often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls into
the error of proving too little. The point which
the Queen's enemies had to eftablith, was, " that
as the Earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the
horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. lb
was the of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
iuader, and commander of the said murder to be
done." Good. ii. zo7. But of this there are only
imperfet hints, obscure intimations, and dark ex-
prefflions in the letters, which however convincing
evidence they might furnish if found real letters,
bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity of
evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All
the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can
serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly, Blackwood,
Turner, &c. abound with passages to this purpose;
nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet still it might have been expected
(lays her latefL defender) that some one or other of
the points or articles of the accusation should be
made out clearly by the proof. But nothing of that
is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing

VOL. 11. L I in

in the letters, tlat could plainly flew the writer to
have been in the foreknovwledge, counsel, or device
of any murder, far 1lls to have persuaded or corn.
manded it; and as little is there -about maintaining
or juitirying any :murerers." Good. i. 76. How
ill advl\itd were Mary's adversaries to contract lJ
much guit, and to praCtifc lb many artiices in or-
der to forge letters, which are lo ill contrived for
eltablilhing the conclusion they had in view ? I-ad
they been io hale as to have recourle to forgery, isit
no, natural to think that they would have produced
bomething more explicit and decisive? 2. As itis
alnmo! imopufnible to invent a long narration confiit-
ing of many circumstances, and to connect it in
fich a manner with real faets, that no mark of fraud
thall appear; so:- this realon flilful forgers avoid
any lo;:t: dic:.i ' of circumstances, eipecially of i.b
rtiinn .,, ! uIcr!!u!us ones, well knowing that the
more t W:i- are mIutiplied, the more are the chances
.of dct'.ti, n incrcaiced. Now Mary's letters, elpe-
cially tie iir'r, are filled with a multiplicity of cir-
:cutin!'ances, extremely natural in a real correlpond.
ence, but altosclhcr foreign to the purpose of the
(Qaeun's enemies, and which it would have been
e;.rc:mc !olly to have inserted, if they had been alto
gtcr! i:ngin;i: ary, and without foundation. 2. The
truth anl rieality of ICveral circumstances in the let.
ter., and th'Ic, too, of no very public nature,
arc coni: men d by undoubted collateral evidence,
Lctt . i.Good. ii. p. i. The Queen is said to have
me': !ne of Lennox's gentlemen, and to have tome
conveilation Vwith him. Thomas Crawford, who
w.:s the pcr:on, appeared before Elizabeth's corn
lI:iiolners, and contirmed, upon oath, the truthot
this circun:It.!;ce. He likewile declared, that
duri:ng the Q(uecn's flay at Glasgow, the King re-
peated to himn, every night, whatever had palled
th-rough tile dLayc , between her Majelty and him.

4 ant

and that the account given of these conver.itions in
the firll letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King commnunicated to him. Good. ii. 245. Ac-
cording to the fame letter there was much dilcourle
between the King and Queen concerning Mynto,
Hiegait, and \Walcar. Good ii. 8. Io, 11. What
this might be, was altogether u-known, till a letter
of Mary's, preftrved in the ScottifP college at Pa-
ris, and published, Keith, Pref. vii. dilcovered it to
be an affair of io much importance a; merited all the
attention fie paid to it at that time. It appears by
a letter from the French ambafiador, that Mlary
was itubjec to a violent pain in her si e. Keith,
ibil. This circumstance is mentioned, Lett. I. p.
,o. in a manner tb natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine production. If we flhall fill think
it probable to luppofe that tb many real circum-
Ilances were artfully introduced into the letters by
the forgers, in order to give an air of authe.nticity
to their producion; it will scarce be poilible to hold
the fame opinion concerning the following particu-
lar. Before the Queen began her first letter to
Bothwell, she, as usual among those who write
long letters containing a variety of fubjeds, made
notes or memorandums of the particulars fie wifled
to remember; but as flhe fat up writing during a
great part of the night, and after her attendants
were afeep, her paper failed her, and lie continued
her letter upon the lame sheet, on which she had for-
merly made her memorandums. This flhe herself
takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: " It
is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you,
yet now after the kissing of your hands, I will end
my letter. Excuse my evil writing, and read it
twice over. Excuse that thing that is firiblit, for
I had na paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the
memorial." Good. ii. 28. These memorandums
frill appear in the middle of the letter; and what

L12 we

we have said seens naturally to account for the man.
ner how they might find their way into a real letter.
It is scarce to be luppoled, however, that any forger
would think of placing memorandums in the mid.
dle of a letter, where, at firlt fight, they make so
absurd and so unnatural an appearance. But if any
shall still carry their refinement so far, as to suppose
that the forgers were so artful as to throw in this cir-
cumftance, in order to preserve the appearance of
genuineness, they must at least allow that the
Queen's enemies, who employed these forgers,
could not be ignorant of the design and meaning of
thele short notes and memorandums; but we find
them mialaking them so far as to imagine that they
were the credit es the bearer, i e. pQints concerning
which the Queen had given him verbal inftrutions.
Good. ii. 152. This they cannot possibly be; for
the Queen herself writes with to much exac2nefs
concerning thedifferent points in the memorandums,
that there was no need of giving any credit or in.
1trufiions to the bearer concerning them. The me-
morandums are indeed the (ontznts of the letter.
'. Mary, mentioning her conversation with the King
about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. fays,
" The morne [i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to
him upon that poin, ;" and then adds, " As to the
reft of Wille Hiegait's, he confeflit it; but it was
the morne [i. e. the morningl after my cumming
or he did it." Good. ii. o. This addition, which
could not have been made till after the converlation
happened, ieerms either to have been inserted by the
Queen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps, Ihe
having written it on the margin, it was taken thence
into the text. If we lilppolt the letter to be a real
one, and written at difierent times, as it plainly
bears, this circumifance appears to be very natural;
but no rcalon could have induced a forger to have
ventured upon such an anachronilfn, for which there

was

was no necessity. An addition perfectly similar to
this made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good.
ii. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the

advocates for her innocence have contended that
thele letters were forged by her enemies, on purpose
to blast her reputation, and tojultify their own re-
bellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the
arguments which were produced, in her own age,
in support of this opinion; the oblervations which
we have already made, contain a full reply to them.
An author, who has inquired into the affairs of
that period with great ind;!lrv, an 1 who has ac-
quirced much knowledge of them, has lately pub-
lilhed (as he affirms) a dem.onitration of the e forgery
of Mary's letters. This demonstration lhe founds
upon evidence both internal and external. With re-
gard to the former heobferves, that the French copy
of the Queen's letters is plainly a tranfation of Bu-
chanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scottish copy; and, by conl:-
quence, the aflertion of the Qucen's enemies, that
fie wrote thenm originally in French, is altogether
groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries.
He accounts for this ifrange succession of tranfla-
ti.)ns, that supposing thatwhen the forgery was pro.
jc'ed, no perlon could be found capable of writing
originally in the French languageletters which would
pass for the Queen's; for that reason they were first
comnpofed in Scottish ; but unluckily the French in-
terpreter, it would seem, did not understand that
language; and therefore Buchanan tranllated them
into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered
into French. Good. i. 79, 80.

IT is scarce necessary to observe that no proof

whatever is produced of any of the suppositions.
The manners of the Scots, in that age, when al-
most every man of rank spent a part of his youth

LI 3 in

in France, and the intercourle between the two na-
tions was great, render it alogetherimnprobablethat
so many colmplicated operations should be necessary
in order to procure a few letters to be written in the
French lancguta.e.

BL'T witho)ut infilling farther on this, we may oh-

serve that all this author's premises may be granted,
and yet his conclulion will not follow, unlels he
likewile prove that the French letters, as we now
have them, are a true copy of thole which were
produtced by Murray and his party in the Scottilh
parlim-nlrt, and at York and Wcftminiter. But
this lie has not attemptel ; and if we attend to the
hiltory of the letters, luch an attempt, it is obvious,
niulit have been unsuccessful. The letters were first
pub li lld at the end of Buchanan's DeteStion. The
firt edition of this treatile was in Latin, in which
language three of the Queen's letters were subjoined
to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 1i7i
Soon afier a Scottifl tranfation of it was published,
and at the end of it were printed, likewile in Scot.
ti!h, the thrce letters which had formerly appeared in
L;atin, and live other letters in Scottish, which were
not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French
translation of the detection, and of seven of the
letters; this bears to have been printed at Edin'
burgh by Thomas Waltem, 1572. The nameof
the place, as well as the printer, is allowed by all
parties to be a manifefl impollure. Our author,
tronm obflrving the day of the month, on which,
the printing is laid to have been finished, has al:
ic:rted that this edition was printed at London; but
no itrefs can be laid upon a date found in a book,
where every other circumstance with regard to the
printing is allowed to be falle. Blackwood, who
(next to Lelly) was the best informed of all Ma-
ry's advocates in that age, affirms that the French
edition of the detection, was published in France
' 1 [ luchalnan] a depuis adjouftl a ccfle decla

matiOl

rnation un petit libelle du pretendu mariage du Duc
de Norfolk, et de la facon de son proces, et la tout
cnvoye aux freres a la Rochelle, letqucls voyants
qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause, l'ont traduit en
Francois, et iceluv fut impritrle a Fdinbourg, c'eft
a dire a la Rochelle, par Thomas Walkem, nom
apofR et fait a plaifir. Martyre de Marie. Jebb. ii.
,75-." iThe author of the Inocence de A[:ric goes
fariher, and names the French translator of the De-
tction. " '.t iceluy premie-rcment compol0f (corn-
m il telmble) par George Buchanan Efc),l)ys, et
depuis traduit en langue Francoise par un Hugonot,
Poitcvin (advocat dt vocation) Canuz, soy difant
(entilhommle, et un de plus remarquez tfeiteuz de
lrance. Jcbb. i. 425, 443." The concurring tei-
timony of two cotemporary authors, whole residence
in France afforded them Ih'ficint means of infor-
mation, must outweigh a flight conjedture. Tlis
French translator does not pretend to publifli the
original French letters as written by the (Qieen her-
ult;, he expressly declares that he translatcd them
trom the Latin. Good. i. 1o . Had our author
iattnrded to all these circumlllnces, he might have
ivclJ hi-mfeilf the labour of so many criticillns to
vpove that the prclent French copy of the letters is
I tr.nnllation from the Latin. 'The French editor
iimicir: acknowledges it, and so far as I know, no
pc;ion ever denied it.

\ E may oblerve that the French translator was
so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary had written thelb
lettcrs, partly in French, partly in Scottish. (-ood. i.
1,. 1 lad this translation been publishcd a:' .ondon
by Cecil, or had it been made by his diirrciio!, io
r'ols an error would not have )been admitted into
It. Ihis error, however, was o'v ir:g to an odl cir-
cumflaince. In the Scottifi traiination of tle De-
ttiuon, two or three lentenrcts of the original ircnch
v'lrc prefixed to each letter, which breakinr olF
\iilh an &c. the Scottill translation of tlhe- v io!Le

L 1 q. followed.

followed. This method ofprintingtranflations was
not uncommon in that age. The French editor ob.
serving this, foolishly concluded that the letttrs
had been written partly in French, partly il
Scottifi.

IF we carefully conGeler those few French fen.

tences of each letter, which still remain, and apply
to them that species of criticism, by which our au.
thor has examined the whole, a clear proof will
arise, that there was a French copy not translated
from the Latin, but which was itlelf the origin;l
from which both the Latin and Scottish have been
translated. This minute criticii'f muit necct ariil
be disagreeable to many readers; but luckily a fw\
sentences only are to be examined, which will ren.
der it extremely short.

IN the firit letter, the French sentence prefixed to

it]ends with these words, y faiJoit bon. It is plain
this expreflion, 'ves ce que peut un corps fans cc:ur, is
by no means a translation of cum plane perinde el,'cij
c;ttqe corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither th
Latin nor Scottifl have retained. Jlu/'qes a I:
dinde is not a translation of toto prandii tem'.pore; the
Scottilh translation, qubile denner-timi, expreffesthe
sense of the French more properly; for anciently
quhile signified unltil as well as during. 7e n'ay pas
tenit grand propos is not justly rendered nequo cont.a-
lekrin fJirmnonem curm quoquam ; the phrafi uled in the
French copy is one peculiar to that language, and
gives a moreprobable accountof her behaviour than
the other. J7geant bien qu'il n ,y faifoit bon, is not
a tranllation of ut quijudicarent id non efe ex rirt,
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with
apprendre. It is evident that both the Latin and
Scotiifn translations have omitted altogether thele
words, et toutefoisje nepuis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends withl prefeint.

3

1"aye veill/ plus tard la haul is plainly no translation
ot diutius illic mnoratafiuls; the lense of the F'rench
is better expressed by the Scottish I have walkit later
ihere-up. Again, Pour excuser vojfre alfCire is very
different from ad excufatndui; n/ojtia negotia. The
five remaining letters never appeared in Latin; nor
is there any proof of their being ever translated into
that language. Four of them, however, arepub-
lifhed in French. This entirely overturns our au-
thor's hypothesis concerning the necessity of a tranf-
lation into Latin.

IN the Scottifl edition of the Dete&aion the whole

/;Viict is printed in French as well as in Scottif,. It
is not poffibleto believe thatthisScottifh copy could
be the original from which the French was tranf-
Lited. Tie French confilts of verses which have
both meafiure and rhyme, and which, in many
places, are far from being inelegant. The Scottif
conifts of an equal number of lines, but without
measure or rhyme. Now no man could ever t:iink
of a thing so absurd and impracicable, as to require
one to translate a certain givetn number of lines in
prole into an equal number of verlis, where bith
nealure and rhyme were to be obi'rvtcl. The
Scottillh, on the contrary, appears mariifci'ly to be
a translation of the French; the phrases, the idioms,
and many of the words are Frenzch, and not Scoc-
rilh. Betides, the Scottish translator has, in ifveral
inltances, miltaken the lienfe of the French, and in
many more expresses the sense imperfectly. -lad
the sonnet been forged, this could not have hap-
pened. The direcors of the fraud would have
undcrftood their own work. I hlall iatisfy mylelf
with one example, in which there is a proof of both
my assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For Ilim I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottifl, but a

French phrae ; the two other lines do not exprels
the sense of the French, and the last is ablulu:e
non cnfe.

TNIE eighth letter was never tranfated into

French. It contains much refined mylicilh about
dvict's, a folly of that age, of ,which Mary was
very fond, as appears fiom fevcral other circum-
itances, particularly from a letter concerning i;;.
peFfas by Drummond of lawthornden. If Ma1r's
adverlaries forged her letters, they were certainly
employed very idly when they produced this.

FROMx theft oblervations it itlems to be evident

that there was a French copy of Mary's letters, :o
which the Latin and Scottifil were only translation.
Nothing nowV remains of this copy but thole icw
flntences which ar- prefixed to the Scottish t-anila.
tion. The French editor laid hold of thcl fein.
tences, and tacked his own tranllation to them,
which, lo far as it is his work, is a servile and a
very wretched translation of Buchanan's Latin;
whereas, in thole introiuc'tory fentcnces, we have
difcovcreld 1rong marks of their being originals,
ant certain proofs that they are not translated from
th. L,ain.

I-r i; lp:!rent, too, fromi comparing the Latin

nni Scttti'th tr.:.ilations with thelie lentences, that
the Scotrih tranllator has more perfectly attained

the

the sense and spirit of the French than the Iatin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early
tr.rillalted into Scottish, Good. ii. 76; it is probable
that liuchanan made his tranllation not from the
F'rench but from this Scottish copy. Were it ne-
cdilr v, leveral critical proofs of this might be pro-
di-td. J: ne that has been already mentioned seems
dctili''e. Diuzius illic inoiralafu bears not the leaRt
rtlcn3',i;l;t ce toj'ay vcillp plus tard la baut; but if,
iliilcad ui I wal/it [i. e. watched] laiter there up,
we' ifipplvle that Buchanan read Iwailit, &c. this
niillak-! inro which he mi bht ft easily have fallen,
,aco)ints icr the error in his tranllation.

l' IsE criticifins, however minute, appear to be

well founilej. But whatever opinion may be form-
ed cutncernini them, tie other arguments with re-
gI.ir to the internal evidence remain in fuill force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Qleen's
letters, which our author has produced, is extreme-
ly I)ecious, but not more iolid than that which we
have ;ale::dy examined, According to Murray's
diarvy, iary lt ou,; .ain Edinburgh to Glasgow
J.;:!:aiy 2 , 1567; fie arrived there on the 23d;
it that place on the 27th; she, together with the
liin2, reached Linlithgow on the 28th, stayed in
tiat town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh
beftre the end of the month. But according to
our author, the Queen did not leave Edinburgh till
Friday January 2.4th; as fie stayed a night at Cal-
lendar, Ihe could not reach Glalgow sooner than
the evening of Saturday the 25th, and fie return-
ed to Linlithgow on Tuesday the 28ch. By confe-
quence, the firit letter which supposes the Queen to
have been at lealt four days in Glasgow, as well as
tlh ti'cond letter, which bears date at Glasgow Sa-
tlinday morning, whereas fle did not arrive there till
the evening, must be forgeries. That the Queen
did not ft out from Edinburgh sooner than the

24th

24th of January, is evident (as he contends) from
the public records, which contain a Precept of con.
firmation of a life-rent by James Boyd to Margaret
Chalmers granted by the Queen on the 74th of Ja-
nuary at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the
Qu1een's dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, ap.
pointing James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son.
That the King and Queen had returned to Linlith.
gow on the 28th, appears from a deed in which
they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace
there, dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good. i,
:18.

T'HIS has been represented to be not only a con.

vinlcing, but a legal proof of the forgery of the
letters iaid to be written by Mary; but how far it
falls short of this, will appear from the following
considerations.

i. IT is evident from a declaration or confession

made by the Bishop of Ross, that before the con.
ferences at York, which were opened in the begin-
ning of October I568, Mary had, by an artificeof
Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of thole
letters which her fuhjeds accused her of having
written to Bothwell. Brown's trial of the Duke oi
Norfolk, 31, 36. It is highly probable that the
Bi(hop of Rots had seen the letters before he wrote
the defence of Queen Mary's honour in the year
1570. They were published to all the world toge-
ther with Buchanan's Detetion, A. D. i57 1. Now
if they had contained an error to gross, and lo ob-
vious, at that time, to discovery, as the fuppofine
the Queen to have pased several days at Glasgow,
while fie was really at Edinburgh; had they con.
tained a letter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning
tho' fie did not arrive there till the evening; is i
poflible that she herself, who knew her own mo
tions, or the able and zealous advocates who ap
peared for her in that age, should not have pub

lilhoc

ifhed and exposed this contradicion, and by so do-
ilg, have blatted, at once, the credit of such an
impolture? In disquisitions which are naturally ab-
ftrufe and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest au-
thor may discover many things, which have efca-
ped the attention, or baffled the sagacity of those
who have formerly confidered the fame subjet.
But when a matter of fact lay so obvious to view,
this circumstance of its being unobserved by the
Queen herself, or by any of her adherents, is al-
most a demonstration that there is some millake or
fallacy in our author's arguments. And lb far are
any either of our hiftcrians, or of Mary's defend-
ers, from calling in question the common account
concerning the time of the Queen's letting out to
Glalgowv and her returning from it, that there is
not the least appearance of any difference among
them with regard to this point. But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which

our author relts the proof of his assertions, con-
cerning the Queen's motions, are not the originals
Iilbfcribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tran-
ilations of copies of those originals. It is not ne-
ceffary, nor would it be very easy to render this in-
telligible to persons unacquainted with the forms of
law in Scotland; but every Scotsman conversant in
business will underltand me, when I fay that the
precept of confirmation of the life-rent to Boyd is
only a Latin copy or note of a precept, which was
fealed with the Privy-feal, on a warrant from the
fignet-office, proceeding on a signature which bore
date at Edinburgh the 24th of January; and that
the deed in favour of James Inglis is the copy of a
letter, fealed with the Privy-feal, proceeding on a
signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with some de-
gree of reafbn, that a proof founded on papers,

which

which are so many removes dilfant from the orisl.
nals, cannot but be very lanle and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were ilTued in

the name both of the King and (Oueen; by law,
the King's subscription was no le;' re'quisite to an)
paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original fignacures be produced in order to ascertain
the particular day when each of them signed, orto
prove that it was signed only by one of them, the
legal proof arising fr ,in these papers would be, that
both the King and Q(een signed them at Edinburgh,
on the .4th of January.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts ifl'ed

by the sovereign, in that age, fte:n to have been in
a great meafilre arbitrary, and affixed at the pl;a-
sure of the writer ; and of confeqlence, these dates
were seldom accurate, are often fiafe, and can never
be relied upon. This abuse became so freque:'t,
and was found to be lb pernicious, that an aót of
parliament, A. I). 1592, declared the affixing a
falle date to a signature to be High Treason.

*5. IHERE still remain, in the public records, a

great number of papers, which prove the necefillt
of this law, as well as the weakness and fallacy of
our author's arguments. And though it be no easy
matter, at the diflance of two centuries, to prove
any particular date to be falle, yet surprising in.
stances of this kind thall be produced. Nothing is
more certain fiom history, than that the King was
at Glalgow 24th January 1567; and yet the record
of signatures from 1565 to i5.; 2, Fol. ,6th, con.
tains the copy of a signature to Archibald Edmon.
sion said to have been fiblicribed by ottr Sovereigns,
i. e. the King and Quleen, at Edinburgh, January
24, 1567; lo that if we were to truit implicitly
the dates in the records of that age, or to hold our
author's argument to be good, it would prove that

nol

not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edin-
burgh on the 2.;tl of January.

Il appears from an original letter of the Bishop

of Rols, that on the 25th of October ! 66, Mary
lay at the point of death; Keith, App. 134; and
yet a (lede is to be found in the public records,
which beIars that it was signed by the Queen that
day, l'rivy-feal, Lib. H5. fol. h9. Ouchterlov *.

B'O I iWE LL seized the Queen as the returned from

Stir!ing, April 24th, 567, and (according to her
own account) carried her to Dunbar with all dili-
oence. And. i. 95. But our author, relying on
lhe dates of tome papers which he found in the re-
cords, Ii;ppofes tha. Bothwell allowed her to stop at
Ed(inburgh, and to tranfat business there. Nothing
can be more improbable than this supposition. We
may therefore rank the date of the deed to IWright
Privy-leal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is men-
rioned( by our author, Vol. i. 124. among the in-
fiances of the falle dates of papers which were if-
sued in the ordinary course of business in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper'
to Sorbes, ibid. it is signed April 14th, not April
24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's his-

tory, it is, that ihe remained at Dunbar from the
time that Bothwell carried her thither, till ihe re-
turned to Edinburgh along with him in the begin.
ning of May. Our author himself allows that she
relided twelve days there, Vol. i. 367. Now
though there are deeds in the records which bear
that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar dur-

* N. B. In the former editions, another instance of the fame
nature with those which go before and follow was mentioned;
but that, as has since been discovered, was founded on a millake
of the person employed to search the records, and is therefore
omitted in this edition. The rcafoning, however, in the Dif-
Itrtation tfands lill in force, notwithltanding this omission.

ing

ing that time, yet there are others which bear that
they were signed at Edinburgh; e. g. there is one
at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy-leal, Lib. 36.
fol. 97. There are others laid to be signed at
Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524.
526. lb, Lib. 32. No. 154. 157. TIherearefome
signed at Dunbar April 28th. Others at Edinburgh
April pcth, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492. Others at
Dunbar May it. Id. ibid. No. 158. These diffc.
rent charters suppose the Queen to have made Ib
many unknown, improbable, and inconfiftentjour.
neys, that they afford the clearest dcneonftration
that the dates in there records ought not to be de.
pended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the

charter said to be signed April 27th, which hap.
pened that year to be a Sunday, which was not,
at that time, a day of business in Scotland, as ap.
pears from the books of federtint, then kept by the
Lords of Sefflon.

FROM this flort review of our author's proof of

the forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is evidert
that his arguments are far from amounting to de.
monftration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of

theft letters is founded on the style and composition,
which are said to be altogether unworthy of the
Q(ueen, and unlike her real produtions. It is
plain, both from the great accuracy of composition
in most of Mary's letters, and even from her soli.
citude to write them in a fair hand, that Ihe valued
herself on those accomplilhments, and was desirous
of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when flie
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of
inaccuracy appear. A remarkable instance of this
may be found in a paper published, Good. ii. 301.
Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
most hurry; and yet under all the difadvantagesot

a trani-

atranflation, they are not destitute either of spirit
or of energy. The manner in which (he expresses
hMr love to Bothwell has been pronounced indecent
and even ihocking. But Mary's temper led her to
warm expreflions of her regard; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce
between the sexes, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a series of
lItters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, co-
pied from the Harleian Iibrary, P. 37. B. 9. fol.
Sa, in which Mary declares her love to that noble-
man in language, which would now be reckoned
extremely indelicate.

T'-1E sonnets and some of Mary's letters to Both-

well were written before the murder of her hus-
band; some of them after that event, and before
her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior
to the death of her husband abound with the fond-
eft expressions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly
discover that their familiarity had been extremely
criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
preflions, which her enemies employed to prove that
ihe was no stranger to the schemes which were
forming against her husband's life. Of this kind
are the following pafTages, " Alace ! I nevir diffa-
vit ony body; bot 1 remit me altogidder to zour
will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and
quhatfaever thing come therof, I fall obey zow.
Advile tou with zourlelf, gif ze can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak
medicine and the bath at Craigmillar." Good. ii. 22,
" See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be fa
meikle praifit and eftemit, as the trew and faithfull
travellis quhilk 1 fuftene for to merit hir place.
For obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I
betrayis thame that may impcfche me. God forgive
me," &c. Ibid. 27. "I have. walkit later thair-

VOL. II. M m up,

up, than I wald have done, gif it had not been to
draw something out of him, quhilk this berer will
fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest commodity that
can be offerit to excuse zour affairis." Ibid. 32.
From the letters posterior to the death of her hus.
band, it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's
seizing Mary by force, and carrying her along with
him, was contrived in concert with herself, and
with her approbation *.

HAVING

* That letters of so much importance as those of Mary's to

Bcthwell should have been entirely loft, appears to many alto.
gether unaccountable. After being produced in England before
Ei izabeth's commissioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good. ii. 235. He seems to have kept
them in his possession during life. After his death, they fell
into the hands of Lennox his successor, who refltored them to
the Earl of IlMorton. Good. ii. 9 . Though it benotnecefa-
rilv connefed with any of the questions which gave occafionto
this dissertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of fomeof
my readers to inform them, that after a very diligent search,
which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to Both-
well can be found in any of the public libraries in Great Bri.
tain. The only certain intellirenceconcerningthem, fincethe
time of their being delivered to Morton, was communicated by
the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXT R ACT of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq; ambassador

from Queen Elizabeth to the King of Scotland, written to Sir
Firancis W\aliingham, secretary of slate, from the original re-
gilier book or Mr, Bowes's letters, from i th of Augult i S2,
to : th 'eptember 1 583, in the poffeflion of Christopher Hun.
:er, MI. D. of Durham.

15S, 8th November, from Edinburgh,

A . RFIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wherein

'were the originals of letters between the Scottish Queen and the
Earl of Bohwell, had been delivered to sundry hands, and
thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it relied,
yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Ptufcardyne's means,
that both the cofler and also the writings a:e come, and now re-
main with the Earl iof Gowrie, who, 1 perceive, will be hardly
intreatcd to make delivery to her MIajety according to her Ma.
ieliy's dclire.

TH 1

HAVING thus stated the proof on both fides;
having examined at so great a length the different

systems

THIS time past I have expended in searching where the cos-

ser and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
Ihould have found great difficulty; now I will essay Gowrie,
and of my success you Ihall be shortly advertised.

12th of November 1 ;z2, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I had both learned, that the cafketand letters men-

tioned in my last, before these were come to the pofleflion of the
Earl of Gowrie, and also found that no mean might prevail to
win the fame out of his hands without his own content and pri-
vity; in which behalf I had employed fit inltruments, that ne-
vrrthelefs profited nothing; therefore I attempted to eflay him-
fclf. letting him know that thefaid casket and letters ihould have
been brought to her Majesty by the offer and good means of
good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majelty
before they came into his hands and custody, and knowing that
lie did bear the like affecion, and was ready to pleasure her
Majelty in all things, and chiefly in this that had been thus far
tendered to her Majetfy, and which thereby (hould be well ac-
cepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited tohis
comfort and contentment; I moved him that they might be a
present to be sent to her Majesty from him, and that I might
caulethe fame to be conveyed to her Majesty adding hereunto
such words and arguments as might both ltir up a hope of libe-
rality, and also bell effed the purpose. At the sirs he was loth
to agree that they were in his poffeflion; but I let him plainly
know that I was certainly informed, that they were delivered to
him by Sanders jardin; whereupon he prefled to know who did
so inform me, enquiring whether the sons of the Earl of Mor-
ton had done it or no. 1 did not otherways in plain terms deny
or anflver thereunto, but that he might think that he had told
me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleated that Ihall
give him to be the author thereof; after he had said [though]
all there letters were in his keeping (which he would neither
grant nor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any person
without the consents and privities, as well of the King, that
had interell therein, as also of the relt of the noblemen enter-
prilers of the ation against the King's mother, and thit would
have them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that
adion. And albeit I replied, that their ation in that part toch-
ing the allignation of the crown to the King by his mother, had
received such cftabliihment, confirmation, and strength, by ads

Mm of

fyftcms with regard to the facts in controversy; it
may be expected that I should now pronounce fen.

tence,

of parliament and other public authority and infiruments, as
neither hiould that cafebefufferedto come indebate orqueflion,
nor such Icrolls and papers ought to be shewed for the firength.
enine thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered to
the hands of her Majelly, to whom they were defined before
they fell in his keeping; yet he would not be removed or satis.
f cd; concluding, after much reasonings, that the t arl of Mor-
ton, nor any other that had the charge and keeping thereof, durst
at any time nake delivery; and because it was the firt time
that I had moved him therein and that he would gladly both
anfRer her Majesty's good expectation in him, and also perform
his duty due to his Sovereign and afoiciates in the action afore-
said; therefore he would seek out the said casket and letters, at
his return to his house, which he thought .should be within a
ihort time; and upon finding of the fameand betteradvice, and
consideration had of the cause, he would give further answer.
This resolution 1 have received as to the thing; and for the pre.
Cent I could not better, leaving him to give her Majesty such
teitimony of his good will towards her, by his frank dealing
herein, as (he may have cause to confirm her highnesses good
opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to
greater goodness towards him. I ihall still labour him both by
myself and also by all other means; but I greatly dilirult the de.
sired success herein.

24th of November t 582, from Edinburgh,

FOR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the

hands of the Earl of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnefily
therein, letting him know the purpose of the Scottish Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels.
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or de.
faced, and that the means which (he will make in this be.
half (hall be so great and effetual, as these writings cannot be
safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that
hath the cutlody thereof, neither (hall he that is once known to
have them be suffered to hold them in his hands. Herewith I
have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that action, and
the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is nov
openly known to have the poffeflion of these writings and I
have lettin him fee what surety it (hall bring to the Laid caufs
and all the parties therein, and to himlelf, that these writings
may be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping
of her Majcily, that will have them ready whcnfoeverany uie

mall

tence. In my opinion, there are only two conclu-
sions, which can bedrawn from the faits which have
been enumerated.

ON E,

(lall be for them, and by her Highnesses countenance defend
them and the parties from such wrongfull objecions as shall be
laid againlt them, offeringat length to him, thatif he be not flliy
fitisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the associates shall not
like of the delivery of them, to her Majeftyin this good manner,
and for the intereRf rehearsed, that I shall readily, upon meeting
and conference with them, procure their assent in this part; (a
matter more easy to offer than to perform) and, laltly, moving
him that (for the secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her
Majis'y'sgood opinion towardshimfelfmay be firmlyfettled and
confirmed by his acceptableforwardnefs herein) he would, with-
out needless scruple, frankly commit these writings to her Ma-
jelly's good cullody for the good uses received. After long de-
hate he resolved, and said, that he would unfeignedly Ihew and
do to her Majelly all the pleasure that he might without offence
to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the associates in the
action, and therefore he would firit make search and view the
said letters, and herein take advice what he might do, and how
far he might satisfy and content her Majefly; promising thereon
togive more resolute answer; and he concluded flatly, that after
he had found and seen the writings, that he might not make de-
livery of them without the privity of the King. Albeit I stood
long with him against his resolution in this point, to acquaint
the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands
of her Majefly, letting him fee that his doings there Lhould ad-
mit great danger to the cause; yet I could not remove him from
it. It may be that he meaneth to put over the matter from him-
felftotheKing,uponfightwhereof I hall travel effectually to nb-
tain the King's consent, that the letters may be committed to
her Majefly's keeping, thinking it more easy to prevail herein
with the King, in the present love and affection that he beareth
to her Highness, than to win any thing at the hands of the as.
fociates in the a&ion, whereof some principal of them now come
and remain at the devotion of the King's mother; in this I (hall
fill call on Gowrie to search out the coffer, according to his pro-
mire; and as I shall find him minded to do therein, so thall I
do my belt and whole endeavour to effect the success to her Mla-
jetly's belt contentment.

zd December 1I58, from Edinburgh.

BECAUsl I saw good opportunity offered to renew the mat-
ter to the Earl of Gowrie for recovery of the lctici. i thne ,>F-

M m 3 f:r

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition

or love, encouraged by the Queen's known aver.
lion to her husband, and presuming on her attach.
ment to himself, struck the blow without having
concerted with her the manner or circumfiances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, instead of
testifying much indignation at the deed, or dilcover.
ing any resentment against Bothwell, who was ac.
cufed of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, conducted his trial in
fich a manner as rendered it impoflible to discover
his guilt, and soon after, in opposition to all the
maxims of decency or of prudence, voluntarily
agreed to a marriage with him, which every confi.
deration hould have induced her todeteft. By this
verdict, Mary is not pronounced guilty of having
contrived the murder of her husband, or even of
having previoully given her consent to his death;
but she is not acquitted of having discovered her
approbation of the deed, by her behaviour towards
him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and

his adherentslaboured to establish, " That as James,

ser in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where.
upon he told me, that the Duke of Lennox had fought earnet-
ly to have had those letters, and that the King did know where
they were, so as they could not be delivered to her Majefly with-
out the King's privity and content, and he pretended to be
Iill X1 iling to pleasure her Majelty in the fame, so far as he
mav with his duty to the King and to the reft of the aflociates
in that anion; but I greatly dillruft to effec this to her Ma-
jelly's pleasure, whcrein, ncverthelcfs, I flall do my uttermoll
endeavours.

'WHET i ER James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death.

A. .

D. 84, , and fiized all his effeils, took care to destroy his

mother's letters, for wvhofe honour hewas at that time extremely
zealous; whether they have perished by some unknown accident;
or whether they may not still remain unobserved among the ar-
chives of ibme of our great families, it is impossible to deter-
niinc.

fum-

fmtyme Erie of Bothwile, was the chiefe executor
of the horribill and unworthy murder, perpetrat in
the person of umquhile King Henry of gude me-
mory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the
Queenis lauchfull husband; fa was Ihe of the fore-
knowledge, counfall, devile, perfwadar and com-
mandar of the said murder to be done." Good. ii.
207.

WHICH of these conclusions is most agreeable to
the evidence, that has been produced, 1 leave my
readers to determine.

Mm4 INDEX.

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages.

A

D A M S 0 N, archbilhop of St. Andrews, is excommu-
nicated by the fynod of Fife, ii. 139. He excommuni.

1, L cated his opponents, ib. is reflored by the general assem-

bly upon conditions, 140. his mean submission to the general
afl:mbly -- 204
Allban,, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles against his

brother K. James 111. i. 57. is made prisoner, but escapes to
France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of England, 58.
procures afllitance to invade Scotland on mean conditions, ib.
returns to Scotland, and is restored to favour, 59. cabals again,
but is forced to fly to France ibid. 60
-- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James

V. i. 37. 63. after several unsuccessful firuggles with the no-
b;lity, he is forced to retire to France 63

Alenson, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuses the court of France,

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him ii. 69

.AIIn, cardinal, publiihed a book proving the lawfulness of kil-

ling excommunicated Princes -- ii. z2

Alva, Duke of, his intrigues in favour of Q. Mary, ii. 27. 31.

43. is recalled from his government of the Netherlands 51

Amba.diacrr, their office - - i. 87
/Andrews St. the archbilhop of, remarkably cured of a dangerous

diflemper, i. 135, 136. the motives of his opposition to the Q.
Regent, 158. his great influence on the bench of Bishops and
weight in Parliament, 163. governed the church with great
moderation, 165. persecutes the reformers, ibid. 166. per-
forms great service to the Congregation against the French, 22 .
is imprisoned for celebrating Mars, 301. ruins Q Mary's as-
fairs by his imprudent condut, 456, 457. is taken prisoner in
Dumbarton Cafle, and hanged ii. 17
----- the castle of, demoliihed by the French i. 116

- - the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q. Regent
and the Reformers, i. 178. is provoked to leave the court,
18o, is one of the chief promotcra of the reformation, 196.

some

rome account, and a characer of him, ibid. 197. artful en.
deavours Iifed to undermine him, ibid. prefjmption of his in.
nocence of the designs charged on him, ibid. is sent by the
convention to invite the Queen to Scotland, 252. is received
by her with confidence and affelion, 253. restrains the turbulent
spirit of the people against popery, 266, 267. is sent t,, relirain
the licentious pra6cices of the borderers, 272. executes his com-
million with vigour and prudence. 273. a conspiracy againlt
him diicovered, 28z. is created Earl of Mar, 285. beomce
obnoxious to the Earl of Huntley, ib. See Mar and Murray.
A.gus, Earl of, was the only man who aferted the independency

of his countly, i. 23, 24. aflumes the Regency duting the
mininoity ot K. James \V. 37. 64. is unable to gain his assec-
tions, 64. is attin:cJ and flies into England - 6;
--.- Obtains leave to return into Scotland, ii. 92. furrendrrs

himself to K. James VI. 103. he with several others seize the
caille of Stirling to oppose Arran, lo6. they are forced to fly
into England at the approach of the King with an army, 107.
he is attainted and his estate forfeited, a i 5. is concerned in a
plot in favour of Spain, 209. is seized and committed prisoner
to the cattle of Edinburgh, 210. escapes and flies to the moun-
tains, 211. offers to submit to a trial, 215. sentence is pro-
nounced against him, 216. he refuses to submit 217
Adjon, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q. Eli.

zabeth - - ii. 25
Anne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI. ii. zoc,

zo0. her arrival in Scotland and coronation, 203. heads a par-
ty that opposes the chancellor - - 212, 13
ArcLbibhops, Bijhops, Deans and Chapters revived in Scotland dur-

ing the King's minority, ii. 38, 39. this gives great offence to
many of the clergy, 39, 40. an act of aflembly against thele
offices, 86, 87. Bishops made fubjice to prefbyteries and affeni-
blies, 139. a great Itroke given to their authority, 185, 186.
None of them present at the Queen's coronation 203
Ary11, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to the

Dauphin of France, i. 163, 164. uses his interest with the re-
formers to make a treaty with the Queen Regent, 178. leaves
her court in resentment of her treachery, 180. refuses to ac-
cede to a treaty with Murray the Regent, 496. is Soon after
forced to submit, 497. ats as lieutenant to the Queen after
the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is prevailed on to join the King's
party, 21. quarrels with Athole, 5. confederates with him
againit Morton, the Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid, they
remonstrate againfi him to the King, 58. they raise forces
against him, 64. negociate a treaty with him by the media-
tion of Q. Elizabeth, 65. is promoted to the office of chan-
cellor, 6-. The King's authority delegated to him and Lord
Sorbes ogainit the popilh Lords, 220. his forces are defeated
in an engagement with them -[blid 321
Aitpio«rasy, prcdominnant in Scotland i. a(

4 Armzado,

drmado, Spanihf, preparations for it, ii. 188, 189. it is defeated

194.

,rra';, Earl, is appointed Regent during the minoriry of Q. Mary,

i. 97. his character, 98. consents to the schemes of England
which difguils the public, loo. becomes suspicious of the Earl
of Lennox, 1oz. is forced to renounce the friendship with Eng-
land and declare for France, I o . and to persecute the reformers,
lo4. publickly abjures the doarines of the reformers, 1o;. is
contemned by one half and little trufled by the other part of the
nation, io6. heads the partisans of France and defenders of
popery, 107. attempts in vain to seize the murderers of cardinal
Beatoun, 113. is forced to make a truce with the conspirators,
114. his elder son is conditionally excluded all right of fiuc-
ceflion, 17. his mean conceflion to the court of France, 124,
z15. gets the title of Chatelherault, 125. is undermined by
the Q. Dowager, 132, 133. proposals and arguments for his
resignation, 134. he consents to it, 135. retrads by the influence
of the archbilhop of St. Andrews, 36. is at last prevailed on
and gets advantageous terms, 157. See Chatelherault.

eldest son of the Duke of Chatelherault, joins in an afro-

ciation with the reformers, i. 194. narrowly escapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 195. is full of resentment againit
the French on that account, ibid. 196. the Congregation so-
licit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, 244. his great imprudence
with regard to Q. Mary, 274. discovers a conspiracy against
the Queen's favourites, 282. loses his reason, ii. 67, 68. is
impriloned by Morton 68

- late Capt. Stewart, gets that title and estate, ii. So. is

appointed to conduat Morton, from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ibid. tortures several of his servants cruelly, 81. his infamous
marriage with the Counters of March, 83, 84. his variance i ith
Lennox, 84. is frustratcd in an attempt to rescue the King at
Ruthven, 91. is confined prisoner to the castle of Stirling, 92.
regains his liberty and the King's regard, loo. resumes his
power and arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthven conspirators de-
clared guilty of high treason, 103. is detelted as author of a per-
fecution against the clergy, lo9. is gained over to Q Elizabeth's
interefl, 114. gets several forfeited estates, 116. his corrup-
tion and insolence, 122. is made chancellor and has unlimited
power, ibid. 123. his venality is limited by his wife, 123.
his monstrous tyranny and oppression, ib. 124. his power un-
dermined by Wotton the Englilh envoy, 134, 135. is confined
in the caltle of St. Andrew's, but Coon recovers favour, 135, 136.
his interest finks much, 138. is stripped of his honours and
spoils, and reduced to his original station - ibid.
Aitirles, Lord of, their origin and business, i. 8i. by whom cho-

fen, 82, 83. the subsequent variations and political use made of
this institution - 83, 84

drundel, Earl of, is appointed a commillioner to the conference
at Wefminfter - i. 486

AA^bJ

A.iJy, ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to Scotland, ii. 19p. his

great promises to King James, ibid. his promises are loon for.
got, 195. he is alhamed and withdraws privately from Scot.
land - - - ibid.
/.raj, nation, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted for

i. 363-365. several inKlances of it in France, 36;, 366.
flop put to it there and in Scotland, 366. several great men
approve of it, 367. prevailed greatly afterwards ii. 20j
.jfmbiy of the church of Scotland, the firfi but feeble and irre.

gular, i. 251. another aflimbly, their demands from the con.
vention, 274, 2Z7. two other assemblies in vain foicitan aug.
mentztion of their revenues, 293, 294. they address Q. Mary
in highn {trains of complaints, 342. an allembly proceeds at Glai.
gow notwithllanding the King's interdiction, ii. 86, 87. two
afTemblies yicld many of the privileges of the church to the
King, 239, 240. declare it lawful for minillers to fit in Parlia.
ment, 243, 244. See Clergy.
A1Jciation, formed in defence of Q Elizabeth against Q. Mary

ii. l l
Athoie, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of Ar-

gyll, ii. 55. joins with him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib,
dies loon after an entertainment at Morton's, 66. fufpicionsof
his being poisoned - ibid.
.Abigne, Lord de. second son of the Lord Lennox, arrives in

Scotland from France, ii. 70. becomes soon a great favourite
of K. James, ibid. high titles and posts beltowed on him, ib.
71. notes against hirr, Appendix, 461. See Lennox.
dufirian family, their origin and power - i. 87, 8

B

BAd ington, Anthony, tome account of him, ii. 1 43. the rife of
D his conspiracy against Q Elizabeth, 14z, 143. the names

and scheme of operations of his aflbciates, ibid. 144. they are
betrayed, seized, and executed - 145, 14
Bacom, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commifloners to the

confederates at Wefiminfier i. 486
Baliol, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. to. is pre-

ferred by Ed 1. It. soon forced by him to resign ibid.
Ballard, a trafficking pried, solicits an invasion of England from

Spain, ii. 143.joins in a conspiracy to murder QO Elizabeth, ib.
is discovered and taken into custody, 146. and executed ibid,
Barore, their jurifdiftion very extensive, i. z . the difference be.

tween the greater and lcfler, whence, 78. three hundred of them
remonfirate against the conduct of the Q. Dowager, 152. the
lesser admitted by their representatives in Parliament, ii. IS7
petition of the lesser Barons to Parliament, Append. 3:i
See Nobles.
Badqfiton Doron, a book publishcd by King James VL fnrengtlhel

his interell in Erg!and -- i. 24

Btatow'

ra:aun, cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify the no-
bles, i. 68, 69. his pretensions to the Regency on the death of
that Prince, 96. forges a testament of the late King, ib. his
views how disappointed, ib. his charaaer, 97. opposes the Earl
of Arran, Regent, ioo, oi. excites most of the nation againll
the English, 102. seizes the young Queen and her mother, ib.
cajols the Earl of Lennox, ib. obliges the Regent to renounce
England and declare for France, 103. and to persecute the
rtformcrs, 104. engrosses the chief direcion of affairs, 1o6.
his double dealing with the Earl of Lennox resented, ib. 107.
i. murdered, 112. his death fatal to the Catholics, 113. a
vain attempt to revenge it, ib. 14. scandalous reports cQ-
cerning him 47
Bdfcrd, Earl of, comes as ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to wit-

ness the baptism of James VI. i. 387. his inftruaions, 388,
iP9. his letters to Sir W. Cecil, Appendix 349. 354. 360.

Btlendon, Sir Lewis, justice clerk, K. James's resident at Lon-

don, ii. 133. joins in promoting Q, Elizabeth's interefl in Scot-
land, ibid. is sent with her envoy into that country ibid.

Slack, Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews, his ridiculous and

seditious expressions in the pulpit, ii. 229, 230. being sup-
ported by the clergy, he declines the civil jurisdiction, 230. is
condemned by the privy council, 231. is sentenced by the
King to reside beyond Spey - - 23
Slarkader, captain, and three others, executed for the murder of

D,,rnly i. 435

BoethiUs, Hetor, his hiltory of Scotland, rome account of i.
Bolton Cafle, Q. Mary confined a prisoner there i. 47
£onot, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney i. 10o
Borderers, an attempt to restrain their licentious practices, i. 272,

273. Q Mary visits them, 377. a scuffle there, in which the
Englih warden, &c. were made prisoners - ii. 53
Borth.'icr, Lord, affifs the Q Regent in defending Leith, i. 213
Bothwell, Earl of, intercepts a fair of money from England to the

Congregation, i. 212. favours the Queen Regent, but resides at
his own house, 21 3. his resentment against the prior of St. An-
dreivs, 285. is by him when Earl of Murray and Regent fum-
moned to a public trial, 326. prevents it by leaving the king-
dom, 327. a sentence of outlawry against him prevented by
the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return, 336. escapes with her
after the murder of Rizio, 361. rome account of his former be-
haviour, 369, 370. commences a favourite of the Queen, 370.
flhe reconciles him to several Lords, with whom he was at va-
riance, ibid. 371. he increases in favour with her, 373. cir-
cumltances concurring in this, 374. he is wounded in attempt-
ing to seize one of the borderers, 377. the Queen's extraordi-
nary regard for him on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton and his associates, 391. propo-
sis the refloration of the popish ecclesiastical jurifdittion, 393.
hi: views in this, ibid. .94. is f;fpeted the author of Darnly's

;nwrder,

murder, 401. is charged with it by Lennox, 403. but fill fa.
voured by the Qeen, 404. appointed governor of Edinburgh
Castle, ibid. his trial is hurried on, 405. remarkable par.
tia;ity in his favour, 406. Lennox accuses him openly, 407.
comes to his trial with a great retinue, 408, 409. is acquitttd
by a jury, 409. the trial universally censured, ibid. 410,
challenges any that would accuse, him, 410. several aas of
Parliament patsed in his favour, ibid. 41 1. he procures an atin
favour of the reformation, ibid. 412. prevails on several of the
nobles to recommend him as a hulband to the Queen, 413, 414,
415. seizes the Qeen on a journey from Stirling, and carries
her to Dunbar, 417, 41 8. his view in this, 418. obtains a par.
don under the great sea', ib. 419. procures a divorce from his
wife, 419. carries the Queen to the cafileof Edinburgh, ibid.
is created Duke of Orkney, 420. and married to the Queen,
ibid. is not allowed the title of King, 421. he watches the
Queen very clctly, ibid. 422. endeavours to get the Prince
into his cultody, 42Z, 423. is alarmed with an association of
the nobles againfi the Q.een and him, 424, 425. carries the
Queen to the catile of Boithwick, 426. raises forces againit
the confederate Lords, ibid. he marches against them, 427,
proposes a single combat, 428. this how prevented, 429. takes
his lalt farewell of the Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid. fends for
a caiket of letters from Q_ Mary to him, 435. they are inter.
cepted by the Earl of Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 4+7,
448. refictions on his condu&t, 443. copy of his divorce fronr
Lady lean Gordon, Appendix 93
B.tbhwell, late Francis Stewart, created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 196.

is imprisoned for consulting witches, 205, 206. efcacs and
attempts to break into the King's presence, 206. retires to the
north, ibid. He and his adherents are attainted, 209. fails in
an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under protecion of
Q. Elizabeth, who solicits for him, 211 . seizes the King's per.
ion, 21 . forces him to dismiss the chancellor, and his other fa.
yourites, ibid. and to grant him a remission, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, 214. is encouraged by the
Englith ambassador, 217. makes another attempt to come at
the King, 218. is repulsed and obliged to fly to the north of
England, ibid. is abandoned by Q_ Elizabeth, and forced to
fly into Spain and Italy, 223. remains in indigent obfctrity,
and is never after reconciled to the King -ibid.

Adam, bishop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of rar-

riage of Q Mary to the Earl of Bothwell - i. 420

Bo,'htelhaugh. See Hamillon.
boulogne, wreited by the French out of the hands of the Englilh,

i. 24. they content to rcltore it and its dependencies to the
French .26
Bowesr, Envoy from Q. Elizabeth, accuses Lennox of disturbing

the peace, ii. 7 '. is refuscd an audience, ibid. is sent to encou-

rage

rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 92. to inquire about King
James's correspondence with the Pope - 246, 247
oayd,, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James III.
frufirated - i. 36

is prevailed on to join the King's party against Q Mary, ii.
1. joins the Ruthven conspirators 89

Brienfn, Count de, comes an ambassador from France to witness

the baptism of K. James VI. i. 387
Bruce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. 1o. his grand-

o!n asserts his right and vindicates the honour of his country,
i2. he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles 46

- a priest, employed by 'the King of Spain to seduce the

Scotch nobles - ii. 96
- Mr. Robert, a presbyterian minister, performs the ceremony
of the coronation of K. James's Queen - ii. 203

Edward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits himself with address and
reputation as ambassador at the court of England, ii. 244. 245

Mr. Robert, a minister, his resolution in refusing to publish

the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 269. is deprived
and banished on that account ibid.
Buchanan, George, his history of Scotland, rome account of, i. 5.

iemarks on his dialogue De jure Regis, 183. alone accuses Q.
Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio, 356. approved
of affaffiation, 367. his partiality in overlooking an aA of Par-
liament in favour of the reformation, 412. attends the Regent
into England when called on to accuse Q. Mary, 475. was one
of the preceptors of K. James VI. ii. 56. commended for his
great genius -- 302

Brkleigh. See Cecil.
Burrozighs, when firfl reprefcnted in Parliament ii. 210

C
CAIS, John, a declaration of his in name of Q Elizabeth to

the Lords of Grange at Lethington, Appendix 411

Caithnefi, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Bothwell for the

murder of Darnly -- 409

Calvin, the patron and restorer of prelbyterian church govern-

ment - - i. 249
Camden, some mistakes of his - i. 388, 389. 415
Canongate, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there ii. 19
Cardan, some account of him, i. 135, 136. his remarkable cure

of the bishop of St. Andrews ibid.
Curey, Sir George, sent ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to en-

courage the conspirators at Ruthven - ii. 92
- Robert, sent by Q Elizabeth to sooth K. James after the
death of his mother, ii. iSo. is not permitted to enter Scot-
land, ibid. was the firfi that brought K. James intelligence of
the death of Q. Elizabeth 290
Crei-t cf letters from Q. Mary to Bothwell, seized by the Earl of

M.rton,

Morton, i. 435. her enemies avail themfclves much of them,

ibid. 43

Cailsh, Earl of, joins the King's party - -

, z
Cafelnau, the French ambassador, is employed to procure the con.

sent of his court to her marriage with Darnly, i. 318, 3 9l. b,
endeavours to make up the differentes between the Qeen :,nj
him, 373. his interceflian in behalf of Q.Mary ii. l:j
Catherine of Medicis, aflumes the government after the death os

Francis 1I. her son, i. 246. her harsh treatment of Q.Mai,
ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 304, 3c,.
bends her whole endeavours to deltroy the Protefrants, ii. ;,
her artful conduft with that view ibid. 2
Cecil, his great capacity as a mminier, i. z3z z;6. is emplo;ij

to negociate a peace with France, ibid. over-reaches the Ftence
ambailador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 256. is appointed a
commiflioner to the conference at W elimintler, 486. is sent by
Q. Elizabe:h with proposals to Qt Mary, ii. 1o. has an inte..
view with her, which excites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, 50, i;
treated harshly by Q Elizabeth fur coafenting to Q. Mary's
death -- 17, ti
- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party againit EITet,

ii. 273. his charader, ibid. 274. his great assiduity, ib.,
enters into a private correspondence with K. James, 2z0. a
letter from him to his majety!, Appendix -!

Cdil'ary of the popikh clergy, a chief engine of their policy, i, 1.
Carle V. Emperor, his great power, i. 87. and unlimited;

bition, 8S. 89. is checked by Francis I. -

-- K. of France makes a league with Q. Elizabeth, ii. 31,;:
Chbstcierau!t. Duke of, that title conferred on the Earl of A'!r,

Regent of Scotland, i. z15. his right of fuccelTion to the cro;
of Scotland maintained, 1 8. enters a protellati'n to fare b,:
right, t16. joins the reformers, in endeavouring to expe', ;:
French army, 191. joins in afrociation with them, 194.

g

looked on as the head of the congregation, 19q;, t,6. His pc
fillanimity, 210. becomes obnoxious to Q. Mary, 274. h!
jea'oufy of the prior of St. Andrewvs, z28. deprived of :
Frerch pension, 304. is alarmed at the Earl of Lennox's retin
to Scotland, 313. an accommodation brought about by t::
Queen's influence, ibid. adheres to Murray in oppoling ::t
Queen's marriage, 338. is pardoned on his humble applicati.,
but forced to retide in France, 341. his partisans grumblei
Murray's being advanced to the legency, 4;1, 452. reLerrI
from France and heads the Queen's adherents, 495. is made be
lieutenant-general, ibid. His resolution wavering, the Rege::
commits him prilbner to the cafle of Edinburgh, 495, 4'.'
is let at liberty by Kirkaldy, and joins the Queen's party, ii
is proclaimed traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 9. is recta
ciled to Morton the Regent, 46, articles of a treaty bctste:
them, ibid. His death -

~~~~~~~~~~~~~<..

Cl, rch of ccotiand. revolutions in it after the union of the crown 9

ii. 2zq, 30Q. See AlJfmbly, Clegy.

Chur, h Lands annexed to the crown by Parliament ii. 1s
Clans, the inflitutidin and nature of i. 2-, 28
CDer)., popish, their great riches and power, i. 67. 141. were made

ule of by K. James V. to lupprefs the nobles, 68, 69. made a
considerable body in Parliament, 142. their great influence over
the laity, 143. they engrossed learning, ib. and held many of
the chief employments, ibid. 1.14. their power increased by
celibacy, ibid. they seized the eflates of the inteltate, 15. and
tied all matrimonial and teltamentary causes, ibid. become
obnoxious to the laity, 146. their great corruptor, when-e,
ibid. there of Scotland particularly diflulute, I47. their weakz
defence of their tenets, 148. try in vain to impoie faife mira-
cls, ib. 119. their impolitic condut to the reformers 167
,-- reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of the church,

i. 21, 25 z. 254. procure a debolition of all relicks of popery,
;:4. a new regulation concerning their revenues, 275-22e.
they are no gainers by it, 280. their flipends, what in tliof
day;, ibid. are offended at the moderation of their leaders, 302.
cecafion a tumult among the people, ibid. 303. more com-
plaints of their poverty, 314. 391. are jealous of Q. Mary, ib.
392. the small allowances appointed to iupport them all, 592.
tne r application for payment of their Itipends of lit'le cfi:'l,
4 r. fresh complaints of the deficiency of the fLnds for tihell
maintenance, 509. are put off with fair words and promies,
ibid. 51o. archbishops, &c. introduced among them by Mor-
ton, ii. 39. their grievances under his adminiliration, 52, 53.
they approve of the Ruthven conspirators, 93. by iavouriin
them they provoke the King, 104. severe laws made agninit
them, o18, iog. they of Edinburgh fly into England, lo. :i?
do several others that were most eminent, ibid. more vigorous
measures againlt them, 116. they obtain no redress on the re-
floration of the exiled Lords, 138. represent their grievances
to Parliamcnt, 183. a maintenance provided for them by Par-
liament, S1, 186. they prevail to get Presbyterian govern-
ment elablilhedby law, 207. their zeal againi' the Popifli Lords,
214, 215. 225. their rash proceedings, 225. 2z7. they erect
a standing Council of the Church, 228. vindicate one of their
number who declined the civiljurifdition, 230, 231. their
flanding Council ordered to leave Edinburgh, 231. this occa-
lions a violent tumult there, 232, 233, 234. they ule their ut-
most efforts to spirit the people, 236. are deserted and fly to
England, ibid. 237. their power greatly reduced, ibid. are
prevailed on to give up many of their privileges, 239. are re-
Itored to a feat in parliament, 241. this violently opposed by
many of them, 243. but carried in their general Aflembly, ib.
244. those entitled to this privilege are laid under many regu-
lations and reRlridions, 3,o. they are brought under great sub-

VOL. If. N n jeCion,

jetion, 23 I. the revolutions among them since the Union of
the Crowns - - - 299, 300
Clinton, Lord, appointed a commissioner at the conference at

Weltminllcr - - - i. 486
Cockbio-n,of Ormilon, receives afupply of money from the Englif

to the congregation, i. 212. is intercepted and robbed of it, ib.

Coin in Scotland, Ibme account of, - i. 206. ii. :5
Comwniearies appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Courr, i. 300. they are deprived of all authority
CofS.onz of faith by the Reformers, consented to by Parliarren:

i, 240
Congregation, the Proteflants diflinguifhed by that name, i. x14,

their leaders enter into an aflbciation, 179. are involved in dif.
ficulties, 2c9. apply to Q Elizabeth for aflillance, 210 mo-
nev sent them by her, intercepted, 212. make a rash and defpe.
rate attempt on Leibh, and are repulsed, ib. 213. are no left un.
fortunate in a feconJ fkirmilh, 213. are quite dispirited and re-
treat to S:itling, ibid. are joined by the.body of the nobles,
2 16. their army dwindles away, ibid. are animated by Knx,
ibid. they apply again to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. their parties ha.
rafs the French, 221. are aflilled by a fleet from England, 222,
conclude a treaty at Berwick, with the D. of Norfolk, 2z;,
224. the design and fubltance of this treaty, 224. negociite :
peace with France, z32. articles of the treaty, 233. they reap
advantages from it, 234., 335. See Reformation.
CE^'vnant, nationa;, framed in defence of the King and Govern-

ment, ii. 192 the nature and rcafonablenefs of it, ibid. 193.
the progress of it since - - 3

Corrielj of S:otlnnd, what - - i. 1SO
g,.d::, a miniiiter, boldly te2tifies againIt Q. Mary's marriage with

bothuxcli ----"-- 2 . 420
'CraVf.rC/, Capr. of Jordan Hill, surprises Dumbarton Callle,

ii. 1 i, 1 i. the difficulties of that enterprise - 1
_- lFarl of, one of the heads of the Spaniif faction, ii. 19i.
196. ofers his fcrvice to the K. of Spain, 196. joins in re.
bllion againtl the King, 199. is forced to submit to him, ib.
and imprioned a fiort ime - - ibid
Crichton, Regent during the minority of K. James II. his barba.

rous Folicv - - - , 3, 3
_- a jcfuit, a plot againlt Q. Elizabcth discovered by his
n eals - -. 117
C, im.:,tls, a remarkable inflance of the difficulty of bringing them

to iultice - - i. 2, :2
(ro: d du, the French ambassador, refused to countenance Q. la-

rv's a:irria c with Bothwell, i. 42z. attempts in vain a recon-
ciliation between the Queen and the confederate Lords, 4;7,
4.:8. mediates a truce between the King's and Queen's party
in Scotland - - - .
Cr ;n mwarimoniral of scotland granted by Parliament to.the DaT-

* ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~p~ldn

phin of France, i. 16 . deputies appointed to carry it, bat are
prevented - 163, i64
Cniilgha'am, Robert, appears at the trial of Eothwell in name of

the Earl of Lennox, i. 408. demands a delay, which is refutled

ibid.

Curk, one of Q. Mary's secretaries, is fcized and carried prisoner
to London, ii. 149. is produced an evidence againli her 158

D

Arnly, Henry, Lord, proposed as a hulband to Q.Mary, i.

D 309. his right of fucceflion confidered, ibid. 310. is per-

mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 316. arrives there, and
quickly gains the Queen's heart, 317. his character, 319. di!-
gulls several of the nobles, particularly Murray, ib. 320. cul-
sivates a familiarity with David Rizio, 320. is despised on tha:
account, 321. grows intolerably insolent and haughty, 329.
Ichemcs to assassinate Murray, 331. a plot to seize and fend.
him to England prevented by the Queen, ibid. evidences of
thi, , 33, 333. his marriage with the Queen c:lebrated, 335.
is honoured with the title of King of Scotland, ibid. is rn-
placable with refpec to the exiled nobles, 346. loses the Queen's
afi:'Cion by his untoward behaviour, 352. demands the Crown
matrimonial, 353. becomes suspicious ofRizin's ill offices with
the Q(een, ib. his resolution to be avenged of him encouraged
by the nobles, 355. articles agreed on between them for thnE
purpose, 357. heads the conspirators who perpetrate the mur-
der, 358. confines the Queen after it is committed, 359. pro-
hibits the meeting of the Parliament, ib. makes his escape
with the Queen, 360, 361. her hatred to him incrcacs, 368.
is neglected by her and treated with little refpec by the nobler,
37z. resolves to leave Scotland, 374. his wayward and ca-
pricious behaviour, 375. he writes the renaons of his conduct
to the Queen, ib. his firange behaviour at the bapti:in of the
Prince, 388. a falfc reason alleged for this confuted, ibid.
389. retires to his father at Glasgow, 391. falls f;ck there,
394. conjecures concerning his distemper, ib. is neglec&ed by
the Queen, 395. the afterwards visits and exprefics affection for
him, 396. he is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 399.
is lodged in a separate house, ibid. he is murdered thc;e, ibi'.
4co. his character, 4oo. a proclamation iflued for difco\cring
the murderers, 401. a remiis inquiry made into it, 402-4,i\,.
Capt. Blackadder and three others executed on that account,
451. the confellion of Morton the Regent at his death con-
cerning the murder, ii. 82. paper of objiecions of the Court
of England againfl his marriage with Q( Mary, App. a dillei-
tation concerning his murder, at the end of vol. ii.

David i. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the church i. 141
-- 1. troubles during his minority - i. 31
1avif/n, font into Scotland by Q Elizabeth, as a spy on the Frenclh

N n z Armal;

.Anbiffador, ii. 96. is Cent to gain Aran's interelt to Q. Ei-
7abeth, I 14. this he soon accomplithes, ibid. brings the war-
rant for Q. Mary's death at Q Elizabeth's desire, 1s-8, 169,
is charged by her with disobeying her orders, 179. is impriicn
ed', trird, and tined, and lores all favour, ibid. objections aga :?
him in the cause of the late Scottish Queen App. 4;
J'e-', \lonfielur, i, sent w ith a supply of forces to aflfl the French

.di.ilt the Englilh in Sco:land, i. 123, tz4. his success there

1
DL)jhi;iP:, in the Church, the firi book of, corpofed, i. 2,

r hy cbje'led again': in a convention of the State., ibid. ar.
other at:empt in favour of Church dilcipline frufirated ii. S

Dczu.'ai, the power and property of that family, i. 34. they

alpire to independency, 53. Will. Earl of, murdered by K.
.]:mes 11. ibid. his son eudeavours to resent it, 54. is forcee
;o fiv in:o England - - ibid,

; 'iliam, Q i Mary committed a prisoner to his caRle cf

i.cci-ieven - - 4--

- eorge, brother to the above, afilis the Queen in mak.
in he.e efcare - 452, 453
---- Arh!tial', one of Darnl)'s murderers, ii. 141. under-
-ce; a ::..c;< ;iil tor that crime and is acquitted, 142. is sent
An: ':i!.;-o! to Enogland, ibid. letter from him to the Q. of
sco:, .-rendix, 4;2. to the King - 43
D. ;r v. ;: \ :n. c'.: r Scotland with an army to fupporttheQueen's

F3;':Yv ii. 6. t.icv join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
JIe ;:icurj- a trece between the King and Queen's parties, 3:.
c.'n'cs v i:h rorces to ai:tt Morton in besieging the castle of
l: 'iburh, _-. . hici is forced to surrender - 4?

-- Sr l)ir^, is a-poirted one of Q. Mary's keepers ii. it:
D.:-.;, Lo.-d o'e-r:, recommended by Q.Elizabethasahuflbnd

to Q Mar, i. 30 . v.hy a favourite of Q. Elizabeth's, ib. is
niii''l p;oinotei b;. her, ibid. 306. his situation extreme.v
delicate, a-. becomnes fufpicioub of Cecil - 3:S
l).::['ar:cn Cai:le, fI;prifed and taken in the King's name by t:e

Regtet .- _ ii. 15. 17
D:ry, a miniiter of Edinburgh, baniied from his charge by K,

Janaes so. hls trte invectives againll the courtiers, ii. 87. at.
ter being re'iiored he is driven f;om it a second time for a;?
pro;ing the ilaid of Ruthven - 1:3

E
E D.ib;ri., is taken and burnt by the English, i. ic8, c;,

: a :re.5c tray there between the French and Scots, 128, I:;.

is seized Iy the lKe!ormers, 185. its inhabitants are teir.b..
=l.ir':,cj by the :i- ech, 2i2. a treaty there with the l:rcn:.
. i En;lniih, , 2, 233. a loan demanded of it by Q( Man,
:;.;:. v.'i;h ihi gra.ted for the luieriority of Leith, ibid. ::
L.c'.t, o1 ia,,i;e on 'y Q Ll.zab:h, 3S9, 350. iS pcl. :

by the Queen's party, ii, 4. and fortified by them, 18. the
City and Castle hold out aganl t the King's force-, 30. is re-
duced to great straits by famine, 31. is relieved by a truce, 32.
the citizens take up arms to promote the King's marriage, zco.
they rife again and insult the King and his ministers on the
murder of the Earl of Murray. zo6, 237. affif the King
againlt Huntley, z2 . a violent tumult there on account of the
Clergy, 232-235. they are severely punished for it by the
King, 236-238. their miniiters return to their charges, 240,
-:I. divided into parilhes, and number cf Ministers increased,
241. they decline publishing the account of Gowrie's confpi-
racy, 268. all, except one who-is banished, are perfuaied by
the King to do it - - ibid. 269

E.Acard I. of England, deRroved thie public archives of Scotland,

i. 4. is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, I . his art to
acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid. his wars with the
Scots under Robert Brace 12, 13. 46

Eghnca.v, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the King's party, ii. z2
£lizabeth, her peaceable accession to the Crown of England, i.

64. supports the congFegation in Scotland. 2 Io, 2

1 !. is spa ng

in her supplies, 211. resolves to support them on a second ap-
plication, 216. her good conduct in matters of importance,
217. motives that determined her to afiti them, ib. 219, zzo.
her deliberate and resolute conduEt, 222, 223. fends a lirong
fleet to their assistance, 223. concludes a traaty with them, ii'.
z24. her right to the Crown of England aflerted by Francis and
Mary, in France, 233. obtains advantageous terms for the Scots,
234. is solicited by the Parliament of Scotland to marry the
Earl of Arran, z44. this Ihe declines, 24;. the feeds of her dif-
content with QLMary, 255, z26. her jealousy of the fuccelfion,
2;7. 26. her excessive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beauty,
260, 261. her dissimulation to her, 261. refutes her a fate-ccn-
duct, 262. fends to congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 269.
retuses a conceflion made by Q. Mary, 270. her jealoulf of her
right betrayed her into mean acions, ibid. her relemblance t:>
llen. VII. ibid. a personal interview with Q. Mary pro-'-ed,
293. she artfully declines it, ibid. her views in regard to Q.
Mary's marriage, 297, 2c3. assumes a disagreeable autrority,
298. names one for a hulband to Q.I Mary, 305. the ditferent
qualifications of her ministers and favourites, ib. 306. d:fremiie;
with Q, Mary about, her marriage, 307-3c;. and lik:,- ile
with regard to L. Darnly, 3 0. affronts Q( Mary by her ir !s'-
ation concerning Lennox, 31 1. is perplexed about the marr:. a
of the Scottish Queen, 31;, 16. permits Darnly to vlit ihe
court of Scotland, 3 6. affects to declare againit Q M-.ry ?
marriage to him, 322, 323. her reasons for this conJuct, 3

; ;

324. her great dissimulation in th..t affair, 330. her harnl .,rd
deceitful behaviour to Murray and his aflociates who had Iled
to her, 339. is itruck at hearing of the birth of Jancs \!.
372. confcnts to iland godmother to him, ibid. the Prliia-

N 1 3 tc,'t

nent addrers her to fettle the fuccefion, 379. this greatly em.
barrafcs her, ib. 380, 381. fie sooths and gains her Parlia.
ment, 382. endeavours to accommodate her differences with
Mary, 389. writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's mur-
derers, 407. interposes in her behalf when a prisoner, 437. her
ambassador is refuted access to Q. Mary, ibid. she offers afliti.
ance to the other nobles, 438. her deliberations concerning the
disposal of Qt Mary on her arrival in England, 461, 462. rc.
fo'ves to detain her there, ib. 463. her motives to this con.
duet, i5. 464. fends her letters of condolence, and gives or.
ders to watch her condut, ib. 464, 465. she gladly accepts
the office of umpire between her and her fubjeEts, 465, 466.
receives a very prefling letter from Q.Mary, 469. her precau.
tions againfl her, 470. appoints commiflioners to hear Q.Mary
and her accusers, 476. her important Situation on that occa.
sion, ib. her views in this affair, 477, 478. receives the Rc-
gen:'s demands, 481. removes the Conference to Wetlminfler,
483. her mean artifices to get the evidence of Q. Mary's guilt
sio;n the Regent, 490. treats her with greater rigour, 491.

rit:cs a harsh letter to Queen Mary, ib. she dismisses the Regent
without approving or condemning him, 493. but secretly sup.
ports his party, ib. makes p-opolals to the Regent in her fh-
yvc:ur, 497' Norfolk's project concealed from her, 500. dif.
covers and defeats a rebellion in Q. Mary's favour, 506, 5c7,
reiol:cs to deliver her up to the Regent, 50o. her great con-
ccrn at his deali, ii. i. continues to encourage factions in
'cot!lhn', 2, 3. her political conduct with regard to Lennox,

-:,;. is excommunicated, and deprived of her kingdom, &c.
by the PcFe, S. fapports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lennox to be Regent, 9. proposes a treaty of accommo.
,:tion between Q( Mary and her fubjedts, Io. procures a cef-
iaion of hoftilties, ib. fends proposals to Q.Mary, i i. her ar-
tinces in tihe conduA of this affair, ib. 12. appoints commil-
licners to frame a treaty, 13. finds a pretence to render their
meetirg fruitless, 14. a marriage proposed between her and
the D. of Anjou, 25. declares openly against the Queen's party,
29. concludes a treaty with France, 31. her motives for ne-
, ociatlng a peace between the two parties in Scotland, 42, 43.
is jea!ous of Cecil's interview with Q. Mary, so. negociates a
treaty between Mo;ton and his adverlaries, 65. her answer to
l;. J.imeb's demand of a poffellion of an efate in England, ib.
(.6. a marriage between her and the D. of Alencon proposed,
(9. interposes in behalf of Morton, 74. her measures in or-
er to save him, 76, 77. countenances the conspirators at
Ruthven, 92. is alarmed at a conspiracy againl her, I I , 1 12.
the deftgns of Q. Mary's adherents againfi her, 113. endea-
rours to recover her interefl in Scotland, and gains Arran to her
interefl, 1 4. amuses Q. Mary with a fruitlefb negociation, 117.
a new conspiracy againfl her, ibid. an association formed for
her defence, 118, 19. lier suspicions of QO Mary, l 9. her

life

lire endangered by a conspiracy, z25. this how discovered
end prevented, 126. occasions an extraordinary tatute for her
preservation, ib. is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, 131. endeavours to form a confederacy
of the Protestant Princes, ibid. 132. and to proceed with ri-
gour against Q Mary, 133. advances her interest in Scotland,
and proposes a league with it, ibid. 13 . fettles a pension upon
J. lames, 134. concludes a treat)y with Scotland, 140. account
of Babington's conspiracy againit her, 142-146. her diffi-
mulation after Q. Mary's conviction, 6r, 11162. her answer to
K. James's intercession for her, 164. her farther dissimulation
and anxiety, 167. signs the warrant for her execution, 168.
her speech to Davison on that occasion, ib. affefis to lament
Qi Mary's death, 17 8. several marks of her artifice in that as-
fair, ib. 179. the endeavours to sooth K. James, 180. pro-
vocations given by her to Spain, i P, Igo. prepares to meet
its resentment, 19g, 191. endeavours to secure Scotland, ibid.
tries to prevent K. James's marriage, 99. solicits him to treat
conspirators against him with rigour, 21 . evades the decision
of K. James's right of fucceflion to the Crown of England, 244,
245. is difgulted at several of his proceedings, 246, 24+'.
discovers his correspondence with the Pope, ibid. fresh grounds
of her suspicion, 273. her conduct with regard to the Earl of

fiTex, ibid. -27,. her irresolution concerning his death, 27¢.
and great concern after it, ibid. receives ambaffadcrs from K.
.[mes with regard, and increases his subsidy, 286. her lair 11-
r.es, 2S3. conjectures concerning the causes of her melancholy,
A:,4-286. her death, 286. and character, 287. 288. de-
clared the K. of Scots her fucceflbr, 289. some of her letters,
Appendix - 327. 351. 362. 363. 363. 380. 382. 387. 4c6.
E'.bi':lnZ, secretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a corre-

fFondence with the Pope, ii. 248. is tried and found guilty of
high trcafon, ib. and pardoned on the Queen's intercession, ib.
England, the Englilh seize and detain King James I. of Scotland

long a prisoner, i. 34. the nobles there humbled, 38. had
early two houses of Parliament, 80. they invade Scotland, 1oS.
their depredations there, l o, I X . a peace between England,
France, and Scotland, l x. invade Scotland again, I 8. gain
a great vicory, 119, 120. it proves of little advantage to
them, 2 1. they force the Scots into a clofcr union with France,
122. conclude a peace, 126. an English fleet arrives in Sco'-
land to assist the congregation, 222. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 223, 224. they enter Scotland and bcfiegc the
French in Leith. 224. are several times repulscd, 226. caules
of their bad success, ib. 227. articles of a treaty of peace,
23 . they (uit Scotland, 236. refletions on the right of fuc-
cePion to their Crown, 257-26o. the Parliament favours Q.
Mary's right of fuccefllon, 379. a league between England
and lrance, ii. 31. between England and Scotland, 140. the
nAtiunal covenant adopted in England --193

N n4 Entaii,

En.';ais, wi:h .hat view introduced i. 2, 2
Epccpal government in the Church, tome account of it, i. 23

an attempt to revive it, ii. 39. it is abolished by the Aflembly,
S5. juiil'isiton abolishcd, 174. See Archbi"jops.
Errcl, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spanish fa&ion, ii. 1l,

his cffers of service to the K. of Spain, 196. appears in rebel.
l:on, gS. is forced to submit to the King, 199. imprisoned
for a flhort time, ibid. joins in another conspiracy, 22C. is
'ummnoncd by the King to surrender, 210. offers to submit o
a tri2l, 21;. fontence pronounced againit him 2i1,
E,,in.e of Dun, is employcd by the Queen Regent to dcceive tte

I'roteliant, i. 175. his Icfentmcnt of this usage ibid.
---- Lord, gove:nor of Edinburgh Castle, aAs a neutral part

betwccn the Q.?eert Regent and t;e congregation, i. 214, le-
ceives thie Qeen Regent into the Castle, 226. is created Earl
of Mar, :8S. See .'ar.
--- exal.'lder. has the chief direSions of the education of ,
I.a;:cs VI. i. ;6. admits some of the nobles to make cor.
plaints to him againlt Moiton the Regewt, 58. is turned out
of S:iiin. Castle by his nephew the Earl of Mar (
Ji;; -C., t!;c !rcr.ch Envoy, endeavours to obstruct a treaty be-

t\. ein En'iand and Scotland - - ii. 134
E'.:-, E'rl of, set up by the Englilh Papists as a candidate for

i:c C o\xn, ii. zz2. heads a party in England, 273. hischa.
r-er-, ibi'. is greatly dillinguifhed by the Queen, ibid. 274.
f.av\C J-.- tie . of' Scts, 7 41. obtains the offices of Lord Lieu-
tcn. r: .n.d Comnniancer in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is unfuccels-
;u!l in that cxpcliticn, ibid. 275. receives a harsh letter fron
tile Qeien, 27;. returns to England and is confined, ibid. is
tri d id celfurcd, ibid. endeavour: to spirit up King James,
:-6. his r.lh and frantic conduct, 277. is again taken into
cu.oi1 , : -S, his death, 2-9. his fbn and affocia:es arereftor
ed to ti:ir .!onours after the acceiflon of K. James ibid.
FEj;c.;e, the lthte of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

i. 8+
Exrc.v:v;:,;:i.i:.'c:, a terrible engine of the Popish Clergy i. 14t

F

£EE,.'/, an Engii(lman, fixes the Pope's excommunication ol
. L.'iza.be:lh, on the gates of the bishop of London's pa-

l-ce i i, 8
F::cr!:>, NM. de la 1Mcttc, font by the French King to interpof.

fir 1L James wlcn confincd by the Ruthven conspirators, ii
,;6. i fr-ced to return without success - ibid
F.:,a'anl g vcr mnlzt, its origin, and alittocratical genius, i. ;, 16

IS. c.iuf's which limited the power of feudal Monarchs, 17
'it.dnl vd.l i;ls liable to few taxes, i R. a remarkable instance o
;he l 1;i.bclu of fcudal government, 20, 21. the mot per

scC

fa idea of the feudal sysem, how attained, 44. flateof it in
England, 77-79. and in Scotland 79, 80
ffreC a populous and powerful county much devoted to the con-

gregation, i. zzi. is destroyed and plundered by the French,
ib. the fynod of, excommunicates the Archbilhop of St. An-
drews for contumacy, ii. 139. they excommunicate the Popish
Lords - - 21t
SorIes, Lord, with the Earl of Argyle, is sent againlt the Popish

Lord:, ii. 220. are defeated by them - ibid. 2zz

fctiiun, John de, his history of Scotland when wrote i, e
Fo(rlr, Sir John, warden of the Englilh border, a scuffle between

him and the Scots - ii. 13
Fotheringay Cattle, Q_Mary's imprisonment, trial, and death there

ii. 140-174
France, the consequences of the subversion of the feudal govern-

ment there, i. 85, a body of French arrive in Scotland to sup-
port the Catholics, 1 1 ;. they reduce the cattle of St. Andrew's,
I I6. another party of them arrive there, 1 23, 124. their tranf-
aFtions there, ibid. 127. conclude a peace with England, z25.
their politic conduat, 127, 128. they leave Scotland, 127.
their artifices in a treaty of marriage between the Dauphin and
the Q of Scots, 157, 158. endeavours to expel the French army
out of Scotland, 9go. anolier party of them arrive there and
fortify Lei:h, 19S. they exasperate the people by their info-
lence, ibid. they are sent againfi the congregation, 220. they
detlroy and plunder Fife, and are much harassed by parties of
the congregation, 221, 222. are greatly alarmed by the arrival
of the Englilh fleet, 222. they return to Leith grcatly haraflcd
and exhaufled, 223. are bcfieged there by the Englilh and the
congregation, 226. they gain several advantages, ibid.-z28.
their motives for concluding a peace, 230. negociations for that
purpose, 231, 232. articles of the treaty, 233, 234. they leave
Scotland, 236. the French advise Q. Mary to moderate mea-
fures, 253. their proporils by an ambafador rejected, 24.
they agree to Q. Mary's marriage with Lord Darnly, 319.
the licentiousness of their morals - 97

- King of, a copy of his directions sent to Scotland, App. 419
Francis I. gives a check to the ambitious projects of Charles V.

i. 89. his fidelity to the Scots, it, his death 115
--- II. comes to the crown of France, i. 193. his charac-

ter, ibid. 245. is guided by the Duke of Guile amd Cardinal
of Lorrain, ibid. he treats the Proeflants with great rigour,
Z31. his death - 45
G lfords, Docor and Gilbert, their notion concerning the

lawfulnces of killing heretical excommunicated Prince',

ii. 4,z. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Elizabeth, ibid.
Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his associates, 14;.

is

is cmployed to carry on a f reign correspondence with QO l ,.
Tr - -140, 1i4

G'amnis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft i. (9
--- Iord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to Morton

to surrender the Regency, ii. 59. is killed in a rencounter at
Stirling - -
_--- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, ii. bS.
his bold fpecch to K. James, 91. he, with the other cons:.
rators, seize the Cal le of Stirling and erect their standard, 1o
he is attainted, and his ellate forfeited -- I1
G,'a. o¾ , bishop of, a note of his concerning the (ueen of Sco:

land's dowry, Appendix - - 4

G.-Ecairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators i. Si
G(;',tl';at. the battle of - ii. 2:
Gc'rJ:,. Sir John, a scuffle in the streets of Edinburgh betweea

him andi Lord Ogiivy, i. zS8. being confined for it, he makcs
his e,cipe, 286. when ordered by the Queen to iurre. dc.
himielf, he takes up arms against her, ib. 2S7. is defeated, a:,:,
together with his brother, made pliloners, .290. he is behea.
ed and his brother pardoned --- ;l

---- .Lord, set at liberty -- 3- i
-_ ddaSir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's intere in the
north, ii, ;c. his charater and geod conduct as a foldie:

32, ';
Go.-.rie, Earl of, joins in a confpiracv to seize the King at Ru:r,.

ven, ii. S9. is viiited and pardoned by the King after his efc..p,
99. becomes iufnfeced, and is ordered for France, io6. dela.;s
his voyage, a.d is taken into cutlody, ibid. he is tried ard
e:xecuted ---
--- Johnn and A'exander, sons of the above, their characer ar.'

conspiracy, ii. '; i. the surprising circumtlances of that rc-
rarkable tranlaciion, 2z2- 556. several different conjectures
concerning it, :,--26S. the:r dead bodies brought into P.:-
I;ament and condemned, 2t9. their ellates and honours forfei;-
ed, and name abolilhed for ever, ib. different accounts of thi.
affair pub:ifhed, but not fatisfakorv, 270-272. See Rita ,

br.
Gr.bam, Sir David, of Fintrv, acculed of a conspiracy with the

popiih Lords in favour of Spain, ii. z0o. is convicted and be.
headed - :1
Gray, mailer of, tome account of him, ii. 120, 21. he become;

a favourite of King James VI. ib. is gained to Q. Elizabeth's
interelt. 1i . betrays Q:. Mary, ibid. persuades K. James to
write a harsh and undutitul lecter to her. 129. joins with otheri
in promoting Q( Eliabeth's interell in Scotland, 1;3. his trea.
chery when sent to intercede for Q. M\ary, 167. his bafencel
discovered, he is disgraced, 1Sa. his vain attempt againa fecre.
tarv Maitland, 183. acts in Italy as a spy from the court of
England, 246. a memorial of his for his Majefly, Appendix,
411i, 44$, to the fecrotary of late - 44j

GCui,

Git, duke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots, i.
J93, 194. is murdered at the siege of Orleans - 296

his intrigues againll Qt Elizabeth, ii. 11, 113. is a

principal promoter of the holy league, 13 , 189. drives the
French King out of his capital - - 189

H
'sI .ddinrtcun, seized and forfeited by the English, i. 122.

is relieved by the French 24

Ti.::',,:e, the rife of that family, i. 36. arbitrary proceedings of
Morion the Regent againtl it, ii. 67, 6:q. See Chatelherault.

---of othwelhaugh, taken prif-r'er at the battle of Lang-

fidc, i. o47. is tried and c,:',demned tor rebellion, ibid. ob-
tins a pardon from Murray the Regent, by the intercellion of
Knox, 471. an account of his murder.ng Murray,' t51, 51z.
niakes his escape, 512. is received in triumph at Hamilton, ii. (

- Mr. Patrick, the firli who fuffcred in Scotland for the

Protellant religion -i. 16

Ji,;itcrd, Earl of, invades Scotland with an Englifi army, i. IcS.

burns Edinburgh and Leith, ib. c19. is made Duke of Somrer-
i:, and proteutor of England, 118. See Sctme;rt.
]Iaf:n, vice-chamberlain of England, the argumel.t by which he

prevailed on QM. ary to plead at her trial ii. I 5

iH.:r II. of France, fends forces to a tlit the Scots, i. i 15. a mar-

riage proposed between his son the Dauphin and the young Q.
of Scots, 12, 124. excites the Scots to invade England, 1 3.
'it. i:;f'mous imposition on Q_ Mary in the treaty of mariiage,
5 -, ;S. per:uadcs his son and Q_ Mary to aflume the tit'es
(; King and Queen of England, ilo. his death 191
--- 111. degenerates greatly on his accefiion to the crown of

France, ii. I 3c. enters into a private negociation with Q_ E'i-
z.ibeti, I, 133. interpolfs feebly in behalf of Q.Mary, 1Iz

-- VIII. of England, by his fvllem of reformation becomes
formidable both to Papills and Pro:ellants, i. 70. propo!es an
iii:erview with King James V. ib. is disappointed by him and
dc!.a:es war against Scotland, 71, 72. invades it, but is forced
to retreat, ibid. his importance as to the balance of power
in lIuroFe, 89. his influence in Scotland how obtained, 92.
hi; schemes with regard to it on the death of James V. 9..
, ere ill-conduzeted by himself and odious to the Scots, 99. ar-
(tmpts to gain the Regency by great promiles, 103. invades
Scotland, io3. this being ill-conduclcd turns to no account,
1:9. receives and rewards the Earl of Lennox, ib. encourages
the murderers of cardinal Beatoun, i 4. his death and cha-
racter, 1 ;. his inconfillent conduct, 169. excluded the Scotch
line by Ihis tefament - 390

liJrri:s, Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the Regent, i. 495.

comies to a treaty with him, 496. he and the Duke are com-
Ini:ucd prisoners tQ the caltle of Edinburgh, 497. intimates the

King's

King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, ii. 59. aco:r.
of his behaviour in Pariiament, Appendix, 385. a letter ire,
him to Lord Scroop and Sir F. Knollis -
Hickford, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him biy c :

covering his intrigues with Q. Mary - i. zm;.
Htiglla;.dsi audJls, an attempt to civilize them by Kiug James \V.

11. 2st. regulations for that purpole, :Sz. three towni er.;..
with the piivileges of royal boroughs ordered to be bui; he
ilodgfon, a priet of Rheims, maintained the lawfulnces of k::i

hcretical excommunicated Princes -i.
HomIe, Lord, ient by K. James VI. with a secret embaff to .

'opne -- i :

IIot,.'ard. See Norfolk.
Hul'iJane, Lord, governor of B:rwi;k, his interview with Ar'::

ii. 114, I1;
Huntly', Earl, though a catholic, jo'ns the reformers in oppofin g-,

French army, i. il. afiills them only with fair promies, :I
214. his further concurrence with them 228. some account f
that family, :S3. 284. his enmity againf the young Queen'
minilters, ibid. his relentment inflamed by an accident, 8;.
appears in an open rebellion against the Queen, z28. his pS'
againit her minilters disappointed, ibid. breaks out into open
rebellion, 28g. is trodden to death in a battle, 290. his faniiy
prosecuted with the utmost rigour, 291. several anecdotea
and conjeelures concerning his plot, ibid. :92, is attainted Cr
Parliament. 3cc. the attainder repealed and the farri'y ro.
stored to ellate and honours - -
b.-- his attachment to Bothwell, 4c6. 413. refuses to fubD,'
to the Regent, 496. is forced to do it, 497. acts as lieuten--:
to the Queen after the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is proclaimec
traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 9. receives some more;
and promises of affiltance from Spain, ibid. io. agrees to a: t.
ty with Morton the Regent, 46. is one of the heads of the S-i.
nifh fa&ion, 191. engages to the Prince of Parma to fe,-ve :
King of Spain, 196. is impTilbned for a short time, i98. e'e.
a lfandard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to submit to the Kic;,
ibid. is again imprisoned, 1t9. is soon set at liberty, ibid, r.
ceives a commifiion from the King, zo6. his barbarous miurCr
of the Earl of Murray, ibid. is summoned to surrender t :i-
tice, 207. flies to the mountains, :l . offers to submit to
trial, 21 . fentene pronounced againil him, zt6. refu. s
submit, ,21. makes another delperate attempt, but is forced:c
fly . .- -. 21S, ^:z

I
J,4.ES I. was detained long a prifoncr in England, i. ;3

toubles in Scotland during that time, ibid. 35. was mn;
impioved by an Erglilh education, 47, 4s. his policy onhi.-:

t'J::

:urn to Scotland, 49. his charaer, ibid. . fu. ppreffe the
power of the nobles, ibid. they being exalperatcd, conspire
againit, and murder him - - 51, 5
,,;S 11tl. troubles in Scotland, during his minority, i. 35, 36.
his attempts againit the nobles, 52, 53. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 53. procures several good laws to be pased, 54, 55.
reduces the power of the nobles, 55. his death 56

11I. the state of Scotland during his minority, i. 36. his

impolitic conduOt, 56, 57. kills one of his b:others, and is
invaded by another, 57, 58. is greatly insulted by his nobles,
;9. his despicable minions, ibid. was the fira that appointed
a standing guard to his person, 60. the nobks are provoked
to take arms againlt him, bi. is killed in a battle against them.
ibid. his character ibid. 6z
.- IV. his chara&cr, i. 62. is killed in a battle against the

Lnglifh at Flowden - 6z, 6;

V. his minority long and turbulent, i. 36. tranfa&ions

during that time, 63, 64. assumes the government while very
voung, 65. his character, ibid. 66. his scheme for humbling
the nobles, 66-69. is diverted from it by the clergy, 71, 72.
takes arms for the defence of his kingdom, 72. his nobles re-
fuliing to follow him, throws him into a deep melancholy, 73-
7,. which is increased by a surprising defeat of his forces, 75.
his death, ibid. refletions on his conduct, ibid, 76. he refused
an alliance with Charles V. Emper.r - 91

VI. his birth, i. 37 1. his baptism, 3S7. the care of him

committed to the Earl of Mar, 404. is by him preserved from
falling into the hands of Bothwell, 422. is crowned, 441. the
nobles oppreiTed by Morton the Regent, turn their eyes to him
for redrel', ii. 56. his education and dispositions, ibid. 57.
he becomes suspicious of the Regent's power, 57. discovers
early a great attachment to favourites, 70. adopts two of dif-
ferent dispositions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with great folemni-
ty, 72. is by his favourites engaged in unpopular measures, SS,
89. is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven, go. and forced
to receive complaints against his favourites, ib. 91. dissembles
with them, and baniflies Lennox, g9. is brought to Stirling and
H-olyroodhoufe, 94. his concern for Lennox's death, and regard
for his memory, 95. receives the French ambassador with great
refpc&t, 96. makes his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 97.
resolves to treat them with moderation, 99. visits Gowrie and
grants him a pardon, ibid. renews his fondness for Arran, ib.
1oo. is by him pcrfuaded to violent measures againlt the con.
fpiiators, ico. his anlwcr to a haughty letter from Qt Elizabeth
on their behalf, to I. is by her interposition rendered more vio-
lent against them, 102. is provoked by the clergy, 104. his
lleps to humble them, 107. his profusion to Arran, 116. fends
a new favourite to England againit the banished Lords, 120.
idevo!ves the whole regal authority on Arran, 122,1 23. writesan
tidlutilul letter to hil mother, z29. is threatened to be difin-

herited

herited lbv ler, ibid. receives a pension from Q.Elizabeth, I'
is reconciled to the exiled Lords, 136. becomes popular by cc"'
eluding a treaty with England, 14o, 141. his fcanda!ousbel.
viour with regard to Archd. D1ouglas, ibid. 142. his erea.
vours to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 163 1,
is greatly incerled at her death, 1So. arguments used by t.
Engliffh ninilicrs to pacify him, ibid. 18i. is forced to ''.:
his relintment, 1lz. attempts to unite the nobles, 184, Ig.
is courted both vy Spain and England, 190, 191. resolves \.
goioufly to adher to the !at:er, 19l. takes several freps vi:'
that view, ibid. his ,kill in the popish controverfv, 192. Vrc:;
a commen:ary on the Revelations, ibid. his maxims with r.
gard :o popery, ibid. I 9'. his excefive lerit) to conflir.;-.
againll hiin. 1i9j. rifilvcs to marry the Princess of Denn-:.;
199. arts uind to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is confumma:.
ed n ra, -. als fvr ths

in crs er n ths in Denmark, i':j,

refletions en his condu&t there, ibid. 2cz. his arrival in Sc::-
land wi;h his Qicen, 203. indulges the Presbyterians, :.
the ill ccniequelnei;s cf his lenity, ibid. -^o. his zeal ag..:
witc!crafr, zc;. is lol cited by QtElizabeih to treat the con.
p n;ratcrs againll him k ith rigour. z it , 1 2. is fufpeAed of c:.
rivin'g with them, : 1. is f irprii3 and ieized by Both;r:',
ibiJ. 21;. and tfrced to corm l with his terms, 213. his ei. :.:
to EB.th..v:! ;b.!ed, ibid. 2 t6. is fuipeCed of favouringr:
popilh L:rd, iii. ii s in nt dancer from them, 21S. C::-
gates h:s ai:hcr;!v to Argyle and Sorbes againit them, ::,.
goes in per!ooi a hi-

iti them, 221. waltes their lands and ga.

rifon- their cd!t:e, ibid. his right of the ucceffion to thecro.:.
of Eng!and oppoled by the papill, -22. his lenity to them i-.
cen!es t! e c!leig and p ople, :6, 2z-. is much provoked ;
the ob! lnacv of the cler-y, :29. gives orcers againll them,:::,
is much inluried, 2::d in great d nSer at Edinburgh, 23:--:;.
leaves IJ!inburgrh and pr;ceeds x ith severity againt: thecitizc.:,
2 3-. 23 . acqu:ires ,biolute dominion in ecclefialtica! affairs, 4:,
24 . iireng:l'ens hii interell in parliament, by re!toring the fI:i
of the eccl :l.ilics. 2 4 --243. endeavours with fuccels to g: a
a party in England, 2-4. increases his reputation, by publil.:r.
his Bafilicon Doroin, 24;. is accused by Q. Elizabeth of cc:.
refpcnding with the Pope, 247. this he denies, and how accouc:-
ed for, ibid. 248. o:her reports concerning this, 248, :?:.
is at great pains to galn the Roman cathelics, 249. his regulj-
tions wi'h regard to the church, z;o, z5 t. the mysterious as
f.iir of Gowry's conlpiracy, 25 1-2-3. his cautious behaviou:
in regard to the Earl of Elfcx, ,77. fends ambaffidors to lfve
him, 27S. they arrive oo late, 279. le reltores his ion an2
allciatcs to their lionours after his acceflion, ibid. continu:i
his intrigues in England, ibid. 2So, z81. his interest grea;tl
ltrengthcr.ed there, ibid. cndea\ours to civilize the highlands
anld 1i l., z2g, z<2. is proclaimed King in England ater the
death of Q Eli;'.'L^th, z'';. is proclaimed iikewiile in Scotland,

290.

i-o. prepares for his journey to England, 291. enters London,
and takes possession of the throne, 292. his character how dif-
ferent from that of Q. Elizabeth, ib. a letter fro:n h;m to Mr.
Archibald Douglas, Appendix - 437
in-.ernreJ castle, refutes to surrender to Q. Mary, i. 288. it is

forced, and the governor punished ibid. 289
rjaiy, the liberty of, how preserved i, 8t

K
K EITH, Sir William, sent to intercede for Qt Mary when

under sentence, ii. 163. letter from him to kccretary Mait-

land, Appendix 437

Kint, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Qt Mhary exe-

cuted - --- i. 170
Ker of Ferniherfi, ravages England on the murder of Murray the
Regent, ii. z. his design, 5. has a scuffle with the English, 135

Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is discovered when ready to

fail to promote a plot in Spain, ii. cg9. his scheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison -- 213

Kii.'gr.u, Henry, his declaration on the peace, Appendix 4 3
Ki;,gs, feudal, the molt limited of all Princes, i. 15. general

caules of this, 17. their revenues were but small, ib. iS. had
no uianding armies, i; . and jurifdiclion limited, 20. means
uled to extend the royal authority, 39. their jurifdilion en-
larged, 41. the extraordinary influence of the Scottifhi Ki;ns
in Parliament, 76. the reason of this -ibid. S I
Klirkaajy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q. Dowager, i. 155. his attainder reversed in Parlia-
n;ent, 0o0. offers to fight Bothwell in single combat, 428.
his interview with Q. Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
429. rescues Maitland from corfinement, Sc6. labours to sup-
port the King's authority, and restore harmony after the murder
of the Regent, ii. 3, 4. accedes to the Queen's party, 4. pro-
sides for a siege by increaling his garrison and fortifying Edin-
Lurgh, I 8. proclaims Lennox's authority unlawful and usurped,
ibid. attempts in vain to prevent a meeting of the Parliament,
19. forms a scheme for surprising the King's party, 22. is at
first successful, but afterwards defeated, 23, 24. comes near to
an agreement with Mar the Regent, 36. a treaty with Morton
breaks it off, 43-4;. fires upon Edinburgh from the catle,
45. is besieged by the Regent,affifled by the Englilh forces, 47.
is forced by mutiny of the garrison to capitulate, 48. furren.
dcrs to Drury the English general, ibid. is by order of Q. Eli-
zabeth delivered up to the Regent, 49. he and his brother
are executed - ibid. o5
Kn)llys, Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of condo-

h nce to Qt Mary on her arrival in England, i. 464. tome of
his letter, Appendix, - - 386-388-393
Knox, John, a fanlous reformer, his characfer, i. 130. after being

iomnc time abroal, he is recalled by the pcrfecuted Protcftanto,

4 176.

1-5, inflames the multitude at Perth with rage against thM p,
p:its, ibid. his notion concerning the government of worna
u hence, i S;, 1 ;. his residence sied in Edinburgh, 187. con.
p!ains of t..e '.:e.Varmnels of the reformers, 202. his orFii,;
to the convention of reformers that it is lawful to refill and Ce.
prive tyrannical Pr'ncts, 2o5. animates and revives the dc.
jfonding Ccngregaticn, 21, z 16. complains of the neglect d
t.e reformers in providing maintenance for their preacher.
2rz. recomrmends the Genera model of Church Governmen'
249. po::.: '... ri.: .-ant: s in the church, 2;c. compos tihe
frit book of ciibip?'::.e, 2 i. renounces friendIhip with the Earl
cf Murray for h:n moderation. 277. is tried for encouragi:- 3
m-uiny =.on_. tre p-eoie, and acquitted, 303, 304. pop':
ijes c :c.cr t i -. 'ion, ibid, is pub ickly accused .5
Mlai:'.ard ct pre.-, :h ;.- i:Sr!'us dolirine concerning refi,'a;c,
_x;. ch.l';; ers cf ;:..; : d:i:ctants, ib. approved of fever-!
ir.:'ai.cs- ;r- .i:i';Tia:: .-:, j -. agrees :o tomre regu'ations c:.
cerinr.g t;e 'e-i.in of S::-.pi ii. 4C. his death and ch:,-:.
ter, -1, 4z. .i: ec .:.:': b. M'!rton thS Regenr, 2. artc;,
l;nt b)' him t ie n .i:'ra .. - .., Appen-ix :

L

L,,-rs .:.. the ._:::'. of
C--. i::*

J L.-.:.c.:, c2, ci i . '- ;'.; a !uI;cio from the Pope v.:s

a ret:..: ,:

' _

.':-.. .- Sj3ti.-.d, i. 3. is flopped at Ps.-i.
L'..:r-, hol'.. a c :fel:;:v of Rjmna. catholics so called, ii,. 1i.

.;i ,,.iv.'-; "'- a r-ee ;o -v them ra! over EuroDe i:.

i,:ni:r.-, t:he rCv.-'a! -;', -.o.mo:es the reformation i. I:;
L/:c .-'r, Earl or', a-?or.:e 3 c:-:r.ioner to the conference:

c,-e.'. m; r..e'r--- -,

bv sj- - i.

4i-
Li:'". b-r.: by dh- Er.-.:.', i. 1 ~-. t orti5ed bv the French, !'

e,:leJ bv ..h Erh!:., : i. Ma!-.ry lands there from Fra:.-,

i,. the sr':ei:.r;;v cf i a . by her to Edinburgh, 3+..2

ti;zed ard iort:r.c b'y Mo:trn the Regent ii. :
L.-.'Y:, Es-! cf, arr:ves in Scodan-J frcm France, i. icz. is m-c:

cocred' by ca:d:nai U-t-un, ibid. his pretensions to the 'J;-
ceaon, ho-. foanJed, 15 . resents Beatoun's deceitfulnefi::
him, ice. heads the reo~mers ard the advocates for the En-.
li:h alilia-ce, i1-. . 'r.rife: the Regent and cardinal, ibid. i
cu;v!ttead bv the cardinll, ilid. i-?. continues alone in ::
in:e.rel cf i:.'alanJ, !::. is forced to fly to that court, vke':
he is ;ewlra.c, i:dJ. i; rarriei to a niece of K. Henry's, rv
x .h:ca hn ecame father ;o a race of Kings, ibid. his cll:=
to ;he 'cc:'.i:n, ;-~S is :i.-rpi:;r.- for a secret correfpondena5
with ; Q , lar, 5 3 D. i invited lecre:;y by her to return to Sc:.
land, iz d. arriees in Scotlan!, and i, received with great ia.
rliari:y tv h:-, 3it, 31;. hi' for'ei:u:e is repealed, and he a
reltored :o h.i e..it: and .hor.-.:r b, t'e Parliament, 313. r'

1 j, 313~~be

lady '-n- prifcrer ta the Tower of London, 325. and treated
wirh rigcurc;. 3- he inGfi on the Drofecutionof hisfon Darnly's
mur.:e'- ;, -03. charges Bothwell with it, ibid. the prosecution
is hu-!r;i, 40;. he craves a delay, wh;cn is re!'ustd, 406, 40y.
he ji- ;,c alone in it, ibid. folici:s Q. Elizabeth's interest to ob-
tain a delay, 4o7. insists on it by proxy at the trial, but is over-
rule2, o40, 409 bring apprehensive of danger he flies toward3
Englind, 41". his countess accuses Q. Mars of the murder to
QL :liz:be:h. 4S7. he appears at the conference at Westminster,
and accusi; Q. Mary of the murder upon oath. 488. returns to
Scotlar;d pro;cted by an English army, ii. 6. is eleted Regent,
. his progress again't the Queen' party, ibid. uppoints com-
miniiolners to framre a tieaty with those of the Queen, 13. fur-
F-: 'Dumb.rton ca:ile, 1;-17. jins the Earl of Morfon at
Leth, ,'s. h iJs a Parliament in the Canongate, 19 another at
Stir'.n , :2. he is surprised and killed there - 23
L.c:x. lord Aubigny. his charaier, ii. 71. joins with the King's

o::er: new favourite :o underr.ine Morton, ibid. renounces Po-
Fe-v. -:. Q Elizabeth demands him to be removed from the
S-i v cor.c:l, 74. is accused by her ambaisador, 78. Arran
tri:; in v 'in to luplanr him, 8,. is commanded by K. James
a: :-e recu'.t of the noc!e- to leave the kit.gdom, g9. tuts of
hi- .ecarture on various cretences, 93, 9g. returns unwiilinglv
to F:rice \here he soon die-, -4. his .emory vindicated and
mr-.-c re.i.' ed by vhe i:;. 9- died a Poteflant ibid.

- : c: ;e' a- the Kin': l;ejtenart in the north after dil;

p-rfL .r -e cD tll Lords - ii. 2zt

L,:, .N'r;'-a;, rnu:wers Ca-dn l Beatoun, i. I12. 113. he and

hi- ai;r.a aes kee. pciTeiron of the ca.:le of St. Anrrev's. 1 13.
rm:.-: ,. t uce w;th the Regen:, 114, il;. are encou.aged by
H. 1. -I!I. - ibid.

bi.',o? cf Ross, is lent by the catholics in Sco:land to en-

g -- (. Mar/ in their intcret}, i. 2 z2 hi- proiofi-sl to her rc-
jeAtdi. ii. 2;. his ne; 'cia:ions in Fng!a.nd in: favour of Q.
M;a- , i:. 2.6. is conrined tonz in the 'o\. er, and afterwards

is ban:!:ie 2 :niand - 29
Liriri, . :--. carrie; :he proproal from the confederates to Q.

MiL r. ::: t :e ih;uld resign the governnient, i. 441. joins the
Ruth:iAe c r.ipirators ii. 89
LGCh;.e'in caftie, Q. Mary committed a pr:foner there, i. 434.

her e caFe fr.'m thence 4;3

--- -- Lnr.!, lett-rs to and from him, Arrpcr.d'i - 416
Logan of Re :.:!rig, an alleged accomplice in Gr\.: it'i conlpiracy,

ii. 2z8, 259. is trie.!, and his eftLte so .:ed long after his
death -- 259, 26
Lcrdt confederate, afsocii'e aga;nlt BoEh.e'l and Q. Mary, i. 424.

rai:c fo:ces a-irl-t them, 425. [ublifh the motives of their
condud, 4:6. prcvai! on the Queen to surrender to them, 430.
assume the title of Lords ot the secret council and the royal
authority * 43q

OL. I. 0 ao Lordp

Lords, popish, confpirc against K. James, ii. 196. are treated by

him with great len:ity, 198. form a new conspiracy, 2c9. the
King proceeds aga:inll them, 210. more of his lenity'to them,
214. frelh dangers trom them, 218. they receive money from
Spain, z29. zeal of the clergy against them, ibid. are declared
guilty ot trealon and their ellates forfeited, ibid. defeat the
King's army, zzo, 2zz. are dispersed on the King's approach,
22. go abroad and give security to keep the peace, ibid. re-
turn to Scotland, and petition for leave to relide in their own
houses, 227. this granted by a convention of elia:e;, ibid.
recant their errors and are abo)lved from excommunication, 2.0.
relapse, and a:e again reconciled to the church of Rome, ibid.
are ieftored to their ellates and honours -241

Lorrain cardital,g'lts fomneofthe belt benefices in Scotlandi. 163.
=- -- Princes of, their ambitious view-, i. s68. inst[;ate the

DI)uphin a;id Qt Mairy to take the titles of King and Queen
of i': land , 1 o. resolve to invade England, ibid. and to check
the icf. rmaition in Scotland, 171. the cardinal's great influence
uier tne young Kinlg, 193, 194. dri\ve the Queen Regent of
ScctlanJ to violent mealurcs, 200. their violences cccafion a con-
fpir;acy againit them, 231. are f:.rced to withdraw their troops
from Scotland, ibid. they insult the Scottirh ambaflhdor, 244.
have great power over the ounng King and Queen. 245, 246.
are forced to contraa their views on the death of the King

247
Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the Reformation, i. 139.

the rapid progreis of his dotrine - 140

M
,.4 AOR John, his hiltcry of Scotland, some account of, i. 5.

M aitland of Lethington, secretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the Congregation, i. 214. his cha-
radler, ibid. 2i ;. is sent by them ambassador to Q( Elizabeth,
216. fends them aflurances of her protection, 22o, is sent by
Q Mary to the court of England, 269. makes a concession to
Q._ Elizabeth, ibid. z20. accompanies Q: Mary in a progress to
the north, 286. he is employed by Q: Mary to desire a personal
interview with Q. Elizabeth, 293. publickly accuses Knox of
preaching seditious doctrine concerning resistance, 315. inti.
mates to QElizabeth theintention ofQ Mary tomarry Darnly,
322. prudentlyconceals her resentment from Q Elizabeth, 325.
proposes moderate measures with regard to Q. Mary when im-
prisoned, 439. attends the Regent when called on to accuse her
in England, 475. he disapproves of this measure, ibid. his in-
trigue with the Duke of Norfolk, 480. 498, 499. is imprisoned
by the Regent, 5o5. is relieved by Kirkaldy, and secured in the
cafile, o56. proposes a coilition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, ii. 3. accedes to the Queen's party, 4. is
deprived of his office of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 9. is

a attainted

attainted in a Parliament of the King's party, 19, agrees with
Mar, 36, 37. his views in refusing a reconciliation with Morton
the Regent, 43, 44. rejecs overtures ofa treaty with him, ibid.
is besieged by him in the castle of Edinburgh, 41. is forced to
capitulate and surrender to the Englifl general, 48, to avoid
the Regent's resentment he dispatches himself, 50. several of
his letters, Appendix - - ii. 403. 437
AMaitland, Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, ii. 133. concurs

with others in promoting Q.Elizabeth's interelt there, ibid. at-
tempts against him by Capt. James Stewart, late Arran, 182.
they prove abortive, and he is advanced to be chancellor, 183.
an attempt to remove him from that office, frulfrated, 98. his
death, 223. a copy of verses in honour of him wrote by the
King ---- ibid.
Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrews, i.

285. accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north, z86.
he and his associates narrowly escape aflaffination, 287, 288.
is created Earl of Murray, 289. See fMurray.
- the title is conferred on L. Erskine, 289. the person of the

young Prince put into his hands, 404. his resolution in pre-
serving him from Bothwell, 422. is chosen Regent, ii. 24. la-
bours to bring about a general peace, 36. is thwarted by Mor-
ton and his associates, ibid. 37. dies of melancholy, 37. his
characer, ibid. his merit and integrity was acknowledged by
both parties - ibid.
-- the young Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns out his
uncle from the catile of Stirling, ii. 62. joins the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 89, go. he with the others seize Stirling castle, and
erea their flandard, io6. is attainted and his elbate forfeited,
liR. is pardoned, and restored to estate and honours 137
March, countess of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of Ar-

ran -- ii. 83, 84
Mary ofGuife, Q Dowager of Scotland, takes a considerable flare

in the government, i. 1zz. is much addicted to the Fiench in-
terest, ibid. projects a marriage of her daughter to the Dauphin
of France, z13. becomes infirumental in promo:ing the Refor-
mation, 132. aspires to the office of Regent, ibid. 13-. pro-
motes difaffecion to the present one, and favours the reformers,
133, 134. visits the court of France, 134. returns to Scot-
land to take pofltlfion of the Regency, 135. alter tome oppofi-
tion ihe obtains it, 137. confers several offices of trult upon
firangers, 15o, 151. propofcs to lay a tax upon land, 152. is
forced to drop it, ibid. tries in vain to excite a war with Eng-
land, 153. the nobles vigorously oppose her mcnfurcs, 154.
treats the reformers with great refpca, 155. obtains a con-
ceflion from the Parliament in favour of the )Dauphin, 161. her
artful management of the reformers, 162, 163. bellows the va-
cant benefices on foreigners, 163. she alters her condlut' to the
reformers, 167. remonltrances against the violent measures of
the Princes of Lorrain, 172. is perfiaded by them to perse-

0 o 2 cute

cute the reformers, 173. her rash answer to their remonstrance,
ibid. 174. summons their preachers to appear before her, 174.
breaks a promise she had made them, 175. marches with an army
againdt them, 177. concludes a treaty with them, 178. this
(he again breaks, 179. her severity at Perth, ibid. her schemes
discovered, ibid. 180. she goes to attack them, 18t. has a-
gain recou-fe to negocia:ion, 182. (he is fiartled at their de-
mands and gets time to answer them, 183. violates another
treaty, 184. loses Perth and forced to abandon Stirling and
Edinburgh, lhe retires with precipitation to Dunbar, ibid. 185.
marches to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, 188. gains time
by her artifice, ib. 189. makes another treaty with them, 189.
her artifices to undermine the prior of St. Andrews, 197. the
absurdity of her scheme, ibid. 198. gets a reinforcement of
French troops, who fortify Leith, 198. (he disregards a remon-
france of the reformers, 199. is influenced by French coun-
fellors, and persuaded to violent measures, 200. retires to Leith
on the approach of the reformers army, 202. her prudent and
artful conduit there, ib. her haughty and imperious answer to
a frefli remonstrance from them, 203. is, by a convention of
them, deprived of her office of Regent, 205. the foundation of
this sentence, ibid. 206. foments differences among them, 2o9,
210. is deserted by her principal secretary, 214. fends French
troops againfi the reformers, 22o. retires into the cafRle of
Edinburgh on the approach of the English, z25. her death and
charader, 229. repented of her violent meafores, 230. lifened
to the initruaions of a reformed preacher - ibid.
IJa,y Queen of England, her persecuting reign, i. 137, 139. her

death - - - 164
- Queen of Scots, born, i. 95. a proposal to marry her to Ed.

VI. 98. she is demanded by Henry VIII. 99. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, 123. a treaty for that
purpose concluded, 124, 125. fie is sent to be educated in
France, 125. the fatal consequence of this, ibid, is imposed
on by the artifices of the French in the treaty of marriage, 157.
her marriage celebrated with great pomp, 158. they take the
title of King and Queen of England, 170o (he makes concef-
sions to the Congregation, 232, 233. declares Q. Elizabeth's
right to the crown of England, 235. (he acquires an entire
ascendant over her hulband, z45. (he is overwhelmed with
great affliftion on his death, and retires to Rheims, 247. {he is
invited by the convention to return to Scotland, 25z. an emilia-
ry from the catholics in Scotland proposed violent measures to
her, ibid. (he is determined to moderation by the French and
the prior of St. Andrews, ib. 253. is prevailed on to prepare
for her return to Scotland, 255. the origin of the discord be-
tween her and Q. Elizabeth, ibid. z56. her pretensions to the
crown of England, 257. is envied on account of her beauty,
260. demands a (afe-conduet from Q.Elizabeth,which is refused,
262. leaves France with great relutance, ib. 263. lands at

Leitb,

Leith, 263. is much affected by the change of herfituation, ib.
several disadvantages attending her acccllion, ib.-265. some
circumstances to her advantage, 265, 26zS. heraccomplilhments
of body and mind, ib. the servants of her chapel insulted, z66,
267. procures the free exercise of her religion, 267. issues a
proclamation in favour of the Protestants, :68. employs them
only in the adminiiration, ibid. attempts to gain Q. Eliza-
beth's favour, 069. makes a conceflion to her, 270. whicll is
rejeced, 271. she makes her public entry into Edinburgh, ib.
an insult offered to her religion on that occasion, ib. 272. dif-
courages the attempts of the papiRs to gaim ner favour, 273.
her aversion to the family of Hamilton, 274. rc.maes a progress
into the north, z86, z2j. her minillers nariowly elc:fp afalhi-
nation, 287, z88. is refused acceis to the castle of InvernesS,
288. when in the utmost confiernation is relieved by the Mon-
ros and other Clans, 288, z89. her forces defeat Huntley's re-
bellion, 290. she desires an interview with Q.. Elizabeth, 293.
negociations concerning her marriage, 294. is solicited by diffe-
rent Princes, 295, 296. her deliberations concerning it, 296.
is forced to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q Elizabeth,
298, 299. to please her fubjefs, determines aai. it a foreign
alliance, z99. determines not to ratify the tlraty of Edinburgh,
30o. further negociations for her marriage, 3C4. dilcovers
the views of Catharine of Medici., ibid. 3.'. Lord Robert
Dudley recomm, nded to her as a hufrand by Q.tiliz/ahth. 30i.
she is highly offended at this, 306. diflembles with Q. E!iza-
beth, ib. 309. entertains thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly,
309. /he recalls Lenox, 31o. is affronted at a letter of Q E;za-
beth's, 31z. her indifference as to the reformed, and zeal for
the catholic religion, 314. is taken with Darnly at first fight, 317.
is greatly moved at QElizabeth's insulting craftiness, ib. 318.
negociates with the court of Rome for a dilpenfation to marry
Darnly, 3 1 8. and the content of the court of France, 319. im-
poses on Randolph, but applies to Q. E;izabeth lor conient to
her marriage, 32z. which she affeets to refuse, 3:3. il resent-
ment (he propoles to fend an ang;y nicllage to ElizatDcth, which
Maitland prevents, 325. jultifies her conduct to thie £ngli/h
ambaflador, ib. 326. endeavours to get Murnay's conftnt,
327. courts the pope's proteaion, and receives a aubfidy from
him, 328. her great address in gaining the consent of her sub-
jests, 329, 330. prevents a plot againit Darnly, 331. fum-
mons her vaflals to take arms against Murray, 33z. and him to
appear before her, 334. her marriage with Darnly celebrated,
335. Ihe confers the title of King of Scots upun him, ib. this
Itep censured, ib. her resentment againit the nialeconients, 336.
Ihe marches againlt them, 337. rejects the intc!ccllion of Q.
Elizabeth in their behalf, ib. continues her march againlt the
rebels, 338. her conduct and courage on that occasion, ib. 339.
drives them out of Scotland, 339. her further relcntnicnt
agiplft them, 340, 341. has recouile to fevcral devicc to raise

0 o 3 Inoncy,

money, 341, 342. her prosperity promotes her religion, 3.
her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 345. deter-
mines to treat them with lenity, 347. is diverted from this
by her religion and French influence, 348, 349. this the source
of her after misfortunes, 350. her intention to restore popery,
351 . is dif-uiled wiih Darnlv's insolent behaviour, 352. her
iamiiiarit\ ki:h RLiio offends the King, 35. vindicated
from anv cTim!r.al correspondence with Rizio, 356, 3;7. uses
her utroit encd . ours to prevent his murder, 3 9. Ihe is con-
f.ncJ by the con!'i-a:ors, ibid. she gains the King, and es.
car tron: t'.em. ;6c. is reconciled to the exiled nb!es, 361.
h.; iat'.. to) .arnl c iocrea:'., 3P, 363 6. and f;avrur for Uoth.

c t'i c,'.;: Inenee-, 3:'9. ex:;i! ui!h-5 s.o!me dom'i.,c Ifu.s among

t:'.'-: : '.-_, :7I. i1 dIliver d c' h r Ion James V1. in the Caille
o: - ..:ib..':h, ibid. invitis ieveral foreign pri-cts to his bap.
t;..::. :. ..co !inues to treat iDarnlv wvith neglect, ib'd. her
a:ac:'i!.c!.t :o Eoth i,el increases, 373. prevents lDanly'sin-
t rnce fii.. 'n;, 3-b. viii:s the borde-r, s 77 an inrftnce of
her r'a-rd 'or Bochwkcll on that ,Icca;ion, ibid. howv ne lival'd
Q. F. z.b:th, ,-. her right of luccetlion favoured by the
En i:h'

. a:lal ::'r.- ;. f~. ie cndeavours to avail herfelfofthat

o-.'-r::u:ar:. S. 1Si. ;, e talke an extraordin ry ftep in si-
vour i. poper , -,.;. r.i\'es a preentt from the pope, but
si ps hi- nuncio at Pr:is, 3S4. ,edeavours to procure a bet.
ter s..'':iicne to; the refcrmei clergy. ibiJ. 385. her aversion
to the K. r ex.Co vie, ibcomes melrcholi, ibid. she dec!ines
a c:vorce r:om h:.:. . oes to Stirling to celera::e her son's
bai: tifl,,-; . is cret'.v offended at the King's behaviour on
th,;t occain. 58n . r's!.-res tne popilh eccleliaftical jurisdiction,
3''. 39-'. t:er negleS of the King during his .ficknels, 39;.
the bc.achi between them becomes irreparable, ibid. 396. ihe
visits hin at G:a'3o.v, *5. the motives of her dillimulation on
th.C occ'i '11. i'. 9-. pre ails on him to come to Edinburgh,
3 :. her ifuticio:s behaviour to hi ; the.e, ibid. 400oo. issues a
procaireat;on for dilioveril;g his murderers, 401. is luppofed to
have been accc:r.!r to it, ibid. q4z. is charged with it abroad
as well as at homne, 4-:. goes to visit her son at Stirling, 417.
is re: cn h.r return b, Bothwell, who seizes and carries her to
Dunbar, ibid. 418. this supposed with her content, ibid. is
conu:itcd to E.!inburgh, 419. and married to Bothwell, 420.
ici:.s an apo'oy to the courts of France and England, 421.
her co::cuit cau'es a general indignation againlt her abroad,
423. i- alarm-d at a combination of the nobles againfr her, 424.
file pFu'li:hes a m.aniic:to to vindicate her conduct, 425. is con-
duct:d to the catle of Borthwick, 426. marches with Both-
teli's forces againlt the confederate Lords, 427. an attempt of
an accommodation proves vain, ibid. 428. is forced to fur-
renjer to the confederates, 430. is infalted by the soldiers and
mob, ibid. 431. is carried to Edinburgh, where many abuses are
offered her, ib. is sent a prifoncr to Lochlevin Castle, 434. Q.

Elizabeth

Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 436. the Ennlifh ambaffa-
dor is refuled accels to her, 437. variOtus proposals among the
confederates concerning her, 43S. ;g.; they oblige her to re-
sign the government, 439--441. diiter:'nt ra bnings on this
measure, 4-12-44i. is much moe.ie w.th the freedl, m of
the Earl of Murray, 446. her party among the noblec be-
come diipirited, 448. her relignaiion ct the Crown :-cccpted
by the Parliament, and her imp ifonment declared lawful, 450.
her letters to Bothwell read, and Ihe Jecl.red . ccefl.ry to the
King's murder. ib. escapes from Lochlbcin, .52, 453. ar-
riveC at Hamilton, 453. is attended b. manv nobles and a nu-
merous army, 4;3, 4;4. an afil)i.ition ligne in her d-fcnce,
45j. her imprudenc- in hazarcintg a ba:t:i, 45-. her ar:im
detfated by the conlfederates, ib:d. her pc'c.i: ate igflit into
G .,loiv.y, ;5a. ralhil determines to re;ir.' co inglan,., 459.
goes thither aainil the advice of her at'eninams, ib. 40o. ar-
rives at Cnrliile. 461. writes to Q. Eiizabeth, imploring her
good offices, Ibid. receives letters of cindo'ence from her, and
demands admittance into her pretlnce, 464, 45,. this refused,
and why, 46;. otrirs to firbmit her cause to Q Elizabeth, ibid.
is much dLceivcj in her expe.itiion from thi-, '6.q. and offend-
ed on dii-overin;s the artinces of Q_ Elizibeti ib. 469. ear-
nelly bolicits to te admit:ed into her prcfiL,ce, 469. fne is car-
ried to BAlton Ca le, 41. cniigrincd a: fi:ndi:;g herself a pri-
soner, .7z. agrees to an inquii:v into her conduet, ibid. her
difiimul:a'ion \i h regard to religion, ih. commfilioner- appoint-
ed :o appear ia her name, C75 her chief view in this affair,
4-6, J77. contents to moving the coniference to Weltminller,
4.3. the is carried to Tuthbury in Staffborelhire, 48.1. is much
offer.ded at the regard fhcwts, the Reent, and :ecalls her consent
to the conference, 4?;. the accu!.iions againit her produced by
the Regent, ..,-. is accui{ed li'ewiiie by the Earl of Lennox,
4'a. her co:nnm:fiiners refute to r.nlwer, and demand a per-
fon;l intervi ew, 488, 4). thve proteit againtt future proceci-
ings, 489. a fulpicious circulntilnce againli her, ib. 490. her
o:nmislioners withdraw frmn the meet.ng, 490. her resolute
anfsver to a harsh proposal of Q_ Elizabeth, 492. avoids any
fiirther progress in the inquiry, ibid. ib enraged at the procred-
ings, and proposes desperate measures, 493, 494. spreads chi-
merical conjeEtures with that view, 494, proposes a d.vorce from
Bothwel, 498. is influenced by the D. of Norfolk's fchenies,
ibid. exchanges many le:ters and love-tokens with him, 499.
confcnis to proposals from the English noble,, 501. their views
in this tranfaclion, 5oo-5c2. a rebellion by her adherents
againi OQ Elizabeth, So6. is removed to Coventry, 5oS. Q.
Elizabeth thinks of delivering her up to the Regent, 5 io. this
project how dilappointed, ib. 5it. acceflion ot Icveral to her
party after the murder of the Regent, ii. 5, 6. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ib. her authority proclaimed
at Linlithgow, 5. her parties dcf.atcd by the new Regent, 9,

0o 4 1.

lc. she ans.wers proposals by Q. Elizabeth, I. attenpts in
vain to get foreign afliftance, ibid. I. ".S!O n:ts commitironers
to frame a t-a:v for her liberation, 13 tni< prov;ng fruirleil,
she is more ilritIy confined, 14. the invalidir! of her refigna.
tion decl.:ed in a parliament held by her a-hcrents, 19. ac of
parlian.cent in Eng'and to cu b her and her rarty, 24. ihe
looks for prc'te~:i,-' from the King of Spain, :b. is denied the
privilege of ;;n ambaliador at the Court of England, :9 is
nmo.e close connned and watched, ib. procee.ings againllt her
in England, 3-. her interetl neoleaed by the French, 4. is
hurt bv the n;altacre at Paris. ;, '. her adi.erent divided
into tuo ;Ctiois, 4;. one or them joins with .'Irton t-.e Re-
gent, 46, review of :he char.a:ters of h;r adhererts ;: .rfpo.
rent·, 4!. -Q. her forlorn lituatinn. 40. is c.:ried to BIxion

'el s, ;o. iofes several of her friends by dc-:h. . :.; a

le::er ard prefrnts to ;er son. 6S. her mefl'r.gxr, h* i l ni:i:d
wi:hout ieeing him ibiJ. her unsa:ineis a: i;is c-n. r ': .e:

: v

the Ruthven conl'irators, 9;. com.l.;ns t., Q FIz:y :n of
her hard uage, ib. go90 nd beg' her irnercuiii;. r t'e ;i:'g
her son, ibid. Thr gmo'toc:'s comp!iacy in her favour. 11 1-
1 ;. a fruilefs nerocizaion xith Q. El.z.ibeth, I 1I. is al.::md
at an sac-biatior. jh defence o Q- Elizabeth. 1 19. is com:n.tecd
to m-refe fes-(re keeers, I :,. betrayed Lord Gray the Scotch
ambaffidor, 1i., i::. a ttarc:e fr t':.e preiervation of Q_ E'i-
rabth. proves fatal to her. Ix.. is more ric.roufl' trctceJ,
12-. her compla i.rs to Q. Eiiza'"eh c-iregarded. 1:-. is by
the French arb.itTador's i-.:erei, removed to T'lirb.ur ihbi.
is u"d: tu'.Iv trea!ed b.- t[e King her for, ibl.. 129. her Da'-
fonate comiclainc to thc French arnbail:. or o. that 'ccati.n,
1 z?. threa:ers to difinhe:it hin, ;-,. ileve-a! d -fcoveries al.
leged sgainft her, 146, 14-. i'e i ^ iardtc ' ni:h unusual vi.
e£i'r.ce, r.i0. her dome.ics., p. pe-s, \-c. are leized. iD:'d. ih
is conve ed :o F'..er'r. n; v C::ie, ib d. deliberanionsconcern-
ir.n the nE':ho3 o. :rx.eeing againll her,. i;. 1;, , i; fai;-
c'cus of paor-n or private murder, I; i, I; 2. v;nJica;es herlieifto
the D. of Gu.: , ibid. the corrmiiioner- fcr rr inc her arrih
at Ftheringay Catlie, I :. her Ip:rited ipeech wsvcn ref'uing
to p:ead, ibid. i ;. is at 'eng:h r'evai.ed on, ;:. she pro-
tetia aa:nti the authority of the court, 14. the accusation
aain:.o her, ib:d. he. defence, 1;I-1 ;7. her sentence, i58.
i:reUJ arites in her trial, 1 9. her fen:ence is confirmed by
pari.ment, ib. who demand the execut:on of it, 16c. France
ir.terDoifs feeb!v in her behalf, 162, the sentence against her
pulithed, 164. (he is treated nith the utmost rigour, 165.
her laiA requel} r. Q. Elizabeth, ibid. refuses the affitance of
a Protetlant B(ho. or Dean, 166. artifices used to inflame
the people againtl her, Itc, 169. her behaviour at her death,

o.-1,74. fen:iments of historians concerning her, 174, 175.

her chbrader, 17i, 1-6. her person described, 177. is buri-
ri6ft at Peterborough, and afterwards in Wcftminfer-Abbc),

ibid.

ibid, 178. letters from her, Appendix, 427. 451. 457. her
wvtl, App. 4zg9 obje&ions against her by Wallingham, App.
456, what course to be taken with her, ibid. a Dissertation on
th- Fenuinenefs of her letters to Bothwell. End of Vol. i.

ilaxU/ell, L'rd, arrives from Spain, and prepares torces to j!in

the Spaniards, ii. 19i. his followers difperied, he is takcn
prisoner -- - J.
MI.vsJil is sent by the French King to observe the motions oF the

Q!e".,c 'te'ent and her advertarics, i. 192. tent to make un a
dil:t..:r c between Elizabeth and Mary, 312. brings about an
an.tearance of f ienfhuip between them. ie. is lint to inform
Q. !izibeth of the birth rs K. J.lmes VI. 37.. puts a letter in-
to the Qre n's hand against her marriage x ith B.thwell, 416.
is forced to fly from court, ib. adviie's K. James to moderarte
meafurei upon his escape from the Ruthven conlpirators, ii. 09.

--- r. Andrew, a clergyman, his char.der, ii. 54. zeal-
oulv opposes Epifcopacv, lb. declines the civil jurildicti.n in
ecckfiallical matters, 1io. is forced to fly into England to
avoid persecution 05

Sir Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q Eliza-

beth lor Q. Mary. while under sentence, ii. 106. execuics his
commi.ffi n with fijelitv and zeal, 167. a memorial of his to
the King, Appendix - 446
--- Mailer of the household to Q. Mary. takes his all fan-

kel or her, ii. 172. her parting speech to him ibid. 173

n.i:kira', S:r Walter, sent by Q( Elizabeth with propofl.ls to Q.

NI-rv ------ --- ii. 10, 1 1
Minniuc, Bilhop of Valence, employed by the French toconclude

a peace with England and Scotland, i. z3 1, z:2. termis agreed
to by him - 233-25
lI:nr.gcmty appointed Archbilhop of Glaf-ow, ii. S6. is refused
and excommunic.ted by the genercal Alf.,n!ly for hi iirmmoral
lie -- -- - ibid. S7
l:-n:snrrcncy, Contiable of France, endeacvor, t,) Drevent the

Dauphin's marriage with Q . l'ry, i. 156. his ruJde.- advice
to Hcnrv II. 19z. makes a ilender appearance in favour of
Q Miary - -- - . 3
f/cr.s'x, Earl of, his irresolute conduct as to the Rc.f' nnation, i.

t+4. accompanies Q. Marv in a procreis to the N \:tn., z26.
iniligates Darnley to be avenged of R:zio 3,

3 ;; . t.'.es the

direct or, of that enters'rile. 3 8. is admiitteu d ri tee e Queen's
prcience, t ho promiles him a pardon, 3 ,c. i: forc'-. L !1t', into
England, 36z. obta;ns his i:.rdon on Bn.thwel' m enirceli;on,
391. leizes a ca'et with letter, from Q. Marvy to I ,tr.wcll. 43q.
h. is, by Q. Elizabeth's intrpnfiticn, in favour ith the Kinir's
party, after the murder of the Regent, ii. 4. appointed on; of
the commissioners to treat with the (Que n's party, i 3 hib de-
mands frullrate the meeting, ibid. 14. is entiriely minuenced
by the Court of England, 21. commands the ;ing's forces at
Lcith, 30. has several ikirmithes with the Qcuen's foices, ib.

closely

clorely befeges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, tl. a
suspension procured by the Englilh and French ambafradors, 32.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 36, 37. he is chosen
Regent, 37. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor.
thumberland, 38. obtains the temporalities of the Archbishop.
rick of St. Andrew's, 39. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 42. attempts in vain to gain Maitland and
Kirkaldy, 43, 44. makes a treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt.
ly, 45. gets possession of the Castle of Edinburgh, 48. his
severity to Kirkaldy and his brother, 49, 50. his adminiltra.
tion becomes odious, 5 . his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. 52. connives at the dispute of the clergy, 54
he irritates the nobles, 55. Argyll and Athol refuse to an.
fwer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord
Claud Hamilton. 56. discovers the defignsof the nobles againfi
him, and proposes to rcfign his office, 58, 59. his resignation
accepted by the King gives universal joy, 59, 60. obtains an
approbation of his conduct, and a pardon in ample form, 60.
continues to watch the motions of his adversaries, 61. is forced
to surrender the Cattle of Edinburgh, ib. resumes his authori.
ty, 62. gains the Castle of Stirling, and a feat in the Privy
Council, 63. procures a meeting of the parliament at Stirling,
ibid. 64. his security ratified in it, 64. forces are raised for
and againd him, 65. he is reconciled to his adversaries by the
intercession of Q. Elizabeth, ibid. is fufpeted of foul play at
an entertainment at his own house, 66. his illegal proceedings
againlt the family of Hamilton, 67. the King's new favourites
undermine him, 71, 72. he endeavours to prevent them, 73.
Q. Elizabeth interposes in his favour, 74. is charged with being
acceflary to the late King's death, 75. he is confined in differ-
ent prisons, 76. discourages an attempt to rescue him, ibid.
all his friends are turned out of office, 79. he is tried and
condemned, 8 1. his refo!ute calm behaviour and confession be-
fore and at his death, 81-83. his body is treated with igno-
miny _ 83
Murray, Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrew's, goes with a handful

of men against Huntly, i. 29o. by his great skill and courage
he gains a complete vicory, ibid. his grant is confirmed by
parliament, 300. cabals against him by Lennox and D;rnly, 320.
his aversion to Darnly and other Court favourites, -326. calls
Bothwell to sand a trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
ly's marriage with the Queen, 327. he and his aflociates are
made the dupes of Q. Elizabeth's policy, 330. concerts to
seize Darnley and carry him to England, 33 1. this prevented by
the Queen, ibid. avoids aflaflination intended him by Darnly,
ibid.-333. evidences of these plots, ibid. the Queen's vassals
are called to arms against him, 332, he is summoned to appear
before her, 334. is again summoned and outlawed on his non-
appearance, 336. is forced to fly with his aflbciates into Argyle-
flire, 337. they arc interceded fbr by Q, Elizabeth, ibid. are

pur-

sued by the Queen, add obliged to fly into England, 3'9.
they meet with unexpeted ill-treatment froin QElizabeth, ib.
340. courts Rikio to intercede with the Queen for him, 346.
many of his old friends solicit for him, ib. 347. the Queen's
fatour how intercepted, 348, 349. a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 350, 351. this hoi prevented, 35z. he and his
afbociates arrive at Edinburgh, 360. are graciodfly received by
the King and Queen, ib. are alarmed at the Queen's escape,
but soon reconciled to her, 361. he is appointed Regent dEr-
ing the minority of K. James VI. 445. his harlh behaviour ini a
visit to the Queen, 446. the success of his wife administration,
448. procures mary of the Queen's party to join him, ibid.
449. gets the places of strength into his hands, 449. his office
of Regent confirmed by parliament, 450. his severe and haughty
behaviour disgusts several, 451, 452Z his adherents in great con-
Ilernation at the Queen's escape from Lochlevin, 454. his pru-
dent condu& on that occasion, 45 5. defeats the Queen's army
at Langfide, 457. he improves this viaoty, 470. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament, 473. is called up-
on by Q Elizabeth to vindicate his conduct, 474. he arrives
at York, 476. his views in this affair, 477. complaints of the
Queen's commifiioners against him, 478. he behaves with
great reserve on this occasion, 479. this part of his conduct
accounted for, ibid. 480. intrigues with the Dtike of Norfolk,
480. his demands from theEnglifl commiflioners, 481, 48z.
answers the complaints of the (Qeen's commiflioners without
touching on the murder, 482, 483. agrees to have the confer-
ence moved to Westminster, 483. is affectionately received by
Q. Elizabeth, which offends Q Mary, 485. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder, 487. produces his evi-
dences, 491. is difmifled by Q. Elizabeth without approving
or condemning his coridut, 492, 493. his party is secretly Tup-
ported by her, 493. ieturns to Scotland, and by his vigorous
conduct, breaks the Queen's party, 495. he receives proposals
both from Q Elizabeth and QMary, 497. he disappoints Nor-
folk, 503, 504. an :acount of his murder, 5 I, 512. his cha-
raAer, 512, 513. his death much lamented by Q Elizabeth
and the King's party, ii. I. much anarchy the conlequence of
it, 2. part bs a lettet of his. App. 396* his heir murdered by
the Earl of Huhtly ,- .. ii. 266

N u, fecretarv to QMary, is feht by her with a letter and
ptreefict to her on', Hii. 68. wiliy Miflmled withbut ]Cihg'

him, ibid. Is ient with offers of humble' refignatioh to Qt Eli
zabeth, 119. is seized and sent prisoner to London, 140. is
produced an evidence against her 158
ENvil discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q. Eliza,

beth- .li. 126

Nobes,

X9blts, their extensive power, i. 22, 23. become turbulent and

formidable, 24. their power greater in Scotland, than in amy
other kingdom, a2. the causes of this, 26-33. their power of
long duration, 38, 39. it becomes intolerable to the Prince,
ibid. they are bumbled in France and England, ibid. but con.
tinue vigorous in Scotland, 39. discords among them encouraged,
40. their jurifdiAion circumscribed, 41. are greatly mortified
by King James V. 66-69. are disappointed in a scheme to (hew
their relentment, 72. refute to attend the King into England,
73. they seize the revenues of the church, 241. refuse to part
with them, to the reformed clergy, 242. 25, 252. diflenfions
among them, 28o, 281. a convention of them approve the
Queen'% marriage to Darnly, 328. several of them recommend
Bothwell as a hulband to her, 413, 414. a frange combination
of them on this occasion, 414, 415. a body of them associate
against her and Bothwell, 424. their different views in ;his,
ibid. a party of them favours the Queen, 436. they are much
dispirited by the gcod conduc of Murray, 448, 449. they are
much provoked by Morton the Regent, ii. 55. think of re.
dress from the King, 56. infuse suspicion of the Regent's
power into him, 57. a meeting of them by him, 58. a party
of them conspire against the King's favourites, 89. they seize
his person and drive them off, go, 91. their neglect of, and
ingratitude to the clergy, 138. the King attempts to reconcile
their feuds and unite them, 184. See Lordi.
Norfolk, Duke of, appointed a commissioner to hear the canfe be.

tween Queen Mary and her accusers, i. 476. forms a scheme
of mounting the throne of Scotland, 479, 480. intrigues with
the Regent and Maitland with that view, ibid. 481. he repre-
sents the demands of the Scots to Q, Elizabeth, 481, 482. his
farther negociations with refpef to Q. Mary. 498, 499. en.
deavours to conceal his designs from Q Elizabeth, 499. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent, ibid. 500. gets the
consent of many of the English nobles, 501. his projet ap-
proved at foreign courts, 502. is discovered and defeated by
Q Elizabeth, 503, 04. flies to Norfolk, 50S. he furrenden
on a second summons, and is sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid.
is set at liberty, and continues his intrigues with Q Mary, ii.
26. is betrayed by his secretary, ibid. is seized with his de-
pendants, and accufdd by them, 28. is executed ibid.
Nortbumberland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q

Mary, i. 506. his scheme defeated, 507, 508. he is seized by
the Regent, 509. is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,
and put to death at York - ii. 31
Aottingham, Countess of, rome account of the trasfattion con,

cerning the Earl of Efli's ring i
i,' :S

0

I N D E X.'

0

OCtaviafj, their inlitution and extensive powers, ii. 224.
Uthey undermine the King's ministers, ibid. become odious,

and a combinatton is formed againf them, 225. being split
into fa&ions, and envied by the courtiers, they resign their
commission - 241
Ogilvi, Lord, has a scuffle with Sir John Gordon in the fireets

of Edinburgh - i. 28;

Oliphant, Matter of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 89
Orangt Prince of, fends anwagent into Scotland, ii. 79. his in-

flrufions, ibid. is assassinated 13
D'Oi/l, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endeavours

to promote a war with England, i. l a4. his design fruitrated,
ibid. the number of troops under his command, x80. instigates
the Queen Regent to violent measures against the Reformers,
ibid. is sent by Q. Mary to demand a fafe-condua from Q.
Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scotland 26a

P

Aid/.y, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, i. 102. creates a sus-
[ picion of the Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent,

103. is made Archbishop of St. Andrews - 6 ,

;6

Parir, the massacre of, ii. 34, 35. rejoicings of the Popiih party .l A. , .

on account of it, 35. the conRternation and horror of the Pro- '<
tenants - - ibid.

Parliament, the nature of their original constitution, i. 76-79.

particularly that of Scotland, 79-93, 236. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 236. a difficulty started and an-
fwered, 238. their proceedings with regard to religion, ibid.
239. condemn the Popish and approve the reformed dotrines
240. several other regulations of the fame tendency, ibid.
241. their validity called in queltion, 242. exceed theirpowers
243. their proceedings laid before the King and Queen, ibid.
244. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, 410. pals an ad in
favour of the Reformation, ibid. 41z. confirm the proceed.
ings of the confederates, 450 parliaments held both by the
King's and Queen's parties, ii. 19. another of the Queen s ad-
herents, ibid. attaint upwards of 200 of their opponents, 21.
a parliament at Stirling by the King's party, 22, firprifed by
the Queen's adherents, ibid. another at Stirling, 63, 64. one
at Edinburgh, 72. and on the King's being of age, 183, 184.
several new laws made there, 184. 187. the lesser Barons ad-
mitted into parliament -- 87
Parry, Dotor, undertakes to murder Q. Elizabeth, ii. 25. is

encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. 126. is executed -' z6
ParMta,, a Jesuit, publishcs a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain'a

Spain's right of fuccefion to the Crown of England ii. 2
Pafidgadis and Pitures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly's murder,

i. 401, 40!. 411. a law made against them - 411
Pattzn, William, his account of the Scottish ancient military diC

cipline - - - 1. 120, 121
Palctr, Sir Amias, is appointed one of QMary's keepers, ii. 120.

his rigid severity to her, 1 7, i z8. d.fcovers her foreign cor.
refpondence, 147. his rude treatment of her, 165. refufesto
be concerned in privately affainating her, 169. a letter fro
him, ADpendix 471
P/llrvi, Bishop of Amiens, is appointed to support the popilh in.

tereif in Scotland, i. 2oo. drives the Queen Regent to violee
measures against the Protestants - - ibid. o01
Pertb, an infurre&ion of the Reformers there againf the Papiih,

i. 176, 177. its inhabitants are severely treated by the Qaee
Regent, 179. a French garifon placed there, ibid. is befiegd
and taken by the Protetants, 184. a great tumaut there on a:.
count of Gowrie's conspiracy - - ii. z;5
pbiUp Ir. of Spain, married to Mary Queen 6f England, i. l;8,

reinforces his army with her troops, 153. his great power, ii.
131. joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to invade aed
conquer England, 9go. his preparations for it dilatory, I.
his design frustrated, ibid. meditates an invasion of Englnd
through Szotland, g19. intrigues with some Scottish Lor
with 'hat view, 196. remits money to them - 2:9

Pi/ky, the battle of i. i9
Piiu V. Pope, excommunicates Q Elizabeth, deprives her of h

kingdom, and abfo!ves he;r subje.s . ii
PFt4i, one of Babington's copfpirators againf Q. Elizabith, ii

14+ discovers the plot 14;
Paltrot, a frantic zelot, afiafinates the Duke of Guise at thb

siege of Orlears - -- i.
Post, Mr. Robert, a minitier, and one of the Lords of Sefie

protefis against law-s oppressive to the Church - ii. ic3
Pop~r, where moR flourihing, i. 40o. what kind prevailed

Scotland, i,1. was pa;dy grafted on Heathenism, 186. i
much hurt by the Congregation, 2 39, their dodrines condenied
by Parliament, 2z0. the jurifdidion of their courts abolilhd,
ibid. their worlbip prohibited, ibid. attempt in vain to ga
Queen Mary's favour, 273. the great influence of Poppry, 349
PCer, the balance of, the great consequence of preferingi, B.

85, ~
PArtAi.triw church government eathifihed in Scotland, i. z4t. i

confrmed br King James VI. 207
Pr:ttrafr, in France, violently persecuted, i. 19,, 195, awe o-

derate on Q: Mary'- arrival from France, z67. are employ
by her in the admintafraton, 268. a fcbeme for fupprciE
them all over Europe, 348. a league formed for tht ppot.
ii. 1i. See R/sormaziu.

i

R Aft. a favourite of K. James II. narrowly ekcapes the

fate of his associates, i. 59. is appointed Captain of the

King's guard, and created Earl of Bothwell, 6o. See Botbwzll.
Randrm, Sieur de, employed by the French to negociate a peace

with England and Scotland, i. 232. teCms agreed on by him,

233, 234

Randolpb, fcnt to encourage the Congregation, i. 21 . con-

gratulates Q. Mary's arrival in Scotland, 269. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. is imposed on
by Q Mary in the affair of her marriage with Darnly, 322.
sent into Scotland on the murder of Murray, ii. 2, 3. inter-
poles for Morton, 77, 78. flies from Scotland in the night, 80.
is sent again there, and concludes a treaty with England, 144.
several of his letters, App. 318. 329. 331. 345. 353, 354. 359

Raltlif. See Suirx.
Rfirmation, its progrers in Scotland, i. 129. account of its firit

preachers, ibid. is much influenced by England, 130, 131.
two remarkable instruments of promoting it, ibid. it makes
great progress, 137. causes contributing to promote it, 139.
its advantages over popery, 149. is favoured by the Q. Re-
gent, 155. an instance of regard for it in Scotland, 156, 157.
the whole party not chargeable with Cardinal Beatoun's mur-
der, 165. a pried burnt for embracing it, ibid. 166. the re-
formers violently persecuted by the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's,
ibid. are proteAed by the Q Regent, 166. apply in vain to
the Popish clergy, 167. a persecution againit them pushed on
by the French interest, 172z 173. the preachers summoned be-
fore the Regent, 174. they are deceived and declared out-laws
by her, 175. a riotous insurrection of them at Perth againfl the
Papifs, 176. prepare to defend themselves against the Queen,
177, 178. conclude a treaty with her which the presently breaks,
178, 179. they take arms againf the Queen, 180, 181: in-
fill on redrelling civil as well as religious grievances, 82. the
influence of the Reformation on liberty, ibid. they befiece and
take Perth, 84. they seize Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. 1 8.
commit great violences on churches and monasteries, 1 8. their
condnc how acconnted for, ibid. 86. an inlsance of their mo-
deration, 187. fix their residence at Edinburgh, ibid. the
Queen prepares to attack them, 188. makes another treaty with
her, 189. are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but allowed
the exercise of their religion, ibid. demand the expulsion of
the French army, 190. are aware of their danger from France,
194. their party flrengthened, ibid. remonltrate against the
French fortifying Leith, 199. take arms in their own defence,
rot. remonirate again to the Regent, 203. are highly in.
cenfed at her imperious answer, ibid. 204. by advice of a con.
vention deprive the Quecn Dowager of the oflice of Regent,

20;.

205. the foundations of this condua, ibid. ro6. the growth
of it encouraged by parliament, 45o 45 1. See CMgregaotiet

Regalitiet, the ample jurifdiaion of i.
Repldging, the privilege of, to whom belonging i. 22
Revengc, encouraged both by cufom and law i. 4
Rweavune of the church, proceedings of Parliament concerning

them i.

2.
Riiolpbi, an agent for the Pope at London negociates for Q:Ma.

ry, ii. z6. his arguments with the D. of Norfolk 27, z8
Rii'o, David, tome account of him and his rife, i. 320, 321.

Darnly's connexion with him, 322. his good offices courted
by Murray, 346. his great interest and familiarity with the
Qneen, 353. incurs the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, 354. several concurring causes of
this, ibid. 3 55 a combination formed to murder him, 3S.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace -- 358, 359
Roema invade Britain, i. 2. give the earliest accounts of the

Scots - ibid.
Raft, Bilhop of, zealously promotes Queen Mary's interef at

London, ii. 27, 28. is confined to the Tower, and threatened
with capital punihiment, 28, 29. is set at liberty and banilhed
the kingdom, 29. some letters of his, Appendix 388. 409
Ruiay, a foreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Scotland, i.

150
R;itaen, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by Darnly,

i. 355. heads the conspirators against him, 358. his part in
that tranfalion, ibid. 359. is admitted into the Queen's pre.
fence, who promises him a pardon, 360. did not repent of it
at his death -- - 367
-. created E. of Gowrie, he and his afbciates seize the King,

and remonstrate against his favourite-, ii. 90,- 9g. drive them
from him, ibid. their condu& approved in an efembly of the
Rates, 93. the King escapes from them, 97. by Arran's in-
fluence violent measures are determined against them, too. Q
Elizabeth intercedes in their behalf, lot. are declared guilty
of high treason, 103. take refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
are harhily treated by Q Elizabeth, 122. a reconciliation with
her brought about, 135, 136. return to Scotland, and are re-
conciled to the King, 136. their moderation on being restored
to their estates and honours, 138. their neglec of their friends
the Clergy - --ibid.

-.-- that name abolilhed by Parliament, ii. 269. See Giamr.
Ratkw raid, what ----- i 91

S
C Adlr, Sir Ralph, appointed a commissioner to hear the cafe

between Q: Mary and her accusers : i 476
SaadiuindJ of Calder, Lord St. John, Cent to la the pioCeding

ot the congregation parliament before the Xing ani Qd oa

it

in France; '. 243. is coldly received and difmifled without 4.
ratification by them - 24
S:vag,, a Spanih officer, his desperate refolutiQn to kill Q Eli.

zabeth - - - . 142, 143
Scotland, its ancient hiflory fabulous, i. i. the origin of the Scots,

2. their history why remarkably obfcore, 3. some account of
the writers of it, 4, 5. is divided into four periods, 5, 6. a re-
view of the third ara, 7. some account of the controversy con-
cerning its independency, ib.-- a. this the cause of great
animofities and much bloodshed, 13. the fate of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 14. it begins to have an influence on
the fate of distant nations, go, g9. influence as to the balance
of power, 91. Rate of Scotland at the birth of Q_ Mary, 96.
is invaded by the English, and several places burnt and plun-
dered, 1o8, 1o9. much alienated from the Englilh, lo, 1 l .
a peace concluded between England, France, and Scotland, i i x.
computation of damages done by the Englilh in Scotland, 1 to,
1 I. a new breach with England, 116. is invaded by a great
English army, 118. the Scots are defeated with great flaugh.
ter, 11 9, zo. their manner of fighting. at that time, 120, 2 1.
a marriage agreed of their young Queen and the Dauphin of
France, 124, 125. they soon repent this Rep, 127. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aversion to the French, 128,
X z9. this inflamed by another incident, 150, 151. they decline
a war with England, 153. fend representatives to witness Q.
Mary's marriage, 156. their care as to the marriage articles,

57, 158. they refue consent to the demands of the French,
159. four of their deputies fufpe&ed to be poisoned, 160.
whichmuch increases the aversion, 161. grant the crown ma-
trimonial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the Englili for
afiftance againfi the French, 210, 216. an English fleet arrives
for.that purpose, 222. conclude a peace with England and re-
ceive an Englilh army, 223, 224. all parties agree in resenting
the French, 233. a treaty between England, France, and Scot-
land, 231, 232. both English and French armies leave Scot-
land, 236. they rejoice much at the death of the young King
of France, 247. fend to invite the Queen to Scotland, 252.
rejeft proposals of an ambassador from France, 253, 254. slate
of Scotland on Q. Mary's return from France, 264. great
zeal of the nation against Popery, 267. the Scots brought into
contempt by Q. Mary's condut, 423. in a miserable condition
after the murder of Murray the Regent, ii. 20. Rate of facions
at that time in it, ib. 21. a league concluded between Scotland
and England, 14o. a view of the revolutions of Scotland since
the acceflion of James VI. 293-307. of the policy of the fRate.
293-299. and of the church, 299, 300. of the genius and
tafle as to learning 3- - 31-07
Scott of Buccleugh, enters and ravages England after the murder

of Murray the Regent, ii. 2. the design of this 5

VOL. 1. P p Scroop,

Scrip, Lord, sent to cndole with, and watch Q.any m he

arrival in England - . i64i
&St.t,. Lords and court of, iy whom fiaiappointed, i.4. the

President and one half of their number of the Clergy .^.4

Setno, Lord, afifts the Queen regent in defndihg lirth i..i3
Sbrewiury, Earl of, the harge of Q .Mar' person committed

to him, i. 484. why removd from that fice, -ii. i0o. is
appointed to fee thefentence againt her executed, 170. letter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, Appen-
dix - - - 4
Sinrcair, Bilhop of Rof, a zealous papist, concurs as President

of the Session, in acquitting Knox of a shargeof trealon, i.

303
Somrfet, Duke of, enters Scotland with a povwrful army, i. 119.

is reduced to a very.citical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with greattiaughter, ibid. this vitory why of little advantage,
12z. cabals against him at the court of England, frce him to
return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies 6
Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. 189, Igo. See Ar-

mado. the lnfanta of, set up as candidate for the Crown of
England - -222
Spam- ambafador is ordered -to leave England, for iptrigning in

favour of Q Mary - - .29
Sprcr, his discoveries concerning .owrie's coDpiracy, ii. 9-

61x. is executed - 261
Stwart, James, prior of St. Andrews, is appointed to trr the

crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of ranc, i. 163, 164.
See St. Aadre-.s.
-- e Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in *codatnd, U. 70.

See &1gny.
--- Capt James, his character, ii. 71. becm~ a favourite

of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder ofrthe late
King, 75. is created Earl of Arran. See Arra.
*---Col. William, commander of the King's guard, contri-

butes to his escape from the Ruthven confpiraton, ii. 98.
seizes the Earl of Gowrie - - 106
--- Francis, created Earl of BothweU, ii. 196. jon in a

treasonable correfpondecce with the popilh lords, ibid. Sec
Bctb- a.ll
,-- all of that name combine in opposing the Chancellor,

ii. 213.
Strling seized by the Reformers, i. 18S. a pqrliament ihe by

the king's party, ii. a2. is surprised by the Queea's adhe-
rents, and a great fray ensues - - ibid.;23
Strczi, Leon, commands a body of French fentinto Sctand,

i. ti;. reduces and demolilhes the cafle of St. Andrews,
r 6. See Fract.

S$urtts, a remarkable flatte concerning it - 1. i.-
Suptriartt'd i proposed in the Church of Sotland. i. 150. tbiu
bufines - - - ibid.

S*Tm

$ . Earl of,one ofheommiffiones to hear the cause betweaq

Q Mary and her eccufers, i. 476. affpmbles a powerful amy
on the bordes, ii. 3, 4. he and Scroop enter, and ravag
Sctland

T
rT AX upon land Er proprfed in Scotlad i. 1sz

I tbragmrtn, Sir Nicholas, sent ambafiador extraordinary
from Q. Elizabeth, to oppose Q. Mary's marriage with Darn-
ly, i. 324, 32j. his intercellion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 346, 347. his enmity to Cecil, 347. is sent to ne-
gociate Q. Mary's liberation, 437. is refused access to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his, Appendix, 365,
366. 374, 378. 381. 383, 384.
--- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy against Q Eliza-

beth, ii. t 1. at sift he denies, but afterwards confesses it, ib.
11.2. reflections on his confeflion, 112, 113. is executed 14

Ticbboure designs to affallinate Q. Elizabeth - ii. 44

freafon, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law of
Scotland - ii. 259, 260

U
V ILMO R , a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland,

i. 150
Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of, ii. 298

W
W ALLACE, Sir William, bravely asserted the liberty of

his country -- i. 1
Walf/ingba, secretary to Q_ Elizabeth, sent ambassador to King

James VI. ii. loz, returns )vithout success, ibid. makes a
favourable report to her concerning James, ibid. interposes in
favour of Q Mary, 119. discovers Babington's conspiracy,
145. why a determined and inveterate enemy to Q: Mary,
149. a letter from him, Append. -- - 460
Warwick, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the government of Eng-

land - - - i. 26

ltr/lminfer, the conferences concerning Q Mary there i. 483
WIe/morland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q Mary,

i. 5o6. his schemes discovered and defeated, 5o8, 509. he
escapes to the Netherlands - - 509
hbitborn, the prior of, imprisoned for celebrating Mass i. 301
Will/x, a minister, declares for reftifance and deprivation of ty-

rannical rulers, i. zo5. is called to attend the Q. Dowager on
her dealh-bed - - 230
lJ'ibart, George, his illegal execution, revenged i. i z
'i!tccrqft, vigoroufy profrcuted in Scotland - ii. o20

w..t ei,_

Wotton, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a peace.

with France - . 232
_--- Sir Edward, sent by Q. Elizabeth into Scotland, ii. 133
his charaacer, ibid. soon gets into high favour with K. James,
ibid 134. procures a league between the two kingdoms, ib.
undermines Arran's power, 134, 135. forms a plot on King
James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave, 135, 136
ORK, the conferences there concerning Q. Mary i. 476

Z
OUCHE, Lord, sent ambaflador by Q. Elizabeth, to re.

monltrate against K. James's lenity to the Popifl lords,
ii. 17. his treachery on that occasion -ibid.

F I N I S.
6 ?E67
