HISTORY

o r
AME RICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,
AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOE SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

DUBLIN:
PRINTED BY J. CHAMBERS,

1797.

# PREFACE.

PREFACE.

IN fulfilling the engagement which I had
come under to the Public with reifpe to the
History of America, it was my intention not to
have publified any part of it until the whole
was completed. The present state of the Bri-
tifli Colonies has induced me to alter that re-
solution. While they are engaged in civil war
with Great Britain, inquiries and speculations
concerning their ancient forms of policy and
laws, which exist no longer, cannot be interest-
ing. The attention and expectation of man-
kind are now turned towards their future con-
dition. In whatever manner this unhappy con-
test may terminate, a new order ofthings must
arise in North America, and its affairs will at-
fume another aspect. I wait, with the folici-
tude of a good citizen, until the fcrment fiib-
fide, and regular government be re-eltablifh-

VOL. 1. a ed

ed, and then I shall return to this part of my
work, in which I had made tome progress.
That, together with the history of Portuguese
America, and of the settlements made by the
several nations of Europe in the Welt India if-
lands, will complete my plan.

TIIE two volumes which I now publish,

contain an account of the discovery of the New
World, and of the progress of the Spanish arms
and colonies there. This is not only the molt
splendid portion of the American story, but so
much detached, that it forms a perfect whole
by itself, remarkable for the unity of the sub-
ject. As the principles and maxims of the Spa-
niards in planting colonies, which have been
adopted in some measure by every nation, in
Europe, are unfolded in this part of my work;
it will serve as a proper introduction to the
hiflory of their establishment in America, and
convey such information concerning this impor-
tant article of policy, as may be deemed no
less interesting than curious.

IN describing the atchievements and infli-

tutions of the Spaniards in the New World, I
have departed in many instances fiom the ac-
counts of preceding historians, and have often
related fats which seem to have been un-

known

known to them. It is a duty I owe the Pub-
lic, to mention the sources from which I have
derived such intelligence, as justifies me ei-
ther in placing tranfadions in a new light, or in
forming any new opinion with refped to their
causes and effects. This duty I perform with
greater fatisfation, as it will afford an oppor-
tunity of expressing my gratitude to those bene-
fadtors, who have honoured me with their coun-
tenance and aid in my researches.

As it was from Spain that I had to expect

the most important information with regard to
this part of my work, I confidered it as a very
fortunate circumfiance for me, when Lord Gran-
tham, to whom I had the honour of being per-
fonally known, and with whose liberality of ien-
timent, and disposition to oblige, I was well ac-
quainted, was appointed ambassador to the court
of Madrid. Upon applying to him, I met with
such a reception as satisfied me, that his endea-
vours would be employed in the most proper
manner, in order to obtain the gratification of
my withes; and I am perfectly sensible, that
what progress I have made in my inquiries
among the Spaniards, ought to be ascribed chief-
ly to their knowing how much his Lordship in-
terestcd himself in their success.

a 2 BuT

BUT did I owe nothing more to Lord

Grantham, than his attention in engaging Mr.
Waddilove, the chaplain of his embassy, to take
the condu& of my affairs in Spain, the obliga-
tions I lie under would be very great. During
five years, that gentleman has carried on research-
es for my behoof, with such astivity, perfeve-
rance, and knowledge of the fubje&, to which
his attention was turned, as have filled me with
no less astonishment, than fatisfa&ion. He pro-
cured for me the greater part of the Spanish
books, which I have consulted; and as many of
them were printed early in the sixteenth centu-
ry, and are become extremely rare, the collecting
of these was such an occupation, as, alone, re-
quired much time and assiduity. To his friendly
attention I am indebted for copies of several va-
luable manuscripts, containing sacs and details
which I might have searched for in vain, in
works that have been made public. Encouraged
by the inviting good-will with which Mr. Wad. i;
dilove conferred his favours, I tranfinitted to him j
a set of queries, with refpedt both to the cuf-
toms and policy of the native Americans, and
the nature of several infritutions in the Spaniifh
Settlements, framed in such a manner, that a Spa.
niard might answer them, without difcloiing any
thing that was improper to be communicated to
a foreigner. He translatcd thcfe into Spanish,

and

and obtained from various persons who had refid"
ed in most of the Spanish colonies, such replies
as have afforded me much inftruCion.

NOTWITHSTANDING these peculiar advan.

tages with which my inquiries were carried on
in Spain, it is with regret I am obliged to add,
that the success with which they have been at-
tended, must be ascribed to the beneficence of
individuals, not to any communication by public
authority. By a singular arrangement of Philip
II. the records of the Spanifl monarchy are depo-
fited in the Archivo of Simancas, near Valladolid,
at the distance of a hundred and twenty miles from
the feat of government, and the supreme courts
ofjuftice. The papers relative to America, and
chiefly to that early period of its history, towards
which my attention was direaed, are so. numerous,
that they alone, according to one account, fil-the
largest apartment in the Archivo; 'and according
to another, they compote eight hundred and fe-
venty-three large bundles. Conscious .of poIfff-
sing, in some degree, the indufhry which belongs
to an hiflorian, the profpett of such a treasure
excited my most ardent curiosity. But the prof-
pet of it, only, is all that I have enjoyed. Spain,
with an excelss of caution, has uniformly thrown
a veil over her tranfations in America. From
itrangers they are concealed with peculiar folici.

VOL. I. b tude.

tude. Even to her own fubjeas the Archivo of
Simancas is not opened without a particular order
from the crown; and after obtaining that, papers
cannot be copied, without paying fees of office
to exorbitant, that the expence exceeds what it
would be proper to bestow, when the gratificati-
on of literary curiosity is the only objec. It is to
be hoped, that the Spaniards will at last discover
this system of concealment to be no less impolitic
than illiberal. From what I have experienced in
the course of my inquiries, I am satisfied, that
upon a more minute scrutiny into their early ope-
rations in the New World, however reprehensible
the a&ions of individuals may appear, the conduct
of the nation will be placed in a more favourable
light.

IN other parts of Europe very different senti-

ments prevail. Having searched, without fuc-
cess, in Spain, for a letter of Cortes to Charles
V. written soon after he landed in the Mexican
empire, which has not hitherto been published;
it occurred to me, that as the emperor was setting
out for Germany, at the time when the mefen-
gers from Cortes arrived in Europe, the letter
with which they were entrusted might possibly
be preserved in the Imperial Library of Vienna.
I communicated tlis idea to Sir Robert Murray
Keith, with whom I have long had the honour to

live

ein friendship, and I had soon the pleasure to
rn, that, upon his application, her Imperial
jefty had been graciously pleased to issue an
er, that not only a copy of that letter (if it
re found), but of any other papers in the li-
ry, which could throw light upon the history
America, ihould be transmitted to me. The
er from Cortes is not in the Imperial Library,
t an authentic copy, attested by a notary, of
t written by the magistrates of the colony
nted by him at Vera Cruz, which I have men-
ned, Vol. ii. p. 32, having been found, it was
nfcribed and sent to me. This, no less curi-
s, and as little known as the letter which was
eobjet of my inquiries, did not come to my
nd till that part of the history to which it re-
es was printed; but I have given some account
what is most worthy of notice in it, at the
dof Notes and Illustrations, vol. ii. Together
th it, I received a copy of a letter from Cortes,
ntaining a long account of his expedition to
onduras, with refped to which, I did not think
neceiary to enter into any particular detail; and
eveife tlofe curious Mexican paintings, which
have described, vol. ii. p. 284, &c.

MY inquiries at St. Peterfburgh were carried
with equal facility and success. In examining

b 2 into

into the nearest communication between our ccr
tin'ent and that of America, it became of confe
quence to obtain authentic information concern
ing the discoveries of the Ruffians, in their navi
gation from Kamchatka towards the coast of Ame
rica. Accurate relations of their first voyag
in i74I, have been publilhed by Muller anp
Gmelin. Several foreign authors have ente
tained an opinion, that the court ofRuffia flud
oufly conceals the progress which has been mal
by more recent navigators, and suffers the Pu
lic to be amused with false accounts of the
route. Such conduct appeared to me unfuiti
ble to those liberal sentiments, and that patrona
of science, for which the present sovereign
Russia is eminent; nor could I discern any politi
cal reason, that might render it improper to
ply for information concerning the late attern
of the Ruffians to open a communication betwe
Asia and America. My ingenious countryr
Dr. Rogerfon, firfi physician to the Empre
presented my request to her Imperial Majeft
who not only dicflaimed any idea of concea
ment, but instantly ordered the journal of Ca
tain Krenitzin, who conduted the only voya
of discovery made by public authority since th
year 174I, to be translated, and his origin
chart to be copied for my use. By confultin

the

em I have been enabled to give a more accurate
ew of the progress and extent of the Ruffian
coveries, than has hitherto been communi-
ted to the Public.

FROM other quarters I have received informa-
on of great utility and importance. M. Cheva-
er de le Pinto, the minister from Portugal to
e court of Great Britain, who commanded for
veral years at Matagroffa, a settlement of the
ortuguefe in the interior part of Brasil, where
!e Indians are numerous, and their original man-
-rs little altered by intercourse with Europeans,
as pleased to fend me very full answers to some
ueries concerning the character and institutions
f the natives of America, which his polite re-
option of an application made to him in my
;ime, encouraged me to propose. These satis-
cd me, that he had contemplated with discern-
ng attention the curious objects which his situ-
tion presented to his view, and I have often
llowed him as one of my best inftruded
uides.

M. SUARD, to whose elegant translation of
le History ofthe Reign of Charles V. I owe
the favourable reception of that work on the con-
tilent, procured me answers to the fame queries

from

from M. de Bougainville, who had opportunitie
of observing the Indians both of North and Sout
America, and from M. Godin le Jeune, wh
resided fifteen years among Indians in Quito
and twenty years in Cayenne. The latter ar
more valuable from having been examined by M
de la Condamine, who, a few weeks before hi
death, made some short additions to them, whic
may be confidered as the last effort of that atten.
tion to science which occupied a long life.

MY inquiries were not confined to one regio

in America. Governor Hutchinson took th
trouble of recommending the consideration of m
queries to Mr. Hawley and Mr. Brainerd, tw
Protestant missionaries, employed among the In
dians of the Five Nations, who favoured me wi
answers, which discover a considerable know
ledge of the people whose customs they describe
From William Smith, Efq; the ingenious hid
rian of New York, I received some useful inio
mation. When I enter upon the Hiflory of oc
Colonies in North America, I ihall have occafic
to acknowledge how much I have been indebt
to many other gentlemen of that country.

FROM the valuable Colledion of Voyage

made by Alexander Dalrymple, Efq; with who
attention to the History of Navigation and Disc

veI

very the Public is well acquainted, I have re-
ceived some very rare books, particularly two
large volumes of Memorials, partly manuscript,
and partly in print, which were presented to the
court of Spain during the reigns of Philip III.
and Philip IV. From these I have learned
many curious particulars with refpet to the in-
terior state of the Spanish colonies, and the va-
rious schemes formed for their improvement.
As this Collection of Memorials formerly belong-
ed to the Colbert Library, I have quoted them
by that title.

ALL those books and manuscripts I have con-

fulted with that attention, which the refpec
due from an Author to the Public required; and
by minute references to them, I have endeavour-
ed to authenticate whatever I relate. The lon-
ger I reflect on the nature of hifl-orical compofi-
tion, the more I am convinced that this fcrupu-
lous accuracy is necefiary. The hifrorian who
records the events of his own time, is credited
in proportion to the opinion which the Public en-
tertains with refpeEt to his means of information
and his veracity. He who delineates the tran-
fadions of a remote period, has no title to claim
assent, unless he produces evidence in proof of
his assertions. Without this, he may write an

amusing

amusing tale, but cannot be said to havecorm-
posed an authentic hiflory. In thote sentiments
I-have been confirmed by the opinion of an-au-
thor*, whom his industry, erudition, and dif-
cernment, have deservedly placed in a high rank
among the most eminent historians of the age.
Emboldened by a hint from him, I have publish-
ed a catalogue of the Spanish books which I have
consulted. This practice was frequent in the
last century, and confidered as an evidence of
laudable industry in an Author; in the present,
it may, perhaps, be deemed the effet of often.
tation; but as many of these books are unknown
in Great Britain, I could not otherwise have re-
ferred to them as authorities, without encum-
bering the page with an insertion of their full ti-
tles. To any person who may chufe to follow
me in this path of inquiry, the catalogue must
be very useful.

MY readers will observe, that in mentioning

fums of money, I have uniformly followed the
Spanish method of computing by pesos. In Ame-
rica, the peso fuerte, or duro, is the only one
known, and that is always meant when any fum
imported from America is mentioned. The peso
fuerte, as well as other coins, has varied in its

numerary
- Mr. Gibbon.

merary value, but I have been advised, with.
t attending to such minute variations, to confi-
r it as equal to four shillings and fix pence of
r money. It is to be remembered, however,
at in the sixteenth century, the effective value
a peso, i. e. the quantity of labour which is
presented, or of goods which it would pur.,
afe, was five or fix times as much as at present.

# CONTENTS.

CONT ENTS.

VOLUME THE FIRST,

BOOK 1.
PROGRESS of navigation among the ancients--

View of their discoveries as preparatory to those of
the moderns--Imperfetion of ancient navigation
and geography-Doirineof the Zones--Farther dif-
coveries checked by the irruption of barbarous nations
---Geographical knowledge flillpreferved in the EaJl,
and among the Arabians-Revival of commerce and
navigation in Europe-favoured by the Croifades
-extended by travellers into the EaJI-promoted
by the invention of the mariner's compafs--FirfJ
regular plan of difcoveryformed by Portugal-State
of that kingdom-Schemes of Prince Henry-Early
attempts feeble-Progrefs along the wejfern coast of
Africa-Hopes of discovering a new route to the
EaJI Indies--Attempts to accomplih this--Prof
pens of success.

B O O K II.
Birth and education of Columbus-acquires navalJkill

in the fjrvice of Portugal-conceives hopes of reach-

ing

ing the Ealt-Indies by holding a westerly course-
his fyJtem foutnded on the ideas of the ancients, and
knowledge of their navigation-and on the difJove-
ries of the Portuguefe-His negociations with dif-
ferent courts-Obltacles which he had to surmount
in Spain-Voyage of difcovery-dfficulties--/c-
cefs-return to Spain-lJ4loniJhment of mankind
on this discovery of a New World-Papal grant of
it-Second voyage-Colony fettled-Farther disco-
veries-War with the Indians-FirJt tax imposed
on them--'Third voyage-He diJcovers the con-
tinent--State of the SpaniJh colony--Errors in
firJi fy/lem of colonizing- Voyage of the Portuguese
to the East Indies by Cape of Good HLope--ffiels of
this-Difcoveries made by private adventurers in
the New World-Name of America given to it-
Machinations againfl Columbus--Difgraced and
sent in chains to Europe-Fourth voyage of Colunm,
bus-His difcoveries-difaJfers-death.

0 0 K III,
State of the Colony in Hifpaniola-New war with the

Indians-Cruelty of the Spaniards-Fatal regulati-
ons concerning the condition of the izdianss-Dimi-
nution of that people-Difcoveries andfettlemnents-
Firt colony planted on the cos tinent-ConqueJt of
Cuba-Difcovery of Florida--of the South Sea-
Great expectations raised by this--OCatifes of difip-
pointmcnt with respect to /hefe 'forfome time-Con-
troverfy concerning the treatiment of the Ilndians-
Contrary deciJions-Zeal of the ecclefiaflics, parti-
cularly of Las Cafas-Singular proceedings of Xi-
menes-Negroes imported into Anmerica-Las Ca-
ffis's idea of a new colony-permitted to attempt it
-unwuccefsfil-Difcoveries towards the wei-YIl-
catan-¢Compeachy-New Spain-Preparations Jor
invading it.

B O O K

B O O K IV.
tiew of America when firIf difco'ered, and of the

manners and policy of its mofi uncivilized inhabi-
tant.s--afl extent of America-Grandeur of the
objects it preJents to view-its mountains-rivers
-lakes-I tsform'favourable to commerce-Tempie-
tature-predominence of coltd-Cazifes of this-un-
cultivated--unwholefomei -its animals--foil-In-
quiry how America was peopled-various theories
-what appears molt probable-Condition and tha-
rater of the Americans-All the MAexicans and Pe-
ruvians excepted, in theftate of favages-Inquiry
confined to the uncivilized tribes-DifficulIy of ob-
taining information-vaPrious causes of this-Mc-
thod observed in the inquiry-I. The bodily confjitu-
tion of the Amnericans conjidered-II. The qualities
of their minds--III. Their domefiic fate--I.
Their politicalJlate and in]Jituions V. Their fyj
tem of war and publicfecurity-VJ. The arts with
which they were ac.quainted-VII. Their redig-ious
ideas and injiilttio: s-VJJLI. Sl/ch Jingidalr and
detached curioms as are not reducible to any of the
former heads--IX. General review and cjiimate of
their ,virtues and defJes.

VOLUME THE SECOND

B 0 0 K V.
iJflory of thc conquejl of New Spain by Cortes.

BOOK

B O O K VI.
Hi/lory of the conqueJf of Peru, by Pizarro-and of

the dijfentions and civil wars of the Spaniards in
that country-Origin--progref --and effets of
these.

BOOK VII.
Miew of institutions and manners of Mexicans and

Peruvians-Civilized fates in comparison of other
Americans-Recent origin of the Mexicans-Fats
which prove their progress in civilization- View of
their policy in its various branches-of their arts
-Fads which indicate a fmallprogrefs in civiliza-
tion-What opinion hozild be formed on comparing
those contradicforyfafts-Genius of their religion
--Peruvian monarchy more ancient--Its policy
founded on religion-Singular effecs of this-pecu-
liar slate of property among the Peruvians- Their
public works and arts-roads,-bridges-buildings
unwarlike fpirit-View of other dominions of Spain
in America-Cinaloa and Sonora-California-
Yucatan and Honduras--Chili-Tucuman-King-
dom of Tierra Firme-New Kingdom of Granada.

BO O K VIII.
View of the interior government, commerce, &c. of tre

SpaniJh colonies-Depopulation of America fJrJl es
fed of their fettlements-not the consequence of any
jyflem of policy--nor to be imputed to religion--
Number of Indians flill remaining-Fundamental
maxims on which the Spanif fyJlem of colonization

is

founded-Condition of different orders of men in
heir colonies-Chapetones-Creoles-Negroes-In-
ians.-Ecclefiafjicalflate andpolicy-Chara cer of
cular and regular clergy-Small progress of chris-
ianity among the natives-Mines chief object of
heir attention-Mode of working thefe-their pro-
~uce-Effecs of encouraging this species of indufiry
Other commodities ofSpanih America-FirJi effets
f this new commerce on Spain---Why the SpaniJb
olonies have not been as beneficial to the parent-
:ate as those of other nations-Errors in her fyJem
of regulating this commerce-confined to oneport-

rried on by annual fleets-Contraband trade-
Decline of Spain both in population and wealth-
Remedies propofed-View of the wife regulations of
tle Bourbon Princes-A new and more liberal sys-
tein introduced-Beneficial effects of this-Probable
*confequences-Trade between Mexico and the Phi-
lippines-Revenue of Spainfrom America-whence
it arifes-to what it amounts.

T HE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK I.

THE
H I ST O R Y

O F
AM E R I CA.

BOOK I.

THE progress of men in discovering and peo- B o 0 K
pling the various parts of the earth, has been ex- I.
tremely flow. Several ages elapsed before they --
removed far from thole mild and fertile regions Thlc arth

slowly pto-

where they were originally placed by their Creator. pled.
The occasion of their first general dilperfion is
known; but we are unacquainted with the course of
their migrations, or the time when they took pof-
itefion of the different countries which they now
inhabit. Neither history not tradition furifll fluch
information concerning tholc remote events, as
enables us to trace, with any certainty, the opera-
tions of the human race in the infancy of Olciety.

We may conclude, however, that all the early F;n, migra-

migrations of mankind were made by land. The rio lb'y
ocean, which every where lurrounds the habitable:
earth, as well as the various arms of thc Ica n hlic
icl)p;ate one region from another, t iouh ldclilne

VOL. I. B to

B 0 0 to facilitate the communication between diftans

I. countries, seem at first, to be formed to check the
C^V~ progress of man, and to mark the bounds of that

portion of the globe to which nature had confined
him. It was long, we may believe, before men
attempted to pass this formidable barrier, and be-
came so skilful and adventurous as to comrmit them-
selves to the mercy of the winds and waves, or to
quit their native shore in queit of remote and un-
known regions.

Ftempsto- NAVIGATION and ihip-building are arts so nice
wards navi- and complicated, that they require the ingenuity,
gation. as well as experience of many successive ages to

bring them to any degree of perfection. From the
raft or canoe, which first served to carry a savage
over the river that obftruted him in the chace, to
the conitrudion of a vessel capable of conveying
a numerous crew with safety to a distant coast, the
progress in improvement is immense. Many es-
forts would be made, many experiments would be
tried, and much labour and invention would be
employed, before men could accomplish this ar-
duous and important undertaking. The rude and
imperfect state in which navigation is fiill found
among all nations which are not considerably ci-
vilized, corresponds with this account of its pro-
grels, and denionflrates that, in early times, the
art was not so far improved as to enable men to
undertake diflaut voyages, or to attempt remote
discoveries.

introdufli- As soon, however, as the art of navigation be-
on of cum- C.
mercc. came known, a new ipecics of correspondence

among men took place. It is from this area, that
we nrult date the commencement of such an inter-
courne between nations as deserves the appellation
of commerce. Men are, indeed, far advanced in
improvement before commerce becomes an objecd
of great importance to theni. They mufl even

;,':",3,%. have

have ria'de some considerable progress towards ci- B O O K
vilization, before they acquire the idea of proper- I-
ty, and ascertain it so perfectly, as to be acquaint- ''
ed With the most simple of all contracs, that of
exchanging by barter one rude commodity for
another. But as soon as this important right is
established, and every individual feels that he has
an exclusive title to possess or to alienate whatever
he has acquired by his own labour and dexterity,
the wants and ingenuity of his nature fuggefi to
him a new method of increasing his acquisitions
and enjoyments, by dilfofing of what is fuperflu-
ous in his own florcs, in order to procure what is
necessary or desirable in those of other men. Thus
a commercial intercourse begins, and is carried on
among the members of the fame community. By
degrees, they discover that neighbouring tribes
possess what they want, and enjoy comforts of
which they wish to partake. In the fame mode,
and upon the fame principles, that domestic traffic
is carried on within the society, an external com-
merce is eflablifhed with other tribes or nations.
Their mutual interest and mutual wants render this
intercourse desirable, and imperceptibly introduce
the maxims and laws which facilitate its progress
and render it secure. But no very extensive com-
merce can take place between contiguous provin-
ces, whose foil and climate being nearly the fame,
yield similar productions. Remote countries can-
not convey their commodities by land, to those
places, where on account of their rarity they are
deiired, and become valuable. It is to navigalion
that men are indebted for the power of trani)polring
their luperfluoiis flock of one part of the earth, to
lupply the wants of another. The luxuries and
blellings of' a particular c l climate are no longlcr con-
fined to itlelf alone, but the c jI) n icint of t lich is
conlnlulic;tcd to the inloR Jilaant lcugious.

B z IN

B 0 O K IN proportion as the knowledge of the advan,

T. tages derived from navigation and commerce con.
*r"'"' tinued to spread, the intercourse among nations

extended. The ambition of conquest, or the ne-
ceffity of procuring a new settlement, were no
longer the sole motives of visiting distant lands.
The desire of gain became a new incentive to ati-
vity, roused adventurers and sent them forth upon
long voyages in search of countries, whose pro-
duEts or wants might increase their circulation,
which nourishes and gives vigour to commerce.
Trade proved a great source of discovery, it open-
ed unknown seas, it penetrated into new regions,
and contributed more than any other cause, to
bring men acquainted with the situation, the na-
ture, and commodities of the different parts of the
globe. But even after a regular commerce was es-
tablifhed in the world, after nations were confide-
rably civilized, and the sciences and arts were cul-
tivated with ardour and success, navigation conti-
nued to be so imperfcEt, that it can hardly be laid
to have advanced beyond the infancy of its im-
provement in the ancient world.

lmperfefi- AMONG all the nations of antiquity the firuc-
aotnnavi ture of their vessels was extremely rude, and their
among the method of working them no less defetive. 'They
ancients.

were unacquainted with fomc of the great princi-
ples and operations in navigation, which are now
confidered as the firfi elements on which that Ici-
ence is founded. Though that property of the
magnet, by which it attracts iron; was well known
to lhe ancients, its molf important and amazing
virue of pointing to the poles had entirely elfapcd
their obtervation. Dcflitute of ihis faitllhful guide,
which ilow condu(cs the pilot with lo much cer-
tainty in the unbounded ocean, during the dark.
ness of niglt, and when the heavens are covered
with clouds, the ancients had no other method of

regulating

regulating their course than by observing the fun B 0 0 K
anld liars. Their navigation was of coifequefice
uncertain and timid. They durst seldom quit fight s
of land, but crept along the coafi, expolerl to all
the dangers, and retarded by all the obftrudions,
unavoidable in holding such an aukward courle.
An incredible length of: tiie was requilite for per-
formling voyages, which are now finiihed in a nlort
space. Even in the miildeft climates, and in leas
the leaf tenipefuous, it was only during the fum-
mer months that the ancients ventured out of their
harbours, The remainder of the ycar was loft in
inacdtivity, It would have been deemed nioft in-
considerate rashness to have braved the fury of the
winds and waves during the winter +.

IWIILE both the science and practice of navi-

gation continued to be so defe&ive, it was an un-
dertaking of no small difficulty and danger to visit
any remote region of the earth. Under every dif-
advantage, however, the active spirit of commerce
exerted itself, The Egyptians, soon after the es- Navigaton
tabliflment of their monarchy, are said to have,,, . ortIi
opened a trade between the Arabian Gulph or Red lgyi)tit'n.
Sea, and the wefiern coast of the great Indian con-
tinent. The commodities which they imported
from the eatl, were carried by land from the Ara-
bian Gulph to the banks of the Nile, and conveyc(e
down that river to the Mecditerranean. But if the
Egyptians ill early times applied Lthlclcclvcs to com-
merce, their attention to it was of short clnraiion.
'J'lic lertile foil atl miild climate of Egypt prouluc-
cc tlhe neccflaries andi comforts of life \witi luch
)rofufion, as rellnercd its illhabitants so iidclepen-
denlt ofolher count rics, that it bccame an cfl;ibliih-
eld malximl a1mong that people, whole ideas all in-

fliiutions
Vcgctius q t. Re inilit. lib. iv.

B O O K flitutions differed in almost every point from those

I. of other nations, to renounce all intercourse with
<' foreigners. In consequence of this, they never

went out of their own country ; they held all sea-
faring persons in detestation, as impious and pro.
fane; and fortifyijng their own harbours, they de-
nied firangers admittance in to thlem ' ; and it was
in the decline of their power, that they again open-
ed their ports, and resumed aly comnnmunication
with foreigners.
Of the Phe- THE character and situation of the Phenicians

wians ere as favourable to the spirit of commerce and
difeovery as those of the Egyptians were adverse
to it, They had no diftinguiihing peculiarity in
their manners and institutions; they were not ad,
diEted to any singular and unsocial form of super-
fitiion ; they could mingle with other nations
without scruple or reludance. The territory
which they pofc'ffed was neither large nor fertile,
Commerce was the only source from which they
could derive opulence or power. Accordingly,
the trade carried on by the Plhenicians of S;idon
and Tyre, was more extensive and enterprizing
than that of any ifate in the ancient world. The
genius of tle Phenicialls, as well as the objc&t
of their policy and the Ipirit of their laws, weie
entirely conmmercial. They were a people of
merchants who aimed at the empire of the tea,
and aAtually pofl'eft( it. Theyir fitips not only
frlquented all tle ports in the Meditelrranean,
but thcy were the firfl iwho ventured beyond the
ancient boundarics of navigation, and palling the
Sircights of Gadcs, vilited the weflcrn coalls of'
Spain and Africa. In many of the places to which
they rclfrted, they planted colonies, and comminu

nicated

I Diod. Sicul. 1ib. i. ip. 7X. Ed. Weffclingi A'hi. 175,
Strabo, lib. xvii. p. 1l.;-. Ed. Ainll. 17o7.

ricated to the rude inhabitants fonie knowledge of B O O K
their arts and improvements. While they extend- I.
ed their discoveries towards the north and the '-
weft, they did not negledt to penetrate into the
more opulent and fertile regions of the south and
eall. Having rendered thenilelves maflers of feve-
ral commodious harbours towards the bottom of
the Arabian Gulph, they, after the example of
the Egyptians, established a regular intercourle
with Arabia and the continent of India on the one
hand, and with the eaflern coa1t of Africa on the
other. From these countries they imported ma-
ny valuable commodities, unknown to the reft of
the world, and, during a long period, engross-
ed that lucrative branch of commerce without a
rival *.

THE vast wealth which the Phenicians acquired of the

by monopolizing the trade carried on in the Red Jews.
Sea, incited their neighbours the Jews, under the
prosperous reigns of David and Solomon, to aim
at being admitted to some share of it. This they
obtained, partly by their conquest of Idumea,
which firetches along the Red Sea, and partly by
their alliance with Hiram king of Tyre. Solomon
fitted out fleets, which, under the direction of Phe-
rician pilots, failed firom the Red Sea to Tarshish
and Ophir, which it is probable were ports in Lidia
and Africa that their conductors were accustomed
to frequent, and returned with such valuable car-
goes as suddenly diffuied wealth and fplelndour'
through the kingdom of Ilrael '. But the singular
iiiflitutions of the Jews, the observance of which
was enjoined by their diviuc legislator, with an in-
tention of prcferviig them a fcparate people, unin-

fedted

' See NOTE I. at the end of the volume.
l Menioire fur Ic Pays t'OIliiir r M. D'Anville Mem. de
l'Aca;deli. des Infcript, &c. tom. xxx. 83.

B O'0 IK feted by idolatry, formed a national charadEer

I. incapable of that open and liberal intercourlle witl
L'ó^ iftrangers which commerce requires. Accordingly.

this unsocial genius of the people, together with the
disasters which bcfel the kinguonl of Israel, pre-
vented the commercial spirit. which their monarchs
laboured to introduce, and to cherish, from ifread-
ing among them. The Jews cannot be numbered
among the natiohs which contributed to improve
navigation, or to extend dilcovery.
oftheCar- BUT though the instructions and example of

the Phenicians were unable to mould the manners
and temper of the Jews, in opposition to the ten-
dency of their laws, they transmitted the commer-
cial spirit with facility, and in full vigour, to their
own defeendants the Carthaginians. The com-
monwealt h of Carthage applied to trade and to na-
val affairs, with no le's ardour, ingenuity and fuc-
cels, than its parent slate. Carthage early rivalled,
and soon furpafed Tyre, in opulence and power,
but teemns not to have aimed at obtaining any ihare
in the commerce with India. The Phenicians had
engrossed this, and had li'ch a command of the
Red Sea as secured to them the exclusive poiAeflion
of that lucrative branch of trade. The commer-
cial ascivity of the Carthaginians was exerted in
another diredion. 'Without contending for the
trade of the eft with their lother-co ut ry, lt)ey ex-
tended their navigation chiefly towards the wefl and
north. Following the course which the Phlnicians
had opened, they pasetd the Straits ol'Gades, and
punhing their difltoveries far beyond theirs, not on-
ly X ifited all the coalls of Spain, but thole of Gaul,
and penetrated at lafl into Britain. At thle fame
niic that they acquired knowledge of new countri es
ill this part of' the globe, they gradually carriccl
their rcilarchlcs tow'ards the loutll. .They made

conllidcrabllc

considerable progress by land, into the interior 1 O O K
provinces .of Africa, traded with some of them, I.
and fubjeted pthers to their empire. They fail- ""'
tdc along the weflern coast of that great conti-
nent, almost to the tropic of Cancer, and planted
Icveral colonies, in order to civilize the natives,
and accufrom them to commerce. They ciicover-
ed the Fortunate Islands, now known by the name
of the Canaries, the utmost boundary of ancient
navigation in the western ocean .

NoR was the progress of the Phenicians and
Carthaginians in their knowldge of the globe,
owuing entirely to the deire of extending tieir trade
from one country to another. Commerce was
followed by its usual effects among both these peo-
ple. It awakened curiosity, enlarged the ideas and
defircs of men, and incited them to bold enter-
prises. Voyages were undertaken, the sole objec
of whxich was to difeovcr new countries, and ex-
plore unknown seas. Such, during the prosperous
ae of the Carthaginian republic, were the famous
navigations of Hanno and 1-iimilco. Both their
lleets were equipped by authority of the senate,
and at public cspcnce. Hanno was diredted to
fleer towards the blol, along the coast of Africa,
and eiems to have advanced much nearer the equi-
noclial line than ary former navigator1-. H-imilco
had it in charge to proceed towards the north, and
to examine th e wcflcrn coafl of the European con-
tincntt. Of the fame nature was the extraordi-
nary navigation of the Phenicians round Africa.
A IPhcuician kleet, we are told, fitted out by Ne-
cho king of Egypt, took its departure about fix

hundred

Pllinii Nat. H-lif. lib. vi. c. 37, edit. in ufum Delph. 4to. 1685.
t' Plinii Nat. liill. lib. v. c. I. Itlnonis Periplus ap. Geo-
g'apl)h. mlinorcs, ed(lit. Hudloni, vol. 1. p. 1.

J l'linii Nat. lHill. lib. ii. c. 67. cfllus Avienus apud Bo-
l(hrt. Gcogr. facr. lib. i. c. 60. p. 652. Opcr. vol. iii. L.
B1.l,. 707.

z O O IK hundred and four years before the Chriflian aera,

I. from a port in the Red Sea, doubled the foutheri
s'rn- promontory of Africa, and, after a voyage of three

years, returned by the Straights of Gades to the
mouth of the Nile *. Eudoxus of Cyzicus is said
to have held the fame course, and to have acconi-
plifhed the fame arduous undertaking-t.

THESE voyages, if performed in the manner

which I have related, may justly be reckoned the
grcateft effort of navigation in the ancient world;
and if we attend to the imperfect slate of the art at
that time,' it is difficult to determine, whether we
ihould most admire the courage and sagacity with
-which the design was formed, or the condut and
good fortune with which it was executed. But un-
fortunately, all the original and authentic accounts
of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages, whe-
ther undertaken by public authority, or in profecu.
tion of their private trade, have perished. The in-
formation which we receive concerning them from
the Greek and Roman authors, is not only obscure
and inaccurate, but, if we except a short narrative
of Hanno's expedition, is of suspicious authority .
Whatever acquaintance with the remote regions of
the earth the Phenicians or Carthaginians may have
acquired, was concealed from the reft of mankind
with a mercantile jealousy. Every thing relative
to the course of their navigation was not only a myf-
tery of trade, but a secret of state. Extraordinary
fats are recorded concerning their solicitude to
prevent other nations from penetrating into what
they wiihed should remain undivulged §. Many of
their dilcoveries fecin, accordingly, to have been
fIarcely known beyond the precindls of their own
ilates. The navigation round Africa, in particti-

lar

* H-erodot. lib. iv. c. 42. 1 Plinii N:it. Hifi. lil). .

c. 67. :1 Se NOTE II. § Strab. Gcogr. lib
3. p. 265. lib. xviii. p. 1 15'4.

lar, is recorded by the Greek and Roman writers, B 0 o K
rather as a firange amusing tale, which they either I.
did not comprehend, or did not believe, than as a 'r
real trantfation, which enlarged their knowledge
and influenced their opinion *. As neither the
progress of the Phenician and Carthaginian dif-
coveries, nor the extent of their navigation, were
communicated to the reft of mankind, all memo-
rials of their extraordinary skill in naval affairs
leem, in a great measure, to have perished, when
the maritime power of the former was annihilat-
ed by Alexander's conquest of Tyre, and the
empire of the latter was overturned by the Roman
arms.

LE.AVING, then, the obscure and pompous ac-of thi

counts of the Phenician and Carthaginian voyages GrC'ks.
to the curiofiiy and conjeEtures of antiquaries, his-
torv must reft satisfied with relating the progress
of nvigati:.a and dilcovery among the Greeks and
Romans, which, though lets splendid, is better as-
ccrtaincd. It is evident that the Phenicians, who
inftru6tecl the Greeks in other useful sciences and
arts, dil not communicate to them that extensive
knowledge of navigation, which they themselves
poffefled; nor did the Romans imbibe that com-
mercial Ipirit and ardour for discovery which dil-
tinnuifhed the Carthaginians. Though Greece be
almooft clcompaf'ed by the tea, which formed
many spacious bays and commodious harbours,
though it be surrounded by a vast number of fertile
iflandls, yet, notwvit-hfanding such a favourable situ-
aiion, which teemed to invite that ingenious peo-
ple to apply themlelves to navigation, it was long
before this art attained any degree of perfection
among them. T'heir early voyages, the objct of
which was piracy rather than commerce, were to

inconsiderable,
* See NOTE IT.

B O 0 K inconsiderable, that the expedition of the Argo.

I. nauts from the coast of Thessaly to the Euxine

f' ' sea, appeared such an amazing effort of skill and
courage, as entitled the condudtors of it to be
ranled among the demigods, and exalted the vclf
fel in which they failed to a place among the hea-
venly constellations. Even at a later period, when
the Greeks engaged in their famous enterprizs
against Trey, their knowledge in naval affairs
seems not to have been much inproved. Accord-
ing to the account of H-omer, the only poet to
whom history ventures to appeal, and who, by his
icrupulous accuracy in defcribintgthe manners and
arts of early ages, merits this di.tinition, the fci-
cnce of navigation, at that tirpe, had hardly ad-
vanced beyond its rudest fate. The Greeks in the
heroic age were unacquainted with the use of iron,
the most serviceable of all the metals, without
which no considerable progress, was ever made in
the mechanical arts. Their vefils were of iiconfi-
derable burthen, and mofrly without decks. Thele
had only one mast, which they crected or took
down at pleasure. They were strangers to the use
of anchors. All their operations in failing were
clumsy and unskilful. They turned their obferva-
tion towards flars, which were improper for re-
gulating their course, and their mode of ol-'erv-
ing thenm was inaccurate and fallacious, When
they had finished a voyage, they drew their paltry
barks ashore, as savages do their canoes, and they
remlainled on dry land until thle Fcalon of relurllinl
to i(a approaclled. It is not then in the early or
heroic ages of' Grcece, that vwe can expc( lto ol)-
I'rve thle fiiencll of navigation and the Ipirit of
(iilcovery nmainlg any conliderable progrCls. Dii)r-
iiig tlhat period of dilirder and ilgnoanlce, a thou-
s1aitl causes concurred in relra.iniigLu curiosity and
cItecrprize wiihin very narlrow bounds.

BUT

BUT the Greeks advanced with rapidity to a B 0 O K

slate of greater civilization and refinement. Go- I
vernment, in its most liberal and perfect form, T
began to be established in the communities of
Greece; equal laws and regular police were gra-
dually introduced; the sciences and arts that are
useful or ornamental in life were carried to a high
pitch of improvement, and several of the Greci-
an commonwealths applied to commerce with
such ardour and success, that they were confider-
ed, in the ancient world, as maritime powers of
the first rank. Even then, however, the naval
vidories of the Greeks must be ascribed rather
to the native spirit of the people, and to that
courage which the enjoyment of liberty inspires,
than to any extraprdinary progress in the science
of navigation. In the Persian war, thole exploits
which the eloquence of the Greek hiflorians have
rendered so famous, were performed by fleets,
composed chiefly of vessels that were open, and
without decks *; the crews of which rushed for-
ward with impetuous valour, but with little art,
to board those of the enemy. In the war of Pe-
loponnefus, their ships seem still to have been of
inconsiderable burthen and of fmiall force. The
extent of their trade was in proportion to this low
condition of their marine. The maritime states
of Greece hardly carried on any commerce be-
yond the limits of the Mediterranean Tea. Their
chief intercouric was with the colonies of their
countrymen, planted in the leer Asia, in Italy
and Sicily. They sometimes visitcd the ports of
E'gypt, of Gaul, and of 'Thrace, or passing through
the Hellespont, they traded with the countries ii-
tualed around the Euxini sea. Amazing infianccs
occur of their ignorance, even of thofi countries,

which
* Thucycl. lib. i. .. 14.

B O O K whih lay within the narrow precinds to which

I. their navigation was confined. When the Greeks
'^T' had assembled their combined fleet against Xerxes

at Egina, they thought it unadvifable to fail to
Samos, because they believed the distance between
that island and Egina to be as great as the distance
between Egina and the Pillars of Hercules*. They
were either utterly unacquainted with all the parts
of the globe beyond the Mediterranean sea, or
what knowledge they had of them was founded on
conjecure, or derived from the informations of a
few persons, whom curiosity and the love of science
had prompted to travel by land into the Upper
Asia, or by lea into Egypt, the ancient feats of
wisdom and arts. After all that the Greeks learn-
ed from them, they appear to have been ignorant
of the most important fads, on which an accurate
and scientific knowledge of the globe is founded.

THE expedition of Alexander the Great into the

east, considerably enlarged the sphere of navigation
and of geographical knowledge among the Greeks.
That extraordinary man, notwithtfanding the vio-
lent passions which incited him, at some times, to
the wildest actions, and the most extravagant en-
terprifes, possessed talents which fitted him not only
to conquer, but to govern the world. He was ca-
pable of framing those bold and original fchenes
of policy, which give a new form to human affairs.
The revolution in comnnerce, brought about by
the force of his genius, is hardly inferior to that
revolution in empire, occasioned by the success of
his arms. It is probable, that the opposition and
efforts of the republic of Tyre, which checked
him so long in the career of his vicories, gave
Alexander an opportunity of observing the vast re-

lources
I.Trodot. lib. viii. c. 132.

1

sources of a.maritime power, and conveyed to him B O 0 K
ibme idea of the immense wealth which the Tyri- I.
ans derived from their commerce, especially that 'rJ
with the East Indies. As soon as he had accom-
plifhed the defirudtion of that state, and reduced
Egypt to fubjedion, he formed the plan of ren-
dering the empire which he proposed to eflabliih,
the centre of commerce as well as the feat of do-
minion. With this view he founded a great city,
which he honoured with his own name, near one
of the mouths of the river Nile, that by the Me-
diterranean sea, and the neighbourhood of the
Arabian Gulf, it might command the trade both
of the east and weft*. This situation was cholieu
\ ith such discernment, that Alexandria soon be-
came the chief commercial city in the world. Not
| only during the subsistence of the Grecian em-

pire in Egypt and in the east, but amidfl all the
successive revolutions in those countries, from
the time of the Ptolemies to the discovery of the
navigation by the Cape of Good Hope, com-
merce, particularly that of the East Indies, con-
tinued to flow in the channel which the sagacity
i and foresight of Alexander had marked out for
it.

His ambition was not satisfied with having open-
ed to the Greeks a communication with India by
lea; he aspired to the sovereignty of those regions
which furnished the reft of mankind with so many
precious commodities, and conduced his army thi-
tier by land. Enterprising, however, as he was,
he may be laid rather to have diicovered, than to
have conquered that country. He did not, in his
progrels towards the calt, advance beyond the
banks of the rivers that fall into the Indus, which is
now the weltern boundary of the valt continent of

of
* Strab. Gcogr. lib. xvii. p. 143. 1149.

- B O O K India. Amidst the wild exploits which diftinguisi!

I. this part of his history, he pursued measures that
vrTr mark the superiority of his genius, as well as the

extent of his views. He had penetrated as far into
India as to confirm his opinion of its commercial
importance, and to perceive that immense wealth
might be derived from intercourse with a country,
where the arts of elegance having been more early
cultivated, were arrived at greater perfection than
in any other part of the earth ". Full of this idea,
he resolved to examine the course of navigation
from the mouth of the Indus to the bottom of the
Persian Gulph; and if it should be found praftica-
ble, to establish a regular communication between
them. In order to effete this, he proposed to re-
move the catarats, with which, the jealousy of
the Persians, and their aversion to correspondence
with foreigners, had obftruted the entrance into
the Euphratest; to carry thelcommodities of the
east up that river, and the Tigris, which unites
with it, into the interior parts of his Asiatic do.
minions; while by the way of the Arabian Gulph,
,and the river Nile, they might be conveyed to
Alexandria, and difiributed to the reft of the world.
Nearchus, an officer of eminent abilities, was en-
trusted with the command of the fleet fitted out
for this expedition. He performed this voyage,
which was deemed an enterprise so arduous and
important, that Alexander reckoned it one of
the most extraordinary events which diftinguifhi
cd his reign. Inconsiderable as it may now ap-
pear, it was, at that time, an undertaking of no
little merit and difficulty. In the prosecution of
it, firiking instances occur of the finall progrcls
which the Greeks had made in naval know-
ledge t. -laving never failed beyond the

bounds

* Strab. Geogr. lil. xv. p 1. 36. Curtius, lib. xviii. c. 9'
1 Strab. Gcogr, lib. xvid. i0. 175 . See NOTE IV.

bounds of the Mediterranean, where the ebb and B 0 OI
flow of the lea are hardly perceptible, when they I
firll observed this phenomenon at the mouth of ~
the Indus, it appeared to them a prodigy, by which
the gods testified the displeasure of Heaven against
their enterprise *. During their whole course,
they leem never to have loit fight of land, but
followed the bearings of the coast so servilely,
that they could not much avail themselves 'of those
periodical winds, wliich facilitate navigation in
the Indian ocean. Accordingly, they spent no
less than ten months f in performing this voy-
age, which, from the mouth of the Indus to that
of the Persian Gulph, does not exceed twenty de-
grees. It is probable, that amidit the violent con-
vulfions, and frequent revolutions in the east, oc-
cafioned by the contests among the successors of
Alexander, the navigation to India, by the course
which Nearchus had- opened, was difconitinued.
The Indian trade carried on at Alexandria, not
only fublified, but was so much improved under
the Grecian monarchs of Egypt, that it proved a
great source of the wealth which difillguifhed that
kingdom.

THrE progrcfs which the Romans made in navi- of tie Ro-

gation and dilcovery, was still more inconsiderable m""n
than that of the Greeks. The genius of the Roman
people, their military education, and the spirit of
their laws, concurred in estranging them from coni-
merce and naval affairs. It was the neceflity of op-
posing a formidable rival, not the desire of extend-
ing trade, which firit prompted them to aim at ma-
ritiine power. Though they soon perceived that,
in order to acquire the univerlal dominion after
which they aspircd, it was neceffaryto render them-
selves maflers of the sea, they still confidercd the na-
val Iervice as a subordinate Rlation, and rclcrved for

VoL. I. C it
: See NOTE V. t Plin, Ilill. Nat, lib. vi. c. 23.

0O 0 K it such citizens as were not of a rank to be admitted
I. into the legions*. In the history of the Roman re-
'--m.' public, hardly one event occurs, that marks attenti-

on to navigation any farther than as it was infiru.
mental towards conquefi. When the Roman valour
and discipline had subdued all the maritime iates
knownin the ancient world; when Carthage, Greece,
and Egypt, had submitted to their power, the Ro-
mans did not imbibe the commercial spirit of the
conquered nations. Among that people of soldiers,
to have applied to trade would have been deemed a
degradation of a Roman citizen. They abandoned
the mechanical arts, commerce, and navigation, to
slaves, to freemen, to provincials, and to citizens
of the lower class. Even after the subversion of
liberty, when the severity and haughtiness of an-
cient manners began to abate, commerce did not
rife into high estimation among the Romans. The
trade of Greece, Egypt, and the other conquered
countries, continued to be carried on in their an-
cient channels, after they were reduced into the
form of Roman provinces. As Rome was the capi-
tal of the world, and the feat of government, all the
wealth and valuable productions of the provinces
flowed naturally thither. The Romans, satisfied
with this, seemed to have suffered commerce to re-
main almost entirely in the hands of the natives of
the refpeDive countries. The extent, however, of
the Roman power, which reached over almost the
whole known world, the vigilant infpe6tion of the
Roman magifirates, and the spirit of the Roman
government, no less intelligent than aative, gave
such additional security to commerce, as animated
it with new vigour. The union anmng nations was
never to entire, nor the intercourse so perfect, as
within the bounds of this vast empire. Commerce
under their dominion, was not obftruated by the

jealousy
* Polyb. lib. v.

jealousy of rival states, interrupted by frequent B o O K
hostilities, or limited by partial reftriaions. One I
superintending power moved and regulated the Tr'
industry of mankind, and enjoyed the fruits of
their joint efforts.

NAVIGATION felt this influence, and improved

under it. As soon as the Romans acquired a tafle
for the luxuries of the east, the trade with India
through Egypt was pushed with new vigour, and
carried on to greater extent. By frequenting the
Indian continent, navigators became acquainted
with the periodical course of the winds, which,
in the ocean that separates Africa from India,
blow with little variation during one half of the
year from the east, and during the other half fix
with equal iteadinefs in the weft. Encouraged by
observing this, they abandoned their ancient flow
and dangerous course along the coast, and as soon
as the western monsoon set in, took their departure
from Ocelis, at the mouth of the Arabian gulf, and
stretched boldly across the ocean *. The uniform
direaion of the wind, supplying the place of the
compass, and rendering the guidance of the stars
less necessary, conducted them to the port of Mu-
firis, on the weflern shore of the Indian continent.
There they took on board their cargo, and return-
ing with the eastern monsoon, finished their voyage
to the Arabian gulf within the year. This part io
India, now known by the name of the Malabar
coast, seems to have been the utmost limit of an-
cient navigation in that quarter of the globe. What
imperfet knowledge the ancients had of the im-
mense countries which stretch beyond this towards
the east, they received from a few adventurers, who
had visited them by land. Their excursions were
not extensive, and it is probable, that while the
Roman intercourlf with India subsistcd, no traveller

C ever
Plin. Hilt. Nat. lib. vi. c. 23.

B O
O K ever penetrated further than to the banks of the

I. Ganges%. The fleets from Egypt which traded at
"T'I' IMufiris were loaded, it is true, with the spices and

other rich commodities of the continent and islands
of the farther India; but there were brought to that
port, which became the flaple of this commerce,
by the Indians themselves, in canoes made of one
treet. The Egyptian and Roman merchants, fatisfi-
ed with acquiring these commodities in this man-
ner, did not think it necessary to explore unknown
seas, and venture upon a dangerous navigation, in
quest of the countries which produced them. BuL
though the discoveries of the Romans in India
were so limited, their commerce there was such as
will appear considerable, even to the present age,
in which the Indian trade has been extended far
beyond the practice or conception of any preced-
ing period. We are informed by one author of
credit 11, that the commerce with India drained the
Roman empire every year of more than four hun-
dred thousand pounds; and by another, that one
Aundred and twenty ihips failed annually from the
Arabian gulf to that country I.

Difcoveiies THE discovery of this new method of failing to
eos the b India is the most considerable improvement in navi-
land. gation made during the continuance of the Roman

power. But in ancient times, the knowledge of
countries was acquired more by land than by sea§;
and the Romans, from their peculiar disinclination
to naval affairs, may be said to have neglected to-
tally the latter, though a more easy and expeditious
method of discovery. The progress, however, of
their victorious armies contributed greatly to extend
discovery by land, and even opened the navigation
of new and unknown seas. Previous to the Roman

conqucts,

I Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. too6. ioo. See NOTE VI.
i Plin. Nat. Hilt. lib. vi .

c . i26. bid.
t Strab. Geogr. lib. ii. p. 179. § Sec NOTE VIL

conquests, the civilized nations of antiquity had B O O K
no communication with those countries in Europe, I
which now form its most opulent and powerful
kingdoms. The interior parts of Spain and of
Gaul were little known. Britain, separated from
the reft of the world, had never been visited, except
by its neighbours the Gauls, and by a few Cartha-
ginian merchants. The name of Germany had
scarcely been heard of. Into all these countries
the arms of the Romans penetrated. They en-
tirely subdued Spain and Gaul; they conquered
the greatefl and most fertile part of Britain; they
advanced into Germany, as far as the banks of
the river Elbe. In Africa, they acquired a confi-
derable knowledge of the provinces, which firetch
along the Mediterranean sea, from Egypt weft-
ward to the straits of Gades. In Asia, they not
only fubjeded to their power most of the pro-
vinces which compoted the Persian and Macedo-
nian empires, but, after their victories over Mi-
thridates and Tigranes, they seem to have survey-
ed the countries contiguous to the Euxine and
Caspian seas, more accurately than they had been
formerly, and to have carried on a more exten-
five trade than that of the Greeks with the opu-
lent and commercial nations, then feated around
the Euxine sea.

FROM this fuccint furveyofdifcoveryand navi- imrperec.

gation, which I have traced from the earliest dawn tr,philO
of historical knowledge to the full efrablifhment of kirowlkdg
the Roman dominion, their progress appears to be airnjg tl
wonderfully flow. It seems neither adequate to
what swe might have expected from the activity and
ceterprife of the human mind, nor to what might
have been performed by the power of the great
empires that successively goverlncd the world. If
we rejccct accounts that are fabulous and obscure; if
we adhere feadily to the light and information of

authentic

'00 -K'anthtentic history, without substituting in its place
I. the conjectures of fancy, or the dreams of etymo.
~-r-' logift&, we muff conclude, that the knowledge

'which the ancients had acquired of the habitable
globe was extremely confined. In Europe, the
'extensive provinces in the eastern part of Germa-
ny were hardly known to them. They were al-
most totally unacquainted with the valf countries
which are now subjet to the kings of Denmark,
Sweden, Prussia, Poland, and the Ruffian empire,
The more barren regions, that stretch within the
ardtic circle, were quite unexplored, In Africa,
their researches did not extend far beyond the
provinces which border on the Mediterranean,
and those situated on the weflern shore of the
Arabian gulf. In Asia, they were unacquainted,
as I formerly observed, with all the fertile and
opulent countries beyond the Ganges, which fur-
nifh the most valuable commodities that, in mo.
dern times, have been the great objet of the Eu-
ropean commerce with India; nor do they seem
to have ever penetrated into those immense re-
gions occupied by the wandering tribes, which
they called by the general name of Sarmatians or
Scythians, and now possessed by Tartars of vari-
ous denominations, and by the Asiatic .fubjets of
Russia.

A remark- B u T there is one opinion that universally prevail.
'ofthis0 ed among the ancients, which conveys a more

striking idea of the small progress they had made
in the knowledge of the habitable globe, than can
be derived from ally detail of their discoveries,
They supposed the earth to be divided into five re-
gions, which they difinguifhed by the name of
,zones. Two of these, which wereneareft the poles,
they termed frigid zones, and believed that the ex-
treme cold which reigned perpetually there, rcn.
dered themh uninhabitable. Another, scated un-

der

der the line, and extending on either fide towards B o o K
the tropics, they called the torrid zone, and ima- L
gined it to be so burnt up with unremitting heat, s"T
as to be equally destitute of inhabitants. On the
two other zones, which occupied the remainder of
the earth, they bellowed the appellation of tempe-
rate, and taught that these, being the only regions
in which life could subsist, were allotted to man for
his habitation. This wild opinion was not a con-
ceit of the uninformed vulgar, or a fanciful fiction
of the poets, but a system adopted by the most en-
lightened philosophers, the most accurate historians
and geographers in Greece and Rome. According
to this theory, a vail portion of the habitable earth
was pronounced to be unfit for sustaining the hu-
man species. Those fertile and populous regions
within the torrid zone, which are now known not
only to yield their own inhabitants the necessaries
and comforts of life, with most luxuriant profusion,
but to communicate their superfluous stores to the
reft of the world, were supposed to be the mansion
of perpetual flerility and desolation. As all the
parts of the globe, which the ancients had disco-
vered, lay within the northern temperate zone,
their opinion that the other temperate zone was
filled with inhabitants, was founded on reasoning
and conjecure, not on discovery. They even be-
lieved that, by the intolerable heat of the torrid
zone, such an insuperable barrier was placed be-
tween the two temperate regions of the earth, as
would prevent for ever any intercourie between
their refpeaive inhabitants. Thus this extrava-
gant theory not only proves that the ancients were
unacquainted with the true state of the globe, but
it tended to render their ignorance of it perpetual,
by representing all attempts towards opening a
communication with the remote regions of the
earth, as utterly impradticable*.

Bu T
* Sec NOTE VIII.

B O O K BUT, however imperfe& or inaccurate the geo-

graphical knowledge which the Greeks and Romans
^r^ ' (had acquired may appear, in refpe& of the present

improved fate of that science, their progress in
discovery will seen considerable, and- the extent
to which they carried navigation and commerce
must be reckoned great, when compared with the
ignorance of early times. As long as the Roman
empire retained such vigour as to preserve its au-
thority over the conquered nations, and to keep
them united, it was an objeEt of public police, as
well as of private curiosity, to examine and de-
scribe the countries which composed this great
body. Even when the other fiiences began to
decline, geography, enriched with new obferva-
tions, and receiving some accession from the expe-
rience of every age, and the reports of every tra-
veller, continued to improve. It attained to the
highest point of perfedion and accuracy to which
it ever arrived in the ancient world, by the indus-

Improve- try and genius of Ptolemy the philosopher. He
mentsin flourished in the second century of the Christian
geography
by Ptolemy. era, and published a description of the terrefirial

globe, more ample and exad than that of any of his
predecessors.

The iva- BUT,'foon after, violent convulsions began to
lion of the
.oman em- hake the Roman slate; the fatal ambition or ca-

re by bar- price of Contantine, by changing the feat of go-

'arous na- o t
tions. vernment, divided and weakened its force; the

barbarous nations, which Providence prepared as
its infiruments to overturn the mighty fabric of the
Roman power, began to assemble and to muster
their armies on its frontier; the empire tottered
lo its fall. During this decline and old age of the
Roman flatc, it was impoflible that the sciences
should go on improving. The eflbrts of genius
were, at that period, as languid and feeble as
those of government. From the time of Ptolemy,

nQ

no considerable addition seems to have been made B O O K
to geographical knowledge, nor did any import- I
ant revolution happen in trade, excepting that 'Tv
Conflantinople, by its advantageous situation and
the encouragement of the Eastern emperors, be-
came a commercial city of the first note.

AT length, the clouds which had been so' long Efas of
gathering round the Roman empire, burit into a their Con-

b &

, , ,

* .' n i * * i * quests on

ilorm. The barbarous nations rushed in with ir- commercial
rcfifible impetuosity, and, in the general wreck, intercourf
occasioned by the inundation which overwhelmed
Europe, the arts, sciences, inventions and disco-
veries of the Romans, perished and disappeared i.
All the various tribes, which conquered and set-
tied in the different provinces of the Roman em-
pire, were uncivilized, firangers to letters, defii-
tute of arts, unacquainted with regular govern-
ment, subordination, or laws. The manners and
inflitutions of some of them were so rude and bar-
barous, as to be hardly compatible with a fiate of
social union. Europe, when occupied by such
inhabitants, may be said to have returned to a
second infancy, and had to begin anew its career
in improvement, science, and civility. The firfi
effeEt of the settlement of those barbarous inva-
ders was to dissolve the union by which the Ro-
man power had cemented mankind together.
They parcelled out Europe into many small and
independent flates, differing from each other in
language and customs. No intercourse subsisted
between the members of those divided and hostile
communities. Accustomed to a simple mode of
life, and averse to industry, they had few wants
to supply, and no superfluities to dilpofc of. The
names of stranger and of enenmy became once more
words of the fame import. Customs every-whe;e

prevailed,
Hist. of Charles V. vol i. 18. 8 7z

B O 0 K prevailed, and even laws were established which

I. rendered it disagreeable and dangerous to visit any
^T'- foreign country*. Cities, in which alone an ex.

tensive commerce can be carried on, were few,
inconsiderable, and destitute of those immunities
which produce security or excite enterprise. The
sciences, on which geography and navigation are
founded, were not cultivated. The accounts of
ancient improvements and discoveries, contained
in the Greek and Roman authors, were negleEted
or misunderstood. The knowledge of remote re-
gions was loft, their firuation, their commodities,
and almost their names, were unknown.

Commercial ONE circimftance prevented commercial inter-
knowledge
ill prefer- coure with distant nations from ceasing altogether.
edinthe Constantinople, though often threatened by the
;astern em- .
pire, fierce invaders, who spread desolation over the

reft of Europe, was so fortunate as to escape their
deftruftive rage. In that city, the knowledge of
ancient arts and discoveries was preserved; a taste
for Splendour and elegance fubfified; the produc.
tions and luxuries of foreign countries were in re.
quest; commerce continued to flourish there, when
it was extint in every other part of Europe. The
citizens of Constantinople did not confine their
trade to the islands of the Archipelago, or to the
adjacent coasts of Asia; they took a wider range,
and following the course which the ancients had
marked out, imported the commodities of the East
Indies from Alexandria, When Egypt was torn
from the Roman empire by the Arabians, the in-
duftry of the Greeks discovered a new channel,
by which the produtions of India might be con-
veyed to Constantinople, They were carried up
the Indus, as far as that great river is navigable;
thence they were transported by land to the banks

of
4 Hist. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 77. 327.

of the river Oxus, and proceeded down its stream B 0o K
to the Cafpitn sea. There they entered the Vol- I
ga, and failing up it, were carried by land to the ·V
Tanais, which condu&ted them into the Euxine
sea, where vessels from Conflantinople waited
their arrival*. This extraordinary and tedious
.mode of conveyance merits attention, not only
as a proof of the violent paflion which the in-
habitants of Constantinople had conceived for
the luxuries of the east, and as a specimen of the
ardour and ingenuity with which they carried on
commerce, but because it demonstrates, that, dur-
ing the ignorance which reigned in the reft of
Europe, an exteifive knowledge of remote coun-
tries was fill preserved in the capital of the Greek
empire.

AT the fame time, a gleam of light and know. and among

ledge broke in upon the east. The Arabians, hav.. the Arbi
ing contracted some relfsh for :the sciences of the
people whose empire they had contributed to
overturn, translated the books of several of the
Greek philosophers into their own language. One
-of the first, was that valuable work of Ptolemy,
which I have already mentioned. The study of
geography became, of consequence, an early ob-
jeEt of attention to the Arabians. But that acute
and ingenious people cultivated chiefly the fpe-
culative and scientific parts of geography. In or-
der to ascertain the figure and dimensions of the
'terrefirial ;globe, they applied the principles of
geometry, they had recourse to astronomical ob.
servations, they employed experiments and opera-
tions, which Europe, in more enlightened times,
has been proud to adopt and to imitate. At that
period, however, the fame of the improvements

made
* Ramufio, v0ol i, p. i72. F,

3 0 OK made by the Arabians did not reach Europe.

I- The knowledge of their discoveries was reserved
'"'" for ages capable of comprehending and of perfet-

ing them.

Revival of BY degrees, the calamities and desolation
nd jnavia- brought upon the western provinces' of the Roman
tion in Lu- empire by its barbarous conquerors, were forgot-
apc' -ten, and in some measure repaired. The rude

tribes which fettied there, acquiring insensibly some
idea of regular government, and some relish for
the functions and comforts of civil life, Europe
began to awake from its torpid and inactive state.
The firlt symptoms of revival were discerned in
Italy. The northern tribes which took possession
of this country, made progress in improvement
with greater rapidity than the people fettled in
other parts of Europe. Various causes, which is
not the objeEt of this work to enumerate or explain,
concurred in restoring liberty and independence to
the cities of Italy . The acquisition of these routed
industry, and gave motion and vigour to all the ac-
tive powers of the human mind. Foreign com-
merce revived, navigation was attended to and im-
proved. Conflantinople became the chief mart to
which the Italians resorted. There they not only
met with a favourable reception, but obtained such
mercantile privileges as enabled them to carry on
trade with great advantage. They were supplied
both with the precious commodities of the east,
and with many curious manufatures, the product
of the ancient arts and ingenuity that fiill 'ubfift-
cd among the Greeks. As the labour and expence
of conveying the productions of India to Conftanti-
nople by that long and indirct course which I have
delcribed, rendered them extremely rare, and of
en exorbitant price, the industry of the Italians

discovered
l JIift. of Charles V. vol. i. p. 33.

discovered other methods of procuring them in B O 0 K
greater abundance, and at an easier rate. They I.
sometimes purchased them in Aleppo, Tripoli, and a
other ports on the coast of Syria, to which they
tvere brought by a route not unknown to the an-
cients. They were conveyed from India by lea, up
the Persian Gulf, and ascending the Euphrates al;d
Tigris, as far as Bagdat, were carried by land
across the Defart to Palmyra, and from thence to
the towns on the Mediterranean. But from the
length of the journey, and the dangers to which the
caravans were exposed, this proved always a tedi-
ous, and often a precarious mode of conveyance.
At length the Soldans of Egypt, having renewed
the commerce with India in its ancient channel, by
the Arabian Gulf, the Italian merchants, notwith-
flanding the violent antipathy to each other with
which Christians and the followers of Mahoniet
were then possessed, repaired to Alexandria, and
enduring, fiom the love of gain, the insolence and
exations of the Mahometans, established a lucra-
tive trade in that port. From that period, the
commercial spirit of Italy became active and en-
terprifing. Venice, Genoa, Pisa, rose from in-
considerable towns, to be populous and wealthy
cities.. Their naval power increased; their velfels
frequented all the ports in the Mediterranean; they
ventured sometimes beyond the Straights; vilited
the maritime towns of Spain, France, the Low
Countries, and England, and, by difiributing their
commodities over Europe, began to communicate
to its various nations some knowledge of the valua-
ble productions of the eafl, as well as fbme ideas
of manufacures and arts, with which they had hi-
therto been anacquainted.

WHI LE the cities of Italy were thus advancing Tlh,. pro-
in their career of improvement, an event happenecd, geFs L.-

i . . ,P1P ..voliril lby
the moll extraordinary perhaps in the history ofti,,rcul

mankind, fLd';.

B 0 o K mankind, which, instead of retarding the comfimer-

I. cial progreft of the Italians, rendered it more rapid.
~'T-ns The martial spirit of the Europeans, heightened

and inflamed by religious zeal, prompted them to
deliver the Holy Land from the dominion of infi-
dels. Vast armies, composed of all the nations of
Europe, marched towards Alia, upon this wild en*
terprife. The Genoese, the Pifans, and the V'neti-
ans furnilhed the transports which carried them
thither. They supplied them with provisions and
military stores. Beside the immense fums which
they received on this account, they obtained com-
mercial privileges and establishments, of great con-
sequence in the settlements which the Crusaders
made in Palestine, and in other provinces of Alia.
From those sources, prodigious wealth flowed into
the cities which I have mentioned. A proportional
increase of power accompanied this, and by the
end of the Holy War, Venice, in particular, be-
came a great maritime fiate, possessing an extensive
commerce, and ample territories i. Italy was not
the only country in which the Crusades contribut-
ed to revive and diffuse such a spirit as prepared
Europe for future discoveries, By their expediti-
ons into Asia, the'other European nations became
well acquainted with remote regions, which for-
merly they knew only by name, or by the reports
of ignorant and credulous pilgrims. They had an
opportunity of observing the manners, the arts, and
the accommodations of people more polished than
themselves. This intercourse between the east and
weft subsisted almost two centuries. The adventur-
ers, who returned from Asia, communicated to their
countrymen the ideas which they had acquired,
and the habits of life they had contraced by visit-
ing more refined nations. The Europeans began to

be
* Effai de l'Hifloire du Commerce de Venife, p. 52, &c.

be sensible of wants with which they were formerly B 0 o K
unacquainted; new desires were excited; and such I.
a taste for the commodities and arts of other coun- -r
tries gradually spread among them, that they not
only encouraged the resort of foreigners to their
harbours, but began to perceive the advantage and
necessity of applying to commerce rheifelves .

THIS communication, which was opened be-Bythedif-

tween Europe and the western provinces of Asia, coveieesof
encouraged several persons to advance far beyond byland.
the countries in which the Crusaders carried on
their operations, and to travel by laud into the
more remote and opulent regions of the east. The
wild fanaticism, which seems at that period to have
mingled in all the schemes of individuals, no less
than in all the counsels of nations, first incited men
to enter upon those long and dangerous peregrina-
tions. They were afterwards undertaken from
profpe&s of commercial advantage, or from mo-
tives of mere curiosity. Benjamin, a Jew of Tu-
dela, in the kingdom of Navarre, possessed with a
superstitious veneration for the law of Moses, and
Solicitous to visit his countrymen in the east, whom
he hoped to find in such a state of power and opu-
lence, as might redound to the honour of his set,
set out from Spain in the year 1160, and travelling
by land to Constantinople, proceeded through the
countries to the north of the Euxine and Caspian
leas, as far as Chinese Tartary. From thence he
took his route towards the south, and after traverf-
ing various provinces of the farther India, he en-
barked on the Indian ocean, viiited several of its
islands, and returned at the end of thirteen years,
by the way of Egypt to Europe, with much infor-
mation concerning a large difiria of the globe,
altogether unknown at that time to the weflern

world.
* His. of Charles V. vol. i.,p. 25, &c.

BO K
o world:. The zeal of the head of the Christian

I. church co-operated with the superstition of Ben-
'^e~ jamin the Jew, in discovering the interior and re-

mote provinces of Asia. All Christendom having
been alarmed with accounts of the rapid progress
of the Tartar arms under Zengis Khan, Innocent
IV. who entertained most exalted ideas concerning
the plenitude of his power, and the fubmififon due
to his injun&ions, feat father John de Piano Carpi-
ni, at the head of a miflion of Franciscan monks,
and father Afcolino, at the head of another of Do-
minicans, to exhort Kayuk Khan, the grandson of
Zengis, who was then at the head of the Tartar em-
pire, to embrace the Christian faith, and to defifl
from desolating the earth by his arms. The
haughty descendant of the greatest conqueror Asia
had ever beheld, aftonifihed at this firange mandate
from an Italian Priest, whose name and power were
alike unknown to him, received it with the con-
tempt which it merited, though he dismissed the
mendicants who delivered it with impunity. But
as they had penetrated into the country by different
routes, and followed for some time the Tartar
camps, which were always in motion, they had an
opportunity of visiting a great part of Asia. Carpi-
ni, who proceeded by the way of Poland and Ruflia,
travelled through its northern provinces as far as
the extremities of Thibet. Afcolino, who seems to
have landed somewhere in Syria, advanced through
its southern provinces, into the interior parts of
Persia t.
X53. NOT long after, St. Louis of France contributed

farther towards extending the knowledge which the
Europeans had begun to acquire of those diflant re-

gions.

' Bergeron Recucil des Voyages, &c. tom. i. p. i.
'* Hakluyt. i. 21. Bergeron, lon. i.

gions. Some designing impoflor, who took ad-B ,0

O K

vantage of the slender acquaintance of the Chris- I
tians with the state and character of the Asiatic '";'"
nations, having informed him that a powerful
Chan of the Tartars had embraced the Christian
faith, the monarch liflened to the tale with pious
credulity, and instantly resolved to fend ambaf-
fadors to this illustrious convert, with a view of
inciting him to attack their common enemy the
Saracens on one quarter, while he fell upon them
on the other. As monks were the only persons in
that age who possessed ifch a degree of knowledge
as qualified them for a service of this kind, he.em-
ployed in it father Andrew, a Jacobine, who was
followed by father William de Rubruquis, a Fran-
cilcan. With reipect to the progress of the former,
there is no memorial extant. The journal of the
latter has been published. He was admitted into
the presence of Mangu, the third khan in succession
from Zengis, and made circuit through the inte-
rior parts of Asia, more extensive than that of any
European who had hitherto explored them'.

To those travellers, whom religious zeal sent

forth to visit Asia, succeeded others who ventured
into remote countries from the profpecit of commer-
cial advantage, or from motives of mere curiosity.
The first and most eminent of there was Marco
Polo, a Venetian of a noble family. Having en- X69.:
gaged early in trade, according to the cuflom of
his country, his aspiring mind swified for a sphere
of a&ivity more extensive than was afforded to it
by the cftabliihed traffic carried on in those ports of
Europe and Asia, which the Venctians frequented.
This prompted him to travel into unknown coun-
tries, in expedtation of opening with them a com-
mercial intcrcourle, nmore lulted to the sanguine

VoL. I. D ideas
Hs IIak, i. 71. Recueil de Voyages par Blergcron, tom. i.

B O O Kideas and hopes of a young adventurer. As hi!

I. father had already carried some European commo.
_"T^ dities to the court of the great Chan of the Tartars,

and had disposed of them to advantage, he resort.
ed thither. Under the protedion of Kublay Chau,
the moit powerful of all the successors of Zengis,
he continued his mercantile peregrinations in Asia
upwards of twenty-fix years; and during that time
advanced towards the east, far beyond the utmost
boundaries to which any European traveller had
ever proceeded. Instead of following the courle
of Carpini and Rubruquis, along the vast unpeopled
plains of Tartary, he passed through the chief trad-
ing cities in the more cultivated parts of Asia, and
penetrated to Cambalu, or Peking, the capital oi
the great kingdom of Cathay, or China, subjet at
that time to the successors of Zengis. He made
more than one voyage on the Indian ccean, he trad-
ed in many of the islands, from which Europe had
long received fpiceries and other conmodities,
which it held in high estimation, though unac-
quainted with the particular countries to which it
wvas indebted forthofepreciousproduations; and he
obtained information concerning several countries
which he did not visit in person, particularly the
island Zipangri, probably the fame now known h1
the name of Japan '. On his return, he aflonilhl
ed his contemporaries with his deferiptions of vas
regions, whose names had never been heard of ir
Europe, and with such pompous accounts of theii
fertility, their populoulhels, their opulence, the
variety of their manufaEturcs, and the extent o:
their trade, as role far above the conception o:
an uninformed age.
13zz. ABOUT half a century after Marco Polo, Sih

John Mandeville, an Englishman, encouraged b)

hi:
* Viaggi di Marco Polo. Rarnus, ii. 2. Bcrgeron, tonl. ii.

his example, visited most of the countries in the B o O K
east which he had described, and like him, pub- I.
lillled an account of them on his return *'. The L
narrations of thole early travellers abound with
many wild incoherent tales, concerning giants, en-
chanters, and monsters: but they were not, fiom
that circumstance, lels acceptable to an ignorant
age, which delighted in what was marvellous.
The wonders which they told, mofily on hearayv,
filled the multitude with admiration. The facts
which they related from their own ob'ervation, at-
tracted the attention of the more diicerning. The
former, which may be confidered as the popular
traditions and fables of the countries through \w hi
they had passed, were gradually dilrcgarded as
Europe advanced in knowledge. The latter, hojw-
ever incredible ftome of them may have appeared
in their own time, have been confirned by the
oblervations of mlodern travellers. Byv means of
both, however, the curiosity of mankind was ex-
cited with refpe& to the remote parts of' tie eartlh,
their ideas were enlarged, and they were nut only
iilenfibly difpoled to attempt new dileovcrics, but
received 'uch information as d(ire-ctd ilhe to th::t
particular courle in which they were aftcrwarJs
carried on.

WiH ril I this spirit was gradually forming in Eu- an:i by tic

rope, a fortunate dilfovery was made, which con- ,l,',",ti'," (f
tributed lnre than all the efforts and ingienuity oftlencun-
I)rcccdilg( ages, to imlprove and to extend naviga-'f1'
tion. '.1'1t wonderful property of the magnet,
by which it communicates such virtue to a llendcr
lod of iron or needle, as to point towards the poles
of the earth, was obi'ervcd(. The use which miiiht
be made of this in ditrcting navigation was ilmme-
diately perceived, atld lIlat miolt valuable, but now
familiar inil umCent, the mari/nes joiipIjJ', was form-

D z cd.
't Voyages and Travels, bySir John Mandlville.

B O O K ed. When, by means of it, navigators found that

I. at all seasons, and in every place, they could disco-
*'T^r ver the north and south with so much ease and ac-

curacy, it became no longer necessary to depend
merely on the light of the flars and the observation
of the sea coast. They gradually abandoned their
ancient timid and lingering course along the shore,
ventured boldly into the ocean, and relying on this
new guide, could steer in the darkest night, and un-
der the most cloudy sky, with a security and preci-
sion hitherto unknown. The compass may be said
to have opened to man the dominion of the sea, and
to have put him in full possession of the earth, by en-
abling him to visit every part of it. Flavio Gioia,
a citizen of Amalfi, a town of considerable trade in
the kingdom of Naples, was the author of this great
discovery, about the year one thousand three hun-
dred and two. It hath been often the fate of those
illustrious benefactors of mankind, who have en-
riched science and improved the arts by their inven-
tions, to derive more reputation than benefit from
the happy efforts of their genius. But the lot of
Gioia has been still more cruel; through the inat-
tention or ignorance of contemporary historians, he
has been defrauded even of the fame to which he
had such a just title. We receive from them no in-
formation with refpet to his profeflion, his charac-
ter, the precise time when he made this important
discovery, and the accidents or enquiries which led
to it: the knowledge of this event, though pro-
ductive of greater effeits than any recorded in the
annals of the human race, is tranfiniited to us with-
out any of tholc circulltanccs, which can gratify
the curiosity that it naturally awakens v:. Though
the use of the compass might enable the Italians
to perform the ihort voyages to which they were

accustomld,

* Collinas & Trombellus de Acus nauticao Invcntorc. In-
flit. Acad. Bonon. turn. ii. part iii. p. 372.

accustomed, with greater security and expedition, B O o Ii
its influence was not so sudden or extensive, as im- I.
mediately to render navigation adventurous, and to %Vr
excite a spirit of discovery. Many cau'es combin-
ed in preventing this beneficial invention from pro-
ducing its full effea instantaneously. Men relin-
quifh ancient habits slowly, and with reluctance.
They are averse to new experiments, and venture
upon them with timidity. The commercialjealou-
fy of the Italians, it is probable, laboured to con-
ceal the happy discovery of their countryman from
other nations. The art of steering by the com-
pass, with such skill and accuracy as to inspire a
full confidence in its direction, was acquired gradu-
ally. Sailors, long accustomed not to quit fight of
land, durst not launch out at once and commit
themselves to unknown seas. Accordingly, near
half a century elapsed, from the time of Gioia's
discovery, before navigators ventured into any seas
which they had not been accustomed to frequent.

THE first appearance of a bolder spirit may be Some ap.

dated from the voyages of the Spaniards to the Ca- PbeldCe'p
nary or Fortunate Islands. By what accident they it il navi-
were led to the discovery of those small isles, ati'0'
which lie near five hundred miles from the Spanish
coast, and above a hundred and fifty miles from the
coast of Africa, contemporary writers have not
explained. But about the middle of the fourteenth
century, the people of all the different kingdoms
into which Spain was then divided, were accustom-
ed to make piratical excursions thither, in order to
plunder the inhabitants, or to carry them off as
ilaves. Clement VI. in virtue of the right claimed
by the holy fee to dilpole of all countries poflcffcd
by infidels, ercded thole illes into a kingdom, in
the year one thousand three hundred and forty-four,
and conferred it on Lewis de la Cerda, delcended
from the royal family of Caflilc. i3ut that unfor-

tunalt

B3 O K tunate prince, destitute of power to assert his nomi-

I anal title, having never visited the Canaries, John
'T^' de Bethencourt, a Norman. baron, obtained a

grant of them from Henry III. of Caflile B. Be-
thencourt, with the valour and good fortune which
distinguished the adventurers of his country, at-
tempted and effected the conque-f, and the poffcf-
sion of the Canaries remained for lome time in his
family, as a fief held of the crown of Castile. Pre-
vious to this expedition of Bethencourt, his coun-
trymen are said to have visited the coast of Africa,
3.65. and to have proceeded far to the south of the Cana-

ry islands. But their voyages thither seem not to
have been undertaken in conlequence of any pub-
lic or regular plan for extending navigation and at-
tempting new discoveries. They were either ex-
cuifions fuggefied by that roving piratical spirit,
which descended to the Normans from their ancef-
tors, or the commercial enterprises of private mer-
chants, which attra&ed so little notice, that hardly
any memorial of them is to be found in contem-
porary authors. In a general survey of the pro-
grefs of discovery, it is sufficient to have mentioned
this event; and leaving it among those of dubious
exifience, or of small importance, we may con-
clude, that though much additional information
concerning the remote regions of the east had been
received by travellers who visited them by land, na-
vigation, at the beginning of the fifteenth century,
had not anvanced beyond the slate to which it had
attained before the downfal of the Roman empire.

rirn reCg- AT length the period arrived, when Providence
jlplac,,ovC decreed that men were to pass the limits within

which they had been so long confined, and open
to themselves a more ample field wherein to dil-
play their talents, their entcrprife, and courage.

The

* Vicra y Clavijo Notic. de la Hiflor. de Canaria, I. 268,
&c. Glas Hilt. c: i.

The first considerable efforts towards this were B O K
not made by any of the more powerful flates of I.
Europe, or by those who had applied to naviga- "-
tion with the greatest assiduity and success. The
glory of leading the way in this new career was
reserved for Portugal, one of the smallest and most
inconsiderable of the European kingdoms. As formed by
the attempts of the Portuguese to acquire thethe Portu-
knowledge of those parts of the globe with which suesc
mankind were then unacquainted, not only im-
proved and extended the art of navigation, but
roused such a spirit of curiosity and enterprise, as
led to the discovery of the new world of which
I propose to write the history, it is necessary to
take a view of the rife, the progress and iuccefs
of their various naval operations. It was in this
school that the discoverer of America was trained;
and unless we trace the fleps by which his infiruc-
tors and guides advanced, it will be impossible to
comprehend the circumstances which fuggefied
the idea, or facilitated the execution of his great
deiign.

VARIOUS circumfiances prompted the Portu-Circum-
guefe to exert their activity in this new direction, fta;ces

which led

and enabled them to accomplish undertakings ap- to thi,.
parently superior to the natural fqrce of their mo-
narchy. The kings of Portugal having driven the
Moors out of their dominions, had acquired pow-
er, as well as glory, by the success of their arms
against the infidels. By their viitories over them,
they had extended the royal authority beyond the
narrow limits within which it was originally circum-
fcribed in Portugal, as well as in other feudal king-
doms. They had the command of the national
force, could rouct it to aft with united vigour, and,
after the cxpulfion of the Moors, could employ it
without dread of interruption from any domestic
cllcimy. By the perpetual holtilities carried on for

several

B O o I several centuries againfI the Mahometans, the mar.

I. tial and adventurous spirit that distinguished all
1~'-~ the European nations during the middle ages, was

improved and heightened among the PoTtuguefe.
A fierce civil war, towards the close of the four.
teenth century, occasioned by a disputed fuccerfi-
on, augmented the military ardour of the nation,
and formed or called forth men of such active and
daring genius, as are fit for bold undertakings.
The situation of the kingdom, bounded on every
fide by the dominions of a more powerful neigh-
bour, did not afford free scope to the activity of
the Portuguese by land, as the strength of their
monarchy was no match for that of Caflile. But
Portugal was a maritime slate, in which there
were many commodious harbours; the people
had begun to make some progress in the know-
ledge and practice of navigation; and the sea
was open to them, presenting the only field of
enterprise in which they could diflinguifh them-
selves.

F;rft at- SUCH was the slate of Portugal, and such the
tempt. disposition of the people, when John I. surnamed

the Ballard, obtained secure possession of the crown
by the peace concluded with Castile in the year one
thousand four hundred and eleven. He was a
prince of great merit, who, by superior courage
and abilities, had opened his way to a throne which
of right did not belong to him. He instantly per-
ceived that it would be impoflible to preserve pub-
*lic order, or domeflic tranquillity, without finding
'ome employment for the restless spirit of his sub-
jects. With this view, he assembled a numerous
fleet at Lisbon, compored of all the ships that he
could fit out in his own kingdom, and of many
hired firom foreigners. This great armament was
R41,. destincd to attack the Moors fettled on the coast of

Barbary. While it was equipping a few velf

ft ls

fels were appointed to fail along the western shore B o o K
of Africa bounded by the Atlantic ocean, and to I.
discover the unknown countries situated there. ---s
From this inconsiderable attempt, we may date the
commenceme't of that spirit of discovery which
opened the barriers that had so long fliut out man-
kind from the knowledge of one half of the terrelf
trial globe.

AT the time when John sent forth these ships on

this new voyage, the art of navigation was fiill
very imperfec. ''hough Africa lay 'o near to
Portugal, and the fertility of the countries already
known on that continent invited men to make far-
ther discoveries, the Portuguese had never ventur-
ed to fail beyond Cape Non. That promontory,
as its name imports, was hitherto coniidered as a
boundary which could not be pafifd. But the na-
tions of Europe had now acquired as much know-
ledge, as emboldened them to disregard the preju-
dices and to correct the errors of their anceflors.
The long reign of ignorance, the constant enemy
of every curious inquiry, and of every new under-
taking, was approaching to its period. The light
of science began to dawn. The works of the an-
cient Greeks and Romans began to be read with
admiration and profit. The sciences cultivated by
the Arabians were introduced into Europe by the
Moors fcttlcd in Spain and Portugal, and by the
Jews, who were very numerous in both these
kingdoms. Geometry, afironony, and geogra-
phy, the fIcienccs on which the art of navigation is
founded, became the objeCs of studious iatentin.
The memory of the difcovcrics made by the an-
cients was revived, and the progress of their navi-
gation and commerce began to be traced. Sonic
of the causes which, during this century and the
last, have obflruced the cultivation of Icince in
Portugal, did not exifi, or did not operate in the

faice

3 0 K fame manner, in the fifteenth century*; and the

I. Portuguese, at that period, seem to have kept
'---'/ pace with other nations on this fide of the Alps in

literary purluits.
trs fuccers. As the genius of the age favoured the execution

of lthat new undertakiing, to which the peculiar
ftatc of their country invited the Portuguese, it
proved fuccelsful. The vessels sent on the disco-
very doubled that formidable Cape, which had
terminated the progress of former navigators,
and proceeded a hundred and sixty miles beyond
it, to Cape Bojador. As its rocky cliffs, which
firetched a considerable way into the Atlantid,
appeared more dreadful than the promontory
'which they had passed, the Portuguese comman-
ders durst not attempt to fail round it, but re-
turned to Lisbon, more satisfied with having ad-
vanced so far, than aflanmed at having ventured no
farther.

prince INCONs D R A B LE as that voyage was, it in-
Henry the creased the palfion for discovery, which began to
director of -
the Portu- arie in Portugal. The extraordinary success of
gueifdifco- the king's expedition against the Moors of Barba-
· cries. ·

ry, added strength to the spirit ofenterprife in the
. nation and pushed it on to new undertakings. In

order to render there successful, it was ncceffary
that they should be conductd by a person who pof-
sessed abilities capable of discerning what was at-
tainable, who enjoyed leisure to form a regular fy-t
tem for prosecuting discovery, and who was ani-
mated with ardour that would perleverc in spite of
obfiacles and repulses. Happily for Portugal, flhc
found all tlole qualities in Hlenry duke of Vifio, the
fourth lon of king John by Philippa of Lancafler,
fiter of H1enry IV. Iing of England. That prince,
in his early youth, having accompanied his father
jn his expedition to Barbary, distinguished himitnlf

by
Sec NOTE IX.

by many deeds of valour. To the martial spirit, B O O I
which was the charadteriftic of every man of no- I
ble birth at that time, he added all the accomplish- "v"
ments of a more enlightened and polished age.
lie cultivated the arts and sciences, which were
then unknown and despised by persons of his rank.
He applied with peculiarfolldnefs to the fiudy of
geography; and by the infirucdion of able maf-
ters, as well as by the accounts of travellers, he
early acquired fucl knowledge of the habitable
globe, as discovered the great probability of find-
ing new and opulent countries, by failing along
the coast of Africa. Such an objecct was formed
to awaken the enthusiasm and ardour of a youthful
mind, and he engaged with the utmofi zeal to pa-
tronize a design that might prove as beneficial,
as it appeared to be fpleidid and honourable. In
order that he might pursue this great scheme with-
out interruption, he retired from court immediate-
ly after his return from Africa, and fixed his refi-
dence at Sagres, near Cape St. Vincent, where the
prolpet of the Atlantic ocean invited his thoughts
continually towards his favourite project, and en-
couraged him to execute it. In this retreat he was
attended by some of the most learned men in his
country, who aided him in his relsarches. He ap-
plied for information to the Moors of Barbary, who
were accustomed to travel by land into the interior
provinces of Africa, in quecl of ivory, gold-duft,
and other rich commodities. He consulted the
Jews fettled in Portugal. By promises, rewards,
and marks of rcl'pcc, he allured into his service
ecveral perl'ols, foreigners as well as Portugucfe,
who were eminent for their skill in navigation. In
taking thole preparatory fleps, the great abilities of
the prince were fccolndd by his private virtues.
His integrity, his affability, his rclpcet for religion,
his zeal for the honour of his country, cugagced

perlonl

B 0 O K persons of all ranks to applaud his design, and tó

I- favour the execution of it. His schemes were al-
-" lowed by his countrymen to proceed neither from

ambition, nor the desire of wealth, but to flow
from the warm benevolence of a heart eager to
promote the happiness of mankind, and which
justly intitled him to assume a motto for his de-
vice, that described the quality by which he wish-
ed to be difinguifhed, the talent of doilng good.

;fcovery of His firfl effort, as is ufaal at the commencc-
oS0anto.nmenit of any new undertaking was extremely in-

considerable. He fitted out a single ship, and giv-
ing the command of it to John Gpnzalez Zarco
and Tristan Vaz, two gentlemen of his houiehold,
who voluntarily offered to condu&t the enterprilc,
he inftru&ted them to use their utmost efforts to
double Cape Bojador, and then to steer towards
the south. They, according to the mode of navi-
gation which fill prevailed, held their course
along the shore: and by following that direction,
they must have encountered almost insuperable
difficulties in attempting to pass Cape Bojador.
But fortune came in aid to their want of skill, and
prevented the voyage from being altogether fruit-
less. A sudden squall of wind arose, drove then!
out to sea, and when they expec&ed every moment
to perish, landed them on an unknown island,
which from their happy escape they named Ports
Santo. In the infancy of navigation, the dilco-
very of this small island appeared a matter of such
moment, that they inflantly returned to Portugal
with the good tidings, and were received by Hen-
ry with the applause and honour due to fortunate
adventurers. This faint dawn of fuccels filled a
mind ardent in the pursuit of a favourite objcct
with such sanguine hopes as were sufficient encou-
,' ragement to proceed. Next year, Henry sent out

three ships under the fame conimanders, to whom

he

he joined Bartholomew Perefireilo, in order to B 0 OK
take possession of the island which they had dif- I
covered. When they began to fettle in Porto ~T'>
Santo, they observed towards the south a fixed
!pot in the horizon, like a small black cloud. By
degrees, they were led to conjecture that it might
be land, and fleering towards it, they arrived at Of Madeira.
a considerable island, uninhabited, and covered
with wood, which on that account they called sMa-
deira i. As it was Henry's chief objec to render
his discoveries useful to his country, he immedi-
ately equipped a fleet to carry a colony of Por- 14.Z
tuguefe to there islands. By his provident care,
they were furniflhd not only with the feeds,
plants, and domeflic animals common in Europe;
but as he foresaw that the warmth of the climate
and fertility of the foil would prove favourable to
the rearing of other produ&cions, he produced
flips of the vine from the island of Cyprus, the
rich wines of which were then in great request,
and plants of the sugar-cane from Sicily, into
which it had been lately introduced. These
throve so prosperously in this new country, that
the benefit of cultivating them was immediately
perceived, and the sugar and wine of Madeira
quickly became considerable articles in the com-
merce of Portugal I.

As soon as the advantages derived from thisDouble

first settlement to the weft of the European con- caPc Boj-.
tinent began to be felt, the spirit of discovery ap-
peared less chimerical, and became more adventu-
rous. By their voyages to Madeira, the Portu-
guefe were gradually accustomed to a bolder na-
vigation, and instead of creeping servilely along

the

" Historical Relation of the first Discovery of Madeira,
translated from the Portugucfe of ]Fran. Alc;ifarano, p. 15, &c.

1' Lud. Guicciardinii Defcritt, de P'aeli itlli, p. i8o, 181.

B O O K the coast, ventured into the open sea. In confe.

quence of taking this course, Gilianez, who con-
sr^' manded one of prince Henry's ships, doubled

Cape Bojador, the boundary of the Portugucle
navigation upwards of twenty years, and whichl
1433. had hitherto been deemed unpalfable. This fuc-

ce!sfitl voyage, which the ignorance of the age
placed on a level with the most famous exploiit
recorded in history, opened a new sphere to na-
vigation, as it dilcovered the vast continent oi
Africa, still washed by the Atlantic ocean, and

Advance firetching towards the south. Part of this was
within the soon explored; the Portugue'e advanced within
tropic>. the tropics, and in the space of a few years they

discovered the river Senegal, and all the coalt ex-
tending from Cape Blanco to Cape de Verd.

Aifnifhed HITHERTO the Portuguese had been guided in
fdtwcat tey their discoveries, or encouraged to attempt them,
there. by the light and information which they received

from the works of the ancient mathematicians and
geographers. But, when they began to enter the
torrid zone, the notion which prevailed among the
ancients, that the exceifve heat, which reignc(l
perpetually there, was to fatal to life as to render
it uninhabitable, deterred them, for some tinte,
from proceeding. Their own obtervations, when
they firfi ventured into this unknown and formni-
dable region, tended to confirm the opinion of
antiquity concerning the violent operation of the
direct rays of the fun. As far as the river Sene-
gal, the Portuguele had found the coast of Africa
inhabited by people relembling the Moors of Bar-
bary. When they advanced to the south of that
river, the human form teemed to put on a new
appearance. They beheld men with skins black
as ebony, with short curled hair, flat noles, thick
lips, and all the peculiar features which are now\
known to diflinguiflh the race of negroes. This

'urprifiig

surprising alteration they naturally attributed to B 0 O K
the influence of heat, and if they should advance .
nearer to the line, they began to dread that its es- ~<
feals would be still more fatal. Thole dangers
were exaggerated, and many other objeiions
against attempting farther discoveries were pro-
poled by some of the grandees, who, from igno-
rance, from envy, or from that cold timid pru-
dence which rejeds whatever has the air of no-
velty or enterprise, had hitherto condemned all
prince Henry's fchemnes. They reprelented, that
it was altogethex chimerical to expet any advan-
tage from countries situated in that region which
the wiidom and experience of antiquity had pro-
nounced to be unfit for the habitation of men ; that
their forefathers, satisfied with cultivating the ter-
ritory which Providence had allotted them, did
not waste the strength of the kingdom by fruitless
projects, in quest of new fettlenlents; that Por-
tugl was already exhaufled by the expence of ar-
tempts to discover lands which either did not exill,
or which nature destined to remain unknown; and
was drained of men, who might have been em-
ployed in undertakings attended with more cer-
tain success, and produdive of greater benefit.
But neither their appeal to the authority of the
ancients, nor their reasonings concerning the in-
terest of Portugal, made any impression upon the
determined philosophic mind of prince Henry.
The discoveries which he had already made con-
vinced him that the ancients had little more than
a conjectural knowledge of the torrid zone. He
was no lels satisfied that the political arguments
of his opponents with respect to the interest of
Portugal were malevolent and ill-founded. Jl
those lentiments he was strenuously supported by
his brother Pedro, who governed the kingdom as
guardian of their nephew Alphonfo V. who had 143.

fuccedcdc

B 0 0 K succeeded to the throne during his minority; and

I. inflead of slackening his efforts, Henry continued

to pursue his discoveries with fresh ardour.

Papalgrant BUT, in order to silence all the murmurs of op-
to Portugal position, he endeavoured to obtain the fautiion of
of what
countries it the highest authority in favour of his operations.
thould dif- With this view, he applied to the Pope, and re-

presented, in pompous terms, the pious and un-
wearied zeal, with which he had exerted him'elf
during twenty years, in discovering unknown
countries, the wretched inhabitants of which were
utter firangers to true religion, wandering in hea-
then darkness, or led affray by the delusions of
Mahomet. He besought the holy father, to whom,
as the vicar of Chrifi, all the kingdoms of the
earth were fubjeEt, to confer on the crown of Por-
tugal a right to all the countries poffefied by In-
fidels, which should be discovered by the indufliy
of its fubjeEts, and subdued by the force of its
arms. He intreated him to enjoin all Christian
powers, under the highefi penalties, not to molest
the Portuguese, while engaged in this laudable en-
terprife, and to prohibit them from fettling in any
of the countries which they should discover. He
promised that, in all their expeditions, it should
be the chief objet of the Portuguese to spread the
knowledge of the Christian religion, to cftablifh
the authority of the holy fee, and to increase the
flock of the universal pastor. As it was by im-
proving with dexterity every favourable conjunc-
ture for acquiring new powers, that the court of
Rome had gradually extended its usurpations, Eu-
gene IV. the pontiff to whom this applicationI
was made, eagerly seized the opportunity that now
prelcnted itfclf. He inflantly perceived that by
complying with prince Henry's request, he might
exercite a prerogative no less flattering in its

ownl

own nature, than likely to prove beneficial in its B O 0 K
consequences. A Bull was accordingly issued, in I
which, after applauding in the firongeft terms the ''T"
pail efforts of the Portuguese, and exhorting them
to proceed in that laudable career on which they
had entered, he granted them an exclusive right
to all the countries which they should discover,
from Cape Non to the continent of India.

EXTRAVAGANT as this donation, comprehend-

ing such a large portion of the habitable globe,
would now appear even in Catholic countries, no
person in the fifteenth century doubted that the
pope,. in the plenitude of his apostolic power, had
a right to confer it. Prince Henry was soon ten-
fible of the advantages which he derived from this
tranl'aFtion. His schemes were authorised and
ifainlified by the bull approving of them. The
spirit of discovery was conneccted with zeal for re-
ligion, which, in that age, was a principle of such
astivity and vigour, as to influence the conduEt of
nations. All Christian princes were deterred from
intruding into those countries which the Portuguese
had discovered, or from interrupting the progress
of their navigation and conquests .

Tlu fame of the Portuguele voyages soon spread F.incandi
over Europe. Men, long accustomed to circurn- p^'0o, of

the Pontu-

scribe the a6tivity and knowledge of the human guefc disco-
mind within the limits to which they had been"."'e'
hitherto confined, were altonifled to behold the
sphere of navigation io suddenly enlarged, and a
prolpet opened of visiting regions of the globe,
the exiflence of which was unknown in frmner
times. The learned and speculative rcafoned and
formed theories concerning thole unexpedted dif-
coveries. The vulgar inquired and wondered;

VOL. I. E and

S See NOTE X.

B O O K and enterprising adventurers crouded from every

I part of Europe, soliciting prince Henry to employ

them in this honourable service. Many Venetians
and Genoese, in particular, who were, at that time,
superior to all other nations in the science of naval
affairs, entered aboard the Portuguese ships, and
acquired a more perfed and extensive knowledge
of their profeflion in that new school do naviga-
tion. In emulation of these foreigners, the Portu-
guefe exerted their own talents. The nation fe-
conded the designs of the prince. Private mer-
chants formed companies, with a view to search
1446. for unknown countries. The Cape de Verd if-

lands, which lie off the promontory of that name,
44 were discovered, and soon after, the isles called

Azores. As the former of these are above three
hundred miles from the African coast, and the lat-
ter nine hundred miles from any continent, it is
evident, by their venturing bo boldly into the open
teas, that the Portuguese had, by this time, im-
proved greatly in the art of navigation.

Death of WHILE the paflion for engaging in new under-
pnryne takings was thus warm and ative, it received an

1463. unfortunate check by the death of prince Henry,

whole superior knowledge had hitherto direted
all the operations of the discoverers, and whose
patronage had encouraged and protected them.
It is true, that during his life, the Portuguese, in
their utnioft progress towards the south, did not
advance within five degrees of the equinofial
line; and, after their continued exertions for half
a century, hardly fifteen hundred miles of the
coast of Africa were dilcovered. To an age ac-
quainted with the efforts of navigation in its irate

From 141Z of maturity and improvement, thofc essays of its
' 1463. early years must neccf'arily appear feeble and un-

skilful. But, inconfidcrable as they may appear,

they

they were sufficient to turn the curiosity of the B 0 0 K
European nations into a new channel, to excite an
enterprising spirit, and to point the way to future "ó
discoveries.

ALPHONSO, who possessed the throne of Portu- The pairion
gal at the time of prince Henry's death, was fo3fordifcovery

languifsies

much engaged in supporting his pretensions to the flor ome
crown of Callile, or in carrying on his expeditions tilln.
againfl the Moors in Barbary, that the force of his
kingdom being exerted in other operations, he
could not prolecute the discoveries in Africa with
ardour. He committed the condudt of them to
Fernando Goniez, a merchant in Lisbon, to whom
he granted an exclusive right of commerce with
all the countries of which prince Henry had taken
poffeflion. Under the restraint and opprefiion of
a monopoly, the lpirit of discovery languished.
It ceased to be a national object, and became the
concern of a private man, more attentive to his
own gain, than to the glory of his country. Some
progress, however, was made. The Portuguese
ventured at length to cross the line, and, to their 47
astonishment, found that region of the torrid zone,
which was supposed to be scorched with intolera-
ble heat, to be nlot only habitable, but populous
and fertile.

JOHN II. who succeeded his father Allphonf, ,,,i.
poffefled talents capable both of forming and ex- Revives

with) addit7-

ecuting great designs. As part of his revenues; onal ardour.
while prince, had arisen from duties on the trade
with the newly-difcovered countries, this naturally
turned his attention towards them, and fhtisfied
him with respect to their utility and importance.
In proportion as his knowledge of these countries
extended, the poffeflion of them appeared to be
of greater consequence. AWhile the Portuguefc
proceeded along the coafl of Africa, from Cape

E z Nlon

B O 0 K Non to the river of Senegal, they found all that

I. extensive tra& to be sandy, barren, and thinly in-
-~^ habited by a wretched people, professing the Ma-

hometan religion, and subject to the vast empire
of Morocco. But to the south of that river, the
power and religion of the Mahometans were un-
known. The country was divided into small in-
dependent principalities, the population was confi-
derable, the foil fertile i, and the Portuguese soon
discovered that it produced ivory, rich gums, gold,
and other valuable commodities. By the acquifi-
tion of these, commerce was enlarged, and became
adventurous. Men, animated and rendered adtive
by the certain profpeEt of gain, pursued discovery
with greater eagerness, than when they were ex-
cited only by curiosity and hope.
its progress. THIS spirit derived no small reinforcement of

vigour from the countenance of such a monarch as
John. He declared hinmfelf the patron of every
attempt towards discovery and promoted it with
all the ardour of his grand-uncle prince Henry, and
'484' with superior power. The effeds of this were im-

mediately felt. A powerful fleet was fitted out,
which, after discovering the kingdoms of Benin
and Congo, advanced above fifteen hundred miles
beyond the line, and the Portuguese, for the first
time, beheld a new heaven, and observed the fixrs
of another hemisphere. John was not only soli-
citous to discover, but attentive to secure the pot-
feflion of those countries. He built forts on the
coast of Guinea; he isnt out colonies to fettle
there; he established a commercial intercourfc
with the more powerful kingdoms; he cndeavour-
ed to render such as were feeble or divided, tri-

butary

' Navigatio Aloyfi Cadtimufli npud Novuim Orbcmn Gry-

lnci, p. 2. 18. Navig;t. all t'ola di S;an 'T'uolle per un piloito
l'orugh. Raniufio i. 115.

butary to the crown of Portugal. Some of the B O K
petty princes voluntarily acknowledged themselves I.
his vassals. Others were compelled to do so by 'rT
force of arms. A regular and well-digefied sys-
tem was formed with refpe& to this new object of
policy, and by firmly adhering to it, the Portu-
guefe power and commerce in Africa were efta-
bliihed upon a solid foundation.

BY their constant intercourse with the people of Hopes o

Africa the Portuguese gradually acquired iomeane,,,rout
knowledge of those parts of that country which to tle Ear
they had not visited. The information which theydi
received from the natives, added to what they had
observed in their own voyages, began to open prof-
peas more extensive, and to suggest the idea of
schemes more important, than those which had
hitherto allured and occupied them. They had
detected the error of the ancients concerning the
nature of the torrid zone. They found, as they
proceeded southwards, that the continent of Africa,
instead of extending in breadth, according to the
docrine of Ptolemy', at that time the oracle and
guide of the learned in the study of geography,
appeared sensibly to contrat itself, and to bend to-
wards the east. This induced them to give credit
to the accounts of the ancient Phenician voyages
round Afiica, which had long been deemed fabu-
lous, and led them to conceive hopes that by fol-
lowing the fame route, they might arrive at the
East Indies, and engross that commerce, which has
been the source of wealth and power to every na-
tion possessed of it. The coniprchenuive genius of
prince Henry, as we may conjcaurle fron the
words of the pope's bull, had early formed tome
idea of this navigation. All the Portuguese pilots

and

* Vide Nov. Orbis Tabul. Geograph. Secund. PloLki.
Ainll. 1730.

B O O K and mathematicians now concurred in representing

it as practicable. The king entered with warmth
^n> ;into their sentiments, and began to concert mea-

fures for this arduous and important voyage.

Schemes for BEPORE his preparations for this expedition
accomplish.
ing this. were finished, accounts were tranlmnitted from Afri-

ca, that various nations along the coast had menti-
onlcd a mighty kingdom situated on their conti-
nent, at a great diitance towards the east, the
king of which, according to their defcripiion,
professed the Christian religion. The Portuguele
inonarch immediately concluded, that this mufft
be the emperor of Abyssinia, to whom the Euro-
peans, seduced by a miflake of Rubruquis, Marco
Polo, and other travellers to the east, absurdly
gave the name Prester or Presbyter John; and as
he hoped to receive information and assistance
from a Christian prince, il prosecuting a scheme
that tended to propagate their common faith, he
resolved to open, if possible, some intercourse with
his court. With this view, he made choice of
Pedro de Covillam and Alphonfo de Payva, who
were perfed masters of the Arabic language, and
sent them into the east, to search for the residence
of this unknown potentate, and to make him prof-
sers of friendihip. They had it in charge, like-
wile, to procure whatever intelligence the nations
which they visited could supply, with refped to
the trade of India, and the courle bs navigation to
that continent.?

Voyage of WHILIE John made this new attempt by land,
.rltholo. to obtain Iome knowledge of the country, which he

uiazn. wishcd so ardently to discover, he did not negle&

the prosecution of this great design by sea. The
1486. conduct of this voyage, the most arduous and im-

portant which the Portuguese had ever projcted,

was

* Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. i. p. 26. L;fitau Decopy.,
de Port. 1. 46.

was committed to Bartholomew Diaz, an officer B O O K
whose sagacity, experience, and fortitude render-
ed him equal to the undertaking. He firetched '"
boldly towards the south, and proceeding beyond 486.
the utmost limits to which his countrymen had hi-
therto advanced, discovered near a thousand miles
of new country. Neither the danger to which he
was exposed, by a succession of violent tempests in
unknown seas, and by the frequent mutinies of his
crew, nor the calamities of famine which he susser-
ed from losing his store-ship, could deter him from
prosecuting his enterprise. In recompence of his
labours and perseverance, he at last descried that
lofty promontory which bounds Africa to the south.
But to decfry it, was all that was in his power.
The violence of the winds, the ihattered condition
of his ships, and the turbulent spirit of his sailors,
compelled him to return, after a voyage of sixteen
months, in which he discovered an extent of coun-
try far greater than any preceding navigator. Diaz
had called the promontory which terminated his
voyage Cabo Tormenlofo, or the flormy Cape; but
the king, his mailer, as he now entertained no
doubt of having found the long desired route to In-
dia, gave it a name more inviting, and of better
omen, The Cape of Good Hope *.

THOSE sanguine expectations of success were Morccor-

confirmed by the intelligence which John received Io,
over land, in consequence of his enlbalfy to Abylf ":'.
finia. Covillam and Payva, in obedience to their
mafler's inftrutions, had repaired to Grand Cairo.
From that city they travelled along witl a caravan
of Egyptian merchants, and crossed over to Aden,
on the Red Sea. There they separated; Payva
failed dirctly to Abyflinia; Covillam cimbarked lor
the East Indics, and having visited Calecut, Coa,

and
* Faria y Sousa Port. Asia, vol. I. p). 26.

B O O K and other cities on the Malabar coast, returned to

I. Sofala, on the east fide of Africa, and thence to
~'"T' Grand Cairo, which Payva and he had fixed upon

as their place of rendezvous. Unfortunately the
former was cruelly murdered in Abyffipia, but Co-
villan found at Cairo two Portuguese Jews, whom
John, whose provident sagacity attended to every
circumstance that could facilitate the execution of
his schemes, had dispatched after them, in order to
receive a detail of their proceedings, and to com-
municate to them new inftruEtions. By one of these
Jews, Covillam transmitted to Portugal a journal
of his travels by fea.and land, his remarks upon the
trade of India, together with exadt maps of the
coasts on which he had touched; and from what
he himself had observed, as well as from the in-
formation of skilful seamen in different countries,
he concluded, that by failing round Africa, a pas-
sage might be found to the East Indies .

Preparti- THE happy coincidence of Covillam's opinion
onsforano- and report, with the discoveries which Diaz had
thel voyage. lately made, left hardly any shadow of doubt with

refped to the poflibillity of failing from Europe to
India. But the vast length of the voyage, and the
furious forms which Diaz had encountered near
the Cape of Good I-lope, alarmed and intimidated
the Portuguese to fuich a degree, although bv long
experience they were now become adventurous and
Ikilful mariners, that tome time was requisite to
prepare their minds for this dangerous and extraor-
dinary voyage. The courage, however, and au-
thority of the monarch, gradually dispelled the vain
fears of his subje~s, or made it necefllry to con-
ceal them. As John thought himself now upon t he
eve of accomplishing that great dcfign, which had

' Faria y Sousa Port, Asia, vol. i, p. 27. Lafi;au iD-
couv. i. 48.

been the principal object of his reign, his earnest- B O O K
nets in prolecuting it became so vehement, that it I.
occupied his thoughts by day, and bereaved him --
of sleep through the night. While he was taking
every precaution that his wifdorn and experience
could suggest, in order to ensure the fuccels of the
expedition, which was to decide concerning the
fate of his favourite projet, the fame of the vail Theatten-
discoveries which thePortuguefe had already rade, rk '(as'
the reports concerning the extraordinary itelli- upon it.
gence which they had received from the east,
and the profpedt of the voyage which they now
meditated, drew the attention of all the European
nations, and held them in fufpence and expectati-
on. By fonme, the maritime skill and navigation of
the Portuguese were compared with thole of the
Phenicians and Carthaginians, and exalted above
them. Others formed conjecures concerning the
revolutions which the luccefs of their I'chemes
might occaiion in the course of trade, and the po-
litical state of Europe. The Venetians began to be
disquieted with the apprchenfion of losing their In-
cian commerce, the monopoly of which was the
chief source of their power as well as of opulence,
and the Portuguese already enjoyed in fancy, the
wealth of the call. But, during this interval,
which gave such scope to the various workings of
curiosity, of hope and of fear, an account was
brought to Europe of an event no less cxtraordi- Sudlenly
nary than unexpected, the difcovcry of a New turnld toa
World situated in the weft, and the eyes and ad- ew obje.
niiration of mankind turned immediately towards
that great object.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK II.

THE
T II

H I S T 0 R Y
M E R I C A.

B O O K II.

AMONG' the foreigners whom the fame of B O K

he discoveries made by the Portuguese had allured IL
nto their service, was Christopher Columbus, a
ubje6t of the republic of Genoa. Neither the time Beirdth
or place of his birth are known with certain- Columbus.
y.; but he was descended of an honourable fa-
lily, though reduced to indigence by various mif-
orunes. His ancestors having betaken themselves
or Iubfiftence to a seafaring life, Columbus disco-
ered, in his early youth, the peculiar characer and
alents which mark out a man for that profession.
is parents, inflead of thwarting this original pro-
iefity of his mind, seem to have encouraged and
ionfirmcd it, by the education which they gave
iln. After acquiring some knowledge of the La-
un tongue, the only language in which science was
laught at that time, he was inftruted in geometry,

cofiuography,
* See NOTE XI.

B O O K cosmography, afironomy, and the art of drawing,

II. To these he applied with such ardour and predilec.
'^^rp tion, on account of their connedion with navigati.

on, his favourite objet, that he advanced with ra.
pid proficiency in the study of them. Thus qua.
J+6x. lified, he went to sea at the age of fourteen, and

began his career on that element which conduted
him to lo much glory. His early voyages were
to thofc ports in the Mediterranean which his coun.
trymen the Genoele frequented. This being a
sphere too narrow for his active mind, he made an
,467. excursion to the northern seas, and visited the coal

of Iceland, to which the English and other nations
had began to resort on account of its fishery. A;
navigation, in every direction, was now become en.
terprifing, he proceeded beyond that island, the
Thule of the ancients, and advanced several degrees
within the polar circle. Having satisfied his curiofi.
ty by a voyage which tended more to enlarge his
knowledge of naval affairs, than to improve his for.
tune, he entered into the service of a famous sea.
captain, of his own name and family. This man
commanded a fniall squadron, fitted out at his owni
expence, and by cruising sometimes againfi the
Mahometans, sometimes agaiuft the Venetians, the
rivals of his country in trade, had acquired both
wealth and reputation. With him Columbus con.
tinued for several years, no less distinguished for his
courage, than for his experience as a sailor. At
length, in an obstinate engagement, off the coal
of Portlugnl, with lolme Velctian caravels, retuirn
ing richly laden from the Low Countries, the vcle
fcl on board which he lcrved took fire, together
will) ole of the enemny's filips, to whlich it was salt
grappled. In this dreadclfl extremity his intrepili
ty and presence of inill did id ot forfakc him. lle
threw himlelf into the Iba, laid hold of a nfoalill
oar, and by the support of ii, and his dcxterity it

twirnnigii,

imming, he reached the shore, though above B O K
wo leagues distant, and saved a life reserved for II.
reat undertakings. .
As soon as he recovered strength for the jour- He enters
ey, he repaired to Lisbon, where many of his inttthle

rpotugucre

untrymen were fettled. They soon conceivedfervice.
ch a favourable opinion of his merit, as well as
lents, that they warmly solicited him to remain
that kingdom, where his naval skill and cxperi-
nce could not fail in rendering him conspicuous.
o every adventurer, animated either with curio-
ty to visit new countries, or with ambition to
iftinguifh himself, the Portuguese service was at
at time extremely inviting. Columbus listened
ith a favourable ear to the advice of his friends,
nd having gained the esteem of a Portuguese lady,
vhoi he married, fixed his residence in LiSbon.
his alliance, ;nftead of detaching him from a sea-
aring life, contributed to enlarge the sphere of his
aval knowledge, and to excite a desire of extend-
g it still farther. His wife was a daughter of
artholomew Pereftrello, one of the captains em-
ployed by prince Henry in his early navigations,
and who, under his protecion, had discovered and
planted the islands of Porto Santo and Madeira.
Columbus got poffetfion of the journals and charts
of this experienced navigator, and from them he
learned the course which the Portuguese had held
in making their discoveries, as well as the various
circumfiances which guided or encouraged them in
their attempts. The fludy of there gratified and
inflamed his favourite passion; and while he con-
telplated the maps, and read the descriptions of
the new countries which Perefirello had lsen, his
impatience to visit them became irresistible. In
order to indulge it, he made a voyage to Madeira,
and continued during several years to trade with

that
* Life of Columbus, c. v.

B O O K that island, with the Canaries, the Azores, the set.

II. tlements in Guinea, and all other places which the
'-r-- Portuguese had discovered on the continent of

Africa i.

Th eeffeeas BY the experience which Columbus acquired,
of their dif-. . , · · - ,
covries during such a variety of voyages to almost every
upon him. part of the globe with which, at that time, anyx in.

tercourfe was carried on by sea, he was now become
one of the most skilful navigators in Europe. But
not satisfied with that praise, his ambition aimed at
oImething more. The successful progress of the
Portuguese navigators had awakened a spirit of cu.
riofity and emulation, which set every man of I'i.
ence upon examining all the circumstances that led
to the discoveries which they had made, or that
afforded a profpet& of succeeding in any new and
bolder undertaking. The mind of Columbus, na.
turally inquisitive, capable of deep reflection, and
turned to speculations of this kind, was so often
employed in revolving the principles upon which
the Portuguese had founded their schemes of dif.
covery, and the mode in which they had carried
them on, that he gradually began to form an idea
of improving upon their plan, and of accomplilh-
ing discoveries which hitherto they had attempted
in vain.

He forms To find out a passage by sea to the East In-
newourfc dies, was the great objec in view at that period.
to India. From the time that the Portuguese doubled Cape de

Verd, this was the point at which they aimed in
all their navigations, and, in comparitbn with it,
all their discoveries in Africa appeared inconfidera-
ble. The fertility and riches of India had been
known for many ages; its spices and other valua-
ble commodities were in high request throughout
Europe, and the vast wealth of the Venetians,

arising
* Life of Columbus, c. iv. v.

rising from their having engrofied this trade, had B o o K
he envy of all nations. But how intent soever the II.
ortuguefe were upon discovering a new route to -r
hose desirable regions, they searched for it only by
eering towards the south, in hopes of arriving at
ndia, by turning to the east, after they had failed
ound the farther extremity of Africa. This
ourfe, however, was fill unknown, and even if
ifcovered, was of such immense length, that a
oyage from Europe to India must have appeared
n undertaking extremely arduous, and of very un-
ertain issue. More than half a century had been
niployed in advancing from Cape Non to the equa-
r; a much longer space of time might elapse be-
re the more extensive navigation from that to In-
ia could be accomplished. These reflections upon
he uncertainty, the danger and tediousness of the
ourfe which the Portuguese were pursuing, natural-
led Columbus to confider whether a shorter and
lore dire& passage to the East Indies might not be
und out. And after revolving long and seriously
very circumstance suggested by his superior know-
dge in the theory as well aspratice of navigation,
fter comparing attentively the observations of mo-
ern pilots with the hints and conjecures of anci-
nt authors, he at last concluded, that by failing
iredly towards the weft, across the Atlantic ocean,
ew countries, which probably formed a part of
e vast continent of India, must infallibly be dif-
overed.
PRINCIPLES and arguments of various kinds, Theprinci-
nd derived from different sources, induced him to Plii
dopt this opinion seemingly as chimerical as it was theory was
w and extraordinary. The fphcrical figure of f"'ndd.
e earth was known, and its magnitude ascertain-
d with fonie degree of accuracy. From this it
as evident, that the continents of Europe, Alia,

and

B O OK and Africa, formed but a small portion of the ter.

II. raqueous globe. It was suitable to our ideas con.
~T''-' cerning the wisdom and beneficence of the Author

of Nature, to believe that the vast space still unex.
plored, was not covered entirely by a waste unpro.
fitable ocean, but occupied by countries fit for the
habitation of man. It appeared likewise extreme.
ly probable, that the continent, on this fide of the
globe, was balanced by a proportional quantity of
land in the other hemisphere. These conclusions
concerning the existence of another continent,
drawn froni the figure and fiiL uture of the globe,
were confirmed by the observations and conjec.
tures of modern navigators. A Portuguese pilot,
having stretched farther to the weft than was usual
at that time, took up a piece of timber artificially
carved, floating upon the sea; and as it was driven
towards him by a westerly wind, he concluded that
it came from some unknown land, situated in that
quarter. Columbus's brother-in-law had found, to
the weft of the Madeira iles, a piece of timber fa.
ihioned in the fame manner, and brought by the
fame wind; and had seen likewise canes of an
enormous size floating upon the waves, which re.
fembled those described by Ptolemy as productions
peculiar to the East Indies . After a couirfe o
westerly winds, trees, torn up by the roots, were of
ten driven upon the coafis of the Azores, and at
one time the dead bodies of two men, with singular
features, which resembled neither the inhabitants
Europe nor of Africa, were cast ashore there.

As the force of this united evidence, arifin

from theoretical principles and practical obicervai
ons, led Columbus to expe& the discovery of no
countries in the Weftcrn Ocean, other reasons in
duced him to believe that there must be connelc

wiib.

with the continent of India. Though the ancients B O O K
had hardly ever penetrated into India farther than IL
the banks of the Ganges, yet some Greek authors -r
had ventured to describe the provinces beyond that
river. And, as men are prone, and. at liberty, to
magnify what is remote and unknown, they repre-
sented them as regions of an immense extent. Cte-
fias affirmed that India was as large as all the reft
of Asia. Oneficriius, whom Pliny the naturalist fol-
lows*, contended that it was equal to a third part
of the habitable earth. Nearchus asserted, that it
would take four months to march from one extre-
mity of it to the other, in a straight lines. The
journal of Marco Polo, who travelled into Asia in
the thirteenth century, and who had proceeded to-
wards the east far beyond the limits to which any
European had ever advanced, seemed to confirm
these exaggerated accounts of the ancients. By
his magnificent descriptions of the kingdoms of Ca-
thay and 'ipango, and of many other countries, the
names of which were unknown in Europe, India
appeared to be a region ofvaiR extent. From these
accounts, which, however defective, were the mofl
accurate that the people of Europe had at that pe-
riod received, with refped to the remote parts of
the eall, Columbus drew a just conclusion. He
contended, that in proportion as the continent of
India firetched out towards the cast, it Inmu, il
conrfquence of the spherical figure of the earth, ap-
proach nearer to the islands which had lately bece
discovered to the wcft of Africa; that the diflance
front the one to the other was probably not very
confiderablc; and that the imofl dircq, as well as
shortest course, to the remote regions of the eall,
was to be found by failing due weft 1. This no-
tion concerning the vicinity of India to the Vcflcrn

VOL. I. F parts

* Nat. iilR. lib. vi. c. 17. 1' Strab. GeoMr. lib. xv.
1'. io x. 1 See NOTE XII.

B O O K parts of our continent, was countenanced by some

II. eminent writers among the ancients, the fantion
S'r * of whose authority was necessary, in that age, to

procure a favourable reception to any tenet. Arif-
totle thought it probable that the Columns of Her-
cules, or Straits of Gibraltar, were not far removed
from the East Indies, and that there might be a
communication by sea between themi. Seneca,
in terms still more explicit, affirms, that, with a
fair wind, one might fail from Spain to India in a
few days t. The famous Atlantic island described
by Plato, which many supposed to be a real coun-
try, beyond which a vast unknown continent was
situated, is represented by him as lying at no great
distance from Spain. After weighing all these par-
ticulars, Columbus, in whose character the modes-
ty and diffidence of true genius was united with the
ardent enthusiasm of a projector, did not reft with
such absolute assurance either upon his own argu-
ments, or upon the authority of the ancients, as
not to consult such of his contemporaries as were
capable of comprehending the nature of the evi-
dence which he produced in support of his opinion.
As early as the year one thousand four hundred and
feventy-four, he communicated his ideas concern-
ing the probability of discovering new countries,
by failing westwards, to Paul, a physician of Flo-
lence, eminent for his knowledge ofcofmography,
and who, on account both of the learning and
candour which, he discovers in his reply, appears
to have been well intitlod to the confidence which
Columbus placed in him. He warmly approved of
his plan, fuggefied several fadts in confirmation of
it, and encouraged him to perfevcre in an under-
taking ol laudable, and which mufl rcdound io

much

* Arifot. de Ccelo, lib. ii. . 14. edit. DuVa], Par. firz9,

'ol. i. p. 472.
')l Senec. Q acft. Natur, lib. i. in proem.

much to the honour of his country, and the bene- B o o K
fit of Europe . II.

To a mind less capable of forming and of exe- '

cuting great designs than that of Columbus, allf rs fcrhng
these reasonings, and observations, and authorities, it into exe-
would have served only as the foundation of iome cutio''
plausible and fruitless theory, which might have
furnished matter for ingenious discourse, or fanci-
ful conj;ecure. But with his sanguine and enter-
prifing temper, speculation led dire&tly to action.
Fully satisfied himself with refped to the truth of
his system, he was impatient to bring it to the test
of experiment, and to set out upon a voyage of dif-
covery. The firit ftep towards this was to secure
the patronage of some of the considerable powers in
Europe, capable of undertaking such an enterprise.
As long absence had not extinguished the affection
which he bore to his native country, he wished that
it ihould reap the fruits of his labours and invenrt
tion. With this view, he laid his scheme beforee applies
the senate of Genoa, and making his country the to the G.-
first tender of his service, offered to fail under the noe
banners of the republic, in quest of the new regi-
ons which he expe&ed to discover. But Colum-
bus had resided for so many years in foreign parts,
that his countrymen were unacquainted with his
abilities and character; and though a maritime
people, they were so little accustomed to distant
voyages, that they could form no just idea of the
principles on which he founded his hopes of fuc-
ccfs. They inconsiderately reje&ted his proposal,
as the dream of a chimerical projector, and loft for
ever the opportunity of rcfioring their common..
wealth to its ancient splendour f.

Fz HAVING

* Life of Columbus, c. viii.
1' Herrera Hill. de las Indias Occid. Dec. r. lib. i. c. 7.

B O O K HAVING performed what was due to his country,

II. Columbus was so little discouraged by the repulle

-wó~^ which he had received, that instead ofrelinquifhing
of Portugal his undertaking, he pursued it with fresh ardour.

He made his next overture to John II. king of Por-
tugal, in whose dominions he had been long efla-
blifhed, and whom he confidered, on that account,
as having the second claim to his service. Here
every circurnftance seemed to promise him a more
favourable reception. He applied to a monarch of
an enterprising genius, no incompetent judge in
naval affairs, and proud of patronising every at-
tempt to discover new countries. His subjects were
the most experienced navigators in Europe, and the
least apt to be intimidated either by the novelty or
boldness of any maritime expedition. In Portugal,
Columbus's ikill in his profession, as well as his per-
fonal good qualities, were thoroughly known; and
as the former rendered it probable that his scheme
was not altogether chimerical, the latter exempted
him from the suspicion of any sinister intention in
proposing it. Accordingly, the king listened to him
in the mofi gracious manner, and referred the confi-
deration of his plan to Diego Ortiz, bishop of Ceuta,
and two Jewish physicians, eminent cosmographers,
whom he was accustomed to consult in matters of
this kind. As in Genon, ignorance had opposed and
dilappointed Columbus; in Lisbon, he had to com-
bat with prejudice, an enemy no less formidable.
The perfors, according to whose decision his fcheine
was to be adopted or rejecled, had been the chief
(lirctors of the Portuguese navigations, and had
advised to search for a paffEge to India, by fleering
a courle dircftly opposite to that which Columbus
recommended as fliorter and more certain. 'They
could not, therefore, approve of his proposal,
without fubmnitting to the double mortification,
of condemning their own theory, and of ac-

kno wledgia

knowledging his superior sagacity. After teasing B 0O K
him with captious questions, and flarting innu- II.
merable objecions, with a view of betraying him -r
into such a particular explanation of his fyflem, asis deceiv
might draw from him a-full discovery of its na-
ture, they deferred passing a final judgment with
refpea to it. In the mean time, they conspired to
rob him of the honour and advantages which he
expe&ted from the success of his scheme, advising
the king to dispatch a vessel, secretly, in order to
attempt the propored discovery, by following ex-
aAtly the course which Columbus seemed to point
out. John, forgetting on this occasion the senti-
ments becoming a monarch, meanly adopted this
perfidious counsel. But the pilot, chosen to exe-
cute Columbus's plan, had neither the genius, nor
the fortitude of its author. Contrary winds arose,
no fight of approaching land appeared, his courage
failed, and he returned to Lisbon, execrating the
projet as equally extravagant and dangerous '.

UPON dilCoveringthisdifhonourabletranfIh'ion, Hc Irees

Columbus felt the indignation, natural to an inge-nd trepair
nuous mind, and in the warmth of his rcfentment to thecourt
determined to break off all intercourle with a na- Spa
tion capable of such flagrant treachery. He in-
ftantly quitted the kingdom, and landed in Spain
towards the close of the year one thousand fiur
hundred and eighty-four. As he was now at liber-
ty to court the protecion of any patron, whom he
could engage to approve of his plan, and to carry
it into execution, he resolved to propose it in per-
son, to Ferdinand and Isabella, who at that time
governed the united kingdoms of Caflile and Ara-
gon. But, as lie had already experienced the uin- I,,',,Sji'to
certain issue of applications to kings and miniilers, Eng3nd.

he
* Life of Columnbu, c. xi. Hcrrera, decad. I. lib. i. c. .

3B 0 O K he took the precaution of fending into England

II his brother Bartholomew, to whom he had fully
^"^'' communicated his ideas, in order that he might

negociate, at the fame time, with Henry VII. who
was reputed one of the most sagacious as well as
opulent princes in Europe.

Obfacles to IT was not without reason that Columbus enter-
his success
in Spain. tained doubts and fears with refpet to the recep-

tion of his proposals in the Spanish court. Spain
was, at that juncture, engaged in a dangerous war
with Granada, the last of the Moorish kingdoms.
The wary and suspicious temper of Ferdinand was
not formed to relish bold and uncommon designs.
Isabella, though more generous and enterprising,
was under the influence of her husband in all her
aations. The Spaniards had hitherto made no es-
forts to extend navigation beyond its ancient li-
mits, and had beheld the amazing progress of dif-
covery among their neighbours the Portuguele,
without one attempt to imitate or to rival them.
The war with the infidels afforded an ample field
to the national activity and love of glory. Under
circumfiances so unfavourable, it was impossible for
Columbus to make rapid progress with a nation,
naturally flow and dilatory in forming all its refo-
lutions. His charater, however, was admirably
adapted to that of the people, whose confidence
and protection he bolicited. He was grave, though
courteous in his deportment; circumspect in his
words and actions; irreproachable in his morals;
and exemplary in his attention to all the duties and
functions of religion. By qualities so refpeCable,
he not only gained many private friends, but ac-
quired such general esteem, that, notwithflanding
the plainness of his appearance, suitable to the
mediocrity of his fortune, he was not confidered
as a mere adventurer, to whom indigence had fug-

gefled

gested a visionary projet, but was received as a B 0 0 K
person to whose propositions serious attention was II
due.

SER DINAND and Isabella, though fully occupied ex'amine

by their operations againit the Moors, paid so much by unikilful
regard to Columbus, as to remit the confiderationjudgcs'
of his plan to the queen's confessor, Ferdinand de
Talavera. He consulted such of his countrymen,
as were supposed best qualified to decide with re-
fpea to a subject of this kind. But true science
had, hitherto, made so little progress in Spain,
that those pretended philosophers, feleaed to judge
in a matter of such moment, did not comprehend
the firit principles, upon which Columbus founded
his conjecures and hopes. Some of them, from
mistaken notions concerning the dimensions of the
globe, contended that a voyage to those remote
parts of the east, which Columbus expected to dil-
cover, could not be performed in less than three
years. Others concluded, that either he would
find the ocean to be of infinite extent, according
to the opinion of some ancient philosophers; or,
if he ihould perfifi in fleering towards the weft be-
yond a certain point, that the convex figure of the
globe would prevent his return, and that he nlufl
inevitably perish in the vain attempt, to open a
communication between the two opposite hemif-
pheres, which nature hadfor everdisjoined. Even
without deigning to enter into any particular dif-
cuffion some rejected the scheme in general, upon
the credit of a maxim, under which the ignorant
and unenterprifing shelter themselves in every age,
" That it is presumptuous in any perlon, to fuppol'e
that he alone possesses knowledge superior to all the
reft of mankind united." They maintained, that
if there were really any such countries as Columbus
pretended, they could not have remained 'o long

concealed

B O O K concealed, nor would the wisdom and sagacity of

II. former ages have left the glory of this invention

.'r"-' to an obscure Genoese pilot.
who make IT required all Columbus's patience and address
hireport negociate with men capable of advancing such
concerning firange propositions. He had to contend not only
it. with the obflinacy of ignorance, but with what

is still more intra6table, the pride of false know-
ledge. After innumerable conferences, and waft-
ing five years in fruitless endeavours to inform
and to satisfy them, Talavera, at last, made
such an unfavourable report to Ferdinand and
Isabella, as induced them to acquaint Colum-
bus, that until the war with the Moors should
be brought to a period, it was inpoffible for
them to engage in any new and expensive enter-
prise.

WHATEVER care was taken tofofien the harih-

ness of this declaration, Columbus confidered it as
a final rejection of his proposals. But happily for
mankind, that superiority of genius, which is capa-
ble of forming great and uncommon designs, is
usually accompanied with an ardent enthusiasm,
which can neither be cooled by delays, nor damped
by dilappointinent. Columbus was of this sanguine
temper. Though he felt deeply the cruel blow gi-
ven to his hopes, and retired immediately from a
court, where he had been amufcJ lo long with vain
expectations, his confidence in the juflnefs of his
own yftcni did not diminish, and his impatience
to dcmonflrate the truth of it by an.adcual experi-
ment became greater than ever. Having courted
the protection of sovereign flaes without success,
he applied next, to persons of inferior rank, and
addrcflcd fucceflively the dukes of Medina Sido-
uia, and Medina Celi, who, though fubjcls,
were pofleffecd of power and opulence more

than

ban equal to the enterprise which he proje&cd. B O O K
is negociations with them proved as fiuitlefs, as II.
hoe in which he had been hitherto engaged; or '
hefe noblemen were either as little convinced by
olumbus's arguments as their superiors, or they
nere afraid of alarming the jealousy, and offend-
,n the pride of Ferdinand, by countenancing a
che.ne, which he had rejected .
AMID the painful sensations occasioned by such Negociation
succession of disappointments, Columbus had to tlier'inEil-
ltain the additional difirefs, of having received land.
o accounts of his brother, whom he had sent to
he court of England. In his voyage to that coun-
ry, Bartho!o:nexv had been so unfortunate as to
11 into the hands of pirates, who having stripped
im of every thing, detained him a prisoner for
everal years. At length he nade his escape, and
rrived in London, but in such extreme indigence,
hat he was obliged to employ himself during a
olnfiderabie time, in drawing and felling maps,
n order to pick up as much money as would pur-
[hale a decent dress, in which he might venture
0o appear at court. He then laid before the king
ihe proposals, with which he had been entrusted
Dy his brother, and, notwithstanding Henry's ex-
tcfiv e caution and parsimony, which rendered
iirn averse to new and expcnfive undertakings, he
eceived Colunibus's overtures, with more appro-
)ation, than any monarch to whom they had hi-
herto been presented.
MEANWHI LE, Columbus being unacquainted Columhlu
sith his brother's fate, and having now no prof- roast of
c<e of encouragenlent in Spain, relblved to visit encourage-

merit ill

he court of England in person, in hopes of meet- sai'
ug with a more favourable reception there. He

had
Life of Coluin. c. 13. llI rrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 7.

B O O K had already made preparations for this purpose

II. and taken measures for the disposal of his chil.
*'ms" dren during his absence, when Juan Perez, the

prior of the monastery of Rabida, near Palos, in
which they had been educated, earnestly solicited
him to defer his journey for a ihort time. Perez
was a man of considerable learning, and of fonc
credit with queen Isabella, to whom he was known
personally. He was warmly attached to Colum
bus, with whose abilities as well as integrity he
had many opportunities of being acquainted.
Prompted by curiosity or by friendihip, he en.
tered upon an accurate examination of his fyflem,
in conjunCtion with a physician fettled in the
neighbourhood, who was a considerable proficient
in mathematical knowledge. This investigation
satisfied them so thoroughly, with refpedt to the
solidity of the principles on which Columbus
founded his opinion, and the probability of fuc.
cess in executing the plan which he proposed,
that Perez, in order to prevent his country from
being deprived of the glory and benefit, which
must accrue to the patrons of such a grand enter.
prise, ventured to write to Isabella, conjuring her
to confider the matter anew, with the attention
which it merited.

MOVED by the representations of a pcrfon

whom she relpe&ed, Isabella desired Perez to re
pair immediately to the village of Santa FC, in
which, on account of the siege of Granada, the
court rcfided at that time, that she might confer
with him upon this important subje&t. The sirs
effest of their interview was a gracious invitation
of Columbus back to court, accompanied wvith
'91' the present of a fmiall fum to equip him forthe

journey. As there was now a certain profpcd,
that the war with the Moors would fpeedilybe

brouglih

brought to an happy issue by the reduction of BO O K
ranada, which would leave the nation at liberty II.
o engage in new undertakings; this, as well as r--
lie mark of royal favour, with which Columbus
ad been lately honoured, encouraged his friends
to appear with greater confidence than formerly
n support of his scheme. The chief of there,
Alonio de Quintanilla, comptroller of the finances
in Castile, and Louis de Santangel, receiver of
the ecclefiafiical revenues in Aragon, whose me-
ritorious zeal in promoting this great design,
entitles their names to an honourable place in
history, introduced Columbus to many persons of
high rank, and interested them warmly in his be-
half.

BUT it was not an easy matter to inspire Ferdi- isagaindir-

nand with favourable sentiments. His cold dif appointed.
trustful prudence frill regarded Columbus's pro-
je6t as extravagant and chimerical, and in order
to render the efforts of his partizans ineffeitual,
he had the address to employ in this new negoci-
ation with him, some of the persons who had for-
merly pronounced his scheme to be impradticablc.
To their astonishment, Columbus appeared before
them with the fame confident hopes of fuccels as
formerly, and infifled upon the fame high recom-
pence. He proposed that a fImall fleet should be
fitted out, under his command, to attempt the
dilcovery, and demanded to be appointed per-
petual and hereditary admiral and viceroy of all
the seas and lands which he should discover, and
to have the tenth of the profits arising from them,
fettled irrevocably upon hinmlclf and his dcfcend-
ants. At the famie time, he offered to advance
the eighth part of the uim necediary for accom-
plififing his dcfign, on condition that he il-ould
be entitled to a proportional liare of benefit from
the adventure. If the citerpriz flihould totally

nmilc arry,

B O O K miscarry, he made no flipulation for any reward

II. or emolument whatever. Inflead of viewing this
tj<b.' conduc as the cleareri evidence of his full per.

suasion with refpe& to the truth of his own f)y:
ter, or being itruck with that magnaninmit,
which, after so many delays aid repulses, would
fioop to nothing inferior to iks original claims,
the persons with whom Columbus treated, began
meanly to calculate the expence of the expeditior.
and the value of the reward which he demanded.
'Ihe expence, moderate as it was, they reprefcut.
ed to be too great for Spain, in the present ex-
haufted slate of its finances. They contended,
that the honours and emoluments claimed by Co-
lumbus, were exorbitant, even if he fiould per-
form the utmoif of vwhat he had prolifed ; arnd
if all his sanguine hopes should prove illufivc,
such vast conccfiions to an adventurer would be
deemed not only inconsiderate, but ridiculous.
In this iipofing garb of caution and prudence,
their opinion appeared so plausible, and was Jb
warnmly supported by Ferdinand, that Isabella de-
clined giving any countenance to Columbus, ald
abruptly broke off the negociation with him which
ihe had begun.

ThIs *was more mortifying to Columbus than

all the difnppointments which he had hitherto met
w:ith. The invitation to court from Isabella, like
an unexpec'ted ray of light, had opened such prol:
pets of luccefs, as encouraged him to hope that
his labours were at an end; but now darkness and
uncertainty returned, and his mind, firm as it
was, could hardly support the shock of such an
unforcfeen reverie. I-e withdrew in deep anguifl
from court, wvith an intention of prolecuting Iis
voyage to England, as his last rcfource.

A BOU T that time Granada furrcndered, and Ser-
dinald and Isabella, in triumphal pomp, took pol:

fcllioni

eflon of a city, the reduction of wuhich extir- B O K
ated a foreign pn'ver fiom the heart of their do- IT.
itjions, and rendered them mailers of all the pro-
,ines, extending from the bottom of the Pyrenecs last uccefs-
the frontiers of Portugul. As the flow o' fpiriis lul.
hich accompanies fuctefs elevates the mind, and january 2.
eders it enterprising, QCintanilla and.Santalge',
he vigilant and discerning patrons of Columbus,
ok advantage of this favourable situation, in order
make one effort more in behalf of their fiiend.
hey addressed themselves to Isabella, and, after
pressing some surprise, that she, who had always
en the munificent patroness of generous under-
akings, should hesitate so long to countenance the
i0 flplendid fchene that had ever been proposed
any monarch, they represented to her, that Co-
nbus was a man of a found understanding and
irtuous character, well qualified, by his experience
navigation, as well as his knowledge of geome-
yto formjuft ideas with refped to the flructure
theglobe and the situations of its various regions;
at, by offering to risk his own life and fortune in
e execution of his scheme, he gave the moRt
tisfying evidence both of his integrity and hope
ffuccefs; that the fum requisite for equipping
h an armament as he demanded was inconfide-
ble, and the Pdvantages which might accrue
onl his undertaking were imnmcnfc; that he de-
anded no recompence for his invention and la-
ur, Iut what was to arile fiom the countries
ichl he flhould difeovcr; that, as it was worthy
her magnanimity to make this noble attempt
extend the sphere of human knowledge, and
}opcn an intercourse with regions hitherto un-
nown, so it would afford the highest fatisfacqion
her piety and zeal, after rc-ctablifhing the
hiflian faith in thofc provinces of Spain from
lIich it had been long banished, to difcovcr a new

w'0orlj

zB O o K world, to which she might communicate the ligh

II- and bleitings of divine truth; that if now Ihe di
_c'~v~ not decide instantly, the opportunity would be los
149"' irretrievably; that Columbus was on his way tl

foreign countries, where some prince, more fortu
nate or adventurous, would close with his propo
fals, and Spain would for ever bewail the fatal ti.
midity which had excluded her from the glory and
advantages that she had once in her power to have
enjoyed.

THESE forcible arguments, urged by persons

of such authority, and at a junEture so well cho.
fen, produced the desired effe&t. They dispelled
all Isabella's doubts and fears; she ordered Co.
lumbus to be instantly recalled, declared her re.
solution of employing him on his own terms, and
regretting the low state of her finances, generous.
ly offered to pledge her own jewels, in order to
raise as much money as would be needed in ma
ing preparations for the voyage. Santangel, in
transport of gratitude, kified the queen's han
and in order to save her from having reconrlet
such a mortifying expedient for procuring money
engaged to advance immediately the fum that M'a
requisite *.

Thecondi- COLUMBUS had proceeded some leagues onh
atgreSfle journey, when the meffingcr from Isabella ove
with Spain. took him. Upon receiving an account of then

expeced revolution in his favour, he returned
redely to Santa Fe, though obme remainder of di
fidence still mingled itself with his joy. But t
cordial reception which he met with firom Iabel
together with the near profpe& of fctting out up
that voyage which had lb long been tlic 0b1o
of his thoughts and willies, olon cffaced l

renenlbrall
* Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. i. c. 8.

emebrance of all that he had suffered in Spain, B O K

uring eight tedious years of solicitation and sus- II.
efe. The negociation now went forward with "1rd
cility and dispatch, and a treaty or capitula- 5492
on with Columbus was signed on the seventeenth
fApril, one thousand four hundred and ninety-
o. The chief articles of it were, I. Ferdinand
nd Isabella, as sovereigns of the ocean, constituted
olumbus their high admiral in all the seas, islands,
nd continents which should be discovered by his
uduflry; and stipulated, that he and his heirs for
ver should enjoy this office, with the fame powers
nd prerogatives which belonged to the high admi-
al of Castile, within the limits of his jurifdilion.

They appointed Columbus their viceroy in all
he islands and continents which he should discover;
mt if, for the better administration of affairs, it
ould hereafter be necessary to establish a separate
overnor in any of those countries, they authorised
lumbus to name three persons, of whom they
ould chufe one for that office; and the dignity of
iceroy, with all its immunities, was likewise to be
ereditary in the family of Columbus. 3. They
ranted to Columbus and his heirs for ever the
enth of the free profits accruing from the produc-
ions and commerce of the countries which he
lould discover. 4. They declared that if any con-
roverfy or law-suit shall arise with refped to any
nrcantile tranfaaion in the countries which should
e discovered, it should be determined by the sole
uthority of Columbus, or of judges to be appoint-
d by him. 5. They permitted Columbus to ad-
aicc one-eighth part of what should be expended
n preparing for the expedition, and in carrying
1 commerce with the countries which he should
ilcover, and intitled him, in return, to an eighth
)art of the profit *.

THro UG Ia
Life of Columbus, c. 15. Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. i. c. 9.

BO O K THOUGH the name of Ferdinand appears con.

Ti. joined with that of Isabella in this tranfadion, his

'~rs Cdifl rust of Columbus was fIill so violent, that here.
'492Z fused to take any part in the enterprise, as kingof

Aragor. - AA the whole expence of the expedition
was to be defrayed by the crown of Castile, lI.
bella reserved for her subje&s of that kingdom an
exclusive right to all the benefits which might e.
dound from its success.

Theprcpa- As soon as the treaty was signed, Ifabelia, by
hi voyage. her attention and aAivity in forwarding the prepa.

rations for the voyage, endeavoured to make some
reparation to Columbus for the time which he had
loft in fruitless solicitation. By the twelfth of May,
all that depended upon her was adjusted; and Co
lumbus waited on the king and queen, in orderto
receive their final instruCtions. Every thing re.
fpc&ing the destination and condu& of the voyage,
they committed implicitly to the difpolal of his pru
dence. But, that they might avoid giving anyjuf
cause of offence to the king of Portugal, they
firitly enjoined him not to approach near to th
Portuguese settlements on the coast of Guinea, no
in any of the other countries to which they claine
right as discoverers. Isabella had ordered the ship,
of which Columbus was to take the command, t
be fitted out in the port of Palos. a finall mariinii
town in the province of Andalusia. As the priul
Juan Perez, to whom Columbus had already ihc
to much indebted, resided in the ncighlbourhoo'1l(
this place, he, by the influence of that good cc!l'
fiaftic, as well as by his own connt&cion with 11
inhabitants, not only raiscd a mong them \what h
wanted of the lum that lie was bound by trcalty
advance, but engaed leveral of them to acc(o;l
pany him in the voyage. The chief of tclhe afi
ciate were three brothers of the I;alin of' 'iliz0i'

of considerable wealth, and of.great experience in B o O K
naval affairs, who were willing to hazard their lives II.
and fortunes in the enterprise,

BUT, after all the endeavours and efforts of Ifa '492

bella and Columbus, the armament was not fuita-
ble either to the dignity of the nation by which it
was equipped, or to the importance of the service
for which it was destined. It consisted of three vef-
tels only. The largest, a ship of no considerable
burden, was commanded by Columbus, as adni-
ral, who gave it the name of Santa Maria, out of
relpeft for the Blefled Virgin, whom he honoured
with singular devotion. Of the lecond, called the
Pinta, Martin Pinzon was captain, and his brother
Francis pilot. The third, named the NVigna, was
under the command of Vincent Yanez Pinzon.
These two were light vessels, hardly superior ia
burden or force to large boats. This squadron,
if it merits that name, was victualed for twelve
months, and had on board ninety men, mofily
tailors, together with a few adventurers, who
followed the fortune of Columbus, and some
gentlemen of Isabella's court, whom she appoint-
ed to accompany him. Though the expence
of the undertaking was one of the circumstances
that chiefly alarmed the court of Spain, and
retarded so long the negotiation with Columbus,
the humn employed in fitting out this squadron did
not exceed four thousand pounds.

As the art of fllipbuilding in the fifteenth

century was extremely rude, and the bulk and
conftrussion of vefrels were accommodated to
the short and ealy voyages along the coast which
they were accuitomcd to perform, it is a proof
of the courage as well as enterpriling genius of
Columbus, that he ventured, with a flet fb un-
fit for a difiant navigation, to explore ullknowu

VOL. I. G seas,

B 0 0 K seas, where he had no chart to guide him, to

II know of the tides and currents, and no experience
^6 of the dangers to which he might be exposed.

49S' His eagerness to accomplish the great design

which had so long engrossed his thoughts, made
him overlook or disregard every circumfiance
that would have intimidated a mind less adven-
turous. He pushed forward the preparations
with such ardour, and was seconded so effeftual-
ly by the persons to whom Isabella committed
the superintendence of this business, that every
thing was soon in readiness for the voyage. But
as Columbus was deeply impressed with senti-
ments of religion, he would not set out upon an
expedition so arduous, and of which one great
objec was to extend the knowledge of the Chris,
tian faith, without imploring publicly the guid-
ance and protection of Heaven. With this view,
he, together with all the persons under his com-
mand, marched in folenin procession to the mo-
naftery of Rabida. After confefling their fins,
and obtaining absolution from them, they received
the holy sacrament from the hands of the prior,
who joined in his prayers to theirs for the fuc-
cess of an enterprise which he had so zealously
patronized.

His depar- NEXT morning, being Friday the third day of
ture from
Spain. Auguit, in the year one thoulhnd four hundred and

ninety-two, Columbus set fail, a little before fun-
rife, in presence of a vast crowd of spectators, who
sent up their supplications to Heaven for the prof-
tAuguft3. perous issue of the voyage, which they wished, ra-

ther than expected. Columbus steercd directly
for the Canary Islands, and arrived there without
any occurrence that would have delerved notice
on any other occasion. But in a voyage of such
expi6tation and importance, every circumstance

was

was the objed of attention. The rudder of the B OO K
Pinta broke loose, the day after they left the har- II.
bour, and that accident alarmed the crew, no less ''
superstitious than unlkilful, as a certain omen of '49"
the unfortunate defliny of the expedition. Even
in the short run to the Canaries, the ships were
found to be so crazy and ill appointed, as to be
very improper for a navigation which was ex-
peted to be both long and dangerous. Colum-
bus refitted them, however, to the best of his
power, and having supplied himself with fresh
provisions, he took his departure from Gomera,
one of the molt westerly of the Canary Islands,
on the sixth day of September.

HEiu i the voyage of discovery may properly be The coirfe
said to begin; for Columbus holding his course h'eld
due wert, left immediately the usual traat of na-
vigation, and firetched into unfrequented and un-
Iknown seas. The first day, as it was very calm,
le made but little way; but on the second, he
loil fight of the Canaries; and many of the fail-
ors, dejected already and dilfmayed, when they
contemplated the boldness of the undertaking,
began to beat their breafis, and to shed tears, as
if they were never more to behold land. Colum-
bus comforted theni with auflrances of iuccels,
and theprolpec6t of vast wealth, in tholi opulent
regions whether lie was conduCing them. This
early discovery of the spirit of his followers taught
Columbus, that he mufi prepare to firuggle, not
only with the unavoidable difficulties whllicl
might be cxpeccd from the nature of his under-
taking, but with such as were likely to arilc from
the ignorance and timidity of the people under
his command; and he perceived that the art of
governing the ninidcs of menc would be no cIrs; rc-
quifite for accoimplifhing the dilcovcric( which lie
had in view, than naval skill and an cuterpriling

G' 2 courage.

B O O K courage. Happily for himself, and for the country

II. by which he was employed, he joined to the ardent

'TrJ temper and inventive genius of a projetor, vir-
,492. tues of another species, which are rarely united

with them. He possessed a thorough knowlege of
mankind, an insinuating address, a patient perse.
verence in executing any plan, the perfect govern.
ment of his own passions, and the talent of ac-
quiring the direetion of those of other men. All
these qualities, which formed him for command,
were accompanied with that superior knowledge of
his profeflion, which begets confidence in times of

vigilance difficulty and danger. To unskilful Spanish tailors,
and atten-.
tionofCo- accustomed only to coailing voyages in the Medi.
lumbus. terranean, the maritime science of Columbus, the

fruit of thirty years experience, improved by an
acquaintance with all the inventions of the Portu-
guefe, appeared immense. As soon as they put to
sea, he regulated every thing by his sole authority;
he superintended the execution of every order;
and allowing himself only a few hours for sleep, he
was at all other times upon deck. As his course lay
through seas which had not formerly been visited,
the founding-line, or instruments for obfervaiion,
were continually in his hands. After the example
of the Portuguese discoverers, he attended to the
motion of tides and currents, watched the flight of
birds, and appearance of fishes, of sea-weeds, and
of every thing that floated on the waves, and en-
tered every occurrence, with a minute exactnels,
in the journal which he kept. As the length of the
voyage could not fail of alarming tailors habituated
only to short excursions, Columbus endeavoured
to conceal from thenl the real progress which they
made. With this view, though they run eighteen
leagues on the `econd day after they left Gonlera,
he gave out that they had advanced only fifteen, and
he uniformly employed the fame artifice of reckoninF

iK,-

ihort during the whole voyage. By the fourteenth B O K
of September, the fleet was above two hundred II
leagues to the wefl of the Canary Isles, at a greater 'T
difiance from the land than any Spaniard had been Apprehen-
before that time. There they were struck with an lions and a

larms of his

appearance no less astonishing than it was new,crcw.
They observed, that the magnetic needle, in their
compasses, did not point exatdly to the polar star,
but varied a degree towards the weft; and as they
proceeded, this variation increased. This appear-
ance, which is now familiar, though it still remains
one of the mysteries of nature, into the cause of
which the sagacity of man hath not been able to
penetrate, filled the companions of Columbus with
terror. They were now in a boundless unknown
ocean, far from the usual course of navigation;
nature itself seemed to be altered, and the only
guide which they had left was about to fail them.
Columbus, with no less quickness than ingenuity,
invented a reason for this appearance, which,
though it did not satisfy himself, seemed so plaufi-
ble to them, as dispelled their fears, or silenced
their murmurs.

HE Itill continued to steer due weft, nearly in
the fame latitude with the Canary islands. In this
course he came within the sphere of the trade
wind, which blows invariably from east to weft,
between the tropics and a few degrees beyond
then. He advanced before this steady gale with
such uniform rapidity, that it was seldom necessary
to shift a fail. When about four hundred leagues
to the weft of the Canaries, he found the sea so
covered with weeds, that it had a resemblance to
a meadow of vast extent; and in some places they
were so thick, as to retard the motion of the vei-
fels. This firange appearance occasioned new
alarm and disquiet. The sailors imagined that
they were now arrived at the utnloft boundary of

thl

B 0 0 K navigable ocean; that these floating weeds would

IL. obflru6t their farther progress, and concealed dan-

gerous rocks, or some large trad of land, which
49 ' had funk, they knew not how, in that place.

Columbus endeavoured to persuade them, that the
appearance which had alarmed, ought rather to
have encouraged them, and was to be confidered
as the sign of approaching land. At the fame
time, a brisk gale arose, and carried them forward.
Several birds were seen hovering about the ihip",
and directing their flight towards the weft. The
desponding crew refurned some degree of spirit,
and began to entertain fresh hopes.
tla ca"e. UPON the first of Ociober they were, according

to the admiral's reckoning, seven hundred and fe-
venty leagues to the westward of the Canar;es, but
left his men should be intimidated by the prodigi-
ous length of the navigation, he gave out that they
had proceeded only five hundred and eighty-four
leagues; and, fortunately for Columbus, neither
his own pilot, nor thole of the other ships, had
ikill sufficient to corre& this error, and caifcovcr
the deceit. They had now been above thict vcclks
at sea; they had proceeded far beyond what former
navigators had attempted or deemed poflible; all
their prognotiics of discovery, drawn from the
flight of birds and other circumflanccs, haci proved
fallacious; the appearances of land, wil i which
their own credulity, or the artifice of their com-
mander had from time to time flattered and amule
them, had been altogether iliufive, and their prlol
pct of lucccfs seemed now to be as diflant as ever.
These rcflections occurred often to men, who had
no other objct or occupation, than to rcalon and
discourse concerniingi the intention and circuni-
stances of their expedition. They made iliplrc

S. Sec NOTE XIII.

lion, at firfl, upon the ignorant and timid, and B O O K
extending, by degrees, to such as were better in- II
formed or more resolute, the contagion spread at
length from ship to ship. From secret whispers 493'
and murmurings, they proceeded to open cabals
and public complaints. They taxed their fove-
reign with inconsiderate credulity, in paying such
regard to the vain promises and rash conje6tures
of an indigent foreigner, as to hazard the lives
of so many of her own fubjets, in prosecuting a
chimerical scheme. They affirmed that they had
fully performed their duty, by venturing so far in
an unknown and hopeless course, and could incur
no blame for refusing, at last, to follow a desperate
adventurer to certain defirudtion. They contend-
ed, that it was necessary to think of returning to
Spain, while their crazy vessels were still in a con-
dition to keep the sea, but expressed their fears
that the attempt would prove vain, as the wind,
which had hitherto been so favourable to their
course, must render it impossible to fail in the op-
pofite direction. All agreed that Columbus should
be compelled by force to adopt a measure on
which their common safety depended. Some of
the more audacious proposed, as the most expe-
ditious and certain method for getting rid at once
of his remonfirances, to throw him into the lea,
being persuaded that, upon their return to Spain,
the death of al unfucccfsful projetor would ex-
cite little concern, and be inquired into with no
curiosity.

Co uMnBUS was fully sensible of his perilous si- T'col,,l'i

tuation. He had observcd, with great concern, i,,

footii n

the fatal operation of ignorance and of fear in pro- tl'h"
ducing dilaffectiou among his crew, and saw that
it was now ready to burtf out into open mutiny.
lie retained, however, perfed pretence of mind.
lie affcctcd to fccnm ignorant of their machina-

tions.

B O O K tions. Notwithifanding the agitation and folici-

II. tude of his own mind, he appeared with a cheer-
%^r^ ful countenance, like a man satisfied with the pro-
I492. grefs which he had made, and confident of fuc-

cess. Sometimes he employed all the arts of in-
finuation to sooth his men. Sometimes he endea-
voured to work upon their ambition or avarice, by
magnificent defc/iptions of the fame and wealth
which they were about to acquire. On other oc-
cafionrs, 'lie assumed a tone of authority, and
threatened them with vengeance from their so-
vereign, if, by their dastardly behaviour, they
mhould defeat this noble effort to promote the glory
of God, and to exalt the Spanilh name above that
of every other nation. Even with seditious fai-
lors, the words of a man whom they had been
accustomed to reverence, were weighty and per-
suasive. 'They not only restrained them from
those violent excesses, which they meditated, but
prevailed with'them to accompany their admiral
for some time longer.
Thlirfcars As they proceeded, the indications of approach-

ret ing the land seemed to be more certain, and excited

hope in proportion. T he birds began to appear in
flocks,'makiig towards the fouth-wefi. Columbus,
in imitation of the Portuguese navigators, who had
been guided, in several of their dilcoveries, by the
motion of birds, altered his course from due weft
towards that quarter whither they pointed their
flight. But, after holding on for several days in
this new direction, withput any better iuccefs than
formerly, having seen no obje&, during thirty
days, but the tfa and the {ky, their hopes iubfided
faftcr than they had risen; their fears revived with
additional force; impatience, rage, and despair,

Dangcr of a appeared in every countenance. All fen e of sub-
m"tiny. ordination was loft: the officers, who had hither-

to concurred with Columbus in opinion, and lip-

poirt (d

ported his authority, now took part with the men; B O0 K
they assembled tumultuously on the deck, expos- II.
tulaied with their commander, mingled threats '"
with their expostulations, and required him in-
itantly to tack about and return to Europe. Co-
lumbus perceived that it would be of no avail to
have recourse to any of his former arts, which
having been tried so often, had loft their effeds;
and that it was impoflible to rekindle any zeal for
the success of the enterprise among men, inwh ofe
breasts fear had extinguished every generous fen-
timent. He saw that it was no less vain to think D;itrefsof
of employing either gentle or feverc measures, to Columbus.
quell a mutiny bo general and so violent. It was
necessary, on all these accounts, to soothe passions
which he could no longer command, and to give
way to a torrent too impetuous to be checked.
He promised solemnly to his men that he would
comply with their request, provided they would
accompany him, and obey his commands for
three days longer, and if, during that time, land
were not discovered, he would then abandon
the enterprise, and direet his course towards
Spain .

ENRAGED as the sailors were, and impatient to Encourag-
turn their faces again towards their native coun- ing appear
try, his proposition did not appear to them unrea-cers.
olnable. Nor did Columbus hazard much in con-
fining himflelf to a term so flort. The presages of
discovering land were now so numerous and pro-
niiling, that he deemed them infallible. For some
(lays the founding line reached the bottom, and
the foil which it brought up indicated land to be
al no great diflance. The flocks of birds increal-
c(, and were composed not only of sea fowl, but
of such land birds as could not Le supposed to

fly
* Oviedo, Hist. ap. Ramus. vol. iii. p. 81. E.

O 0 0 K fly far from the fiore. The crew of the Pinta
I1. obfcrved a cane floating, which seemed to have
~'r's' been newly cut, and likewise a piece of timber

artificially carved. The sailors aboard the Nigna
took up the branch of a tree with red berries,
perfetly freih. The clouds around the setting
fun affSured a new appearance; the air was n;cze
mild and warni, and, during night, the wind be.
came unequal and variable. From all these fymp.
toms, Columbus was so confident of being near
land, that on the evening of the eleventh of Oc.
tober, after public prayers for success, he or-
dered the fails to be furled, and the ships to lie
by, keeping firi&C watch, left they should be
driven ashore in the night. puring this interval
of fufpence and expectation, no man shut his
eyes, all kept upon deck, gazing intently to-
wards that quarter where they expected to difl
cover the land, which had been so long the object
of their wishes.

Land difo- ABOUT two hours before midnight, Columbus,
vcred. flanding on the forecafile, observed light at a dif:

tance, and privately pointed it out to Pedro Cut-
tierez, a page of the queen's wardrobe. Gutie.
rez perceived it, and calling to Salcedo, comp-
troller of the fleet, all three saw it in motion, as i
it were carried fiom place to place. A little after
midnight, the joyful found of land, land, was
heard from the Pinta, which kept always a-hcad
of the other ships. But, having been ib ofien de-
ccived by fallacious appearances, they were nlo
become flow of belief, and waitecl, in all the an-
guilh of uncertainty and impatience, for the re-

la lurn of clay. As soon as mlorning dawned, their
t\ 12-. doubts and scars were (tilpcllcl, they beheldl an

island about two leagues; 1o the north, wlhole lisl
and verdant fields, well rlored with wood, anlj
watered with many rivulets, prcfkeltcd to thlh

the

the aspec& of a delightful country. The crew of B O K
the Pinta instantly began the Te Deum, as a hymn II
of thanksgiving to God, and were joined by thole b
of the other fhfips, with tears of joy and tranf-
ports of congratulation. This office of gratitude
to Heaven was followed by an a&t of justice to
their commander. They threw thcniielves at the
feet of Columbus, with feelings of self condem-
nation mingled with reverence. They implored
him to pardon their ignorance, incredulity, and
insolence, which had created him so much unne-
ceffary disquiet, and had so often obftru&ed the
prosecution of his well-concerted plan; and pas-
iing, in the warmth of their admiration, from
one extreme to another, they now pronounced
the man, whom they had so lately reviled and
threatened, to be a person inspired by Heaven
with sagacity and fortitude more than human, in
order to accomplish a design, so far beyond the
ideas and conception of all former ages.

As soon as the fun arose, all the boats were Firftinter

view with

manned and armed. They rowed towards the lnatis,
island with their colours displayed, warlike music,
and other martial pomp; and as they approached
the coast, they iaw it covered with a multitude of
people, whom the novelty of the fpeftacle had
drawn together, and wvhole attitudes and gestures
cxprcffed wonder and aitonithment at the firange
objects vwhich presented themselves to their view.
Columbus was the firfl European who set foot in
lhec Newv World which he had discovered. He
landed in a rich dress, and with a naked sword
in his hand. His men followed, and kneeling
down, they all kissed the ground which they had
so long dclircd to tec. They next crected a cru-
cifix, and profirating themselves before it, re-
turned thanks to God for conducling their voyage
to such an happy issue. They then took solemn

poffeflion

B O O K possession of the country for the crown of Cafiile

II. and Leon, with all the formalities which the Por.
'^~rz tuguefe were accuflomed to observe in adls of this

kind, in their new discoveries i.
Theirmu- THE Spaniards, while thus employed were fur-

tU a-. rounded by many of the natives, who gazed, in

silent admiration, upon actions which they could
not comprehend, and of which they did not fore.
fee the consequences. The dress of the Spani-
ards, the whiteness of their skins, their beards,
their arms, appeared firange and surprising. The
vast machines in which they had traverled the
ocean, that seemed to move upon the waters with
wings, and uttered a dreadful found resembling
thunder, accompanied with lightning and minoke,
firuck them with such terror, that they began
to refpe& their new guests as a superior order
of beings, and concluded that they were chil-
dren of the Sun, who had descended to visit the
earth.

THE Europeans were hardly less amazed at

the scene now before them. Every herb, and
shrub, and tree, was different from those which
flourished in Europe. The foil feerned to be
rich, but bore few marks of cultivation. The
climate, even to Spaniards, felt warm, though
extremely delightful. The inhabitants appeared
in the simple innocence of nature, entirely naked.
Their black hair, long and uncurled, floated
upon their ihoulders, or was bound in trefrcs
around their heads. They had no beards, and
every part of their bodies was perfctly finooth.
Their complexion was of a duflky copper colour,
their features singular, rather than difagrecablc,
their asped gentle and timid. Though not
tall, they were well shaped, and ativc. Their

faces,
X Life of Columblus, c. 22, 23. I-errera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 13'

faces, and other parts of their body, were fantaf- B O O K
tically painted with glaring colours. They were shy IL
at first through fear, but soon became familiar with 'r'
the Spaniards, and with transports of joy receiv-
ed from them hawks-bells, glass beads, and other
baubles, in return for which they gave such provi-
fiols as they had, and some cotton yarn, the only
commodity of value that they could produce.
Towards evening, Columbus returned to his fiips,
accompanied by many of the islanders in their
boats, which they called canoes, and though rude-
ly formed out of the trunk of a tingle tree, they
rowedthem with surprising dexterity. Thus, ill
the first interview between the inhabitants of the
old and new worlds, every thing was conducted
amicably, and to their mutual fatisfadion. The
former, enlightened and ambitious, formed alrea-
dy vail ideas with refpet to the advantages which
they might derive from those regions that began
to open to their view. The latter, simple and un-
dilcerniug, had no foresight of the calamities and
dclblation which were now approaching their counl-
try.

COLUMBUS, who now assumed the title and au- Columlus

thority of admiral and viceroy, called the ifiand taif'ls'a
which he had discovered San Salvador. It is bet- milal alnd
ter known by the name of Guanahani, which the vic""y.
natives gave to it, and is one of that large cluf-
ter of islands called the Lucaya or Bahama iflcs.
It is situated above three thousand miles to the
weft of Gomera, from which the squadron took
its departure, and only four degrees to the south
of it; so little had Columbus deviated from the
westerly course, which he had chosen as the most
proper.

CoLUMB US employed the next day in visiting tib Piocceds

coafls of the island; and from the universal po- t!Wlab`.
verty of the inhabitants he perceived that this was

IIot

B O OK not the rich country for which he fought. But,

II. conformably to his theory concerning the discovery
^"'Tr of those regions of Asia which itretched towards

the east, he concluded that San Salvador was one
of the isles which geographers described as situated
in the vai ocean adjacent to India . Having ob.
served that most of the people whom he had seen
wore small plates of gold, by way of ornament,
in their nostrils, he eagerly inquired where they
got that precious metal. They pointed towards the
south, and made him comprehend by signs, that
gold abounded in countries situated in that quarter.
Thither he immediately determined to direEt his
course, in full confidence of finding there those
opulent regions which had been the object of his
voyage, and would be a recompence for all his
toils and dangers. He took along with him leven
of the natives of San Salvador, that, by acquiring
the Spanish language, they might serve as guides
and interpreters; and those innocent people con-
fidered it as a mark of diftindtion when they were
feleted to accompany him.

Discovers HE saw several islands, and touched at three of
Cuba. the largest, on which he bellowed the names of St.

Mary of the Conception, Fernandina, and Isabella.
But as their foil, productions, and inhabitants,
nearly resembled those of San Salvador, he made
no flay in any of them. He inquired every where
for gold, and received uniformly for answer, that
it was brought from the south. He followed that
course, and soon difeovered a country of vail ex-
tent, not perfeltly level, like those which he had
already visited, but sO diversified with rising
grounds, hills, rivers, woods, and plains, that he
was uncertain whether it might prove an island, or
part of the continent. The natives of San Salva-

dor,
P Pet. Mart. cpift. 135.

or, whom he had on board, called it Cuba; Co- B o O ,
umbus gave it the name of Juanna. He entered II-
hemouth of a large river with his squadron, and ~r'
1 the inhabitants fled to the mountains as he ap-
roached the shore. But as he resolved to careen
is hips in that place, he sent some Spaniards, to-
ether with one of the people of San Salvador, to
ew the interior parts of the country. They, hav-
g advanced above sixty miles from the shore, re-
orted upon their return, that the foil was richer,
nd more cultivated than any they had hitherto dif-
overed; that, besides many scattered cottages,
hey had found one village, containing above a
houfand inhabitants; that the people, though nak-
, seemed to be more intelligent than those of San
alvador, but had treated them with the fame ref-
?edful attention, kissing their feet, and honouring
hem as sacred beings allied to Heaven; that they
ad given them to eat a certain root, the taste of
which resembled roasted chefluts, and likewise a
ingularfpecies of corn called maize, which either
vhen roafled whole or ground into meal, was
bundantly palatable; that there seemed to be no
four-footed animals in the country, but a species of
dogs, which could not bark, and a creature refem-
bling a rabbit, but of a much smaller size; that they
had obfcrvcd some ornaments of gold among the
people, but of no great value ".

THESE messengers had prevailed with some of His coniec-
the natives to accompany them, who informed Co- tur's ,it
Iumbus, that the gold of which they made their or-
naments was found in Clibanacan. By this word
:hcy meant the middle or inland part of Cuba; but
Columbus, being ignorant of their language, as
'ell as unaccuftoned to their pronunciation, and
?is thoughts running continually upon his own the-

ory
* Life of Columbus, c. 24.-z8. Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. I. c. 14.

B O O K ory concerning the discovery of the East Indies, h1

II. was led, by the resemblance of found, to fuppoli
"~"r' that they spoke of the Great Khan, and imaginec

that the opulent kingdom of Cathay, described bl
Marco Polo, was not very remote. This induce(
him to employ fonle time in viewing the country
He visited almost every harbour, from Porto de
Principe, on the north coast of Cuba, to the eats.
ern extremity of the island; but though delighted
with the beauty of the scenes, which every where
presented them selves, and amazed at the luxurian!
fertility of the foil, both which, from their novel.
ty, made a more lively impression upon his imai.
nations, he did not find gold in such quantity as
was sufficient to satisfy either the avarice of his fol.
lowers, or the expectations of the court to whicli
he was to return. The natives as much aflonifhed
at his eagerness in quest of gold, as the Europeans
were at their ignorance and simplicity, pointed to.
wards the east, where an island which they called
Hayti was situated, in which that metal was nore
abundant than among them. Columbus ordered
his squadron to bend its course thither but Martin
Alonfo Pinzon, impatient to be first who should
take possession of the treasures which this country
was supposed to contain, quitted his companions
regardless of all the admiral's signals to flacken fail
until they should come up with him.

Discovers COLUMBUS, retarded by contrary winds, did
Hispaniola. nol reach Hayti till the sixth of December. He

called the port where he first touched St. Nicholas
and the island itself Efpagnola, in honour ofthf
kingdom by which he was employed; and it is the
only country, of those he had yet discovered, whicl
has retained the name that he gave it. As he coulc
neither meet with the Pinta, nor have any inter

courrf
* See NOTE XIV.

course with the inhabitants, who fled in great con- B o o K
fternation towards the woods, he soon quitted St. II
Nicholas, and failing along the northern coast of '"J
the island, he entered another harbour, which he
called Conception. Here he was more fortunate;
his people overtook a woman who was flying from
them, and after treating her with great kindness,
difiniffed her with a present of such toys as they
knew were most valued in those countries. The
description which she gave to her countrymen of
the humanity and wonderful qualities of the firan-
gers; their admiration of the trinkets, which she
shewed with exultation; and their eagerness to
participate of the fame favours, removed all their
fears, and induced many of them to repair to the
harbour. The strange objects which they beheld,
and the baubles which Columbus beflowed upon
them, amply gratified their curiosity and their
wishes. They nearly resembled the people of
Guanahani and Cuba. They were naked like
them, ignorant, and simple; and seemed to be
equally unacquainted with all the arts which ap-
pear Inoft necessary in polilied Iocicties; but they
were gentle, credulous, and timid, to a degree
which rendered it easy to acquire the aftendant
over them, especially as their cxcefiive admiration
led them into the falme error with the people of the
other islands, in believing the Spaniards to be
more than mortals, and defeended inmmediately
from Heaven. They poffeflecl gold in greater
abundance than their neighbours, ivhich they rea-
dily exchanged for bells, beads, or pins; and, in
this unequal traflic, both parlics were highly pleas-
ed, each confidering themlelves as gainers by the
tranfation. Here Columbus awas viftied by a
prince or caziquze of the country. He appeared
with all the pomp known among a {imple people,
being carried in a fort of palanqiinl uppgr the Iloul-

VOL. I. H daer

B O O K ders of four men, and attended by many of his

II. fubjets, who served him with great refped. His

*a-r-' deportment was grave and flately, very reserved
1492' towards his own people, but with Columbus and

the Spaniards extremely courteous. He gave the
admiral some thin plates of gold, and a girdle of
curious workmanship, receiving in return presents
of small value, but highly acceptable to him :.

COLUMBUS, still intent on discovering the

mines which yielded gold, continued to interro-
gate all the natives with whom he had any inter-
course concerning their situation. They concur-
red in pointing out a mountainous country, which
they called Cibao, at some distance from the sea,
and farther towards the cast. Struck with this
found, which appeared to him the fame with Ci-
pango, the name by which Marco Polo, and other
travellers to the east, distinguish the islands of Ja-
pan, he no longer doubted with rcfpedt to the
vicinity of the countries which he had discovered
to the remote parts of Asia; and, in full expec-
tation of reaching soon those regions which had
been the obje& of his voyage, he direted his
course towards the east. He put into a commo-
dious harbour, which he called St. Thomas, and
found that diftrid to be under the government
of a powerful cazique, named Guacanahari, who,
as he afterwards learned, was one of the five so-
vereigns among whom the whole island was di-
vided. He immediately sent messengers to Co-
lumbus, who, in his name, delivered to him the
present of a nafk cnrioufly fashioned, with the
ears, note, and mouth of beaten gold, and invited
him to the place of his refidencc, near the har-
bour now called Cape Francois, some leagues to-
wards the cafl. Columbus dilpatched some of his

officers

* Life of Columbus, c. 32. Ilerrcra, dec. i. lib. i. c. 15,
&c.

officers to visit this prince, who, as he behaved B O O.K
with greater dignity, seened to claim more atten- II.
tion. They returned, with such favourable ac- i.---'
counts both of the country and of the people, as 149"
made Columbus impatient for that interview with
Guacanahari to which he had bee; invited.

HE failed for this purpofc from St. Thlomas, on One of li

the tvwenty-fourth of December, with a fair wind, hip left.
and the sea perfectly calm; and as, amidfl the
multiplicity of his occupations, he had not shut his
eyes for two days, lie retired at midnight, in or-
der to take some rcpoel, having commnitted the
helm to the pilot, with fitrdi injnnlions not to
quit it for a moment. The pilot, dreading no
ranier, carelessly left the helm to an unexperi-
enced cabin-boy, and the ship, carried away by
a current, was dashed against a rock. The vio-
lence of the shock awakened Columbus. He rail
lu to the deck. There, all was confusion and
(Iclpair. He alone retained prelence of iind. He
ordered some of the ihilors to take a boat, a!nd
carry out an anchor aflern ; but, inflead of obey-
ing, they made off towards the Nigna, which was
about half a league distant. He then comnanded
the masts to be cut down, in order to lighten tL 1-.
ilip; but all his eudeavours were too late; ths:
vdelil opened near the keel, and filled so fast with
water, that its lots was inevitable. The linooth-
es's of the efa, and the timely affiitance of boats
fiom the Nigna, enabled the crew to livce their
lives. As soon as the islanders heard of this dil-
afler, they crowded to the lhore, with their prince
Guacanahari at their head. Inilead of taking ad-
vantage of the diflrcs ill which they beheld the
Spaniards, to atlcmpt any thing to their detriment,
they lamented tliir mnisfbrtuie with lears of fin-
cere condolence. Not aaiscd with this unavail-
ing exrellion of their fynipathy, they put to 1Cti

II z aval:

B O o K a vast number of canoes, and, under the diretion

II. of the Spaniards, assisted in saving whatever could
'T"-'i be got out of the wreck, and by the united labour

1492. of so many hands, almost every thing of value

was carried ashore. As fast as the goods were
landed, Guacanahari in person took charge of
them. By his orders, they were all deposited in
one place, and armed centinels were potled, who
kept the multitude at a distance, in order to pre.
vent them not only from embezzling, but from
infpeting too curiously what belonged to their
guests *. Next morning this prince visited Co.
lumbus, who was now on board the Nigna, and
endeavoured to console him for his loss, by offer-
ing all that he possessed to repair it t.

Ditlefs of THE condition of Columbus .was such, that he
Columbus. stood in need of consolation. He had hitherto

procured no intelligence of the Pinta, and no lon.
ger doubted but that his treacherous associate had
set fail for Europe, that he might have the merit of
carrying the first tidings of the extraordinary disco.
veries which they had made, and might so far pre-
occupy the ear of their Sovereign, as to rob him of
the glory and reward to which he vasjuftly intitled.
There remained but one vessel, and that the small-
ell and most crazy of the squadron, to traverse
such a vast ocean, and carry so many men back to
Europe. Each of those circumstances was alarm-
ing, and filled the mind of Columbus with the ut-
most solicitude. His desire of overtaking Pinzon,
and of effacing the unfavourable impreflions which
his misrepresentations might make in Spain, made
it necessary to return thither without delay. The

Refolvcsto difficulty of taking such a number of persons
leave a part
of ilscrcw aboard the Nigua, confirmed him in an opinion,
ain th if- which the fertility of the country, and the gentle

temper
* See NOTE XV. t Ilerrera, dec. i. lib. i. c. 3.

temper of the people, had already induced him to B 0 o K
form. He resolved to leave a part of his crew in II.
the island, that, by residing there, they might y-r
learn the language of the natives, fludy their dif- I492
position, examine the nature of the country, search
for mines, prepare for the commodious settlement
of the colony, with which he proposed to return,
and thus secure and facilitate the acquisition of
those advantages which he expeEted from his dif-
coveries. When he mentioned this to his men,
all approved of the design; and from impatience
under the fatigue of a long voyage, from the le-
vity natural to sailors, or from the hopes of anaf-
sing vast wealth in a country which afforded such
promising specimens of its riches, many offered vo-
luntarily to be among the number of those who
ihould remain.

NoT IN G was now wanting towards the execu- ObtainE the
tion of this scheme, but to obtain the content of cOnfnt of
Guacanahari; and his unfufpicious simplicity soon th na
presented to the admiral a favourable opportunity
of proposing it. Columbus having, in the-beft
manner he could, by broken words and signs, ex-
pressed tome curiosity to know the cause which had
moved the islanders to fly with such precipitation
upon the approach of his ships, he informed him
that the country was much infested by the incurfi-
ons of certain people, whom he called Carribeans,
who inhabited several islands to the south east.
These he decfribed as a fierce and warlike race of
men, who delighted in blood, and devoured the
flesh of the prisoners who were so unhappy as to
fill into their hands; and as upon the first appear-
ancc of the Spaniards, they were supposed to be
Carribeans, whom the natives, however numerous,
durst not face in battle, they had recourse to their
usual method of fcuring their safety, by flying into
the thickest and most impenetrable woods. Gua-

canahari,

B O O K canahari, while speaking of those dreadful inva.

II. ders, discovered such symptoms of terror, as well

- as such confcioufneis of the inability of his owni

people to resist them, as led Columbus to conclude
that he would not be alarmed at the proposition of
any scheme which afforded him the prolpet of ain
additional security against their attacks. He in.
ftantly offered him the affifiance of the Spaniards
to repel his enemies; he engaged to take him and
'his people under theprotection of the powerful ni0-
narch whom he served, and offered to leave in the
island such a number of his men, as illould be iuf.
ficient, not only to defend the inhabitants from fu-
ture incursions, but to avenge their pafl wrongs.

Builds a THE credulous prince closed eagerly with the
i''t. proposal, and thought himself already safe unclr

the patronage of beings sprung from Heaven, and
superior in power to mortal men. The ground was
marked out for a small fort, which Columbus called
Navidad, because he had landed there on Chriifnias
day. A deep ditch was drawn around it. lhe
ramparts were fortified with pallifades, and the
great guns, saved out of the admiral's ship, were
planted upon them. In ten days the work was
finished ; that simple race of men laboured with
inconliderate afiiduitv in creding tlis first nmoii-
iient of their own iervitudc. Diili:;g this icne
Colunmbus, by his carefies and liberality, laboilrci
to incrcafe the high opinion which the natives ci,-
tcrtained of the Spaniards. But while h cenda-
noured to inilpire thenl with confidence in thc'ir
dil'pofition to do good, he wished likewise to gni
thenii lome Itriking idea of their povwer to pIunili
and deflroy such as were the objects of their juli
indcligniatioln. With this view, il p re l;nec ol a .n::
afciii'ly, he cirew up his men in order of banttle,
and macde an oflentatious but innocent diClil:.y ()

'ti:

the sharpness of the Spanish swords, of the force B o o K
of their spears, and the operation of their cross- II.
bows. These rude people, firangers to the use ^-r-
of iron, and unacquainted with any hostile weapons, 1492-
but arrows of reeds pointed with the bones of fish-
es, wooden swords, and javelins hardened in the
fire, wondered and trembled. Before this surprise
or fear had time to abate, he ordered the great
guns to be fired. The sudden explosion firuck
them with such terror, that they fell flat to the
ground, covering their faces with their hands;
and when they beheld the aflonifhing effe&t of the
bullets, they concluded that it was impossible to re-
silt men, who had the command of such deftruc-
tive instruments, and who came armed with thun-
der and lightning againfi their enemies.

AFTER giving such impressions both of the be- risinftruc-
neficence and power of the Spaniards, as might ton"s to

-

, rrthofe he left

have rendered it easy to preserve an ascendent over in it.
the minds of the natives, Columbus appointed
thirty-eight of his people to remain in the island.
He entrusted the command of these to Diego de
Arada, a gentleman of Cordova, investing him
with the fame powers which he himself had receiv-
ed from their Catholic Majesties; and furnishcd
him with every thing requisite for the subsistence or
defence of this infant colony. He flriCly enjoined
them to maintain concord among themfclves, to
yield an unreservcd obedience to their comman-
der, to avoid giving offence to the natives by any
violence or exa6lion, to cultivate the friendlhip of
Guacanahari, but not to put thcmfelves in his pow-
er by firaggling in small parties, or marching too
far from the fort. He promitsd to revisit them
soon, with such a reinforcement of firength as
might enable them to take full poffeflion of the
country, and to reap all the fiuits of their difcove-

ries.

D O O-K ries. In the mean time, he engaged to mention

II. their names to the king and queen, and to place
"-nr' their merit and lervices in the most advantageous

light u.

HAVING thus taken every 'precaution for the

security of the Colony, he left Navidad on the
'493. fourth of January, one thousand four hundred and

ninety-three, and fleering towards the east, disco-
vered, and gave names to most of the harbours on
the northern coast of the island. On the sixth, he
descried the Pinta, and soon came up with her,
after a separation of more than fix weeks. Pinzon
endeavoured to justify his conduct, by pretending
that he had been driven from his course by firess of
weather, and prevented from returning by contra-
ry winds. The admiral, though no firanger to his
perfidious intentions, or the frivolity as well as
falsehood of what he urged in his defence, was lo
sensible that this was not a proper time for -ven-
turing upon any high firain of authority, and
felt such fatisfaótion in this juntion with his
consort, which delivered him from many difqui-
eting apprehensions, that lame as Pinzon's apolo-
gy was, he admitted of it without difficulty, and
restored him to favour. During his abfcnce from
the admiral, ?inzon had vi{ited several harbours in
the island, had acquired fboe gold by traffickiug
with tire la!ives, but had nladc no dilcovcry of
any importance.

Rto,lvcs to

1 F ,lca the condition of lis ships, as well as the
ci"it°O tcn!per of his imen, Columbus now found it ntI-

ceffly to Laftcn his return to Europc. 'I'he former,
having futfered mLuch during a voyage of such un-
uliral duration, wvere extremely leaky. The lantcr

cxp:-cfrcd

* OviirCo np. Rnnm.'lo, iii. p. i. E. I-errera, dec. i. lib.
i. c. 20. Life of Culu.bus , c. 34.

spreffed the utmost impatience to revisit their na- B O O K
jie country, from which they had been so long II.

Ci:l!t, aid where they had things so wonderful "'
nd unheard-of to relate. Accordingly, on the 4'
sxteenih of January, he directed his courie to-
,ards the north east, and, soon loft fight of land.
ie had on board obme of the natives, whom he
ad taken from the different islands which he dif-
0overed; and besides the gold, which was the chief
objet of research, he had collected specimens of
ll the produdions which were likely to become
ubjects of commerce in the several countries, as
,ell as many unknown birds, and other natural
curiosities, which might attraft the attention and
excite the wonder of the people. The voyage
was prosperous to the fourteenth of February,
asd they had advanced near five hundred leagues
acrols the Atlantic Ocean, when the wind began A vol.nt
to rife, and continued to blow with encreafing formarifes.
rage, which terminated in a furious hurricane.
Ewcry expedient that the naval skill and expe-
rience of Columbus could devise was employed,
in order to save the ships. But it Was impoflible
to withstand the violence of the florm, and as
they were still far from any land, deftrutio.l
feclned inevitable. The sailors had recourse to
praycrs to Almighty God, to the invocation of
aillts, to vows and charms, to every thing that
religion dictates, or superstition suggests to the as-
fiighted mind of man. No profpcd of deliverance
appearing, they abandoned themielves to delpair,
and expeded every moment to be swallowed up
il the waves. Besides the passions which naturally
ARitate and alarm the human mind in such awvful
litnations, when certain death, in one of his rnoft
terrible forul, is before it, Columbus had to en-
dure fcclings of distress peculiar to himlelf. He ThlcconrIu
deadled that all the knowledge of the amazing dif- colu-,

coveries

B o O K coverics which he had made was now to pcrili

it. mankind were to be deprived of every merit thi
"6~~ might have been derived from the happy fucce!
1'4 3of his schemes, and his own name would defcten

to posterity as that of a rafl deluded adventurer
instead of being tranfmitred with the honour d1i
to the author and conductor of the most noIb;
enterprise that had ever been undertaken. 'hifb
refletions extinguished all sense of his own per
tonal danger. Less affe&cd with the loss of life,
than solicitous to preserve the memory of what lie
had attempted and atchieved, he retired to hii
cabbin, and wrote upon parchment, a short ac
count of the voyage which he had made, of ile
course which he had taken, of the situation ai
riches of the countries which he had discovered
and of the colony that he had left there. IHain
wrapt up this in an oiled cloth, which he inclosed
in a cake of wax, he put it into a calk carefully
flopped up, and threw it into the sea, in hopc
that some fortunate accident might preserve a de.
pofite of so much importance to the world*.

Takes hel- AT length Providence interposcd, to save a life
Azore's. reservcd for other services. 'The wind abated, tle

sea became calm, and on the evening of the si:
teenth they dilcovered ]andl; and though unccr.ii
what it was, they made towards it. They floo
knew it to be St. Mary, one of the Azores o
weftcrn iflcs, fui'jct to th c rowvl of l'ortua.
'There, after a violent conifl wNith the governor
in which Columbus ldilplaycd no less spirit thlll
prudence, he obtained a J ilpply of fiefh prori
lions, and whatever clfc lic needed. One (!'
curnilancc, however, greatly clilkluieted him. ' li
Pinta, of which he had loll fight on the irfi d;i

* Life of Coluimbin , c. 37. Ilcrrcr a, dec. i. lib. ii. c. I.
Sec NOTE XVI.

of the hurricane, did not appear; he dreaded for B 0 O K
tome time that she had foundered at sea, and that II
all her crew had p;crifhed: afterwards, his former r
suspicions recurred, and he became apprehensive 149'
that Pi:zen had borne away for Spain, that he
might reach it before him, and by giving the first
account of his discoveries, might obtain ifobe share
of his fame.

IN order to prevent this, he left the Azores as Feb. 24.

soon as the weather would permit. At no great Arivs at
diflance from the coast of Spain, when almost at
the end of his voyage, and beyond the reach of
any dilaftcr, another frorm arose, little inferior to
the former in violence; and after driving before
it during two days and two nights, he was forced
to take flielter in the river Tagus. Upon applica- March 4.
tion to the king of Portugal, he was allowed to
come up to Lisbon; and, notwithstanding the envy
which it was natural for the Portuguese to feel,when
they beheld another nation entering upon that pro-
vince of discovery which they had hitherto deemed
peculiarly their own, and in its first essay, not only
rivalling but eclipsing their fame, Columbus was
received with all the marks of diftintion due to a
man who had performed things so extraordinaryand
unexpccted. The king admitted him into his pre-
{ence, treated him with the highest relpcCt, and lif-
tened to the account which lie gave of his voyage
withh admiration mingled with regret. While Co-
lulibus, on his part, enjoyed the latisfadlion of de-
scribing the importance of his discoveries, and of
being now able to prove the solidity of his clihenes
to tlofe very persons, who, with an ignorance
ldigraceful to thcmfelves, and fatal to their coun-
try, had lately rejc~ted them as the projcels of a
visionary or designing acdvcnturer".

CO.UMBUS
:' Life of Columbus, c. 4e, 41. IHerrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 3.

B OO K COLUMBUS was so impatient to return to Spain,

II. that he remained only five days in Lisbon. On

~'-v the fifteenth of March he arrived in the Port of
Re,,u93. Palos, seven months and eleven days from the
Slpain. tine when he set out thence upon his voyage. As

soon as his flip was dilcovered apprQaching the
port, all the inhabitants of Palos ran eagerly to
the shore, in order to welcome their relations and
fellow-citizens, and to hear tidings of their voy-
age. When the prosperous issue of it was known,
when they beheld the firange people, the un-
known animals, and singular productions brought
from the countries which had been discovered, the
effusion of joy was general and unbounded. The
bells were rung, the cannon fired'; Columbus
was received at landing with royal honours, and
all the people, in solemn proceflion, accompanied
him and his crew to the church, where they re-
turned thanks to Heaven, which had so wonder-
fully conducted and crowned with success a voy-
age of greater length and of more importance,
than had been attempted in any former age. 01n
the evening of the fame day, lie had the iatis-
fa&ion of feeing the Pinia, which the violence
of the tempest had driven far to the north, enter
the harbour.

His recep. TIE sirss care of Columbus was to inforn the
tin.' king and queen, who were then at Barcelona, of his

arrival and fuccets. Ferdinand and Isabella, no Ids
aflonifhed than delighted with i his unexpec.'cld event,
returned an anf\ver in terms the inof rcl'peEtful alnd
flattering to Columbus, requcfiitig hlin to repair il-
mediately to court, that from his. own mouth, they
mnight receive a full detail of his extraordinary lIr-
vices and difcovcrics. During his journey to Bar-
celona, the people crowded fiomn the adjacent
country, fbllowirtg hini every where with adnira.

tiui;

Lion and applause. His entrance into the city was B o O K
condueted, by order of Ferdinand and Ilabella, II.
with pomp suitable to the great event, which added -
such distinguishing Idftre to their reign. The peo- 49"
pie whom he brought along with him from the coun-
tries which he had dilcovered, marched £rfi, and
by their singular complexioi-, the wild peculiarity
of their features, and uncouith finery, appeared
like men of another fSpecies. Next to them were
carried the ornaments of gold, faflioned by the
rude art of the natives, the grains of gold found
in the mountains, and dust of the fame metal ga-
thered in the rivers. After these appeared the va-
rious commodities of the new discovered countries,
together with their curious productions. Columbus
himself closed the procession, and attracted the
eyes of all the fpeEtators, who gazed with admira-
tion on the extraordinary man, whose superior saga-
city and fortitude had conducted their countrymen,
by a route concealed from palt ages, to the know-
ledge of a new world. Ferdinand and Isabella re..
ceived him clad in their royal robes, and feated
upon a throne, under a magnificent canopy. When
he approached they flood up, and railing him as
he kneeled to kits their hands, commanded him to
take his feat upon a chair prepared for him, and to
give a circumstantial account of his voyage. He
delivered it with a gravity and composure no le's
suitable to the difpolition of the Spanish nation,
than to the dignity of the audience in which he
spoke, and with that modelt simplicity, which
charaterifes men of superior minds; who, satisfied
with having performed great actions, court not
vain applause by an ostentatious display of their ex-
ploits. When he had finished his narration, the
king and queen, kneeling down, offered up a f,:-
lemn thanks to Almighty God for the difcovecy of
those new regions, from which they cxpctcd so

many

BO O K many advantages to flow in upon the kingdoms

IL fubjedt to their government'-. Every mark of
~s~^ honour that gratitude or admiration could suggest
I493. was conferred upon Columbus. Letters patent

were issued, confirming to him and to his heirs all
the privileges contained in the capitulation con-
cluded at Santa Fe; his family was ennobled;
the king and queen, and, after their cx,-mpic,
the courtiers, treated him, on every occasion, with
all the ceremonious refpedt paid to perlons of
the highest rank. But what pleated him most, as
it gratified the enterprising activity of his niind,
bent continually upon great objects, was an order
to equip, without delay, an armament of fiuch
force, as might enable him not only to take pof-
feflion of the countries which he had already dii-
covered, but to go in search of those more opu-
lent regions, which he flill confidently expected
to find t.

Aftonilh- WHILE preparations were making for this ex-
mannd at pedition, the fame of Columbus's successful voy-
his difcove- age spread over Europe, and excited general attcn-

. tion. The multitude struck with amazement when

they heard that a new world had been found, could
hardly believe an event so much above their con-
ception. Men of science, capable of comprehlicd-
ing the nature, and of discerning the cfiecs, of
this great discovery, received the account of it wiih
admiration and joy. They spoke of it with rap-
ture, and congratulated one another upon their
felicity, in having lived at the period when, b)
this extraordinary event, the boundaries of human
knowledge were to much extended, and such a new
field of inquiry and observation opened, as would

Icad

.Sec NOTE XVII.

* Lifie of Colunmbus, c. 42, 43. Herrcra, dec. r. lib. ii
c. 3.

ad mankind to a perfet acquaintance with the B o o K
ruaure and productions of the habitable globe :. II.
arious opinions and conjectures were formed con-
ernig the new-found countries, and what division '493.
fthe earth they belonged to. Columbus adhered
lacioufly to his original opinion, that they fliould
reckoned a part of thole vast regions of Alia,
mprehended under the general name of Indid.
his sentiment was confirmed by the obfervatious
hich he made concerning the produstions of the
uatries which he had discovered. Gold was
0own to abound in India, and he had met with
ch proniifng samples of it in the islands which
:visited, as led him to believe that rich mines of
might be found. Cotton, another production of
East Indies, was common there. The pimento
the islands, he imagined to be a species of the
ad-Indian pepper. Ile mistook a root, some-
hat refenibliing rhubarb, for that valuable drug,
ich was then supposed to be a plant peculiar to
eEaft Indies t. The birds which he had brought
Ine were adorned with the fame rich plumage that
linguifhes those of India. The alligator of the
e country appeared to be the fame with the cro-
dile of the other. After weighing all these cir-
nflances, not only the Spaniards, but the other
ions of Europe, seem to have adopted the opi-
of Columbus. The countries which he had DiMinu;th-
overed were colfidered as a part of India. In ,Iy b,

name us the

rlequence of this notion, the name of Indies is wilintiies.
en to them by Ferdinand and Ilabella, in a rati-
ation of their former agreement, which was
1nted to Columbus upon his return t. Even as-
lhe error which gave rife to this opinion was de-
*ld, and the true position of the New Wlorld

was

''. Mart. epift. 133, 134,, 135. Set NOTE XV1II.
lI'rrcra , dec. 1. lib. i. c. 2). Gomnarla Hilt. c. 17.
Life of Columbus, c, 41.

B O 0 K was ascertained, the name has remained, aid th

II. appellation of Weft Indies is given by all the peopl

"'w- of Europe to the country, and that of Indians tl

1493. its inhabitants.

Preparati- THIE name by which Columbus distinguished r,
ons for a fe-
condvoyag. countries which he had discovered was so invirti

the specimens of their riches and fertility, w,;i
he produced, were so considerable; and thc e
ports of his companions, delivered frequcntly vii
the exaggeration natural to travellers, so faivoura
ble; that they excited a wonderful spirit of ci:cr,
prise among the Spaniards. Though little atcu(
tomed to naval expeditions, they were imlpatieii
to set out upon another voyage. Volunteers (
every rank solicited to be employed. Alluredb
the vast profpets which opened to their anti!io
and avarice, neither the length nor danger of th
navigation intimidated them. Cautious as Ferd
nand was, and averse to every thing new or adei
turous, he seemed to have catched the famc pir
with his fubjeas. Under its influence, prepar
tions for a second expedition were carried on ,it
a rapidity unusual among the Spaniards, and
an extent that would be deemed not inconfide
ble in the present age. The fleet confilled of
ventecn ships, some of which were of good 1i
den. It had on board fifteen hundrcd ]elilo
among whom were many of noble families, ,
had served in honourable stations. The grcat
part of these being deflined to remain in thecou
try, they were furniihed with every thing rcqui
for conquest or settlement, with all kinds of E'
pean donmciic animals, with such feeds andlpla
as were most likely to thrive in the climate tlt
Weft Indies, with utensils and inftrumcnts ofe
ry fort, and with such artificers as might be ID
useful in an infant colony :'.

* Herrcra. dec. i. lib. ii. c. 5. Life of Colunllti, c. 4

BUT, formidable and well provided as this fleet B o O K

was, Ferdinand and Isabella did not reft their title II.
to the poffeflion of the newly-difcovered countries
upon its operations alone. The example of the Theriglt o
Portuguese, as well as the fuperfrition of the age, Spainltothe
made it neceflary to obtain from the Roman pontiffn ,,,rmby
a grant of those territories which they wished tothcnpo..
occupy. The Pope, as the vicar and reprefenta-
tive of Jesus Christ, was supposed to have a right
of dominion over all the kingdoms of the earth.
Alexander VI. a pontiff infamous for every crime
thai disgraces humanitaiy, filled the papal throne at
that time. As he was born Ferdinand's subject,
and very solicitous to lecure the proteclion of that
monarch, in order to facilitate the execution of
his ambitious schemes in favour of his own fa-
nily, he iiiftantlycomplied with his request. Bv
an aft of liberality which cost him nothing, and
that served to establish the jurifdietion and prcten-
sions of the papal fee, he bestowed on lFerdinand
and Isabella all the countries inhabited by Infidels
which they had discovered, or should discover;
and in virtue of that power which he derived
froln Jesus Christ, he vcftcd in the crown of Cal-
tile a right to vail regions, to the pofleffion of
which he himself was lb far firom having any itle,
that he was unacquainted witl their fituaion,
and even with their exiftencc. As it was necelfary
to prevent this grant from interfering with that
formerly made to the crown of Portugal, he ap-
pointed that a line, fiippofed to be drawn from
pole to pole, a hundred leagues to tli wvcftward of
tlle Azores, should fcrve as the limit between
llem; and, in the plenitude of his power, con-
ferred all to the call of this imaginary line upon
the Portuguese, and all to the weft of it upon the
Spaniards'. Zeal for propagating the Christian.

VOL. I. I faith
* Hcrrcra, dec. , lib. ii. c, 4. Torquemada Mon. Ind.
lib. xviii. c. 3.

B 00 K faith was the consideration employed by Ferdi

II- nand in soliciting this bull, and is mentioned by
'ba ' Alexander as his chief motive for issuing it. 1ii

1493. order to manifelt some concern for this laudable

object, several friars, under the direaion of Fa-
ther Boyl, a Catalonian monk of great reputation,
as apoflolical vicar, were appointed to accompany
Colunibus, and to devote themselves to the in-
firuction of the natives. The Indians whom Co-
lumbus had brought along with him, having re-
ceived some tincture of Christian knowledge, were
baptized with much solemnity, the king himllciil;
the prince his son, and the chief perbons of his
court, standing as their godfathers. Tholi firlt
fruits of the New 5'orld have not been followe(l
by such an increaf as pious men wificd, and had
reason to expect.

Second voy- FERDINAND and Isabella having thus acquiredl
agbis- a tille, whichl was then deemed complet(ely valid,

to extend their discoverics, and to cftablifh their
dominion over such a vast portion of the globe,
nothing now retarded the departure of the fleert
Columbus was extremely impatient to revisit the
colony which he had left, and to purfuc that ca-
reer of glory upon which he had entered. le Ic:
fail froim the Bay of Cadiz on the twenty-fifth ol
September, and touching again at the island oi
Gomera, he fleered farther towards the south thaa
ill his former voyage. By holding this course, he
enjoyed more fleadily the benefit of the regular
winds, which reign within the tropics, and was
carried towards a large clufler of islands, filtatcd(
considerably to the cast of thoie which he had al-
ready discovercd. On the twcnty-fixthl day astir
Nov. . his departure from Goniera, he made land'i. 1

was one of the Caiibbec or Leeward lllands, to
which he gave the name of Defieada, on accoutnt

* Oviedo ap. Ranulf. iii. 85. B.

of the impatience of his crew to dilcover fomne BO 0 K
part of the New World. After this he visited II
blccefiively Dominica, \Marigralante, Guadaloupe, ~
Antigua, St. John de Porto Rico, and several other I4'3
illands, Icattered in his way as he advanred to-
wards the north-west. All thelc he found to be
inhabited by that fierce race of people whom
Guacanahari had painied in luch ifrightful colours.
His delcriptions appeared not to have been exag-
gerated. The Spaniards, as often as they landed,
met wvith iuch a reception as convinced Ihem of
their martial and daring spirit ; and they dilcover.
ed in their habitations the relics of thole horrid
fcafis which they had madce upon the bodies of
their cneniec. taken in war.

Lui i as Columbus was eager to know the Rfate Ar;-ivcs s

of tihc colouy which he had planted, and to supply 'i"lO
it wit;h Ihole neceisiries of which he fuppolcdl it to
be in want, he made no flay in any of tholi ifhnds,
and proceeded directly to iifpaniola", AX hen lhe
arrived olT Navidad, the flation in which he had
left the thirty-eight men under the command of
Arada, he was astonished that none of themn ap-
peared, and expeced every moment to fee them
running with transports of joy to welcome their
countrymen. Full of Iblicitude about their safety,
andc foreboding in his mind what had befallen
then, he rowed instantly to land. All the natives
from whom he might have received information
had fled. But the fort which he had built was
entirely demolished, and the tattered garments,
the broken arms and utensils icaticred'about it,
left no room to doubt concerning the unhappy
fate of the garriol-l'.

I WVunILE

* P. M artyr. dec . 11 i . 18. I-err.rn,, dcei. r. lib. ii. c. 7.

Liti of ColulnbJus, c. 46. &.
& . I lilt. de Cura de lob P'a-

B O O K WHILE the Spaniards were ihedding tears ovch

It- those fad memorials of their fellow-citizens, a bro,

**~~ ther of the cazique Guacanahari arrived. From
Thefat3 of him Columbus received a particular detail of whai
the men had happened after his departure from the island.
cfttherc. The familiar intercourse of the Indians with the

Spaniards tended gradually to diminish the super-
flitious veneration with which their first appearance
had inspired that simple people. By their own in-
discretion and ill conduet, the Spaniards speedily
effaced those favourable impressions, and loon con-
vinced the natives, that they had all the wants.
and weaknesses, and passions of men. As loon as
the powerful restraints which the preefnce and
authority of Columbus imposed was withdrawn,
the garrison threw off all regard for the officec:
whom he had invested with command. Rcgardlei;
of the prudent inftrustions which he had given
them, every man became independent, and gra-
tified his desires without controul. The gold, the
women, the provisions of the natives, were all
the prey of those licentious oppressors. They
roamed in small parties over the island, extending
their rapacity and insolence to every corner of i;
Gentle and timid as the people were, those unpro-
voked injuries at length exhausted their patience,
and rouzed their courage. The cazique of Cibao,
whose territories the Spaniards chiefly infefled on
account of the gold which they contained, fur-
prized and cut off several of them, while they
firaggled in as perse& security as if their con-
duct had been altogether inoffensive. He then
afiembled his fubjeEts, and surrounding the fort,
set it on fire. Some of the Spaniards were killed
in defending it, the reft perifled in attempting to
make their escape by crofling an arm of the fca.
Guacanahari, whom all their exactions had not
alienated from the Spaniards, took arms in their

behalf,

behalf, and endeavouring to prote& them, had BO o K
received a wound, by which he was still con- II.
fined . -

THOUGt this account was far from removing His pudent

the suspicions which the Spaniards entertained with condut.
refpet to the fidelity of Guacanahari, Columbus
perceived so clearly that this was not a properjunc-
ture for inquiring into his conduct with scrupulous
accuracy, that he rejeced the advice of several of
his officers, who urged him to seize the person of
that prince, and to revenge the death of their
countrymen by attacking his subjects. He repre-
sented to them the neceflity of securing the fiiend-
ihip of some potentate of the country, in order to
facilitate the settlement which they intended, and
the danger of driving the natives to unite in some
desperate attempt against them, by such an ill-timed
and unavailing exercise of rigour. Instead of waft-
ing his time in puniihing pafl wrongs, he took
precautionsfor preventing any future injury. Witl
this view, he made choice of a Situation more
healthy and commodious than that of Navidad.
He traced out the plan of a town in a large plain
near a spacious bay, and obliged every person to
put his hand to a work on which their common
safety depended, the houses and ramparts were
soon to far advanced by their united labour, as to
afford them flelter and security. This rising city,
the first that the Europeans founded in the New
World, he named Ifabclla, in honour of his patro-
ncfs the queen of Caitile l'

IN carrying on this neccflary work, Columbus Difcont,lu

iad not only to fuflain all the hardlhips, and to en- of "',i
counter ail the difficulties, to which infant colo-

nies

P. M:artyr, dccnd. p. 22, &c. Herrcra, dec. I. lib. ii.

c. 9. Life of Columbus, c. 49, 50.
'i Life of Columbus, c. 5 . llerrc'ra, dec. i. lib, ii. c. to.

B O O K nies are exposed when they fettle in an unculti-

IT. vated country, but he had to contend with what
-r was more insuperable, the laziness, the impatience,
'493 and mutinous disposition of his followers. By the

enervating influence of a hot climate, the natural
inactivity of the Spaniards seemed to incrcalc.
Many of them were gentlemen, unaccuflomed to
the fatigue of bodily labour, and all had engaged in
the enterprise with the sanguine hopes excited by
the splendid and exaggerated descriptions of tholc
who returned with Columbus from his first voyage,
or by his own mistaken idea that the country which
he had difeovered was either the Cipango oi'Marco
Polo, or the Ophir%, from which Solomon im-
ported those precious commodities which luddenly
diffused such extraordinary riches through his king-
dom. But when, inf-ead of that golden harvcil
which they had expeated to reap without toil or
pains, the Spaniards saw that their profpedt of
wealth was remote as well as uncertain, and that it
could not be attained but by the flow and perfever-
ing efforts of industry, the dilappointnient of those
chimerical hopes occasioned such dejection of mincl
as bordered on delpair, and led to general difcon-
tent. In vain did Columbus endeavour to revive
their spirits by pointing out the fertility of the foi,
and exhibiting the fpeciinens of gold daily brounlli
in from cliffirent parts of the illand. ' lcy liad
n:ot patience to wait for the gradual retuirns \lhk'li
the fornmer miight yield, aud the laticr llic dci-
pi! cd as icanty ;and incoiL'fi(ldcr:l) . '1 il:c pirit ci
diliffcciion l'pread, and a (onlpiracy was IO;-;'c'u:,
vwiich night have been fatal to Coluinbus alnd tlic
colony. Happily he diicoverecl it, and itizing lti
ringleaders, lpiiihccd son, of t hem, (lent <,s('icrs
priloners into Spain, whithler lie diflpatc'hcd t\,cC'i\

*» \\. Mq:rs.( !^. t-. 1p, ?.;.

of the ihips which had served as transports, with B 0 O K
an carneft request for a reinforcement of men, II
and a large supply of provisions .
-':

MEANWHILE, in order to baniih that idleness, '494-

which by allowing his people leisure to brood over into tie
their dilappointment, nourifled the spirit of dil- f~:a cf the
content, he planned several expeditions into the Counlty.
interior part of the country. He sent a detach-
ncnt, under the command of Alonfo de Ojeda,
a vigilant and enterprising officer, to visit the dif-
trid of Cibao, which was said to yield the great-
eR quantity of gold, and followed him in person
with the main body of his troops. In this ex-Marchl12.
pedition, he displayed all the pomp of military
magnificence that he could exhibit, in order to
firike the imagination of the natives. He march-
ed with colours flying, with martial music, and
'with a finall body of cavalry that paraded some-
times in the front and sometimes in the rear. As
those were the first horses that appeared in the
New World, they were objeats of terror no less
than admiration to the Indians, who having no
tame animals themselves, were unacquainted with
that vast accession of power, which man hath ac-
quired by fubjceing them to his dominion. They
imagined them to bc rational "crcatures, that
bormcd but one animal with their riders. They
cwre aftonifled at their speed, and confidered
tieir ilpetuofity and strength as irrififlible. But

lwhile Columbus endeavoured to inlpire the natives
\'ith a dread of his power, lie did not neglcet the
;irts of gaining their love and confidence. IHe
adhered fcr upuloutly to the principles of integrity
.nrd jufiice in all his traiilh'ations with themn, and
ICeated them, on every occasion, not only with hu-

mlanity,
lllt'rrcra, dec. i. lib ii. c. yo, i 1.

B O O Kmanity, but with indulgence. The difiridt of Ci-

IL bao answered the defeription given of it by the na-
'^'r^ tives. It was mountainous and uncultivated, but

9' in evey river and brook gold was gathered either

in dust or in grains, some of which were of con-
fiderable size. The Indians had never opened
any mines in search of gold. To penetrate into
the bowels of the earth, and to refine the rude
ore, were operations too complicated for their
talents and indufiry, and they had no such high
value for gold as to put their integrity and inven-
tion upon the stretch in order to obtain it-. The
finall quantity of that precious metal which
they possessed, was either picked up in the beds
of the rivers, or washed from the mountains by
the heavy rains which fall within the tropics. Bur,
from those indications, the Spaniards could no
longer doubt that the country contained rich trca-
iures in its bowels, of which they hoped loon to
be mafierst. In order to secure the command of
this valuable province, Columbus ereted a final
fort, to which he gave the name of St. Thomas, by
wayof ridicule upon some of his incredulous fol-
lowers, who would not believe that the country
produced gold, until they law it with their own
eyes, and touched it wil h their hands t.

The d;ifrefs THi account of those pronlifing appearances
and difaf- of wealth in the countrv of Cibao came very lea-
ti, colony fonably to comfort the defponcling colony, which
ccrcct.f. was affecaed with distresses of various kinds.

The flock of provisions which had been brought
from Europe was mofilly conluined ; what rc-
rmined was so much corrupted by the ieat and
moillure of the climate, as to be alnoft unfit

io

Ovi(Clo, lib. ii. p.

. A.

. '' P. M;!rtvr. ccc p. 32.
; -Ierrcr;, dec. . lib. ii. c. 2. Life of Columblus, ..

for use; the natives cultivated so small a portion B O O K
of ground, and with bo little skill, that it hardly II.
yielded what was ujficient for their own fubfif- '.
tence; the Spaniards at Isabella had hitherto eci- '494
ther time nor leisure to clear the foil, so as to reap
any considerable fruits of their own industry. On
all there accounts, they became afraid of pcrifhing
with hunger, and were reduced to live already at
flort allowance. At the fame time, the diseases
predominant in the torrid zone, and which rage
chiefly in those uncultivated countries, where the
hand ofindufiry has not opened the woods, drain-
ed the marihes, and confined the rivers within a
certain channel, began to 1pread among them.
Alarmed at their violence and unusual symptoms,
they exclaimed againfit Columbus and his compa-
nions in the former voyage, who, by their fplen-
did but deceitful descriptions of Hispaniola, had
allured them to quit their native country for a bar-
barous uncultivated land, where they mufft either
be cut off by famine, or die of unknown diftem-
pers. Several of the officers and persons of note,
inflead of checking, joined in thole seditious com-
plaints. Father Boyl, the apoftolical vicar, was
one of the most turbulent and outrageous. It re-
quired all the authority and address of Columbus
to re-cflablifh subordination and tranquillity in the
colony. Threats and promises were alternately
iiiploycd for this purpose; but nothing contri-
biured more to tooth the malcontents than the
p)rolrpet of finding, in the nines of Cibao, such
a lrich itore of treahfrcs as would be a recompence
for all their Iuffcrings, and efface the memory of
former dilappointments.

WH1.iN, by his unwearied endeavours, concord Columrnus

and order were so far restored, that he could ven- ,atmi'o.
ture to leave the illand, Columbus resolved tovciec.
purfuc his dilcovcries, that he might be able to

ascertain

B 0 K ascertain whether those new countries with whic

1. he had opened a commrunication, were conneeced
-'~7 with any region of the earth already know-n, or

'J44' whether they were to be confidered as a separate

portion of the globe, hitherto unvisited. Heap-
pointed his brother Don Diego, with the afiflance
of a council of officers, to govern the island in
his abfcnce; and gave the command of a body of
Jbldicrs to Don Pedro Margarita, with which he
was to visit the different parts of the island, and
endeavour to eflablifh the authority of the Spani-
ards among the inhabitants. Having left them
very particular infiruftions with respect to their
condud, he weighed anchor on the twenty-fourth
of April, with one fiip and two frall barks under
his, command. During a tedious voyage of full
five months, he had a trial of ahnoft all the nunc-
rous hardships to which persons of his profession
are exposed, without making any discovery of
importance, except the island of Jal'naica. As he
ranged along the southern coast of Cuba i, he was
entangled in a labyrinth formed by an incredible
number of small islands, to which he gave the
name of the Queen's Garden. In this unknowvl,
course, among rocks and fielves, he was retarded
by contrary winds, aflaulted by furious ftornin,
and alarmed with the terrible thunder and light-
ning which is often almnoft inccfiant between the
tropics. At length his provisions fell flort; hie
crew, exhausted with fatiguc as well as hunger,
mrurmured and threatened, and wlcr readyc t(
proceed to the most defperal exircmities a:a.hiii
him. Beset with danger in l'uch various forms, he
was obliged to keep continual waltch, to obfllrv
every occurrence with his own\9 eyes, to ifiTc cverl
order, and to fupcrintcid the execution ol i;. (;'

~Sec~ NOTE SX,..,
* Sec NOTE'; XIX.

no occasion, was the etent of his skill and expe- B o o K
riece as a navigator Io much tried. To these the rI.

uiindron owed its safety. But this unremitted 'w-'--

f;,iIue of body anld iitenfie application of mind, 1494
overpowering his conflitution, though naturally
;vioarous and robufi, brought on a feverish dilbr-
der, which terminated in a lethargy, that depriv-
ed him of fenie and memory, and had almost
rorved fatal to his litfe .
BUT, on his return to Hispaniola, the sudden Sept. 27.
emotion of joy which he felt upon meeting with Onhisre-
his brother B}artholomew at Isabella, occasioned his brother,
fuich a flow of spirits as contributed greatly to his Eartholo-

1,-t l Y7 ea r'j'- c h mew, at lai.

rccovery. It was now thirteen years ince the two bella.
brothers, whlom iunilarity of talents united in close
friendship, had separated from each other, and
during that long period there had been no inter-
course between them. Bartholomew after finish-
ing his negociation in the court of England, had
set out for Spain by the way of France. At Paris
he received an account of the extraordinary disco-
veries which his brother had made in his first voy-
age, and that he was then preparing to embark on
a 'ccond expedition. Though this naturally in-
dcced him to purlue his journey with the utmo:f
rdilpatch, Columbus had failed for Hilfpaniola be-
fore he reached Spain. Ferdinand and Isabella
received hint with the refpc&t due to the brother
of a manla whose merit and fcrvices rendered him
Io coll'picuous; and as they knew what confola-
lion his pretence would afford to Colunilius, they
perlflaclcd himi to take the comimanld of three ships,
wlich tlhey had appointed to carry provisions to
thei colony ;.it l'abclla- .

' Ifile of C( oIiihlltiis, c. 54., &c. I]crrLcr, dlcc. i. llb. ii.

t. '3 t.1. ' I

P.
1 Matityr .

(c. 1. 34, &c.
i' .lc-rrta. dec. i. lib. ii. c. 15.

B3 o O 1K HE could not have arrived at any juncture u he:

II. Columbus flood more in need of a friend capahli
~'-wT of aflifting him with his counsels, or of dividing

4~t94; with him the cares and burden of goverrincerLt

rakrarmis For although the provisions now broujht fro.n
aa'd tde Europe, afforded a temporary relief to the Spani.

ards from the calamities of famine, the supply was
not in such a quantity as to support them long, and
the island did not hitherto yield what was sufficient
for their fuflenance. They were threatened with
another danger, flill more formidable than the
return of scarcity, and which demanded more im-
mediate attention. No sooner did Columbus leave
the island on his voyage of discovery, than the
soldiers under Margarita, as if they had been set
free from discipline and subordination, icorncd
all reitraint. Inflead of conforming to the pru.
dent infiruiEions of Columbus, they difperlcd in
flraggling parties over the island, lived at difcrc-
tion upon the natives, wased their provifionl,
seized their women, and treated that inoffenfivc
race of men with all the infolellcc of military op.
pression *.

As long as the Indians had any profpcct tlii;:

their sufferings might come to a period by the vo-
luntary departure of the invaders, they iubmlittlc
in silence, and dissemblcd their sorrow; but they
now perceived that the yoke would be as permanlnct
as it was intolerable. 'The Spaniards had built a
town, ancl surrounded it with ramparts. They iad
rec(tcd forts in different laccs. They had inclofiec
and loxwn several fields. It was apparent thal tile'
aname not to visit the count:ry, but to fettle in it.
Though the number of thofce firallngs was notI ci-
tidcrable, tlih e ae f uiculiativaion anong ili:. rIn(!

* P. Martyr, (1Ce. p. 4;.

?)Cople was so imperfe&, and in such exaEt pro- B O K
portion to their own consumption, that it was with II.
difficulty they could afford fubfifience to their newv 'rs
,uefts. Their own mode of life was so indolent 1494
ind inactivc, the warmth of the climate so ener-
vating, the constitution of their bodies naturally so
feeble, and so unaccustomed to the laborious exer-
ions of indutlry, that they were satisfied with a
proportion of food amazingly small. A handful of
maize, or a little of the insipid bread made of the
affada-root, was sufficient to support men, whole
hength and spirits were not exhausted by any vi-
orous efforts either of body or mind. The Spa-
iards, though the most abstemious of all the Eu-
opean nations, appeared to them exceflively vo-
acious. One Spaniard consumed as much as fe-
veral Indians. This keenness of appetite furprif-
d them so much, and teemed to them to be so in-
tiable, that they supposed the Spaniards had left
heirown country, because it did not produce as
uch as was requisite to gratify their immode-
ate desire of food, and had come among them
n quest of nourishment :. Self-prefervation
rompted them to wish for the departure of guefis
ho wafted so far their slender flock of provifi-
ns. The injuries which they suffered, added to
heir impatience for this event. They had long
xpeced that the Spaniards would retire of their
wn accord. They now perceived that, in order
oavert the defiruftion with which they were threa-
ened, either by the flow consumption of famine,
by the violence of their opprefTors, it was ne-
efary to assume courage to attack those formida-
le invaders with united force, and drive them
rom the settlements of which they had violently
aken possession,

Herr dec. c.
lib. c. 7.

BOOK SUCH were the sentiments which univerfail

II. prevailed among the Indians, when Columbus r.
<^rw turned to Isabella. Inflamed by the unlprovokced

x494. 1

Walr.wit outrages of the Spaniards, with a degree of :a;
them. of which their gentle natures, formed to iuffer ail

submit, seemed hardly susceptible, they ;vaid
only for a signal from their leaders to fall upon tile
colony. Some of the caziques had already isr.
prized and cut off ieveral of the stragglers. Te
dread of this impending danger united the Spa
niards, and re-efiablifhed the authority of Ct.
lumbus, as they saw no prolpect of fafecy but i!
committing themlelves to his prudent guidaili,
It was now necessary to have recourif to arns,
the employing of which againfi the Indians, (o.
lumbus had hitherto avoided with the ,rcatel
solicitude. Unequal as the conflict may Icun
between the naked inhabitants of the New V\o'
armed with clubs, sticks hardened in the f
wooden swords, and arrows pointed with bone
or flints; and troops accuflomed to the diicipiire
and provided with the inftrunients of deitrucfii
known in. the European art of war, the fituatio
of the Spaniards was far from being exem
from danger. The vast superiority of the nati'e
in number, conlpenlated many defects. An ham
ful of men was about to encounter a whole nr
tion. One adverse event, or even any unaio
seen delay in determining the fate of the
might prove fatal to the Spaniards. Confcio
that the success depended on the vigour andr
pidity of his operations, Columbus inflantly
fembled his forces. They were reduced to a
ry ihlall number. Dileaics, engendered by t
ivar'mth and humidity of the country, had. r
cd among them with much violence; expcieii
had not yet taught them the art either of cul:i

~l. l

these, or the precautions requisite for guarding B O OK
agaiift them; two-thirds of the original adven- II-
turers were dead, and many of those who fur- s
vived were incapable of service *. The body t9S.
which took the field consisted only of two hundred
foot, twenty horse, and twenty large dogs; and
how firange flever it may seem to mention the last
as composing part of a military force, they were not
perhaps the least formidable and defirutive of the
whole, when employed against naked and timid
Indians. All the caziques of the ifiand, Guacana-
hari excepted, who retained an inviolable attach-
ment to the Spaniards, were in arms to oppose
Columbus, with forces amounting, if we may be-
lieve the Spauifh historians, to an hundred thou-
iand men. Infiead of attempting to draw the Spa-
niards into the faftlnefes of the woods and moun-
tains, they were so imprudent as to take their fta-
tion in the Vega Real, the most open plain in the
country. Columbus did not allow them time to
perceive their error, or alter their position. He
attacked them durin ththe night, when undifciplin'
cd troops are least capable of aEing with union and
concert, and obtained an easy and bloodless vic-
tory. The conflernation with which the Indians
were filled by the noise and havoc made by the fire-
arms, by the impetuous force of the cavalry, and
the fierce onset of the dogs, was so great, that they
threw down their weapons, and fled without at-
tempting reftiance. Many were slain; more were
taken prisoners, and reduced to servitude t; and
so thoroughly were the reft intimidated, that from
that moment they abandoned themselves to despair,
relinquishing all thoughts of contending with ag-
grefsors whom they deemed invincible.

CO LUMBUS employed several months in march-A tax lm-
ing through the island, and in fubje&ing it to the tPU"' u

Spanish
*Life of Columbus, c. 6., t See NOTE XX.

X.

B 0o K Spaniih government without meeting with any

opposition. He imposed a tribute upon all the in.
, habitants above the age of fourteen. Each person

who lived in those difirists where gold was found,
was obliged to pay quarterly as much gold dust as
filled a hawk's bell; from those in other parts of
the country, twenty-five pounds of cotton were
demanded. This was the first regular taxation of
the Indians, and served as a precedent for exactions
still more intolerable. Such an heavy impofitioit
was extremely contrary to those maxims which Co-
lumbus had hitherto inculcated with refpet to the
mode of treating them. But intrigues were cari
rying on in the court of Spain at this juncture, itn
order to undermine his power and discredit his ope.
rations, which constrained him to depart from his
own fyflem of adminifiration. Several unfavoura-
ble accounts of his conduct, as well as of the
countries discovered by him, had been transmitted
to Spain. Margarita and Father Boyl were now at
court; and in order tojuftify their own conduEt, or
to gratify their resentment, watched with malevo-
lent attention for every opportunity of spreading
insinuations to his detriment. Many of the cour-
tiers viewed his growing reputation and power with
envious eyes. Fonseca, the archdeacon of Seville,
who was intrufded with the chief diretion of Indian
affairs, had conceived such an unfavourable opinion
of Columbus, for rome reason which the contem-
porary writers have not mentioned, that he listencd
with partiality to every inveftive against him. It
was not easy for an unfriended ftranger,unpraclifcd
in courtly arts, to counteract the machinations of lo
many enemies. Columbus saw that there was but
one method of supporting his own credit, and of
silencing all his adversarics. He must produce
such a quantity of gold, as would not only justify

what

what he had reported with relpeat to the richness B O O K
of the. country, but encourage Ferdinand and Ifa- II
bella to persevere in prosecuting his plans. The ne- -
ceffity of obtaining it, forced him not only to im- '495
pole this heavy tax upon the indians, but to exact
payment of it with extreme rigour; and may be
pleaded in excufc for his deviating, on this occa-
iion, from the mildness and humanity with which
he uniformly treated that unhappy people .

THE labour, attention, and foresight which the Fatalef-

Indians were obliged to employ in procuring the fa oftliat
tribute demanded of them, appeared the noft into-
lerable of all evils, to men accustomed to pals their
days in a careless, improvident indolence. They
were incapable of 'uch a regular and pcrievering
exertion of indufiry, and felt it such a grievous re-
firaint upon their liberty, that they had recourle to
an expedient for obtaining deliverance fromn this
yoke which demonflrates the excel's of their il pati-
ence and despair. They formed a Ichemne of farv-
ing those oppressors whom they durst not attempt to
expel; and from the opinion which they entertain-
ed with rel'pet to the voracious appetite of the
Spaniards, they concluded the execution of it to be
very practicable. With this view, they fulpendcd
all the operations of agriculture; they foweed no
maize, they pulled up the roots of the lmanioc which
were planted, and retiring to the nofl inacceflible
parts of the mountains, left the uncultivated plains
to their enemies. This; del'perate resolution pro-
duced some part of the effcEs which they cxpeted.
The Spaniards were reduced to extremle want; but
they received such c;iolnable lipplies of proviiions
from Europe, and found lb many rclources in their
own ingenuity and ilduftry, that they fiffercd no
great loss of men. 'The wretched Indians were the

VOL. I. ' K viciim·

' I-crrera, dec. r, lib ii. c. r,.

B O O K victims of their own ill-concerted policy. A vafl

II. multitude shut up among barren mountains, with-
^r-' out any food but the spontaneous producions of

I495- the earth, soon felt the utmost distresses of famine.

This brought on contagious diseases; and, in the
course of a few months, more than a third part of
the inhabitants of the island perished, after expe-
riencing misery in all its various forms 4.

Intrigues Br T while Columbus was thus successfully efta,
gaUina o- blifhing the foundations of the Spanish grandeur
Iimbus in
the courtof in the New World, his enemies laboured with un-
Spain. wearied assiduity to deprive him of the glory and

rewards to which his services and sufferings intitled
him. The hardihips unavoidable in a new fettlc-
ment, the calamities occasioned by an unhealthy
climate, the disasters attending a voyage in un-
known seas, were all represented as the fruits of his
restless and inconsiderate ambition. Ilis prudent
attention to preserve discipline and subordination
was denominated excess of rigour; the punish-
ments which he infli&ed upon the mutinous and
disorderly were imputed to cruelty. These accufa-
tions gained such credit in a jealous court, that a
commissioner was appointed to repair to Hispaniola,
and to infpe& into the condu0t of Columbus. By
the recommendation of his enemies, Aguado, a
groom of the bed-chamber, was the person to
whom this important trust was committed. But in
this choice they seem to have been more influenced
by the obsequious attachment of the man to their
interest, than by his capacity for the flation. Puff-
ed up with such sudden elevation, Aguado display-
ed, in the exercise of this office, all the frivolous
felf-importance, and acted with all the difgufling

insolence,

* Herrera, dec. i. lib. xi. c. 18. Life of Columbus, c. 61.

Oviedo, lib. iii. p. 93. D. Benzon Hilt. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c.
9. P. Martyr, dec. p. 48.

insolence, which are natural to little minds, when B O O K
raised to unexpeted dignity, or employed in fune- II
tions to which they are not equal. By listening 'r
with eagerness to every accusation againfi Colum- '495'
bus, and encouraging not only the malcontent
Spaniards, but even the Indians, to produce their
grievances, real or imaginary, he fomented the
spirit of dissention in the island, without establish-
ing any regulations of public utility, or that tend-
ed to redress the many wrongs, with the odium
of which he wished to load the admiral's admini-
firation. As Columbus felt sensibly how humiliat-
ing his situation must be, if he should remain in
the country while such a partial inlpeEtor observed
his motions, and controuled his jurifdidtion, he
took the resolution of returning to Spain, in order
to lay a full account of all his tranfasSions, parti-
cularly with rcfpecA to the points in dispute between
him and his adversaries, before Ferdinand and Ifa-
bella, from whose justice and dicfernment he ex-
peced an equal and a favourable decision. Ile
committed the adminifiration of affairs, during his
absence, to Don Bartholomew, his brother, with 496.
the title of Adelantado, or Lieutenant-Governor.
By a choice less fortunate, and which proved the
source of many calamities to the colony, he ap-
pointed Francis Roldan chiefjuflice, with very ex-
tensive powers*.

IN returning to Europe, Columbus held a course Returns to

different from that which he had taken in his for- Spain.
mer voyage. He fleered almofi due east from His-
paniola, in the parallel of twenty-two degrees of
latitude; as experience had not yet discovered the
more certain and expeditious method of stretching
to the north, in order to fall in with the fouth-well
winds. By this ill advised choice, which, in the in-

K z fancy
HIerrera, dec. i. lib. ii. c. 18. Lib. iii. c. i.

B 0 0 fancy of navigation between the New and Old

IL Worlds, can hardly be imputed to the admiral as
1-pr^ a defe& in naval skill, he was exposed to infinite

496 fatigue and danger, in a perpetual struggle with

the trade-winds, which blow without variation
from the east between the tropics. Notwithfland-
ing the almost insuperable difficulties of such a na-
vigation, he perfifled in his course with his usual
patience and firmness, but!made so little way, that
he was three months without feeing land. At
length, his provisions began to fail, the crew was
reduced to the scanty allowance of fix ounces of
bread a-day for each person. The admiral fared
no better than the meanest sailor. But, even in
this extreme distress, he retained the humanity
which distinguishes his character, and refused to
comply with the earnest solicitations of his crew,
some of whom proposed to feed upon the Indian
prisoners whom they were carrying over, and
others infifled to throw them over-board, in order
to lessen the consumption of their small flock. He
ererefented, that they were human beings, re-
duced by a common calamity to the fame condi-
tion with thenfelves, and intitled to share an equal
fate. His authority and remonfirances diflipated
those wild ideas luggefled by despair. Nor had
they time to recur, as he cane soon within fight of
the coast of Spain, and all their fears and susser-
ings ended .

Hisrecep.. COLUNIIUS appeared at court with the modest
ion there. but determined confidence of a man conscious not

only of integrity, but of having performed great
fcrvices. Ferdinand and Isabella, ashamed of their
own facility in lending too favourable an ear to fri-
volous or ill-founded accusations, received him with

such
IIcrrcr, dec. i. lib. iii. c. r. Life of Columbus, c. 64.

such distinguished marks of refpe&c, as covered his B 0 0 K
enemies with shame. Their censures and calum- II.
nies were no more heard of at that juncture. The ~r-
gold, the pearls, the cotton, and other commodi- z496.
ties of value which Columbus produced, seemed
fully to refute what the malcontents had propagated
with refpe't to the poverty of the country. By
reducing the Indians to obedience, and imposing a
regular tax upon them, he had secured to Spain a
large acceflion of new fubjeEts, and the eflablifh-
ment of a revenue that promised to be confidera-
ble. By the mines which he had found out and
examined, a source of wealth still more copious
was opened. Great and unexpeted as those ad-
vantages were, Columbus represented them only
as preludes to future acquisitions, and as the ear-
nest of more important discoveries, which he fill
nmeditated, and to which those he had already made
would conduct him with ease and certainty *

THE attentive consideration of all those circum- A plan

stances miade such impression, not only upon Ifa- tfl' mor
bella, who was flattered with the idea of being the regular
patroness of all Columbus's enterprises, but even mnt o.i;
upon Ferdinand, who having originally expreflcd colony.
his disapprobation of his schemes, was fill more
apt to doubt of their success, that they resolved to
Iupply the colony in Hispaniola with every thing
that could render it a permanent cftabliflment,
and to furnish Columbus with such a fleet, that he
might proceed to search for those Cnew countries,
of whose existence he seemcd to be confident. The
measures mollt proper for accompliihing both thcfie
designs were concerted with Columbus. Dilcovcry
had been the sole objcft of the firIt voyage to the
New World; and though, in the lecond, fittle-
ment had been propolcd, the precautions taker,

for
Lire of Colunbus, c. 65. IIerrcra, dec. r' lib. iil. c. i.

e4

B 0 0 K for that purpose had either been insufficient, or

I were rendered ineffectual by the mutinous spirit of

C'I'B ' the Spaniards, and the unforeseen calamities arif-
X496.

49 ing from various causes. Now a plan was to be

formed of a regular colony, that might serve as a
model in all future establishments. Every pariicu-
lar was considered with attention, and arranged
with a scrupulous accuracy. The precise number
of adventurers who should be permitted to embark
was fixed. They were to be of different ranks
and profefiions; and the proportion of each was
ellablifhed, according to their usefulness and the
wants of the colony. A suitable number of women
was to be chosen to accompany these new settlers.
As it was the firit objet to raise provisions in a
country where scarcity of food had been the occa-
sion of so much distress, a considerable body of
huibandmen was to be carried over. As the Spa-
niards had then no conception of'deriving any be-
nefit from those productions of the New World
which have since yielded such large returns of
wealth to Europe, but had formed magnificent
ideas, and entertained sanguine hopes with respect
to the riches contained in the mines which had
been discovered, a band of workmen, skilled in
the various arts employed in digging and refining
the precious metals, was provided. All thele emi-
grants were to receive pay and fubfitence for fonim
years, at the public expence i.

A dcfc in T US far the regulations were prudent and well
it. adapted to the end in view. But as it was forefecn

that few would engage voluntarily to eittle in a
country, whole noxious climate had been fatal to so
many of their countrymen, Columbus propo1cd to
transport to Hilfpaniola such malefactors as had
been convicted of crimes, which, though capital,

wver
' Ilerrera dec. i. lib. iii. c. z.

were of a less atrocious nature; and that soir the B O O
future a certain proportion of the offenders usually II.
sent to the gallies, should be condemned to labour '-r
in the mines which were to be opened. This ad- '496'
vice, given without due refleEtion, was inconfide-
rately adopted. The prisons of Spain were drain-
ed, in order to collect members for the intended
colony; and the judges were inftruaed to recruit
it by their future sentences. It is not, however,
with such materials, that the foundations of a foci-
ety, destined to be permanent, should be- laid.
Industry, sobriety, patience, and mutual confi-
dence are indispensably requisite in an infant fettle-
ment, where purity of morals must contribute more
towards establishing order than the operation or
authority of laws. But when such a mixture of
what is corrupt is admitted into the original con-
Ritution of the political body, the vices of those
unsound and incurable members will probably in-
feat the whole, and must certainly be produtive
of violent and unhappy effe&s. This the Spani-
ards fatally experienced; and the other European
nations having successively imitated their practice
in this particular, pernicious consequences have
followed in their settlements, which can be im-
puted to no other cause %.

THOUGH Columbus obtained, with great facility Executed

and dispatch, the royal approbation of every mea- "owly.
sure and regulation that he proposed, his endea-
vours to carry them into execution were so long
retarded, as mull have tired out the patience of
any man, less accufRomed to encounter difficulties
and to surmount them. Those delays were occafi-
oned partly by that tedious formality and spirit of
procrastination, with which the Spaniards conduc
bufineli; and, partly by the exhaufled state of the

treasury,

I-Ierrera, dec. I. liq. iii. c. 2. Touran Hist. Gener. de
'Anmerique, i. p. 51.

B OO I treasury, which was drained by the expence of ce.

II. lebrating the marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella's
'*^' only son with Margaret of Austria, and that of Jo-

1496. anna, their second daughter, with Philip arch-duke

of Austria*: but must be chiefly imputed to the
malicious arts of Columbus's enemies. Aflonifhed
at the reception which he met with upon his re-
turn, and overawed by his presence, they gave
way, for some time, to a tide of favour too firong
for them to oppose. Their enmity, however, was
too inveterate to remain long inactive. They re-
fumed their operations, and by the assistance of
Fonseca, the minister for Indian affairs, who was
now promoted to the bishopric of Badajos, they
threw in so many obstacles to protra& the prepara-
tions for Columbus's expedition, that a year elapl-
-ed before he t could procure two ships to carry
over a part of the supplies deflined for the colony,
and almost two years were spent before the fnall
squadron was equipped of which he himself was
to take the command ~.

14qS. THIS squadron confifled of fix {hips only, of no

Third voy- great burden, and but indifferently provided for a
hunbus. long or dangerous navigation. The voyage which

he now meditated was in a course different from
any he had undcrtaken. As he was fully perfuad-
ed that the fertile regions of India lay to the
bouth-weft of those countlics which he had dil-
covcred, he proposed, as the mofl certain method
of finding out thelc, to fland direily ifuth fromn
the Canary or Cape de Verd inands, until he
c;amie under the equinodtial line, and then to
flretch to the weft before the favourable wind
for such a course, which blows invariably bc-
May30. tween the tropics. With this idea he set fail, and

touched
* P. Martyr. epiifl. C;i,. l' Life of Columbus, c. 6i.

Hlerrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 9.

touched first at the Canary, and then at the Cape B O O K
de Verd islands, From the former he dispatched II-
three of his ships with a supply of provisions for 's
the colony in -lifpaniola: with the other three, he Jl493
continued his voyage towards the south. No re-
ilarkable occurrence happened until they arrived
vithin five degrees of the line. There they were jul
becalmed, and at the fame time the heat waxed so
cxceflive, that many of their wine cafls burst, the
liquor il others foured, and their provisions cor-
rupted*. The Spaniards, who had never ventur-
ed lb far to the bouth, were afraid that the ships
would take fire, and began to apprehend the rea-
lity of what the ancients had taight concerning
the deftruEtive qualities of that torrid region of
the globe. They were relieved, in tome measure,
from their fears by a seasonable fall of rain. This,
however, though so heavy and unintermitting that
the men could hardly keep the deck, did not
greatly mitigate the intenseness of the heat. The
admiral, who with his usual vigilance had directed
every operation in person, from the beginning of
the voyage, was so much exhaufled by fatigue and
want of lleep, that it brought on a violent fit of
the gout, accompanied with a fever. All these
circumstances confirained him to yield to the im-
portunities of his crew, and to altar his course to
the north weft, in order to reach some of the Car-
rihee islands, where he might refit, and be sup-
plied with provisions.

ON the first of Augufl, the man stationed in the Difcoverc
round top surprised them with the joyful cry ofinto-'
l,,d. They flood towards it, and difiovered a America,
considerable island, which the admiral called Tri-
nidad, a name it flill retains. It lies on the coast
of Guiana, near the mouth of the Orinoco. This,

though
* P. Martyr, dec. p. 70p

B o O K though a river only of the third or fourth magri

II. tude in the New World, far surpasses any of th,
-ó''"' fireams that water our hemisphere. It rolls to

14.' wards the ocean such a vast body of water, ac(

rushes into it with such impetuous force, that wvhc
it meets the tide, which on that coast rites to al
uncommon height, their collision occasions a ivel
and agitation of the waves no less surprising thai
formidable. In this conflic, the irresistible tor.
rent of the river so far prevails, that it frefheni
the ocean maily leagues with its flood*, Colun.
bus, before he could perceive the danger, was en
tangled among those adverle currents and temper.
tuous waves, and it was with the utmost difficult)
that he escaped through a narrow fitait, whict
appeared so tremendous, that he called it La .Boc
del Drago. As soon as the conflernation which
this occasioned permitted him to reflect upon the
nature of an appearance so extraordinary, he dil:
cerned in it a source of comfort and hope. He
justly concluded, that such a vast body of water
as this river contained, could not be supplied by
any island, but must flow through a country of
immense extent, and of consequence, that he was
*now arrived at that continent which it had long
been the obje't of his wishes to discover. Full of
this idea, he flood to the weft along thecoaft of thole
provinces which are now known by the names of
Paria and Cumana. He landed in several places,
and had some intercourse with the people, whe
refenbled thole of Hispaniola in their appearanct
and manner of life. Tlhey worc, as orniaieliiis
finall plates of gold, and pearls of confiderablt
value, which they willingly exchanged for Eu.
ropean toys. They seemed to possets a better un.
derftanding, and greater courage, than the inlia

bitant
" Gunnilla Hl. ic 1e'Orenoclpe, torn. i. p. 14.

itants of the islands. The country producedB oK
four-footed animals of several kinds, as well as a I.
great variety of fowls and fruits-. The admiral '"
was so much delighted with its beauty and fertility, 1498.
that with the warm enthusiasm of a discoverer,
lleimagined it to be the paradise described in Scrip-
ture, which the Almighty chose for the residence
of man, while he retained innocence that render-
ed him worthy of such a habitation . Thus Co-
lumbus had the glory not only of discovering to
mankind the existence of a New World, but made
considerable progress towards a perfec knowledge
of it; and was the firit man who condu&ed the
Spaniards to that vast continent which has been
the chief feat of their empire, and the source of
their treasures in this quarter of the globe. The
shattered condition of his ihips, fearcity of pro-
rifions, his own infirmities, together with the im-
patience of his crew, prevented him from purfu-
ing his discoveries any farther, and made it necef-
lary to bear away for Hispaniola. In his way thi-
ther he discovered the islands of Cubagua and
Margarita, which afterwards became remarkable
for their pearl-fifhery. When he arrived at HIifpa- Aug. 30.
niola, he was wafted to an extreme degree with fa-
tigue and sickness; but found the affairs of the
colony in such a situation, as afforded him no prof-
pct of enjoying that repose of which he flood so
much in need.

MANY revolutions had happened in that coun- State of

try during his absence. His brother, the Adelan- Hifplaniol
tado, in confequenc of an advice which the admi- val there.
ral gave before his departure, had removed the
colony from Isabella to a more commodious flation,

on

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 9, o1, 1 . Life of Colum-
bus, c. 66-73.

I Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. 12. Gomera c. 84. See
NOTE XXI.

L 0 0 K on the opposite fide of the iland, and laid the

II- foundation of St. Domingo*, which was long the
^""^ most considerable European town in the New

49 -' World, and the feat of the supreme courts in the

Spanish dominions there. As soon as the Spa-
niards were eflablifhed in this new settlement, the
Adelantado, that they might neither languish in in-
acdivity, nor have leisure to form new cabals,
marched into those parts of the island which his
brother had not yet visited or reduced to obedience.
As the people were unable to resist, they submitted
every where to the tribute which he impoled. But
they soon found the burden to be so intolerable,
that, overawed as they were by the superior pow-
er of their oppressors, they took arms against them,
Those infurre&tions, however, were not formida-
ble. A conflict with timid and naked Indians was
neither dangerous nor of doubtful iflue.
Mutiny of BUT while the Adelantado was employed against

oan them in the field, a mutiny, of an afpedt far more

alarming, broke out among the Spaniards. The
ringleader of it was Francis Roldan, whom Co-
lumbus had placed in a flation which required him
to be the guardian of order and tranquillity in the
colony. A turbulent and inconsiderate ambition
precipitated him into this desperate measure, lo
unbecoming his rank. The arguments which bh
employed to seduce his countrymen were frivolous
and ill-founded. He accused Columbus and his
two brothers of arrogance and severity; lie pe-
tended that they aimed at clablifiliiing an ilidcpel:-
dent dominion in the country; lie raxed themr witll
an intention of cutting off part of the Spaniari.
by hunger and fatigue, that they might more eaflil
reduce the remainder to fulbjction ; he rcprcli'li-
ed it as unworthy of Castilians, to relaiin 11t:

talicnt
*P. Mitrtyr. cict. p. 56.

tame and passive slaves of three Genoese adven- B O O K
urers. As men have always a propensity to impute I.
he hardships of which they feel the pressure, to r~
the mifconduat of their rulers; as every nation 149S'
views ,ith a jealous eye the power and exaltation
fforeigners, Roldan's infinuatiols made a deep
mpreflion on his countrymen. His chara6ter
nd rank added weight to them. A confidera-
e number of the Spaniards made choice of him
s their leader, and taking arms against the Ade-
oitado and his brother, seized the king's maga-
iie of provilions, and endeavoured to surprise
h, fort at St. Domingo. This was preserved
y the vigilance and courage of Don Diego Co-
iiibus. The mutineers were obliged to retire
the province of Xaragua, where they continu-
dnot only to disclaim the Adelantado's authority
henfelves but excited the Indians to throw of the
oke !.

SuCH was the distracted state of the colony
hen Columbus landed at St. Domingo. He was
lonifhed to find that the three ihips which he had
ilpatched from the Canaries were not yet arrived.
y the unfkilfulnefs of the pilots, and the violence
currents, they had been carried a hundred and
:ty miles to the weft of St. Domingo, and forced
take shelter in a harbour of the province of Xara-
ua, where Roldan and his seditious followers were
ntoned. Roldan carefully concealed from the
mnanders his infurredion against the Adelanta-
, and employed his utmost address to gain their
nfidence, persuaded them to set on shore a confi-
rable part of the new settlers whom they brought
er, that they might proceed by land to St. Do-
is(oe. It required but few arguments to prevail

with

'Herrera, dec. I. lib. iii. c. A.-8. Life of Columbus, c. 74
:*. Gonmara. . 2z. P. Martyr, p. 78.

B O O K with those men to espouse his cause. They wert

IT. the r fuse of the jails of Spain, to whom idle,
^~s~^ ness, licentiousness, and deeds of violence wert

familiar; and they returned eagerly to a courfi
of life nearly resembling that to which they hat
been accustomed. The commanders of the flip:
perceiving, when it was too late, their imprudence
in disembarking so many of their men, flood axva
for St. Domingo, and got safe into the port
few days after the admiral; but their flock of pro
visions was so wafted during a voyage of such lon
continuance, that they brought little relief to th
colony *.

Composcd By this junction with a band of such bold an
by the pru-
dentco1-P desperate aflociates, Roldan became extremely so
dUuof Co- midable, and no less extravagant in his demand

Columbus, though filled with resentment at his i
gratitude, and highly exasperated by the infolenc
of his followers, made no hafle to take the siel
He trembled at the thoughts of kindling the flan
of a civil war, in which, whatever party prevai
ed, the power and strength of both must be so muc
wafted, as might encourage the common enemy
unite and complete their destruCtion. At the fa
time he observed, that the prejudices and paffio
which incited the rebels to take arms, had sos
infe&ed those who fiill adhered to him, that ma
of them were adverse, and all cold to the fervic
From such sentiments, with respect to the publ
interest, as well as from the view of his own fit
ation, he chose to negociate rather than to figl
By a seasonable proclamation, offering free pard
to such as should merit it by returning to th
duty, he made imprcffion upon some of the m

conteln

* Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c, 12. Life of Columbui-
78, 79.

contents. By engaging to grant such as should B O O K
desire it, the liberty of returning to Spain, he II.
allured all those unfortunate adventurers, who, r
from sickness and disappointment, were disgust- 1498.
ed with the country. By promising to re-elta-
lifh Roldan in his former office, he soothed his
pride; and by complying with most of his de-
mands in behalf of his followers, he satisfied
their avarice. Thus, gradually and without blood-
ed, but after many tedious negociations, he dif-
olved this dangerous combination which threaten-
d the colony with ruin; and restored the appear-
nce of order, regular government and tranquil-
ity .

IN consequence of this agreement with the mu- A new
neers, lands were allotted them in different parts modeoffet.
f the island, and the Indians fettled in each dif- tablifeci.
rit were appointed to cultivate a certain portion of
round for the use of those new maiters. The per-
rrmance of this work was substituted in place of
hetribute formerly imposed; and how neceflary
ever such a regulation might be in a sickly and
eble colony, it introduced among the Spaniards
e Repartimientos, or distributions of Indians efta-
ifhed by them in all their settlements, which
ought numberless calamities upon that unhappy
eople, and fubjeted them to the molt grievous
ppreffion -. This was not the only bad effeEt of
einiurrection in Hispaniola; it prevented Co-
rbus from prosecuting his discoveries on the
tinent, as felf-prefervation obliged him to keep
ar his person his brother the Adelantado, and
sailors whom he intended to have employed
that service. As soon as his affairs would per-
it, he sent some of his fiips to Spain with a jour-

nal

' errera dec. I. lib. iii. c. 13, 14. Life of Columbus, c.
&c.
tlerrera, dec. I. lib. ili. c. 14, &c.

B O K nal of the voyage which he had made, a defcrip.

It. tion of the new countries which he had discovered,
'-vr'. a chart of the coast along which he had failed,

'499. and specimens of the gold, the pearls, and other

curious or valuable produCtions which he had
acquired by trafficking with the natives. At the
fame time he transmitted an account of the inlur.
reseion in Hispaniola; he accused the mutineers
not only of having thrown the colony into luch
violent convulsions as threatened its dilfolution,
but of having obftruated every attempt toward
discovery and improvement, by their unprovok.
ed rebellion against their superiors, and propos
ed several regulations for the better governmlen
of the island, as well as the extinction of that
mutinous spirit, which, though suppressed at pre.
sent, might soon burst out with additional rage.
Roldan and his afrociates did not negle& to con
vey to Spain, by the fame ships, an apology so
their own conduct, together with their recrimina
tions upon the admiral and his brothers. Uafor
tunately for the honour of Spain, and the happi
ness of Columbus, the latter gained most credi
in the court of Ferdinand and Isabella, and pro
duced unexpeaed effects'.

Trhevoyage BUT, previous to these, events had happenc
of Vasco de
Gama to which merit attention, both on account of thei
the East own importance, and their connection with I
Indies, by
the Cape of history of the New World. While Columbus w
Good Hope. engaged in his successive voyages to the weft, ti

spirit of discovery did not languish in Portugal, t
kingdom where it first acquired vigour, and b
came enterprising. Self-condemnation and regr
were not the only sentiments to which the fucccls
Columbus, and reflecion upon their own inpr

dcil

* Herrcra, dec. i. lib, iii. c. 14. Benzon, Hill. Nov.0 0
lib. i. c. 2.

dence in rejeAcing his proposals, gave rife among B 0 0 K
the Portuguele. They excited a generous emula- II-
tion to surpass his performances, and an ardent de- s
fire to make some reparation to their country for '499'
their own error. With this view, Emmanuel, who
inherited the enterprising genius of his predecel-
fors, persisted in their grand scheme of opening a
paIIage to the Eafi-Indies by the Cape of Good
Hope; and ioon afier his accefiion to the throne,
equipped a squadron for that important voyage. He
gave the command of it to Val'o de Gamna, a man
of noble birth, poffeftld of virtue, prudence, and
courage, equal to the flation. ''he lquadron, like
all thole fitted out for dilcovery in the infancy of
navigation, was extremely feeble, consisting only of
three veflels, of neither burden nor force adequate
to the lervice. As the Europeans were at that time
altogether unacquainted with the course of the
trade-winds and periodical monlbons, which render
naviga-ion in the Atlantic ocean, as well as in the
sca that separates Africa from India, at tbme seasons
easy, and at others not only dangerous, but al-
niofi imprafticable, the time cholen for Gama's de-
parture was the molt improper during the whole
year. IHe set fail from'lilbon on the ninth of July, 1497.
and itandingtowards the ibuth, had to ftrugge for
tour month ls with contrary winds, before he could
reach the Cape of Good Hope. Here their vio-Nov
lence began to abate; and during an interval of
calm weather, Gania doubled that formidable pro-
niontory, which had so long been the boundary of
navigation, and directed his course towards the
lorth-cafr, along the African coatl. He touched
at leveral ports; and after various adventures,
which the Portguctle liillorians relate with high but
ijult encomiums upon his conductd and intrepidity,
he came to anchor befbre the city of Melinda.

lThroughout all the vail countries which extend
Voi. 1. 1, along

B O O K along the coast of Africa, from the river Senegal to

II. the confines of Zanguebar, the Portuguese had
nrJ- found a race of men rude and uncultivated, ftran-
1499 g gers to letters, to arts and commerce, and differing

from the inhabitants of Europe no le's in their sea-
tures and complexion, than in their manners and
institutions. As they advanced from this, they ob-
served, to their inexpreflible joy, that the human
form gradually altered and improved, the Asiatic
features began to predominate, marks ofciviliza-
tion appeared, letters were known, the Mahome-
tan religion was established, and a commerce, far
from being inconsiderable, was carried on. At that
time several vessels from India were in the port of
Melinda. Gama now pursued his voyage with al-
most absolute certainty of success, and under the
conduct of a Mahometan pilot, arrived at Calecut,
upon the coast of Malabar, on the twcnty-fecond
of May one thousand four hundred and ninety-
eight. What he beheld of the wealth, the popu-
loufnefs, the cultivation, the industry and arts of
this highly civilized country, far surpassed any idea
that he had formed, from the imperfect accounts
which the Europeans had hitherto received of it.
But as he possessed neither fuflicient forces to at-
tempt a settlement, nor proper commodities with
which he could carry on commerce of any confe-
quence, he hastened back to Portugal, with an ac-
count of his success in performing a voyage the long-
eft, as well as most difficult, that had ever been
made since the first invention of navigation. He
landed at Lisbon on the fourteenth of September
one thousand four hundred and ninety-line, two
years, two months, and five days, from the time
he left that port :.

TH-us, during the courle of the iiftccnth cen-
tury, mankind made greater progrcls in cxploring

tlic
*Ramufio, vol. i. * i y. D),

the slate of the habitable globe, than in all the ages B O O K
which had elapsed previous to that period. The II
spirit of discovery, feeble at firll and cautious, -r-
moved within a very narrow sphere, and made its 1499'
efforts with hesitation and timidity. Encouraged by
fucccfs, it became adventurous, and boldly extend-
ed its operations; in the course of its progreflion, it
continued to acquire vigour, and advanced at length
with a rapidity and force whichburft through all the
limits within which ignorance and fear had hither-
to circunfcribed the activity of the human race,
Almost fifty years were employed by the Portu-
guefe in creeping along the coast of Africa from
Cape Non to Cape de Verd, the latter of which
lies only twelve degrees to the south of the former.
In le's than thirty years, they ventured beyond the
equinoCiial line into another hemisphere, and pe-
netrated to the southern extremity of Africa, at
the distance of forty-nine degrees from Cape de
Verd. During the last seven years, a new world
was discovered in the weft, not inferior in extent
to all the parts of the earth with which mankind
were at that time acquainted. In the east, un-
known seas and countries were found out, and a
communication, long desired, but hitherto con-
cealed, was opened between Europe and the opu-
lent regions of India. In comparison with events
so wonderful and unexpe&ted, all that had hither-
to been deemed great or Iplendid, faded away and
disappeared. Val: objcts now presentcd them-
Iclves. The human mind, rouzed and intcrcft-
ed by the profped, engaged with ardour in pur-
suit of them, and exerted its acIive powers in a
new direction.

THIs spirit of cntcrpritc, though but ncwly i;r,,,,i

awakened in Spain, began loon to operate cxtcll- c:tei'U:()
lively. All the attempts: towards difcovcry male i s',!i,,tad
in that kingdom, had hithcrto ben carried on by vcilturr, .

L :, Columbus

B O O K Columbus alone, and at the expence of the fove.

IL reign. But now private adventurers, allured by the
-'ó'v magnificent descriptions he gave of the regions
1499' which he had visited, as well as by the specimens

of their wealth which he produced, offered to fit
out squadrons at their own risk, and to go in quefi
of new countries. The Spanish court, whose scan-
ty revenues were exhaufled by the charge of its ex-
peditions to the New World, which, though they
opened vail profpeats of future benefit, yielded a
very sparing return of present profit, was extreme-
ly willing to devolve the burden of discovery upon
its subjeó[s. It seized with joy an opportunity of ren-
dering the avarice, the ingenuity, and efforts of
projectors, infirumental in promoting designs of
certain advantage to the public, though of doubtful

Ojeda the success with refpe& to themselves. One of the first
irftofthiefe. propositions of this kind was made by Alonfo dc

Ojeda, a gallant and acive officer, who had ac-
companied Columbus in his second voyage. His
rank and chara&er procured him such credit with
the merchants of Seville, that they undertook to
equip four ships, provided he could obtain the roy-
al licence, authorising the voyage. The powerful
patronage of the bishop of Badajos, easily securcd
success in a suit so agreeable to the court. Without
consulting Columbus, or regarding the rights and
jurifclision which he had acquired by the capitula-
tion in one thousand four hundred and nincty-two,
Ojeda was permitted to set out for the New World.
In order to dire&t his course, the bishop communi-
cated to him the admiral's journal of his lafi voy-
age, and his charts of the countries which he had
May. discovered. Ojeda firuck out into no new path of

navigation, but adhering servilely to the route
which Columbus had taken, arrived on the coast of
Paria. He traded with the natives, and fianclig
to the weft, proceeded as far as Cape do Vcla, and

ranged

ranged along a considerable extent of coast beyond B O O K
that on which Columbus had touched. Having II
thus ascertained the opinion of Columbus, that -r
this country was a part of the continent, Ojeda 499
returned by way of Hispaniola to Spain, with some
reputation as a discoverer, but with little benefit
to those who had raised the funds for the expedi-
tion .

AMERIGO VESPUCCI, a Florentine gentleman, Isaccom-

accompanied Ojeda in this voyage. In what fta- PAmerigo
tion he served, is uncertain; but as he was an ex- Vfpucci.
perienced sailor, and eminently skilful in all the
sciences subservient to navigation, he seems to
have acquired such authority among his compani-
ons, that they willingly allowed him to have a
chief share in directing their operations during the
voyage. Soon after his return, he tranfinitted an
account of his adventures and discoveries to one
of his countrymen; and labouring with the vanity
of a traveller to magnify his own exploits, he had
tie alddres and confidence to frame his narrative,
so as to make it appear that he had the glory of
having first dicfovered the continent in the New
World. Amerigo's account was drawn up, not
only with art, but with some elegance. It con-
tained an aniuting history of his voyage, and ju-
dicious observations upon the natural productions,
the inhabitants, and the cutfoms of the countries
which he had vilitcd. As it was the firfl defcrip-
tion of any part of the New World that was pub-
lifhed, a performance so wel' calculated to gratify
hec pallion of mankind ror what is new and mar-
vellous, circulated rapidly, and was read with ad- Fmmwl,ol,
miratiou. The country of which Anicrigo was ^te

' iCa "

luppofcd to be the ditcovcrer, caime gradually to given to the
be called by his name. The caprice of mankind, NewWorld.

oftenl
* ilrrcrat, lcc. i. lib. iv. c. 1, 2, J.

B 0 0 K often as unaccountable as unjust, has perpetuated

II. this error. By the universal content of nations,
ób7' AMERICA is the name beflowed on this new quar-
499. ter of the globe. The bold pretensions of a for-

tunate impoflor have robbed the discoverer of the
New World of a difiintion which belonged to
him. The name of Amerigo has supplanted that
of Columbus; and mankind may regret an a& of
injustice, which, having received the fanetion of
time, it is now too late to redress%.

Voyage of )DUKING the fame year, another voyage of dif.
Alonfo

'nino. covery was undertaken. Columbus not only in-

troduced the spirit of naval enterprise into Spain,
but all the first adventurers who diftinguithed
themselves in this new career, were formed by his
instructions, and acquired in his voyages the Ikill
and information which qualified them to imitate
his example. Alonfo Nigno, who had served un-
der the admiral in his last expedition, fitted out,
in conjunction with Christopher Guerra, a mer-
chant of Seville, a single ship, and failed to the
coast of Paria. This voyage seems to have been
conduted with greater attention to private eniolu-
ment, than to any general or national objet. N ig-
no and Guerra made no discoveries of any impor-
tance ; but they brought home such a rctuin of gold
and pearls, as inflamed their countrymen with the
deire of enga;giing in fin:ilar adxentures t.

3500. SOON after Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of the

Jafvnc',' admiral's companions in his first voyage, iailed
Yancz Pin- from Palos with four ships. I-e flood boldly to-
zon. wards the foutli, and was the first Spaniard who

ventured to cross the cquinoctial line ; but he seems
to have landed on no part of the coast beyond the
mouth of the Maragnon, or river of the Amazons.

Al

Sec NOTE XXII.

1 '
P. Mnartyr, dec. p. 87. llerrcra, dec. i. lib. iv. c. j.

All these navigators adopted the erroneous theory B O O K
of Columbus, and believed that the countries TI
which they had discovered, were part of the vast
continent of India .500.

DURING this firtf year of the sixteenth century, The Portu-

that fertile difirit of America, on the confines of yefil.
which Pinzon had ftopt short, was more fully dif-
covered. The successful voyage of Gama to the
East Indies, having encouraged the king of Portu-
gal to fit out a fleet so powerful, as not only to
carry on trade, but to attempt conquest, he gave
the command of it to Pedro Alvarez Cabral. In
order to avoid the coast of Africa, where he was
certain of meeting with variable breezes, or fre-
quent calms, to retard his voyage, Cabral flood
out to sea, and kept so far to the weft, that, to his
firprife, he found himself upon the shore of an
unknown country, in the tenth degree beyond the
line. He imagined, at firif, that it was some if-
land in the Atlantic ocean hitherto unobserved;
but, proceeding along its coast for several days, he
was led gradually to believe, that a country so ex-
tensive formed a part of some great continent.
This latter opinion was well founded. The coun-
try with which he fell in belongs to that province
in South America, now known by the name of
Brasil. He landed; and having formed a very
high idea of the fertility of the foil, and the agree-
ablenefs of the climate, he took pofIeflion of it
for the crown of Portugal, and dispatched a ship
to Liflbon with an account of this event, which
appeared to be no lets important than it was un-
cxpdced t. Columbus's discovery of the New
World was the effort of an adive genius, enligh-
tened by icience, guided by experience, and aft-

ing

; Ierrcra., dec. i. lit). iv. c. 6. P. Martyr, dec. p. g95
' I-lcrrcra, (Icc. i. lib. iv. c. 7.

B O O K ing upon a regular plan, executed with no less cou-

II. rage than perseverance. But from this adventure
^"s*- of the Portuguese, it appears that chance might
15 0. have accomplished that great design, which it is

now the pride of human reason to have formed and
perfected. If the sagacity of Columbus had not
condutled mankind to America, Cabral, by a for-
tunate accident, might have led them, a few years
later, to the krnowledge of that extenfivecontinenti.

Macliinati- .WHILE the Spaniards and Portuguese, by thole
ons as.airft
Colunbus. fucceflive voyages, were daily acquiring more en-

larged ideas of the extent and opulence of that
quarter of the globe which Columbus had made
known to them, he himself, far from enjoying the
tranquillity and honours with which his services
should have been recompelfed, was struggling
wvith every distress in which the envy and malevo-
lence of the people under his command, or the
ingratitude of the court which he served, could
involve him. Though the pacification with Ro!-
dan broke the union, and weakened the force of
the mutineers, it did not extirpate the feeds of
discord out of the island. Several of the malcon-
tents continued in arms, refusing to submit to the
admiral. Hie and his brothers were obliged to
take the field alternately, in order to check their
incursions, or to punifhi their crimes. The per-
petual occupation and disquiet which this cre-
ated, prevented him from giving due attention
to the dangerous machinations of his enemies
in the court of Spain. A good number of thole
who wecre nmolt cilalisfied with his adiniPtr-ation,
had embraced the opportunity of rcturningto
Europe with the fliips which he dispatched frnio
St. Domingo. The final dilfappoiintm(cnt of nll
their hopes inflamed the rage of thcel unfortunatl:

acdventu 'c1r
': IIer'e rl, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 5.

adventurers againfi Columbus to the utmost pitch. B o o K
Their poverty and diftreis, by exciting compafion, Il.
rendered their acculations credible, and their conn-
plaints interesting. They teazed Ferdinand and 1500.
Isabella incessantly with nmemorials, containing the
detail of their own grievances, and the articles of
their charge against Columbus. Whenever either
the king or queen appeared in public, they fur-
rounded them in a tumultuary manner, illifillg
with importunate clamours for payment of the ar-
rears due to themn, and demanding vengeance upon
the author of their iufferings. They inbulted the
admiral's sons wherever they met them, reproach-
ing them as the offspring of the projecor, whose
fatal curiosity had discovered those pernicious regi-
ons which drained Spain of its wealth, and would
prove the grave of its people. Those avowed en-
deavours of the malcontents from America to ruin
Columbus were seconded by the secret, but more
dangerous insinuations of that party among the
courtiers, who had always thwarted his fchenles,
and envied his success and credit .

FERDINAND was difpofid to liflcn, not only Thelrinflu-

01.

1i ence on Ser,

with a willing, but with a partial ear, to thole accu- dinand and
fations. Notwithflanding the flattering accounts isabella
which Columbus had given of the riches of Ame-
rica, the remittances from it had hitherto been so
scanty, that they fell far short of defraying the ex-
pence of the armaments fitted out. The glory of
the discovery, together with the prol'pcc't of re-
mote commercial advantages, was all that Spain
had yet received in return for the efforts which she
had made. But time had already diminished the
fira lelllations of joy which the discovery of a New
World occasioned, and fame alone was not an ob-
ject to satisfy the cold interciled mind of Ferdinand.

The
Life of Columbus, c. 85.

B 0 O K The nature of commerce was then so little under.

II. flood, that, where immediate gain was not acquired,
'-r"y^ the hope of distant benefit, or of flow and mode.

5CO·. rate returns, was totally disregarded. Ferdinand

confidered Spain, on this account, as a loser by the
enterprise of Columbus, and imputed it to his jiiil:
condut and incapacity for government, that a
country abounding in gold had yielded nothing of
value to its conquerors. Even Isabella, who, from
the favourable opinion which she entertained of
Columbus, had uniformly proteced him, wPas
shaken at length by the number and boldncfs of
his accusers, and began to fufpedt that a difaffec-
tion so general mufll have been occasioned by real
grievances, which called for redress. The bishop
of Badajos, with his usual animolity againtl Co.
lumbus, encouraged there suspicions, and confirm-
ed them.
r.tl effi-as As soon as the clueen began to give way to the

ts torrent of calumny, a resolution fatal to Columbus

was taken. Francis de Bovadilla, a kInight of Ca-
latriva, was appointed to repair to Hispaniola, : witL
full powers to inquire into the conduc of Colum-
bus, and, if he found the charge of mal-admi. i-
firation proved, to fuperlede him, and assume th
government of the island. It was impoflible to
clcape condemnation, when this preposterous coin-
million nmale it the intercfe of tlhe judge to filld
the perlbn whom he lwas sent to try, guilt'.
'ThourIh Columbus had now conipofed all the dif-
lentions in the ifalld ; though he had brought bolth
Spaniards and Indians to submit peaceably to Iis
govcrnmcni ; though he had made Inch effctual
p]rovilioln for working the mi:es, alC ('cultivi':iing
the cotuln ry\, as \'oult( have I'ccurcd a conlidcrahle
revenue to the kini , as ll as alarge profits to il!-
dividuals, I.uovadilll;, without deigning to atlci(l

to

o the nature or merit of those services, discovered, B o o
rom the moment that he lauded in Hispaniola, a II.
deerlslined purpose of treating him as a criminal. "'"
le took peffelfion of the admiral's houle in St. Do- '5C0
mingo, from which he happened at that time to be
bfent, and seized his effects, as if he had been al-
ready convided; he rendered hinmfelf maser of the
frt and of the king's flores by violence; he requir-
ed all persons to acknowledgc him as luprerne go-
vernor; he set at liberty the prifoirers confined by
the admiral, and fuimmoned him to appear before
his tribunal, in order to anfiver for his conduct;
transmitting to him, together with the fuinmons, a
copy of the royal mandate, by which Columbus
was enjoined to yield implicit obedience to his
commands.
COLUMBUS, though deeply affected with thecolu,,,lbu
ingratitude and injustice of Ferdinand and Isabella, fnt in
did not hesitate a moment about his own conduc. Spain.
He submitted to the will of his sovereigns with a
refpeEtful silence, and repaired direcly to the court
of that violent and partial judge whom they had
authorised to try him. Bovadilla, without admit-
ting him into his prelence, ordered him instantly to
be arrefied, to be loaded with chains, and hurried o0ober.
pn board a ihip. Even under this humiliating re-
veril of fortune, the firmncfs of mind which dif-
linguifes tlc character of Columbus, did not for-
fake him. Conlcious of his own integrity, and
o(lacing hinmlclf with reflecting upon the great
things which he had atchieved, he endured this
iifult offered to his charaticr, not only wiih coin-
polurc, but with dignity. Nor had he the confo-
lation of sympathy to mitigate his fuflcrings. Bo-
vadilla hadl already rendered hinilllf to extremely
popular, by granting various immunities to the
colony, by liberal donations of Indians to all who
applied for ihcmi, and by rclaxing the reins of

dilcipline

i, o o i discipline and government, that the Spaniards,

II. who were mofily adventurers, whom their indi.
'~--r- gence or crimes had impelled to abandon their La.

;500 tive country, expressed the mofi indecent fatisfac.

tion with the dilf race and imprilfounent of ColGj:,.
bus. They flattered themselves, that novw tiic
should enjoy an uncontrouled liberty, more fuila
ble to their disposition and former habits of lifc.
Among pelifons thus prepared to censure the ypro.
ceedings, and to asperse the character of Colur.
bus, Bovadilla collected materials for a charie
againfi him. All accusations, the most inmproba.
ble as well as inconfifient, were received. No in-
former, however infamous, was rejected. 'lIte
result of this inquefl, no less indecent than partial,
he tranfnaitted to Spain. At the fame time, he or-
dered Colunlbus, with his two brothers, to be car-
ried thither in fetters; and, adding cruelty to iu-
fult, he confined them in different ships, and ex-
eluded them from the comfort of that friendly itl-
tercourfe which might have soothed their conmmon
distress. But while the Spaniards in Hifpanioia
viewed the arbitrary and insolent proceedinirs of
Bovadilla wit h a general approbation, which reilctls
dihonour upon their name and country, one nian
flill retained the memory of the great acQioni
which Columlbus hadl performed, and was touclic:i
with the feutiintns oi vencration and pit)' due to
his rank, his age and his merit. Alonfo de Val
lejo, the cap ain of the vefiel on board which tli
admiral was cousincd, as lool) as lie was clcai o1
the iflanil, approached his prilboter wit h g rat i;c-
Ijicat, and oie-red to relcale hinl from the fcttcl'
wilh which he \was miijuflly loaded. " No," rIlli-
edt Colulmbi), wit a generous indignalltiotl,
v'ear thlic i roIs ilM confl ccjluce of an ordert roil
my [ovcrcigt is. ''lihy flall lind ime as obedient to
this as to their olicer i'junaions. 13y tljic (0111-

ni;iiH!

and I have been confined, and their command L o o K
alone iall set me at liberty ." 1i.

FORTUNATELY, the voyage te o Spain was ex- -s"'
tremiely hort. As soon as Fcrdinand and liabella N' T.
Were informed that Columbus was brough t home Stt

h ti

e ;y

prisoner, and in chains, they perceived at once o.i'
lhat uiverfal afitonfllmeut this even;t itU octca-' rit
oi, aud what an inpreffion to toheir difadvan:Lac
ituft make. All Europe, they forrefawv would be
illed wiith indignation at this ungenerous requital
fa xman who had performed ations worthy of the
igheft recompence, and would exclaimn againit the
ijiufice of the nation, to which he had beenl such

nemiinent benefatuor, as well as against the in-
raaiiude of the princes whoereig e

rehad ren-

ered illustrious. Afhanied of their own conddut,
id eager not only to make fonie reparation for
is injury, but to efface the Lrain which it might
X upOin their charaEter, they inifantly if;ed or-
rrs to let Colurbus at liberty, invited hin to
ourt, and renitted money to enable hiln to appear
hre ill a annler suitable to his rank. sWhen he
itered the royal preience, Columbus threw him-
If at the feet of his sovereigns. He remained
r some tine silent; the various paflions which
giated his smind fupprcffing his power of uttcr-
ce. At length he recovered hinifelf, and vin-
icated his condust in a long discourse, producing
ie nolt satisfying proofs of his own integrity as
el1 as good intention, and evidence, no lels clear,
the malevolence of his enemies, who, not satis-
ed with having ruined his fortune, laboured to
eprive him of what alone was now left, his ho-
our and his fame. Ferdinand received him with
eent civility, and Isabella with tcndernefs and

rcletSt.

' Life of Columbus, c. 86. IHercra, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 8-i i.
mara I-ifl. c. 23. Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6.

B 0 0 K refpeet. They both expressed their sorrow fol

II. what had happened, dilavowed their knowledge
^~^ of it, and joined in promising him protesion and

500o future favour. But though they instantly degrad.

ed Bovadilla, in order to remove from themllvea
any suspicion of having authorised his violent pro.
ceedings, they did not restore to Columbus thi
jurisdiCtion and privileges as viceroy of tholc
countries which he had discovered. Though wl.
ling to appear the avengers of Columbus's wrongs,
that illiberal jealouly which prompted them to in.
vest Bovadilla, with such authority as put it in his
power to treat the admiral with indignity, fli!l
subsisted. They were afraid to trust a man to
whom they were so highly indebted, and retailingi
him at court under various pretexts, they appoint
ed Nicholas de Ovando, a knight of the militar
order of Alcantara, governor of Hilpaniola*.

COLUMBUS was deeply affecftcd with this ncI

injury, which came from hands that seemed tobe
employed in making reparation for his paRt susser
ings. The sensibility with which great minds fee
every thing that implies any suspicion of their in
tegrity, or that wears the asped of an affront,
exquisite. Columbus had experienced both fron
the Spaniards ; and their ungenerous conduct cs
afperated himi to such a degree, that he conld in
longer conceal the sentiments which it excited
Wherever he went, he carried about with him, as
memorial of their ingratitude, thofc fetters wit
which he had been loaded. They were conflant
huing up in his chamber, and he gave orde
that when he died they should be buried in hi
grave '-.

M1EANWHILF

i HcIrrcrn,(lec. I. . iv. c. io--12. Life of. Columbus, c.
t Life of Columbus, c. 86.. . 577.

MEANWHILE, the spirit of discovery, notwith- B O O K
flanding the severe check which it received by I.
the ungenerous treatment of the man, who firilt
excited it in Spain, continued acive and vigorous. Pro.Is o
Rtodcrigo di Baftidas, a perlbn of diltintliou, fitled dilcovtry.
out two ships in co-partuery with John de la Cofn, January.
who having served under 1he admiral in two of
his voyages, was deemed the mol: skilful pilot in
Spain. They fleered dirctly towards the conti-
nent, arrived on the coasl of Paria, and proceed-
ing to the weft, discovered all the coast of the
province now known by the name of Terra Fir-
ma, from Cape de Vcla, to the gulf of Darien.
Not long after Ojeda, with his former associate
Amerigo Velpucci, set out upon a second voyage,
and being unacquainted with the deflination of
Baftidas, held the fame course, and touched at the
iame places. The voyage of Baftidas was prol-
perous and lucrative, that of Ojeda unfortunate.
But both tended to encreafe the ardour of dilco-
very: for in proportion as the Spaniards acquired
a more extelfive knowledge of the American con-
tinent, their idea of its opulence and fertility in-
crealfed.

BEiFORE these adventurers returned from their o(hr,:'..p-
voyages, a fleet was equipped at the public cx- p,,t",,,,-_
pence, for carrying over Ovando, the new gover- lqan,.oa.
lor, to I-ifpaniola. H-is presence there was ex-
tremely requisite, in order to flop the inconsiderate
carcer of Bovadilla, whole imprudent adminifira-
ion threatened the tlttlcment with ruin. Con-
cious of the violence and iniquity of his proceed-
igs againat Columbus, he continued to make it
his bole object to gain the favour and lipport of
his countrymen, by accommodating hinifelf to
their pailions and prejudices. With this view,

lhe
k Herrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 1l.

B O O K he established regulations, in every point the rc.

II. verse of those which Columbus deemed eflential
'>"-;* to the prosperity of the colony. Instead of the

501. severe discipline, necessary in order to habituate

the diflolute and corrupted members of which
the society was composed, to the restraints of la":
and subordination, he suffered them to enjoy fuc'l
uncontrouled licence, as encouraged the wildecr
excefres. Instead of proteaing the Indians, he
gave a legal fanlEion to the oppreflion of that un-
happy people. He took the exaft number of
such as survived their past calamities, divided
thenm into distinct classes, distributed thei ill
property among his adherents, and reduced the
whole island to a slate of complete lerviludc.
As the avarice of the Spaniards was too rapacious
and impatient to try any method of acquiring
wealth but that of searching for gold, this iern'i
tude became as grievous as it was unjust. The
Indians were driven in crowds to the mountains,
and compelled to work in the mines by mailers
who imposed their tasks without mercy or dii.
cretion. Labour, io dilproportioned to their
strength and former habits of life, wafled that
feeble race of men with such rapid conl'unption,
as nuft have soon terminated in the utter cxtiic-
tion of the ancient inhabitants of the iflaind:'.

ioewrenula- 'IT'l neceflity of applying a speedy remedy to
blificd. thole disorders, haftlned Ovando's departure. lie

had the command of the most refpecWlble armament
hitherto fitted out for the New World. It confill-
cd of thirty-two ships, on board of which tWo
thousand five hundred perfbns embarkcd, with an
intention of fettling in the country. Upon the ar
rival of the new governor with this powerful rcill

forccincll

* lerrera, dec. i. lib. iv. c. 1 . &c. Oviedo IHil. lib. ii
c. 6. p. 97. cnzon. Hist. lib. i. . 12. p. 51.

forcement to the colony, Bovadilla resigned his B 0 0 K
charge, and was commanded to return inflant- II.
ly to Spain, in order to answer for his conduct. r&'
Roldan, and the other ringleaders of the muti- 1502-
neers who had been molt aiive in opposing Co-
lumbus, were required to leave the island at
the fame time. A proclamation was issued, de-
claring the natives to be free fubjeds of Spain,
of whom no service was to be exacted contrary
to their own inclination, and without paying then
an adequate price for their labour. \With refped
to the Spaniards thenifelves, various regulations
were made, tending to hfpprefs the licentious
spirit which had been lo fatal to the colony, and
to eltablifh that reverence for law and order on
which society is founded, and to which it is in-
debted for its increase and stability. In order to
limit the exorbitant gain which private persons
were supposed to make by working themines, an
ordinance was published, directing all the gold to
be brought to a public fnielting-houfe, and declar-
ing one half of it to be the property of the crown*.

WHILE these Iteps were taking for securing the Thedifa-

tranquillity and welfare of the colony which Co- g.eable si-
lumbus had planted, he himself was engaged in the coum'bus,
unpleasant employment of soliciting the favour of
an ungrateful court, and, notwithstanding all his
merit and services, he solicited in vain. He dc-
nanded, in terms of the original capitulation in
one thousand four hundred and ninety-two, to be
reinflated in his office of viceroy over the countries
which he had dilcovered. By a firange fatality,
the circunftance which lie urged in lupport of his
claim, determined a jealous monarch to rejcdt it.

VOL. I. M The

* Solorzano PolitiLa Indiana, li). i. c. 12. lierrcra, dec. z.
lib. iv. c. 12.

B O O K The greatness of his discoveries, and the profpea

II- of their increasing value, made Ferdinand confider
.~'r" the concessions in the capitulation as extravagant
5OZ.' and impolitic, He was afraid of entrusting a sub-

jet with the exercise of ajurifdiation that now ap.
peared to be so extremely extensive, and might
grow to be no less formidable. He inspired Isabella
with the fame suspicions, and under various pre-
texts, equally frivolous and unjust, they eluded all
Columbus's requisitions to perform that which a so-
lemn treaty bound them to accomplish. After at,
tending the court of Spain for near two years, as
an humble suitor, he found it impossible to remove
Ferdinand's prejudices and apprehensions; and
perceived, at length, that he laboured in vain,
when he urged a claim of justice or merit with an
interested and unfeeling prince.

He forms BUT even this ungenerous return did not difcou-
newfchemes rage him from pursuing the great object which firil
vs"ery. called forth his inventive genius, and excited him

to attempt discovery. To open a new passage to
the East Indies was his original and favourite
scheme. This still engrossed his thoughts; and ei-
ther from his own observations in his voyage to Pa-
ria, or from some obscure hint of the natives, or
from the accounts given by Baftidas and de la Cosa
of their expedition, he conceived an opinion that
beyond the continent of America, there was a sea
which extended to the East Indies, and hoped to
find some strait or narrow neck of land by which a
communication might be opened with it and the
part of the ocean already known. By a very for-
tunate conjecture, he supposed this strait or isthmus
to be situated near the gulf of Darien. Full of
this idea, though he was now of an advanced age,
worn out with fatigue, and broken with infirmities,
he offered, with the alacrity of a youthful adven-

turer,

turer, to undertake a voyage which would afcer- g 0 0 K
tain this important point, and perfect the grand II.
scheme which from the beginning he proposed to ^-
accomplish. Several circumstances concurred in 1502.
disposing Ferdinand and llabclla to lend a favoura-
ble ear to this proposal. They were glad to have
the pretext of any honourable employment for re-
moving from court a man with whole demands they
deemed it impolitic to comply, and whose services
it was indecent to negle&t. Though unwilling to re-
ward Columbus, they were not insensible of his me-
rit, and from their experience of his skill and con-
duet, had reason to give credit to his conjeCtures,
and to confide in his success. To these confidera-
tions, a third nmuf be added of still more powerful
influence. About this time the Portuguelf fleet,
under Cabral, arrived from the Indies; and, by the
richness of its cargo, gave the people of Europe a
more perlfect idea, than they had hitherto been able
to form, of the opulence and fertility of the earls
The Portuguele had been more fortunate in their
discoveries than the Spaniards. They had opened
a communication with countries where industry,
arts, and elegance flourished; and where commerce
had been longer established, and carried to greater
extent than in any region of the earth. Their first
voyages thither yielded immediate, as well as vast
returns of profit, in commodities extremely precious
and in great request. Liflon became immediately
the feat of commerce and of wealth ; while Spain
had only the expectation of remote benefit, and of
future gain from the weftcrn world. Nothing,
then, could be more acceptable to the Spaniards
than Columbus's offir to conduct them to the east,
by a route which he cxpetcd to be fiorter, as well
as lels dangerous, than that which the Portuguese
had taken. Even Ferdinand was routed by fuch.a
profpe&t, and warmly approved of the undertaking-.

M 2 Bu

BOO K BUT, interesting as the objet of this voyage

II. was to the nation, Columbus could procure only
'-rJ ' four small barks, the largest of which did not ex-
His ourth ceed seventy tons in burden, for performing it.
voyage. Accustomed to brave danger, and to engage in ar-

duous undertakings with inadequate force, he did
not hesitate to accept the command of this pitiful
squadron. His brother Bartholomew' and his fe-
cond son Ferdinand, the historian of his actions,
accompanied him. He failed from Cadiz on the
ninth of May, and touched, as usual, at the Canary
islands; from thence he purposed to have flood di-
rectly for the continent, but his largefi vessel was
so clumsy and unfit for service, as confirained him
'to bear away for Hispaniola, in hopes of exchang-
ing her for some ship of the fleet that had carried
June 29. over Ovando. When he arrived off St. Domingo,

he found eighteen of these ships ready loaded, and
on the point of departing for Spain. Columbus
immediately acquainted the governor with the de-
flination of his voyage, and the accident which had
obliged him to alter his route. He requested per-
mission to enter the harbour, not only that he might
negociate the exchange of his ship, but that he
might take shelter during a violent hurricane, of
which he discerned the approach from various
prognostics, which his experience and sagacity had
taught him to observe. On that account, he ad-
vised him likewise to put off some days the de-
parture of the fleet bound for Spain. But Ovando
refused his request, and despised his counsel. Un-
der circumfiances in which humanity would have
afforded refuge to a firanger, Columbus was de-
nied admittance into a country of which he had dif-
covered the exiftcnce, and acquired the posIes-
- iion. His salutary warning, which might have been
attended to without any inconveniency, was

regarded

regarded as the dream of a visionary prophet, who B O O K
arrogantly pretended to predito an event beyond II.
the reach of human foresight. The fleet set fail T
for Spain. Next night the hurricane came on 5
vwith dreadful impetuosity. Columbus, aware of
the danger, took precautions againit it, and saved
his little squadron. The fleet defined for Spain
met with the fate which the rashness and obfti-
nacy of its commanders merited. Of eighteen
Ships two or three only escaped. In this general
wreck perished Bovadilla, Roldan, and the great-
er part of those who had been the most active in
persecuting Columbus, and oppressing the Indi-
ans. Together with themselves, all the wealth
which they had acquired by their injustice and
cruelty was swallowed up. It exceeded in value
two hundred thousand peso's; an immense fum at
that period, and sufficient not only to have screen-
ed them from any severe scrutiny into their con-
due, but to have secured them a gracious recep-
tion in the Spanish court. Among the ships that
escaped, one had on board all the effe6ts of Co-
lumbus which had been recovered from the wreck
of his fortune. Historians, itruck with the exa&
discrimination of charaders, as well as the just
distribution of rewards and punishments, confpi-
cuous in thole events, universally attribute them
to an immediate interposition of divine Provi-
dence, in order to avenge the wrongs of an injured
man, and to punish the oppressors of an innocent
people. Upon the ignorant and superstitious race
of men, who were witnesses of this occurrence, it
made a different impression. From an opinion,
which vulgar admiration is apt to entertain with
refpet to persons who have ditinguifhed them-
Iclves by their sagacity and inventions, they be-
lieved Columbus to be poffefied of supernatural
powers, and imagined that he had conjured. .p

this

B 0 0 Kthis dreadful form by magical art, and incauta.

II. tions, in order to be revenged of his enemies*.
~Sm-~ COLUMBUS soon left Hiipaniola, where he had

July14. met with such an inhospitable reception, and flood
Searcliesin towards the continent. After a tedious ard dan-
pafragt gerous voyage, he discovered Guiana, an island
the indian not far diflant from the coast of Honduras. There
cean-. he had an interview with some inhabitants of the

continent, who arrived in a large canoe. They
appeared to be a people more civilized, and who
had made greater progress in the knowledge of
useful arts, than any whom he had hitherto disco-
vered. In return to the inquiries which the Spa-
niards made, with their usual eagerne's, concern-
ing the places where they got the gold which they
wore by way of ornament, they diredted them to
countries situated to the weft, in which, according
to their description, gold was found in such pro-
fusion, that it was applied to the most common
uses. Inflead of fleering in quest of a country so
inviting, which would have condu&ed them along
the coast of Yucatan to the rich empire of Mex-
ico, Columbus was so bent upon his favourite
scheme of finding out that strait which coimnni-
cated with the Indianl ocean, that he bore a ay to
the east towards the gulf of Darien. In this navi-
gation he difcovcrcd all the coafi of the continelt,
from Cape Gracias a Dios, to a harbour, whith,
on account of its beauty and security, he called
Porto Bello. He searched, in vain, for the ima-
lginary firait, through which heexpeCled to nlakc
his way into an unknown tea ; and though he xc1i,
on shore tfveral tines, and advanced into tlie
country, he did not penetrate so far as to crol0
the narrow iflhnius which Icparatcs the gulph of

Ovicdo, lil. iii. 3. . 9. Ilcrrcra, dec. I. lib. v. c. i, '
ife of' Columbus, c. $8.

Mexico from the great southern ocean. He was B O O K
so much delighted, however, with the fertility of II.
the country, and conceived such an idea of its " '-'
wealth, from the specimens of gold produced by 150'.
the natives, that he resolved to leave a fnall co-
lony upon the river Belem, in the province of Ve-
ragua, under the command of his brother, and
to return himself to Spain, in order to procure i5°3.
what was requisite for rendering the establishment
permanent. But the ungovernable spirit of the
people under his command, deprived Columbus
of the glory of planting the first colony on the
continent of America. Their insolence and rapa-
cioufnefs provoked the natives to take arms. and
as they were a more hardy and warlike race of men
than the inhabitants of the islands, they cut off
part of the Spaniards, and obliged the reft to aban-
don a flation which they were unable to maintain $.

THrs repulse, the first that the Spaniards met Shipwreck-

with from any of the American nations, was not cat of a.
the only misfbrtune that besel Columbus; it was maica.
followed by a fucceflion of all the disasters to which
navigation is exposed. Furious hurricanes, with
violent ftornis of thunder and lightning, threat-
ened his leaky vessels with destruCtion, while his
discontented crew, exhaustcd with fatigue, and
destitute of provisions, was unwilling or unable to
execute his commands. One of his flips perish-
ed; he was obliged to abandon another, as unfit
ior fcrvicc; and with the two swhich remained,
he quitted that part of the continent wliich in his
anguifli he named the Coafl of Vexation 1, and
bore away for Hispaniola. New cliflrcics awaited
him in lhis voyage. He was driven back by a vi-
olent tcmpeft from the coast of Cuba, his ships fell

foul

:* Herrera, dec. I. lib. v. c. 5, &c. I.ife of Colrmbuls, c.
b9, &c. Ovicdo, lib. iii. c. 9. 1 La coDla de !os contraltcs ,

B o o K foul of one another, and were so much shattered

II. by the shock, that, with the utmost difficulty, they
^-ór'- reached Jamaica, where he was obliged to run them

sJunl. aground, to prevent them from finking. The mea-

sure of his calamities seemed now to be full. He
was cafl ashore upon an island at a considerable
diflance from the only settlement of the Spaniards
in America. His ships were ruined beyond the
possibility of being repaired. To convey an ac-
count of his situation to Hispaniola, appeared im-
pracicable; and without this it was in vain to ex-
peEt relief. His genius, fertile in resources, and most
vigorous in those perilous extremities when feeble
minds abandon themselves to despair, discovered
the only expedient which afforded any profpedt of
deliverance. He had recourse to the hospitable
kindness of the natives, who, confidering the Spa-
niards as beings of a superior nature, were eager,
on every occasion, to minilter to their wants. From
them he obtained two of their canoes, each formed
out of the trunk of a single tree, hollowed with
fire, and so mis-shapen and aukward as hardly to
merit'the name of boats. In these, which were
fit only for creeping along the coast, or crossing
from one bay to another, Mendez, a Spaniard,
and Fiefchi, a Genoese, two pcntlemen particu-
larly attached to Columbus, gallantly offered to
fct out for Hispaniola, upon a voyage of above
thirty leagues ". This they accomplished in ten
days, after filrmounting incredible dangers, and
enduring such fatigue, that fevcral of the In-
dians who accompanied them funk under it,
and died. The attention paid to them by the
governor of Hispaniola was neither such as their
courage merited, nor the ctillrefs of the perlbns
from whom they came, required. Ovanido, from a

mean
* Ovielo, lib. iii. c. 9.

mean jealousy of Columbus, was afraid of allow- B O 0 K
;ng him to let his foot in the island under his go- II-
vernment. This ungenerous passion hardened his '
heart againit every tender fentimient, which reflec- '53'
tion upon the services and misfortunes of that
great man, or companion for his own fellow-citi-
zens, involved in the fame calamities, must have
excited. Mendez and Fiefchi spent eight months
in soliciting relief for their commander and affo-
ciates, without any profpeEt of obtaining it.

DURING this period, various passions agitated Hisdi reif

the mind of Columbus, and his companions in ad-ingsthere.
verfity. At first the expectation of fpeedydelive-
rance, from the success of Mendez and Fiefchi's
voyage, cheered the spirits of the most despond-
ing. After some time the more timorous began
to fufpeEt that they had miscarried in their daring
attempt. At length, all concluded that they had 5so4,
perished. The ray of hope which had broke in
upon them, made their condition appear now more
difinal. Despair, heightened by disappointment,
fettled in every breast. Their last resource had
failed, and nothing remained but to end their
niilerable days among naked favagcs, far from their
country and their friends. The seamen, in a
transport of rage, rose in open mutiny, threaten-
ed the life of Columbus, whom they reproached
as the author of all their calamities, seized ten
canoes, which he had purchased fiom the Indians,
andl despising his remonstrances and entreaties,
made off with them to a diflant part of the island.
At the fame time, the natives murmured at the
long residence of the Spaniards in their country.
As their indufiry was not greater than that of their
neighbours in Hispaniola, like them, they found
the burden of supporting so many strangers to be
altogether intolerable. They began to bring in
1rovifions with reluAance, they furnished them

wvitl

B O 0 K with a sparing hand, and threatened to withdrawv

II. those supplies altogether. Such a resolution muit

'br^ quickly have been fatal to the Spaniards. Their
45°4 Sfafety depended upon the good-will of the Indians:

and unless they could revive the admiration and re-
verence with which that simple people had at firt
beheld them, deftrution was unavoidable. Though
the licentious proceedings of the mutineers had, il
a great measure, effaced those impressions which
had been so favourable to the Spaniards, the inge-
nuity of Columbus suggested a happy artifice, that
not only restored but heightened the high opillion
which the Indians had originally entertained of
them. By his ikill in astronomy, he knew that
there was shortly to be a total eclipse of the moon.
He assembled all the principal perfonsof the difirift
around him on the day before it happened, and,
after reproaching them for their fickleness in with-
drawing their affection and assistance from nie!-
whom they had lately revered, he told them, that
theSpaniards were servants of the Great Spirit who
dwells in heaven, who made and governs tlic
world; that he, offended at their refuting to sup-
port men who were the objects of his peculiar ta.
vour, was preparing to punish this crime with ex-
emplary severity, and that very night the moon
should withhold her light, and appear of a bloody
hue, as a sign of the divine wrath, and an emblem
of the vengeance ready to fall upon them. 'Jo
this marvellous prediclion fonie of thcll lifiencd
with the careless indifflrence peculiar to the peop!L
of America; others, with the credulous aftonillh-
inent natural to barbarians. But when the mooni
began gradually to be darkened, and at lenlth ap-
peared of a red colour, all were firuck with terror.
They ran with conftcrnation to their houses, aind
returned inflaiitly to Columbus loaded with provi-
4ions, threw them at his feet, conjuring him to ill-

tcrccdc

tercede with the Great Spirit to avert the deftruc- B O O K
tion with which they were threatened. Columbus, II
seeming to be moved by their entreaties, promiled r
to comply with their desire. The eclipse went off, '504
the moon recovered its splendour, and from that
day the Spaniards were not only furnifbied profuse-
ly with provisions, but the natives, with fuperfti-
tious attention, avoided every thing that could
give them offence'.

DURING those tranfaaions, the mutineers had A ruel ad

dition to

made repeated attempts to pa's over to Hispaniola, them.
in the canoes which they had seized. But, from
their own mifcondud, or the violence of the winds
and currents, their cfloris were all unsuccessful.
Enraged at this dilappointmelit, they marched to-
wards that part of the island where Columbus re-
mained, threatening him with new danger and in-
fults. While they were advancing, an event hap-
pened more cruel and afflifing than any calamity
which he dreaded from them. The governor of
Hispaniola, whose mind was still filled with some
dark suspicions of Columbus, tent a Ihlall bark to
Jamaica, not to deliver his difireffed countrymen,
but to spy out their condition. Left the sympathy
of those whom he employed fiould afford them re-
lief, contrary to his intention, he gave the com-
mand of this vcfiel to Elcobar, an inveterate enemy
of Columbus, who adhering to his infiructions
with malignant accuracy, cast anchor at tome dif-
lance from the island, approached thc fitore in a
finall boat, obl'crved the wretched plight of the Spa-
niards, delivered a letter of empty compliment to
the admiral, received his anfwver, and departed.
When the Spaniards firit descried the vessel fland-
ing towards the illand, every heart exulted, as if

the

* ,ife of Columbuls, c. 103. Herrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 5,

6. Bcnzol, Ilil .
. i. i.c. 14.

B O O K the long expe&ed hour of their deliverance had

II. at length arrived; but when it disappeared so fud.

denly, they funk into the deepest dejeftion, and
504- 'all their hopes died away. Columbus alone,

though he felt most sensibly this wanton ilflll
which Ovando added to his past neglect, retained
such composure of mind, as to be able to cheer
his followers. He assured them, that Mendez and
Fiefchi had reached Hispaniola in safety; thai
they would speedily procure ships to carry them
off; and as Efcobar's vessel could not take them
all on board, that he had refused t o go with her,
because he was determined never to abandon the
faithful companions of his distress. Soothed with
the expectation of speedy deliverance, and de-
lighted with his apparent generosity in attending
more to their preservation than to his own safely,
their spirits revived, and he regained their confi-
dence .

WITHOUT this confidence, he could not have

refitfed the mutineers, who were now at hand. All
his endeavours to reclaim those detperate men had
no effec't but to increase their frenzy. Their de-
mands became every day more extravagant, al(l
their intentions more violent and bloody. The
common iately rendered it necessary to oppolc
them with open force. Columbus, who had been
long afflicted' with the gout, could not take the
field. His brother,' the Adclantado, inarchdl
la)y ZU. againlit them. They quickly met. The mutinccr

rejedecl with sorn terms of acconmmodation, whic
he once more offercd iheni, and ruffed on boldly'
to the attack. They fell not upon an (c1enil'i:-
prepared to recciv/e them. In the firfl filocI<, ki-
vcral of their nlotl daring leaders were flaiii. T'1
Adclantado, wl:olc llrcngtl was equal to his cou-

Li of olui

us. c. I4. I rCra, dc rae,l vi. c.
> Lifc of Columbus. c. 1t4. Ilcrrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 17

ra e, closed with their captain, wounded, disarm- B O o K
ed, and took him prisoner*. At fight-of this, I.
the reft fled with a dastardly fear, suitable to their 'r
former insolence. Soon after, they fubnmitted in '54
a body to Columbus, and bound themiclves by
the most solemn oaths to obey all his conmmands.
Hardly was tranquillity re-eltablifhed, when the
ships appeared, whose arrival Columbus had pro-
miled with great address, though he could fore-
fee it with little certainty. With traniports of joy,
ihe Spaniards quitted an island in which the un-
Iceling jealousy of Ovando had suffered them to
languish above a year, exposed to misery in all its
various forms.

WHEN they arrived at St. Domingo, the go- Aug,. 3.
ernor, with the recan artifice of a vulgar mind, , J, an
that labours to atone for insolence by servility, i,-i;,l:a
awlved on the man whom he envied, and had at-
empted to ruin. He received Columbus with the
oft studied refpeld, lodged him in his own house,
d diftinguilhed him with every mark of honour.
ut, amidst those over-a6ced demonfitrations of re-
ard, he could not conceal the hatred and malig-
ity latent in his heart. He set at liberty the cap-
ain of the mutineers, whom Columbus had
rought over, in chains, to be tried for his crinms,
nd threatened such as had adhered to the admi-
al with proceeding to a judicial inquiry into
heir conduct. Columbus lubmitted in silence to
that lie could not redress; but discovered an ex-
reme impatience to quit a country under the ju-
idiction of a man who had treated him, on
very occasion, with inhumanity and injustice.
is preparations were ibon finiihed, and he fct
il for Spain hwith two fiips. Difalhers similar 1o Sept.
hose which had accomipaLied him through life

continued
Life of Columbus, c. r107 Jlcrrcra, dec. 1. lib. vi. c. I.

B O O K continued to pursue him to the end of his career,

I. One of his vessels being disabled, was soon forced
óT ' back to St. Domingo; the other, shattered by vio.
1504. lent storms, failed seven hundred leagues wil
December. jury-mafts, and reached with difficulty the portof

St. Lucar .

Death of THERE he received the account of an event the
NObv.l. most fatal that could have befallen him, and \vhid

completed his misfortunes. This was the death of
his patroness queen Isabella, in whose justice, hu-
manity, and favour, he confided as his last resource.
None now remained to redress his wrongs, or to
reward him for his services and sufferings, but Fcr-
dinand, who had so long opposed and lo often in-
jured him. To solicit a prince thus prejudiced
against him, was an occupation no less irklone
than hopelels. In this, however, was Columbus
doomed to employ the close of his days. As soon
as his health was in some degree re-eflablifhed, he
repaired to court; and though he was received
there with civility barely decent, he plied Ferdi
nand with petition after petition, demanding th
punishment of his oppressors, and the reftution
of all the privileges beflowed upon him by the ca-
pitulation of one thousand four hundred and nine
ty-two. Ferdinand amused him with fair word
and unmeaning promises. Instead of grantin
his claims, he proposed expedients in order!
elude them, and spun out the affair with such ap
parent art, as plainly discovered his intention tha
it should never be terminated. The declinin
health of Columbus flattered Ferdinand with th
hopes of being soon delivered from an importu
nate suitor, and encouraged him to perfeverel
this illiberal plan. Nor was he deceived in hi

expeCLation

" Lifo of Columbus, c. Io8. Herrera, dec. i. lib.
C. 12.

expeaations. Disgusted with the ingratitude of a B O 0 K
monarch whom he had served with such fidelity II
and success, exhausted with the fatigues and hard-
ships which he had endured, and broken with the ,54'
infirmities which these brought upon him, Co-Deathof
lumbus ended his life at Valladolid on the twen- Columbu.
tieth of May one thousand five hundred and fix, 5
in the fifty-ninth year of his age. He died with
a composure of mind suitable to the magnanimity
which distinguished his charaSer, and with senti-
ments of piety becoming that supreme refpec for
religion, which he manifested in every occurrence
of his life t.

t Life of Columbus, c. roS. IHerrera, dec. r. lib. vi. c.
13, 14, 15.

THE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK III.

THE

HISTORY E
H I S T O R Y

OF
A M E R I C A.

B O O K III.

JW HILE Columbus was employed in his last B o 0 K
voyage, several events worthy of notice happened
in Hilfpaniola. The colony there, the parent and
nurle of all the subsequent establishments of Spain stateofthe
in the New World, gradually acquired the formcl,,tlin
of a regular and prosperous society. The humane
Iblicitude of Isabella to protet the Indians from
oppreflion, and particularly the proclamation, by
which the Spaniards were prohibited to compel
them to work, retarded, it is true, for fonme timc,
the progress of improvement, The natives, who
confidered exemption froin toil as supreme feli-
city, scorned every allurement and reward by
lwhich they were invited to labour. The Spani-
ards had not a lullicicnt number of hands either
to work the mines or to cultivate the foil. Seve-
ral of the first colonills, \who had beeLn accufomned
to the service of the Indians, quitted the island,

Vo ,. I. N when

B O O K when deprived of those infiruments without which

II. they knew not how to carry on any opei'a-
'^rs' tion. Many of those who came over with Ovan-

5 do, were seized with the distempers peculiar to

the climate, and in a short space above a thousand
of them died. At the fame time, the demand of
one half of the product of the mines as the royal
share, was found to be an exaction so exorbitant,
that no adventurers would engage to work them
upon such terms. In order to save the colony
from ruin, Ovando ventured to relax the rigour
os.s of the royal edicts. He made a new distribution

of the Indians among the Spaniards, compelling
them to labour, for a flated time, in digging the
mines, or in cultivating the ground; but, in or-
der to screen himself from the imputation of hav-
ing fubjeted them again to servitude, he enjoined
their mafiers to pay them a certain fum, as the
price of their work. He reduced the royal flare
of the gold found in the mines from the half to
the third part, and soon after lowered it to a fifth,
at which it long remained. Notwithitanding Ifa-
bella's tender concern for the good treatment of
the Indians, and Ferdinand's eagerness to improve
the royal revenue, Ovando persuaded the court to
approve of both these regulations:.

War with BUT the Indians, after enjoying respite from
the Indians. oppression, though during a short interval, now

felt the yoke of bondage to be so galling, that they
made several attempts to vindicate their own li-
berty. This the Spaniards confidered as rebel-
lion, and took arms in order to reduce them to
lubje&ion. When war is carried on between na-
tions whose slate of improvement is in any degree
limilar, the means of defence bear some propor-
tion to thoie employed in the attack ; and in this

equal
* Herrera. dec. i. lib, v. c. 3.

equal contest such efforts must be made, such ta- B 0 0 K
lents are displayed, and such passions routed, as III
exhibit mankind to view in a situation no less firik- '-r'
ing than interesting. It is one of the noblest func- '5
tions of history, to observe and to delineate men,
at a juncture when their minds are most violently
agitated, and all their oowers and passions are
called forth. Hence the operations of war, and
the struggles between contending states, have been
deemed by historians, ancient as well as modern,
a capital and important article in the annals of hu-
man adtions, but in a contest between naked sava-
ges, and one of the most warlike of the European
nations, where science, courage, and discipline
on one fide, were opposed by timidity, ignorance,
and dilbrder on the other, a particular detail of
events would be as unpleasant as uninitructive. If
the fluiplicity and innocence of the Indians had
inspired the Spaniards with humanity, had soft-
ened the pride of superiority into companlion, and
had induced them to improve the inhabitants of
the New World, inflead of oppressing them, some
sudden ads of violence, like the too rigorous chaf-
tilenments of impatient inflruftors, might have been
related without horror. But, unfortunately, this
colnfioufncfts of superiority operated in a diffelrent
manner. The Spaniards were advanced f far be-
yond the natives of America in improvement of
every kind, that they viewed them with contempt.
They conceived the Americans to be beings of an
inferior nature, who were not intitled to the rights
and privileges of men. In peace they fubjeled
them to servitude, in war they paid no regard to
thole laws, which, by a tacit convention between
contending nations, regulale hofiility, and set lbnme
bounds to its rage. They confidered them not as
men fighting in defence of their liberty, but as
llaves, who had revolted againt their mailers.

N 'Their

B O OK Their caziques, when taken, were condemned

III- like the leaders of banditti, to the most cruel and
'-ónW ignominious punilhments; and all their fubjets

1505. without regarding the diftinaion of ranks establish

ed among them, were reduced to the fame slate o
abje& slavery. With such a spirit and sentiments
were hostilities carried on against the cazique o
Higuey, a province of the eastern extremity of the
island. This war was occasioned by the perfidy o
the Spaniards, in violating a treaty which they hac
made with the natives, and it was terminated bi
hanging up the cazique, who defended his peopl<
with bravery so far superior to that of his country
men, as intitled him to a better fate ".

The cruel THE conduct of Ovando, in another part of the
and treache- island, was still more treacherous and cruel. The
rous con-
dua of province anciently named Xaragua, which extends
Ovando. from the fertile plain where Leogane is now situ.

ated, to the western extremity of the island, was
subjea to a female cazique, named Anacoana
highly refpeded by the natives. She, from tha
partial fondness with which the women of America
were attached to the Europeans, (the cause of which
shall be afterwards explained) had always courted
the friendship of the Spaniards, and loaded then
with good offices. But some of the adherents of
Roldan having fettled in her country, were cb
much exasperated at her endeavouring to restrain
their excesses, that they accused her of havinl
formed a plan to throw off the yoke, and to exter-
minate the Spaniards. Ovando, though he knew
well how little credit was due to Iuch profligate
men, marched, without further inquiry, towards
Xaragua, with three hundred foot and levcnll
horsemen. To prevent the Indians fromn taking
alarm at this hofiile appearance, he gave out that
his sole intention was to vilit Anacoana, to ;hlioll

* Herrcra, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 9, ic.

his countrymen had been so much indebted, in the B o o I
most refpe6tful manner, and to rcgulate with her II.
the mode of levying the tribute payable to the king v
of Spain. Anacoana, in order to receive this illus- 5
tious guest with due honour, assembled the princi-
pal men in her dominions, to the number of three
hundred, and advancing at the head of these, ac-
companied by a vast croud of persons of inferior
rank, she welcomed Ovando with songs and dan-
ces, according to the mode of the country, and
conduEted him to the place of her residence. There
he was feasted for some days, with all the kindness
of simple hospitality, and amused with the games
and fpedacles usual among the Americans upon oc-
cafions of mirth and festivity. But, amidst the fe-
curity which this inspired, Ovando was meditating
the deflrucion of his unfufpicious entertainer and
her fubjecs ; and the mean perfidy with which he
executed his fchemc, equalled his barbarity in form-
ing it. Under colour of exhibiting to the Indians
the parade of an European tournament, he ad-
vanced with his troops, in battle array, towards
the house in which Anacoana and the chiefs who
attended her were assembled. The infantry took
poffefiion of all the avenues which led to the
village. The horfemcn encompalked the houte.
These movements were the olbjecA of admiration
without any mixture of fear, until, upon a signal
which had been concerted, the Spaniards d(ldcii-
ly dresw their swords, and rushed upon the Indi-
an%, defcncelcfs, and aflonifhed at an ad of trea-
chery which exceeded the conception of unde-
ligning men. In a nmoment Anacoana was Iccured.
All her attendants, were seized and bound. Fire
,was set to the houlf; and, without examination or
convidtion, all thelic unhappy pcrlbns, the most
illuflrious in their owl oncountrl, were confumled
in the flames. Anacoana was rclcxrvcd for a niore

ignominilou

B 0 K ignominious fate. She was carried in chains to

III. St. Domingo, and, after the formality of a trial
^"r before Spanilh judges, she was condemned upon

505. the evidence of those very men who had betrayed

her, to be publicly hanged .

Reduftion OVERAWED and humbled by this atrocious
of the In -
dians, and treatment of their princes and nobles, who were
its effctb ob jects of their highefi reverence, the people in all

the provinces of Hilpaniola submitted, without far-
ther refifiance, to the Spanish yoke. Upon the
death of Isabella, all the regulations tending to mi-
tigate the rigour of their servitude were forgotten.
The finall gratuity paid to them as the price of
1506. their labour was withdrawn; and at the fame time

the tasks imposed upon them were increased. Ovan-
do, without any restraint, difiributed Indians a-
mong his friends in the island. Ferdinand, to
whom the queen had left by will one half of the re-
venue arising from the settlements in the New
World, conferred grants of a similar nature upon
his courtiers, as the least expensive mode of re-
warding their services. They farmed out the In-
dian., of whom they were rendered proprietors, to
their countrymen fettled in Hilpaniola; and that
wretched people, being compelled to labour in or-
der to satisfy the rapacity of botih, the exations of
their oppressors no longer knew any bounds. But,
barbarous as their policy was, and atal to the inha-
bitants of l-lilianiola, it produced for sonic time,
very considerable efiec:s. By calling forth the force
of a whole nation, acnd exerting it in one direl[ioin,
the working of tlhe niines was carried on with a-
mazing rapidity and success. During several years,
the gold brought into the royal fmelting-houfcs in

l:lilalaio];I

" Ovielo, lib. iii. . z. I-E lrrea, dec. 1. lib. xi. . .

4

Oviedo, lib. iii. c. i 2. Rtclacion de dcllruyc. d( lIa Iidi;s, i):tr
Blart. de las Casas, p 8.

Hispaniola amounted annually to four hundred B O O
and sixty thousand pesos, above a hundred thou- Il
sand pounds sterling; which, if we attend to the '
great change in the value of money since the be- 506
ginning of the sixteenth century to the present
times, muff appear an immense fum. Vafi for-
tunes were created, of a sudden, by some. Others
dissipated in ostentatious profusion, what they ac-
quired with facility. Dazzled by both, new ad-
venturers crouded to America, with the molt ea-
ger impatience, to share in those treasures which
had enriched their countrymen; and, notwith-
flanding the mortality occasioned by the unheal-
thinefs of the climate, the colony continued to in-
crease .

OVANDO governed the Spaniards with wisdom Progrefsof

and juflice, not inferior to the rigour with whichth' cCoony.
he treated the Indians. He established equal laws,
and, by executing them with impartiality accuf-
tomed the people of the colony to reverence them.
-le founded several new towns in different parts of
the island, and allured inhabitants to them, by the
concession of various immunities. He endeavour-
ed to turn the attention of the Spaniards to some
branch of industry more useful than that of search-
ing for gold in the mines.- Some flips of the fu-
gar-cane having been brought from the Canary if-
lands by way of experiment, they were found to
thrive with luch increale in the rich foil and warm
climate to which they were transplanted, that the
cultivation of them soon becaine an objeet of cornm
nlerce. Extensive plantations were begun ; figat-
works, which the Spaniards called ingenios, from
the various machinery employed in them, were
erected, and in a few years the nanufaciure of this
conmoiodity was the great occupation of the inha-

bitants
Ilcerreradec. i. lib. vi. c. 18, &c.

B O O K bitants of Hispaniola, and the most considerable

III. source of their wealth .

*sTi!~ THE prudent endeavours of Ovando, to pro.
Politicalre- mote the welfare of the colony, were powerfully
gulationsof eiconded by Ferdinand. The large remittances
Ferdinan which he received from the New World, opened

his eyes, at length, with respect to the importance
of those discoveries, which he hitherto affested to
undervalue. Fortune, and his own address, hav.
lng now extricated him out of those difficulties in
1507. which he had been involved by the death of his

queen, and by his disputes with his fon-in-law
about the government of her dominionst, he had
full leisure to turn his attention to the affairs of
America. To his provident sagacity, Spain is in-
debted for many of those regulations which gradu-
ally formed that system of profound, but jealous
policy, by which she governs her dominions in the
New World. He erested a court, distinguished by
the title of the Casa de Contratacion, or Board of
Trade, composed of persons eminent for rank and
abilities, to whom he committed the administration
of American affairs. This board assembled regu-
larly in Seville, and was inverted with a diftinA
and extenfivejurifdiEtion. ' He gave a regular form
to ecclesiastical government in America, by noni-
nating archbishops, bishops, deans, together with
clergymen of subordinate ranks to take charge
of the. Spaniards eftabliflled there, as well as of
the natives, who should embrace the Chrifliai
faith. But, notwithilanding the oblcquious de-
votion of the Spaniflh court to the Papal Sec,
Ifch was Ferdinand's solicitude to prevent any
foreign power from claiming jurilclitioii, or ac-
quiring influence, in his new dominions, that

lie

Ovildo, lib. iv. C. . o. f (l R i,;,
Charles V. vol. ii. p. 6, (c.

he reserved to the crown of Spain the sole right ofB o 0 K
patronage to the benefices in America, and fti- III.
pulated that no papal bull or mandate should be -
promulgated there, until it was previously exa- 's06
mined and approved of by his council. With the
fame spirit of jealousy, he prohibited any goods
to be exported to America, or any person to set-
tle there, without a special licence from that coun-
cil .

BUT, notwithstanding this attention to the po- Thenum.

lice and welfare of the colony, a calamity impend- dirofs t
ed which threatened its dissolution. The original minifies
inhabitants, on whole labour the Spaniards in Hif-fa'
paniola depended for their prosperity, and even
their existence, wafted so fast, that the extindion
of the whole race seemed to be inevitable. W hen
Columbus discovered Hispaniola, the number of
its inhabitants was computed to be at least a mil-
lion f. They were now reduced to sixty thousand
in the space of fifteen years. This consumption of
the human species, no less amazing than rapid, was
the effect offeveral concurring causes. The natives
of the American islands were of a more feeble con-
ftitution than the inhabitants of the other hemif-
phcre. They could neither perform the fame work,
nor endure the fame fatigue with men whose organs
were of a more vigorous conformation. The in-
adlive indo!lence in which they delighted to pals
tliir days, as it was the ecfecc of their debility, con-
tributcd likewise to increafc it, and rendered them
fromn habit as well as constitution, incapabl e of hard
labour. 'The food on which they fubfilted, allorded
little nourifhnent, and they were accustomed to
takelit iin fnall quantities, not lfulflcient to invigo-
rate a languid frame, and render it equal to the

cltorts

* Hclrrern, dec. i. lib. vi. c. 19. 20.
-) Ibid. dec. i. lib. x. c. 12.

B O O K efforts of industry. The Spaniards, without at-

II. tending to those peculiarities in the constitution of
"Cv the Americans, imposed talks upon them so difpro.
1596 portioned to their strength, that many funk under

the fatigue, and ended their wretched days. Others,
prompted by impatience and derpair, cut short
their own lives with a violent hand. Famine,
brought on by compelling such numbers to aban.
don the culture of their lands, in order to labour in
the mines, proved fatal to many. Diseases of va-
rious kinds, some occasioned by the hardflips to
which they were exposed, and others by their inter-
course with the Europeans, completed the delola-
tion of the island. Being thus deprived of the in.
Ilruments which they were accustomed to em-
ploy, the Spaniards found it impossible to extend
their improvements, or even to carry on the works
i5oS. which they had already begun. In order to pro-

vide an immediate remedy for an evil so alarming,
Ovando proposed to traniport the inhabitants of tih
Lucayo islands to Hispaniola, under pretence that
they might be civilized with more facility, and in-
Ilrucled to greater advantage in the Chriflian re-
ligion, if they were united to the Spaniff colony,
and under the immnediate infpe&ion of the millio-
aries fettled there. Ferdinand, deceived by thin
artifice, or willing to connive at an act of violence
which policy represented as necefthry, gave his ai:
sent to the propolnl. Several vefelis were fittld
out for the Lucayos, the commanders of which il-
folrmed ihe natives, with whole langlage Ihey wec:
now well acquainted, that they came from a delici-
ous country, in whlich their departed anceflors ('-
fidcd, by whom they were lcnt to invite theml to r'-
fort thither, to partakc of the hlils which thcy cti-
joyed. '1 hat lipp!e pceople listened with wocliid(r
and1 credulity ; atl(d, ftond of vifilitngtheir relatiols
and friends ill that happy region, followed the Spa-

nialrds

niards with eagerness. By this artifice, above for- B O O K
tythoufand were decoyed into Hispaniola, tofhare IIL
inl the fuiferings; s hich were the lot of the in- '--
habitants of that island, and to mingle their 1508'
groans and tears with those of that wretched race
of lmen *

THE Spaniards had, for some time, carried on Newdifco-

veries and

their operations in the mines of Hiipaniola with fcttlements.
luch ardour, as well as success, tlat they feeimed to
have engrossed their whole attention. The lfirit
of discovery languiihed; and, since the last voyage
of Columbus, no enterprise of any moment had
been undertaken. But as the decrease of the In-
dians rendered it impossible to acquire wealth in
that island with the fame rapidity as formerly, this
urged them to search for new countries, where their
avarice might be gratified with more facility. Juan
Ponce de Leon, who commanded under Ovando in
the eastern difirit of Hispaniola, passed over to the
illand of St. John de Porto Rico, which Columbus
had discovered in his second voyage, and penetrat-
ed into the interior part of the country. As he found
the foil to be fertile, and expeted from some fymp-
toms, as well as fiom the information of the inha-
bilants, to discover mines of gold in the mountains,
Ovando permitted him to attempt making a lettlc-
nient in the island. This was ealily effleed by an
olliccr eminentic for conclut no less than for courage.
in a few )'cars Porto Rico was fubjedied to the Spa-
'iih government, the natives were reduced to ser-
itudce; and,,being treated with the lamne inconfi-
dicrate rigour as their neighbours in llifpaniola, the
tace of original inhabitants, worn out with fatigue
iid fuffcrings, was toon exterminated f.

ApOUT

' Herlrra, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 3. Oviedo, lilb. iii. c. 6. Go-
TTa IHilL. c. 41.

' icrrern eldec. I. lib. vii. c. 1-4. Gomnara lift. c. 44,
ItlMlcioln c 13. dc la Caftis, p. 10.

13 O O K ABOUT the fame time, Juan Diaz de Solis, in

III conjunction with Vincent Yanez Pinzon, one of

- Columbus's original companions, made a voyage

to the continent. They held the fame course
which Colamnbus had taken, as far as to the 'ila;d
of Guiana; but, standing from thence to tile

cwft, they discovered a new and extensive pro-

-vince, afterwards known by the name of Yucatan,
and proceeded a considerable way along the coait
of that country '. Though nothing memorable
occurred in this voyage, it deserves notice, becaule
it led to diicoveries of greater importance. For
the fame reason, the voyage of Sebastian de Ocanm-
po must be mentioned. By the command of
Ovando, he failed round Cuba, and first discover-
ed, with certainty, that this country, which Co-
lumbus once supposed to be a part of the continent,
was a large island t.

Plies Co- THIS voyage round Cuba was one of the la.
pointed go- occurrences under the administration of Ovando.
vcrnorof Ever since the death of Columbus, his son Doi
ifpaniola. Diego had been employed in soliciting Ferdinand

to grant him the offices of viceroy and admiral in
the New World, together with all the other in:-
nunities and profits which dclccndcd to him by il-
heritance, in consequence of the original capitula-
tion with his father. But if these dignities and re-
venues appeared lb considerable to Ferdinand, that
;it the expence of being deemed unjust as well as
inllgr(teful, he had wrested them froni Columbus, it
is not surprising that he should be unwilling to con-
for them on his son. Accordingly, Don Diego
waflcd two years in incefiant but fruitlcfs iniportu-
nily. XV'ca y of this, he endeavoured at length to
oltaii l:y a ;i :gal lentence, what he could not pro-

Clll'c

k' if -rre;r, idec. i. libt. vi. c. 17.
; llid. lib. vii. c. i.

cure from the favour of an interefled monarch. B 0 OK
He commenced a suit against Ferdinand before the II
council that managed Indian affairs, and that court, ' -'
with integrity which reflects honour upon its pro- 5
ceedings, decided against the king, and iufai;cd
Don Diego's claim of the vice-royalty, and all thi
other'privilegesftipulated in the capitulation. Even
after this decree, Ferdinand's repugnance to put a
subjet in poffeflion of such extenlive rights, might
have thrown in new obstacles, if Don Diego had
not taken a ftep which interefled very powerful
persons in the success of his claims. The sentence
of the council of the Indies gave him a title to a
rank so elevated, and a fortune so opulent, that he
found no difficulty in concluding a narriage with
Donna Maria, daughter of Don Ferdinand de To-
ledo, great commendator of Leon, and brother of
the duke of Alva, a grandee of the first rank, and
nearly related to the king. The duke and his fa-
mily espoused so warmly the cause of their new
ally, that Ferdinand could not refifi their folicita-
tions. He recalled Ovando, and appointed Don l509
Diego his successor, though, even in conferring
this favour, he could not conceal his jealouly;
for he allowed him to assume only the title of go-
vernor, not that of viceroy, which had been ad-
judged to belong to himn.

HE soon repaired to Hispaniola, attended by Herepairsto

his brother, his uncles, his wife, whom the cour- Hilifp"'Qla.
tefy of the Spaniards honoured with the title of
vice-queen, and a numerous retinue of persons of
both sexes, born of good families. He lived with
afplendour and magnificence hitherto unknown in
the New World; and the family of Columbus
feeined now to enjoy the honours and rewards due
to his inventive genius, of which he himself had

been
* Hcrrcra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 4, &'

B O O K ben cruelly defirauded. The colony itself acquir.

III. ed new lustre by the accession of so many inhabi.

tants of a different rank and character from most
J159. of those who had hitherto migrated to America,

and many of the most illustrious families in the
Spanish settlements are descended from the per-
sons who at that time accompanied Don Diego Co.
lumbus*.

No benefit accrued to the unhappy natives from

this change of governors. Don Diego was not only
authorised by a royal edit to continue the reparti-
mientos, or distribution of Indians, but the parti.
cular number which he might grant to every per-
son, according to his rank in the colony, was ipe-
cified. He availed himself of that permission;
and soon after he landed at St. Domingo, he divid-
ed such Indians as were still unappropriated, a-
mong his relations and attendants-.

Pearl fihery THE next care of the new governor was to com-
of Cubagua. ply with an infiruction which he received from the

king, about fettling a colony in Cubagua, a small
island which Columbus had discovered in his third
voyage. Though this barren spot hardly yielded
subsistence to its wretched inhabitants, such quan-
ititcs of those oyflers which produce pearls were
found on its coafi, that it did not long efcapc the
inquisitive avarice of the Spaniards, and became a
place of considerable retort. Large fortunes were
acquired by the fifhcry of pearls, which was car-
ried on with extraordinary ardour. The Indians,
especially those from the Lucayo islands, were
compelled to dive for them ; and this dangerous
and unhealthy cmploynment was an additional cala-
mity, which collributed not a little to the extinc-
tion of that devoted racc.

ABOUT

* Oviedo, lib. iii. c. i. '' Rccopilacion de Leyes, lib. vi. tit.

8.1. 1, 2. Hlrera, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 1o. 4 Herrera, dec. I.
lib. vii. c. 9. Goniara Hilt. c. 78.

ABOUT this period, Juan Diaz de Solis and Pin- B 0 0 K
zon set out, in conjuncEion, upon a second voyage. III.
They flood directly south, towards the equinotial -
line, which Pinzon had formerly crofTed, and ad- Nes9
vanced as far as the fortieth degree of bouthern la- ases.
titude. They were astonished to find that the con-
tinent of America stretched, on their right hand,
through all this vafi extent of ocean. They land-
ed in different places, to take possession in the
name of their sovereign; but though the country
appeared to be extremely fertile and inviting, their
force was so finall, having been fitted out rather
for difcoveiy than making settlements, that they
left no colony behind them. Their voyage, ferv-
ed, however, to give the Spaniards more exalted
and adequate ideas with reiped to the dimensions
of this new quarter of the globe*.

THOUGH it was above ten years since Columbus Afettlemcnt
had discovered the main land of America, the Spa- o 'i-
rniards had hitherto made no fettlernent in any part temjptcd
of it. What had been so long negleced was now
ltrioufly attempted, and with considerable vigour,
though the plan for this purpose was neither form-
ed by the crown, nor executed at the expence of
the nation, but carried on by the enterprising spirit
of private adventurers. This Icheme took its rife
fro Alonfo de Ojeda, who had already made two
voyages as a dicfoverer, by which he acquired con-
iderable reputation, but no wealth. But his cha-
r,'ter for intrepidity and conduct easily procured
;iii associates, who advanced the money requisite
to defiay the charges of the expedition. About
he tame time, Diego de Nicueffa, who had acquir-
( a large fortune in Hispaniola, formed a linilar
Icinil. Ferdinand encouraged both; and though
refuted to advance the finalleft flin, was cx-

trelely
* Herrcra, dec. i. lib. vii. c. 9.

B 0 0 K tremely liberal of titles and patents. He erected

III. two governments on the continent, one extending
d"óT from Cape de Vela to the gulf of Darien, and the
50°9' other from that to Cape Gracias a Dios. The for-

mer was given to Ojeda, the latter to Nicuefla.
Ojeda fitted out a ihip and two brigantines wiih
three hundred men; Nicueffa, fix vessels, with
seven hundred and eighty men. They failed about
the fame time from St. Domingo for their refpe&ive
governments. In order to give their title to thole
countries obme appearance of validity, several of
the most eminent divines and lawyers in Spain were
employed to prescribe the mode in which they
Ihould take possession of them*. There is not in
the history of mankind any thing more singular or
extravagant than the form which they devised for
this purpose. They inftru&ted those invaders, as
soon as they landed on the continent, to declare to
the natives the principal articles of the Christian
faith; to acquaint them, in particular, with the
supreme jurifdi&ion of the Pope over all the king-
doms of the earth; to inform them of the grant
which this holy pontiff had made of their country
to the king of Spain; to require them to embrace
the doFtrines of that religion which they nmade
known to them; and to submit to the fovclrein
whose authority they proclaimed. If they rcfu!id
to comply with this requisition, the terms of which
must have been utterly incomprehensible to an ull
inftruaed Indian, then Ojeda and Nicueffa were
authorised to attack them with livord and fire; to
reduce them, their wives and children, to a fate
of fcrvitude ; and to compel them by force to re
cognize thei jnril'li'tion of the church, and the
authority of the Ilonarch, to which they woul
not voluntarily fubjeEt thcnllelvesl-.

I-Herrera, dec. i. lib.vii. c. 15. -j Sec NOTE XXIIf

As the inhabitants of the continent could not B O O K

at once yield assent to doarines too refined for III.
their uncultivated understandings, and explained -g----
to them by interpreters imperfeEtly acquainted .s59·
with their language ; as they did not conceive how ters attend-
a foreign priest, of whom they had never heard, is it.
could have any right to dilpofe of their country,
or how an unknown prince should claim jurildic-
tion over them as his fubjeis; they fiercely op-
poled the new invaders of their territories. Ojeda
and Nicueffa endeavoured to efledt by force what
they could not accomplish by persuasion. The
contemporary writers enter into a very minute de-
tail in relating their tranfacfiions; but as they made
no discovery of importance, nor established any
permanent settlement, their adventures are not
intitled to any considerable place in the general
history oF a period, where romantic valour, firug-
gling with incredible hardships, distinguish every
effort of the Spanish arms. They found the na-
tives in those countries of which they went to ai:-
fume the government, to be of a chara&er very dif-
ferent from that of their countrymen in the islands.
They were fierce and warlike. Their arrows \were
dipped in a poilon so noxious, that every wound
wvas followed with certain death. In one encounter
they cut off above seventy of Ojeda's followers, and
the Spaniards, for the first time, were taught to
dread the inhabitants of the New World. Nicuefla
was opposed by people equally rclblute in defence
of their poffcllions. Nothing could ioften their
ferocity. Though the Spaniards employed every
art to soothe them, and to gain their confidence,
they refuied to hold any intcrcourfe, or to ex-
change any friendly office, wlith men whole rcfi-
dence among them they conlidered as fatal to their
liberty and indpclndenlce. This implacable en- 5o10:
nmity of the nativcs, though it rendered it extreme-

VOL. I. ° ly

B O O K difficult as well as dangerous to establish a fettle.

III. ment in their country, might have been surmount.
'brJ' ed at length by the perseverance of the Spaniards,

'510' by the superiority of their arms, and their skill in

the art of war. But every difaiter which can be
accumulated upon the unfortunate, combined to
complete their ruin. The loss of their ships by
various accidents upon an unknown coast, the dif.
cafes peculiar to a climate the most noxious in all
America, the want of provisions, unavoidable in a
country imperfeatly cultivated, dissention among
themselves, and the incessant hostilities of the na.
tives, involved them in a fucceflion of calamities,
the bare recital of which strikes one with horror.
Though they received two considerable reinforce-
ments from Hispaniola, the greater part of those
who had engaged in this unhappy expedition, pe-
rifhed, in less than a year, in the most extreme ni-
fery. A few who survived, fettled as a feeble
colony at Santa Maria el Antigua, on the gulf l
Darien, under the command of Vasco Nugnez de
Balboa, who in the most dcfperate exigencies, dif.
played such courage and conduct, as first gained
the confidence of his countrymen, and marked hii'
out at their leader in more fplcndid and fuccclsful
undertakings. Nor was he the only adventurer in
this expedition who will appear with lustre in nlmor
important scenes. Francis Pizarro was one oc
Ojeda's companions, and in the school of adversity
acquired or improved the talents which fitted himn
for the extraordinary actions which he afterwards
performed. Ferdinand Cortes, whole name be-
came still more famous, had engaged early in this
enterprise, which roused all the adivc youth of
Hispaniola to arms; but the good fortune which
accompanied him in his fublequent advcnturcs,
interpoled to save him from the dilafters to which
his companions were expoled. HIc was taken ill at

St.

St. Domingo before the departure of the fleet, and B o o K
detained there by that indisposition*. III

NOTWITHSTANDING the unfortunate issue of '5

this expedition, the Spaniards were not deterred con~sei of
from engaging in new schemes of a iimilar nature. Cuba.
When wealth is acquired gradually by the perie-
vering hand of industry, or accumulated by the
flow operations of regular commerce, the means
employed are so proportioned to the end attained,
that there is nothing to firike the imagination, and
little to urge upon the acive powers of the mind
to uncomnon efforts. But when large fortunes
were created almost instantaneously; when gold
and pearls were procured in exchange for baubles;
when the countries which produced these rich
commodities, defended only by naked savages,
might be seized by the first bold invader; objets
so singular and alluring, rouzed a wonderful spirit
of enterprize among the Spaniards, who rushed
with ardour into this new path that was opened to
wealth and diftindion. While this spirit conti-
nued warm and vigorous, every attempt either to-
wards discovery or conquest was applauded, and
adventurers engaged in it with emulation. The
paflion for new undertakings, which chara&terifes
the age of discovery in the latter part of the isth
and beginning of the i6th century, would alone
have been sufficient to prevent the Spaniards from
flopping short in their career. But circumstances
peculiar to I-Iilfpaiiola at this juncture concurred
with it in extending their navigation and conquefls.
The rigorous treatment of the inhabitants of that
island having almost extirpated the race, many of
the Spanifi planters, as I have already observed,
finding it impofible to carry on their works with

0 2 the

IIerrera, dec. I. lib. vii. c. 1, &c. Gomara Hilt. c.

57, 58, 59. Benzun. IIilt. lib. i. c. 19-23. P. Martyr,
decadC. 122. '

B 0 O K the fame vigour and profit, were obliged to look

II'. out for settlements in some country whose people

were not yet wafted with oppression, Others, with
3510. the inconsiderate levity natural to men upon whom

wealth pours in with a sudden flow, had squander-
ed, in thoughtless prodigality, what they had ac-
quired with ease, and were driven by necessity to
embark in the most desperate schemes, in order to
5sII. retrieve their affairs. From all there causes, when

Don Diego Columbus proposed to conquer the if.
land of Cuba, and to eflablifh a colony there, many
persons of chief difiintion in Hispaniola engaged
with alacrity in the measure. He gave the com-
mand of the troops destined for that service to I)i-
ego Velasquez, one of his father's companions in
his second voyage, and who, having been long set-
tied in Hispaniola, had acquired an ample fortune,
with such reputation for probity and prudence,
that he seemed to be well qualified for conducting
an expedition of importance. Three hundred men
were deemed sufficient for the conquest of an island
above fevcn hundred miles in length, and filled
with inhabitants. But they were of the fame un-
warlike chara&er with the people of Hispaniola.
They were not only intimidated by the appearance
of their new enemies, but unprepared to refifl
them. .For though, from the time that the Spani-
ards took poflefiion of the adjacent islands, there
was reason to expe&t a descent on their territories,
none of the Iniall communities into which Cuba
was divided, had either made any provision for
its own defence, or had formed any concert for
their common safety. The only obstruction the
Spaniards met with was fiom Hatuey, a cazique,
who had fled from Hifpaniiola, and taken polfcf-
sion of the eaflern extremity of Cuba. He flood
upon the defensive at their firli landing, and in-
deavoured to drive them back to their fliips.
r sHiis

His feeble troops, however, were soon broken and B 0 0 K
dispersed; and he himself being taken prisoner, III.
Velasquez, according to the barbarous maxim of 9
the Spaniards, confidered him as a slave who had I5"
taken arms against his master, and condemned him
to the flames. When Hatuey was faflened to the
stake, a Francifcau friar labouring to convert him,
promised him immediate admittance into the joys
of heaven, if he would embrace the Christian faith.
"Are there any Spaniards," fays he, after some
pause, " in that region of bliss which you describe?"
" Yes," replied the monk, " but only such as are
worthy and good." " The best of them," re-
turned the indignant cazique, " have neither worth
nor goodness; I will not go to a place where I
may meet with one of that accursed race" ". This
dreadful example of vengeance struck the people of
Cuba with such terror, that they fearcely gave any
opposition to the progress of their invaders; and
Velasquez, without the loss of a man, annexed this
extensive and fertile island to the Spanish mo-
narchy t.

THE facility with which this important conquet Discovery

was completed, fcrved as an incitement to other un- of Floria.
dertakings. Juan Ponce de Leon, having acquired
both fame and wealth by the reduction of Porto
Rico, was impatient to engage in fonie new enter-
prile. He fitted out three ships at his own ex- 151z.
pence, for a voyage of discovery, and his reputa-
tion soon drew together a respectable body of fol-
lowers. He directed his course towards the Lucayo
inands; and after touching at several of them, as
well as of the Bahama isles, he flood to the south-
weft, and discovered a country hitherto unknown

to

* 3. dc lais Cafta, p. 40. 1 I-Icrrera, dec . . Iib. ir.
c. 2, 3, &c. Ovicdo, lib. xvii. c. 3, p. 179.

B O O K to the Spaniards, which he called Florida, either

IlI. because he fell in with it on Palm Sunday, or on

account of its gay and beautiful appearance. He
attempted to land in different places, but met with
such vigorous opposition from the natives, who
were fierce and warlike, :s convinced him that an
increase of force was requisite to effeEt a fetilement.
Satisfied with having opened a communication
with a new country, of whose value and impor-
tance he conceived very sanguine hopes, he return-
ed to Porto Rico, through the channel now known
by the name of the Gulf of Florida.

IT was not merely the passion of searching for

new countries that prompted Ponce de Leon to un-
dertake this voyage, he was influenced by one of
those visionary ideas which at that time often min-
gled with the spirit of discovery, and rendered it
more enterprising. A tradition prevailed among
the natives of Porto Rico, that in the isle of Bi-
mini, one of the Lucayos, there was a fountain of
such wonderful virtue as to renew the youth, and
recall the vigour of every person who bathed in its
salutary waters. In hopes of finding this grand re-
florative, Ponce de Leon and his followers ranged
through the islands, searching, with fruitless folici-
tude and labour for the fountain, which was the
chief object of their expedition, That a tale lb fa-
bulous should gain credit among simple uninfitruqed
Indians is not surprising. That it ihould make any
imprefion upon an enlightened people appears, in
the present age, altogether incredible. The fat,
however, is certain; and the moit authentic Spa-
nifh hiftoriansmention this extravagantfallyof their
credulous countrymen. The Spaniards, at that pe-
riod, were engaged in a career of afcivity which
gave a romantic turn to their imagination, and
daily prclcnted to them firange and marvellous

olbjcCs.

obje&s. A New World was opened to their view. B O O K
They visited islands and continents of whose ex- III.
iftence mankind in former ages had no conception. '~r
In those delightful countries nature seemed to as- 15's'
fume another form; every tree and plant and ani-
mal was different from those of the ancient hemif-
phere. They seemed to be transported to enchant-
ed ground; and, after the wonders which they
had seen, in the warmth and novelty of their ad-
miration, nothing appeared to them so extraordina-
ry as to be beyond belief. If the rapid succession
of new and striking scenes made such impression
even upon the found understanding of Columbus,
that he boafled of having found the feat of Paradise,
it will not appear strange that Ponce de Leon should
dream of discovering the fountain of youth ".

SOON after the expedition to Florida, a dilco- Progres of

Balboa in

very of much greater importance was made in ano- Darien.
ther part of America. Balboa having been raised
to the government of the small colony at Santa
Maria in Darien, by the voluntary suffrage of his
associates, was so extremely desirous to obtain from
the crown a confirmation of their election, that he
dispatched one of his officers to Spain, in order to
solicit a royal commiflion, which might invert him
with a legal title to the supreme command. Con-
fcious, however, that he could not expect success
from the patronage of Ferdinand's miniflers, with
whom he was unconncted, or from negociating in
a court to the arts of which he was a firanger, he
endeavoured to merit the dignity to which he as-
pired, and aimed at performing Tome signal service
that would secure him the preference to every

competitor.

* P. Martyr, decad. p. 202. Enrfayo Chronol. para la Hifl.

id la Florida, por D. Gab. Cardenas, p. i. Oviedo, lib.
xvi. c. 1 . Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. S. Hifl. de la Con ..
de la Florida, par Garc. de la Vega, lib, . c. 3.

B O O K competitor. Full of this idea, he made frequent

III- inroads into the adjacent country, subdued several

1w' of the caziques, and colleded a considerable quan-

tity of gold, which abounded more in that part of
the continent than in the islands. In one ofthole
excursions, the Spaniards contended wvih iuch ca-
gernefs about the division of omic gold, that they
were at the point of proceeding to ads of violence
against one another. A young cazique, who was
present, aflonifhed at the hith value which they !et
upon a thing. of which he did not dilccern the ule,
tumbled the gold out of the balance with indigna-
tion; and, turning to the Spaniards, "Why do
you quarrel (fays he) about such a trifle? If you are
so paflionately fond of gold, as to abandon your
own country, and to disturb the tranquillity of
distant nations for its fake, I will conduct you to a
region whcre the metal which fecms to be the chief
objea of your admiration and desire, is so common
that the meaneit utensils are formed of it." Tranf-
ported with what they heard, Balboa and his com-
panions inquired eagerly where this happy country
lay, and how they might arrive at it. He informed
them that at the diflance of fix funs, that is of fix
days journey towards the south, they should dilco-
ver another ocean, near to which this wealthy
kingdom was situated; but if they intended to at-
tack that powerful fiate, they mull afiemble forces
far superior in number and strength to thofc with
which they now appeared I.

T'le T'i-Is was the firfi information which the Spa-
£chlcmies
whicE l niaridsreceived concerningthe great fouthtrnocean,
forms, or the opulent and extensive country known aficr-

wards by the name of Peru. Balboa had now bc-
fore him objeas suitcd to his bouudlcls ambition,

anti

IHerrern, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 2. Con nra, c. Co. P.
Martyr, Dccad. p. I149.

and the enterprising ardour of his genius. He B 0OK
immediately colcluded the ocean which the cazi- IIL
que mentioned, to be that for which Columbus
had searched wiitout success in this part of Ame- '5- '
rica, il hopes of opening a more direc coinmuiiri-
catioIl with the East Indies, and he conicitured
that the rich territory which had been dicfribed to
1iiin, must be part of that vast and opulent region
of the earth. Elated with the idea of performing
what so great a man had attempted in vain ; and
eager to accomplish a discovery which he knew
would be no lets acceptable to the king than be-
ieficial to his country, he was impatient until he
could set out upon this enterprise, in comparison
of which all his former exploits appeared incon-
fiderablc. But previous arrangement and prepa-
ration were requisite to ensure success. He began
rith courting and securing the friendship of the
clighbouring caziques. He sent some of his of-
ficers to Hiipaniola, with a large quantity of gold,
as a proof of his past fucceis, and an earnest of
Lis future hopes. By a proper distribution of
ihis, they secured the favour of the governor,
and allured volunteers into the service. A confi-
derable reinforcement from that island joined him,
a;:d he tholught himself in a condition to attempt
ti:e discovery.

'1-i , iihmius of Daricn is not above sixty miles Difficulty o
ii breadth, but this neckl of land, which bindsLxecuti"n5
,1li('cther the continents of North and South Ame-
rica, is firengthened by a chain of lofty) mountains
lrcetchinig through its whole extent, which render
11 barrier of lolidity fifficicnt to refifl the impulle
0I o

Iw o(pposite oceans. l'he mountains are co-
lcred wirthLl sifts almofi inaccelfible. The vallc's
i that mll oi climate, where it rains during two
I[lilds or' Ihe year, arc marshy, and fb fIrcquently
a\crllovcdt, lthat the inhabitants find it neccf3lry,

in

B 0 0 K in many places, to build their houses upon trees,

III. in order to be elevated at some distance from the
s'~~ damp foil, and the odious reptiles ingendered in
S 2- the putrid waters'. Large rivers rush down \\itli

an impetuous current from the high grounds. In
a region thinly inhabited by wandering savages,
the hand of industry had done nothing to mitigate
or corre&t those natural disadvantages. To march
across this unexplored country, with no other
guides but Indians, whose fidelity could be little
trusted, was, on all there accounts, the boldest en.
terprife on which the Spaniards had hitherto enl.
tured in the New World. But the intrepidity of
Balboa was such as distinguished him among his
countrymen, at a period when every adventurer
3 was conspicuous for daring courage. Nor was

bravery his only merit, he was prudent m condui,
generous, affable, and possessed of those popular
talents which, in the most desperate undertakings,
inspire confidence and secure attachment. Evci
after the juntion of the volunteers from Hifpa-
niola, he was able to mutler only an hundred and
ninety men for his expedition. But they were
hardy veterans, inured to the climate of America,
and ready to follow him through every danger. A
thousand Indians attended them to carry their pro-
visions; and to complete Iheir warlike array, they
took with them several of those fierce dogs, whicl
were no less formidable than deftruEive to their
naked enemies.

I)i(cover., BA .kOA set out upon this important expediiion
tseouLh on the firfi of September, about the lime that thic

periodical rains began lo abate. IHe proceeded
by sea, and without any difficulty, to the territories
of a cazilque, whole friendship he had gained
but no sooner did he begin to advance into the i-

tcrir
P. Marlyr, decad. p. 158.

terior part of the country, than he was retarded B O O K
by every obstacle which he had reason to appre- II
hend, from the nature of the territory, or the "" '
disposition of its inhabitants. Some of the cazi-
ques, at his approach, fled to the mountains with
all their people, and carried off or destroyed
whatever could afford fubfiflence to his troops.
Others collected their subjects, in order to oppose
his progress, and he quickly perceived what an
arduous undertaking it was, to condut such a
body of men through hostile nations, across swamps
and rivers, and woods, which had never been
paifed but by straggling Indians. But by sharing
in every hardship with the meanefi soldier, by
appearing the foremost to meet every danger, by
promising confidently to his troops the enjoyment
of honour and riches superior to the most luccefs-
ful of his countrymen, he inspired them with such
e;lthufiaftic resolution, that they followed him with-
out murmuring. When they had penetrated a
good way into the mountains, a powerful cazique
appeared in a narrow pass, with a numerous body
of his fubjeds to obflrua their progress. But
men who had surmounted so many obstacles, de-
spiled the opposition of such feeble enemies.
They attacked them with ilnpetuofity, and hav-
inlg dispersed them with much ease and great
laughtcr, continued their march. Though their
guides had represented the breadth of the ifthnius
to be only a journey of fix days, they had already
Ipent twenty-five in forcing their way through the
woods and mountains. Many of them were ready
to fink under such uninterrupted fatigue in that
flltry climate, several were seized with the dilfales
peculiar to the country, and all became impatient
lo reach the period of their labours and suser-
ings. At length the Indians assurcd them, that,

front

B O K from the top of the next mountain they fhouk

III- discover the ocean which was the object of theii
^^r^ withes. When, with infinite toil, they had climb.

J513 ed up the greater part of that steep ascent, Bslbo;

commanded his men to halt, and advanced alone
to the fumnmit, that he might be the first who should
enjoy a fpetacle which he had so long desired,
As soon as he beheld the South Sea firetching in
endless profpeet below him, he fell on his knees,
and, lifting up his hands to Heaven, returned
thanks to God, who had conducted him to a dif-
covery so beneficial to his country, and so ho-
nourable to himself. His followers, observing his
transports of joy, rushed forward to join in his
wonder, exultation and gratitude. They held on
their course to the shore with great alacrity, when,
Balboa advancing up to the middle in the waves
with his buckler and fwvord, took poffeflion of
that ocean in the name of the king his mailer,
and vowed to defend it, with there arms, against
all his enemies%.

TH AT part of the great Pacific or Southern ocean

which Balboa first discovered, still retains the nanm
of the Gulph of St. Michael, which he gave to it,
and is situated to the eaif of Panama. From fevc-
ral of the petty princes, who governed in the di.
Strids adjacent to that gulf, he extorted provifionls
and gold by force of arms. Others Lent them to
him voluntarily. To these acceptable presents,
some of the caziques added a considerable quanl-
tity of pearls; and he learned from them, will)
much satisfaction, that pearl oysters abounded iii
the lea which he had newly discovered.

TO Gc. Tili I

* Ilerrer;), d(Ici.I. lib. x, c. i, &c. Gomara c. ( ;, ac'
P. Miuryr, tdcad. p. 205, &c.

TOGETHER with the acquisition of this wcalth, B 0 o K
which icrved to soothe and encourage his followers, III1
he received accounts which confirmed his sanguine n"
hopes of future and more extensive benefits fronm H,'crives
the expedition. All the people on the coast of the il,,;,latio
South Sea, concurred in informing him that there a;n;o,.,
was a mighty and opulent kingdom situated at alent'coL""
considerable distance towards the eai, the inhabi- t'
tants of which had tame animals to carry their
burdens. In order to give him an idea of these,
they drew upon the sand the figure of the Llamas
or sleep, afterwards found in Peru, which the Pe-
ruvians had taught to perform such fcrvices as they
described. As the Llama, in its form, nearly re-
Ientbles a carnal, a beast of burden deemed pe-
culiar to Alia, this circumfiance, in conjunclion
with the discovery of the pearls, another noted
produation of that country, tended to confirm
the Spaniards in their mistaken theory with rel-
eft to the vicinity of the New World to the East
Indies *.

BUT though the information which Balboa rc, obi;,et to
eived from the people on the coast, as well as his "tuI""'
wn conjectures and hopes, rendered him extreme-
y impatient to visit this unknown country, his pru-
nce restrained him from attempting to invade it
ith an handful of men, exhausted by fatigue, and
eakened by difeafcs-f. He determined to lead
ick his followers, at present, to their settlement
Santa Maria in Darien, and to return next leafon
ith a force more adequate to such an arduous en-
rprize. In order to acquire a more extensive
towledge of the isthmus, he marched back by a
iercnt route, which he found to be no less dan-
erous and difficult than that which he had for-
rly taken. But to men elated with fucccfs, and

animated
'llerrcra, dec. I. lib. x. c. 2. Sec NOTE XXIV.

BO K animated with hope, nothing is unfurmounta.

III. ble. Balboa returned to Santa Maria, from
s-rbd which he had been absent four months, with

i54. greater glory, and more treasure, than the Spa.

niards had acquired in any expedition in the
New World. None of Balboa's officers diflin.
guifhed himself more in this service than Fran.
cisco Pizarro, or assisted with greater courage and
ardour in opening a communication with those
countries, in which he afterwards aFted such an
illustrious part '.

Pedrarias BALBOA'S first care was to fend information to
govedorof Spain of the important discovery which he had
Larien. made; and to demand a reinforcement of a thou.

sand men, in order to attempt the conquest of that
opulent country, concerning which hehad received
such inviting intelligence. The first account of the
discovery of the New World hardly occasioned
greater joy than the unexpe6ted tidings, that apaf.
sage was at last found to the great southern ocean
The communication with the East Indies, by
course to the westward of the line of debarkation
drawn by the Pope, seemed now to be certain
The vast wealth which flowed into Portugal fro
its settlements and conquests in that country, c
cited the envy and called forth the emulation
other flates. Ferdinand hoped now to come in s
a ihare in this lucrative commerce, and in hise
gernefs to obtain it, was willing to make an e
beyond what Balboa required. But even in this c
crtion, his jealous policy, as well as the fatal an
pathy of Foufeca, now bishop of Burgos, to e
ry man of merit who distinguished hinimelf in
New World, were conllpicuous. Notwithftan
ing Balboa's recent services, which marked I
out as the Inoft proper person to finifli that gr

undcrltak

i I1,.rrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. '.- (6. Gomara. c. 6i. P1'
tyr, dtec. p. 299, &c.

undertaking which he had begun, Ferdinand was B o o K
lb ungenerous as to overlook these, and to appoint iI.
Pedrarias Davila governor of Darien. He gave -¥'
hiim the command of fifteen flout vefTels, and '5'
twelve hundred soldiers. Thele were fitted out at
the public expence, with a liberality which Ferdi-
nand had never displayed in any former ariia-
mernt deflined for the New WVorld; and luch was
the ardour of the Spanifl gentlemen to followr a
leader who was about to conduct them to a coun-
try, where, as fame reported, they had only to
throw their nets into the sea, and draw out gold-,
that fifteen hundred embarked on board the fleer,
and if they had not been restrained, a much great-
er number would have engaged in the service -1.

PI)DRARIAS reached the gulph of Darien with -
out any remarkable accident, and immediately sent
some of his principal officers ashore, to inrforrn Bal-
boaof his arrival, with the king's conlmnilion, to
be governor of the colony. To their aftoiifh-
ment, they found Balboa, of whose great exploits
they had heard so much, and of whose opulence
they had formed such high ideas, clad in a canvas
jacket, with {hoes made of packthread, employed,
together with some Indians, in thatching his own
hut with reeds. Even in this simple garb, which
corresponded so ill with the expectations and wishes
of his new guests, Balboa received them with dig-
nity. The fame of his dilioveries had drawn so
lany adventurers from the islands, that he could
noIvmuifer four hundred and fifty men. At the
head of those daring veterans, he was more than
match for the forces which Pedrarias brought
tith him. Bqt though his troops murmured loud-
y at the injustice of the Icing in superseding their

conlmander,

*Herrera, dec. i. ;i!, :. /

. ? Ibid. dec. . lib. x.
6. 7. P. Martyr, dec. p. .1/7, 15'.

B O O K commander, and complained that firangers would

II now reap the fruits of their toil and success, Bal-

CT6' boa submitted with implicit obedience to the wrill
I514, of his sovereign, and received Pedrarias with all

the deference due to his character '.

Dissention NOTWITHSTANDING this moderation of Bal-
between
him and boa, to which Pedrarias owed the peaceable pof-
Balboa. session of his government, he appointed a judicial

inquiry to be made into his conduct while under
the command of Nicueffa and Elicifo, and inmpf.
ed a considerable fine upon him, on account of the
irregularities of which he had then been guilty.
Balboa felt sensibly the mortification of being sub-
jected to trial and to puniihment in a place w-here
he had so lately occupied the firit station. Pedra.
rias could not conceal his jealousy of his superior
merit; so that the resentment of the one, and the
envy of the other, gave rife to dissentions extreme-
ly detrimental to the colony. It was threatened
with a calamity flill more fatal. Pedrarias had
July. landed in Darien at a most unlucky time of the

year, about the middle of the rainy ieafon, in that
part of the torrid zone where the clouds pour dow
such torrents as are unknown in more temperat
climates -. The village of Santa Maria was featc
in a richli plain, environed with marshes and woods
The constitution of Europeans was unable to with
fland the pestilential influence of such a situation
in a climate naturally so noxious, and at a fealon
peculiarly unhealthy. A violent and dellruqiv
malady carried off many of the soldiers who a
companied Pedrarias. An extreme scarcity
provisions augmented this distress, as it rcudcre
it impossible to find proper refrefihncnt for t

sic

* Herrcra, dec. i. lib. x. c. 13, 1i. -. Riclarl iii
Naturclle de I'Air. toin. i. p). 2c;.

lick, or the neceiTary fuflenance for the healthy ,. 1B 0 0 K
In the fiace of a month, above fix hundred per- I
ibns perithed in the utmost misery. Dejection and s
despair spread through the colony. Many princi-
pal persons solicited their dismission, and were
glad to relinquish all their hopes of wealth, in
order to escape from that pernicious region. Pe-
drarias endeavoured to divert those who remained
from brooding over their misfortunes, by finding
them employment. With this view, he sent feve-
ral detachments into the interior parts of the coun-
try, to levy gold among the natives, and to search
for the mines in lwhich it was produced. Those
rapacious adventurers, more attentive to present
gain than to the means of facilitating their future
progress, plundered without diftinaion wherever
they marched. Regardless of the alliances which
Balboa had made with several of the caziques,
they firipped them of every thing valuable, and
treated them, as well as their fubjets, with the ut-
most insolence and cruelty. By their tyranny and
exactions, which Pedrarias, either from want of
authority or of inclination, did not restrain, all
the country from the gulf of Darien to the lake of
Nicaragua was desolated, and the Spaniards were
inconsiderately deprived of the advantages which
they might have derived from the friendship of the
natives, in elxtending their conqucits to the South
Sea. Balboa, who saw with concern that such ill-
judged proceedings retarded the execution of his
favourite fchemc, sent violent remoiiitrances to
Spain against the imprudent government of Pe-
drarias, which had ruined a happy and flourishing
colony. Pedrarias, on the other hand, accufled
him of having deceived the king, by magnifying

VOL. I. P hii
" Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 14. P, M.irtyr. dec. p. 272.

B 0 O K his own exploits, as well as by a false reprefenta-

II.- tion of the opulence and value of the countrye.
~'i- FERDINAND became sensible at length of his:

Vio!'nt4 imprudence in superseding the moLi alive and cx-
proceedings perienced officer he had in the New World, and,
boall Ba by way of compensation to Balboa, appointed him

iAelantado, or Lieutenant-governor of the coun-
tries upon the South Sea, with very extensive pri-
vileges and authority. At the fame time he en-
joined Pedrarias to support Balboa in all his enter-
prises, and to consult with him concerning every
measure which he himself pursued. But to effec
such a sudden transition from invetetate enmity to
perfect confidence, exceeded Ferdinand's power.
Pedrarias continued to treat his rival with neglet;
and Balboa's fortune being exhausted by the pay-
ment of his fine, and other exadtions of Pedrarias,
he could not make suitable preparations for taking
possession of his new government. At length, by
the interposition and exhortations of the bishop of
Darien, they were brought to a reconciliation;
and, in order to cement this union more firmly,
1516. Pedrarias agreed to give his daughter in marriage

to Balboa. The first effec of their concord was,
that Balboa was permitted to make several fiall
incursions into the country. These he conducted
with such prudence, as added to the reputation
which he had already acquired. Many adventu-
rers resorted to him, and, with the countenance
and support of Pedrarias, he began to prepare for
his expedition to the South Sea. In order to ac-
complifh this, it was neceflary to build vcffels ca-
pable of conveying his troops to thole provinces
which he purposed to invade. After surmounting
many obstacles, and enduring a variety of thole

hardfhiip.

* Hcrrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 15. dec. 2. c. r, &c. Goma-

ra, c. 66. P. Martyr, dec. 3. c. to. Relacion de B. dc las
Casas, p. I a.

hardships which were the portion of the conquer- B o o K
ors of America, he at length finished four fmrall II-
brigantines. In these, with three hundred chosen -r
men (a force superior to that with which Pizarro I517
afterwards undertook the fame expedition), he
was ready to fail towards Peru, when he received
an unexpected message from Pedrarias%. As his
reconciliation with Balboa had never been cordial,
the progrcfs which he made revived his ancient
enmity, and added to its rancour. He dreaded
the prosperity and elevation of a man whom he
had injured so deeply. He fuipected that success
would encourage him to aim at independence upon.
his jurifdiEion; and so violently did the passions
of hatred, fear, and jealousy, operate upon his
mind, that, in order to gratify his vengeance, he
scrupled not to defeat an enterprise of the greatest
moment to his country. Under pretexts which
were false, but plaulible, he desired Balboa to
pofipone his voyage for a short time, and to repair
to Acla, in order that he might have an interview
with him. Balboa, with the unfufpicious confidence
of a man conscious of no crime, instantly obeyed
the funlmons ; but as soon as he entered the place,
he was arrefled by order of Pedrarias, whole im
patience to fatiatc his revenge did not susser him
to languish long in confinement. Judges were im-
mediately appointed to proceed to his trial. An.
accusation of disloyalty to the king, and of an in-
tention to revolt against the governor, was pre-
ferred againtl him. Sentence of dcath was pro-
nounced ; and though the judges who palTed it,
iccondcd by the lwhole colony, interceded warmly
for his pardon, Pedrarias continued inexorable;
and, to their ailouiifhmenit and bfrrow, the Spani-
ards behcld the public execution of a man whom

P 2 they

" 'rr:ca, d"c , . lib. i . c. 3 Lib . i .
c . 1. 1 1.

B O O K they universally deemed more capable than any

IIL who had borne command in America, of forming
C*~~ and accomplishing great designs*. Upon his

death, the expedition which he had planned was
relinquished. Pedrarias, notwithfianding the vi-
olence and injuflice of his proceedings, was not
only screened from punishment by the powerful
patronage of the bishop of Burgos and other cour-
tiers, but continued in power. Soon after, he
obtained permission to remove the colony from its
unhealthy tfation at Santa Maria to Panama, on the
opposite fide of the isthmus; and though it did not
gain much in point of healthfulness by the change,
the commodious situation of this new fettlemenz
contributed greatly to facilitate the subsequent con-
quefis of the Spaniards in the vast countries situ-
ated upon the Southern Ocean t.

s151. DURING these tranfadtions in Darien, the his-

New disco-
verie,' tory of which it was proper to carry on in an un-

interrupted tenour, several important events oc-
curred with refpeE to the discovery, the conquest,
and government of other provinces in the New
World. Ferdinand was so intent upon opening a
communication with the Molucca or Spice islands
by the weft, that, in the year one thousand five
hundred and fifteen, he fitted out two ships at his
own expence, in order to attempt such a voyage,
and gave the command of them to Juan Diaz de
Solis, who was deemed the most skilful navigator
in Spain. He flood along the coafi of South Ame-
rica, and on the first of January one thousand
five hundred and sixteen, entered a river, which
he called Janeiro, where an extensive commerce is
now carried on. From thence he proceeded to a
spacious bay, which he supposed to be the entrance
into a itrait that communicated with the Indian

ocean;
*' Hercrra, dcc. 2. lib. ii. c. 21, 22. ' Ibid, lib. iv. c. i

ecean; but upon advancing farther, he found it to B 0 0 K
be the mouth of Rio de Plata, one of the vast ri- III
vers by which the southern continent of America is r
watered. In endeavouring to make a descent in '5X7.
this country, De Solis and several of his crew were
slain by the natives, who, in fight of the ships, cut
their bodies in pieces, roasted and devoured them.
Dilcouraged with the loss of their commander, and
terrified at this ihocking fpeEtacle, the surviving
Spaniards set fail for Europe, without aiming ac
any farther difeovery . Though this attempt
proved abortive, it was not without benefit. It
turned the attention of ingenious men to this course
of navigation, and prepared the way for a more
fortunate voyage, in which, a few years posterior
to this period, the great design that Ferdinand had
in view was accompliihed.

THOUGH the Spaniards were thus aclively em-statofthe
ployed in extending their discoveries and fettle- colonyin
ments in America, they fiill considered Hispaniola Hifpanioa.
as their principal colony, and feat of govern-
ment, Don Diego Columbus wanted neither incli-
nation nor abilities to have rendered the members
of this colony, who were most immediately under
his jurisdiction, prosperous and happy. But he
was circumscribed in all his operations, by the sus-
picious policy of Ferdinand, who on every occa-
lion, and under pretexts the most frivolous, re-
trenclled his privileges, and encouraged the treafu-
rcr, the judges, and other subordinate officers, to
counterac his measures, and to dilfute his autho-
rity, The molt valuable prerogative which the go-
vernor poffTeflec, was that of difiributing Indians
aillong the Spaniards fettled in the island. The ri-
rrouis servitude of those unhappy men having
been but little mitigated by all the regulations in

their
Icrrera, dec. 2. lib. i. c. 7. P. Martyr, dccad p. 317.

B O O K their favour, the power of parcelling out such ne.

III. ceffary instruments of labour at pleasure, secured to
*-'r'-- the governor great influence in the colony. In or-

X517. der to strip him of this, Ferdinand created a new

office with the power of difiributing the Indians,
and bestowed it upon Rodrigo Albuquerque, a re-
lation of Zapata, his confidential miniiter. Mor-
tified with the injustice, as well as indignity, of
this invasion upon his rights, in a point so cftlntial,
Don Diego could no longer remain in a place
where his power and coniequence were almnioi an-
nihilated. He repaired to Spain vith the vain
hopes of obtaining redress ". Albuquerque entered
upon his office with all the rapacity of an indigent
adventurer, impatient to amats wealth. He becan
Uith taking the exact number of Indians in the
island, and found that from sixty thousand, xxho,
in the year one thousand five hundred and eijnt,
survived after all their sufferings, they were li:o\
reduced to fourtlen thousand. T-hcee he threw
into separate divisions or lots, and befiowed theml
upon such as were willing to purchase theni at the
highest price. By this arbitrary distribution, fecve
ral of the natives were removed from their origin,
]abitations, :nany were taken from their anci
ent malters, and all of them lubjcaed to hela
vier burdens, and to more intolerable labour, in
order to reiniburfc their new proprietors. 'Tlolc
additional calamities completed the milcvry, ai(1
hastened to the cxtinEfion of this wrctched and in-
nocent race of men I.

Controveiry TInI violence of thcfe proceedings, to¢(illi
Wjth 'cfpct' with the fatal confcquences which attenlcld Itlei
1niikt of ilc not only excited complaints among such as t lio('Ig
Indians. thenfclves aggrievcd, but touched the hbcan:; (

;tl

* Herrera rlrc. .i

lib, ix. c. .

5 li, .

c. rz, T t
dec. i. lib. x. c. 2.

all who retained any sentiments of humanity. B K
From the time that ecclefiaitics were lent into Ame- III.
rica to infiru&t and convert the natives, they per- ;'-
ceived that the rigour with which the Spaniards 1517'
treated them, rendered their mriniftry altogether
fruitless. The mifiionaries, in conformity to the
mild spirit of that religion which they were em-
ployed to publilh, early remonstrated againfl the
maxims of their countrymen with refpe&t to the
Americans, and condemned the repartimientos, or
diflribu/ions, by which they were given up as
slaves to their conquerors, as no less contrary to na-
tural justice and the precepts of Chriflianity, than
to found policy. The Dominicans, to whom the
inlltrution of the Americans was originally com-
mitted, were moif vehement in testifying against
the repar/imientos. In the year one thousand five
hundred and eleven, Montefino, one of their most
eminent preachers, invieghed against this praclice
in the great church at St. Domingo, with all the
impetuosity of popular eloquence. Don Diego Co-
lumbus, the principal officers of the colony, and
all the laymen who had been his hearers, com-
plained of the monk to his superiors; but they, in-
ilead of condemning, applauded his dofrine, as
equally pious and seasonable. The Franciscans,
influenced by the spirit of opposition and rivalihip
which subsists between the two orders, discovered
bfme inclination to take part with the laity, and to
espouse the defence of the repartimientos. But as
they could not with decency give their avowed ap-
probation to a fyflem of oppreflion, so repugnant
to the spirit of religion, they endeavoured to pal-
liate what they could not jultiif, and alleged, in
cxcufe for the condudt of their countrymen, that
it was impossible to carry on any improvement in
the colony, unlcfs the Spaniards poflticld fuchl do-

minion

iB O OK minion over the natives, that they could compel

III. them to labour*.
_r~"! THE Dominicans, regardless of such political and
co,7. interested considerations, would not relax in any
decisions degree the rigour of their sentiments, and even re-

othis pin, fused to absolve, or admit to the sacraments, such

of their countrymen as held the natives in fervi..
tude t. Both parties applied to the king for his (c-
cifion in a matter of such importance. Ferdiand
empowered a commitee of his privy-council, a!-
lifted by some of the moil eminent civilians and dic
vines in Spain, to hear the deputies sent from Ilif-
paniola, in support of their refpedive opinions.
After a long ditcuffion, the speculative point in
controversy was determined in favour of the Domi-
nicans, the Indians were declared to be a free pco-
ple, intitled to all the natural rights of men ; but,
notwithflanding this decision the repartiimietos were
continued upon their ancient footing . As this
determination admitted the principle upon which
the Dominicans founded their opinion, it was noi
calculated either to silence or to convince the:. At
length, in order to quiet the colony, which was
alarnled by their remonfirances and censures, Ferdi-
nand issued a decree of his privy-council, declarinc,
that after mature consideration of the Apofiolic
513. Bull, and other titles by which the crown of Calfiic

claimed a right to its poficllions in tbe New world,
the servitude of the Indians was warranted both
by the laws of Gol and of man; that unlcer theyli
vere luLjeclcd to the dominion of til Spani-
ards, and compelled to rciidc under itheir in
fpc6ltion, it would be in. poilibl to rccla:

' I-crrcr n, d(c. I. lib. viii. c. 1i. Ovcd;( o, lib. iii. c. 6. p.

97. '1 Ovicdo, ibid. '1 I-'crrcrl, dcc. i. lib. viii. c. 1.
lib. ix. c. 5.

them from idolatry, or to inftrut them in the B O OK
principles of the Chriflian faith; that no farther III.
scruple ought to be entertained concerning the s
lavwfulnefs of the repartimiertos, as the king and 517
council were willing to take the charge of that
upon their own consciences; and that therefore
the Dominicans, and monks of other religious or-
ders, should abstain, for the future, from those
illveEtives, which, from an excess of charitable,
but ill-informed zeal, they had uttered againfi that
practice'.

THAT his intention of adhering to this decree
might be fully underflood, Ferdinand conferred
,lew grants of Indians upon several of his courti-
erst. But, in order that he might not seem alto-
gether inattentive to the rights of humanity, he
published an edi&, in which he endeavoured to
provide for the mild treatment of the Indians un-
der the yoke to which he fubjeded them; he re-
gulated the nature of the work which they ihould
be required to perform, he prescribed the mode
in which they should be clothed and fed, and gave
(lirccions with refpec to their inflrution in the
principles of Christianity§.

BUT the Dominicans, who, from their experi- Effot
euce of what was pail, judged concerning the fu-thef'
ture, soon perceived the inefficacy of those provi-
sions, and foretold, that as long as it was the inter-
ceI of individuals to treat the Indians with rigour,
no public regulations could render their servitude
mild or tolerable. They confidered it as vain to
iafle their own time and firength in attempting to
commnunicate the sublime truths of religion to men,
whole spirits were broken, and their faculties im-
paircd by opprcfliou. Some of them, in despair,

requcfled

IT Herrcra, ldec. . lib. ix. c. x4. ' Sec NOTE XXVT
§ Ilcrrera, ibid.

B o O K requested the permission of their superiors to re,

ill. move to the continent, and to pursue the obje&t of
-'rs their mnifion among such of the natives as were
51'7' not hitherto corrupted by the example of the Spa.

niards, or alienated by their cruelty from ti.e
Christian faith. Such as remained in iip'aniohl
continued to remlonflrate, with decent irmnei:,
againfl the servitude of the Indians*.

Bartholo- TI'IE violent operations of Albuquerque, ,he
mew de las new distributor of Indians, revived the zeal of tih
Casais ap-
pe.s in de- Dominicans againi tihe repartimientos, and called
Ience oi the forth an advocate for that opprcffed people, w.ho

pofefifed all the courage, the talents, and activity
rcquifite in supporting such a defperatc caule.
This was Bartholomew de las Casas, a native of
Seville, and one of the clergymen sent out with
Columbus in his second voyage to Hilpaniola, in
order to fettle in that island. He early adopted
the opinion prevalent among ecclefiaflics, with
refpedt to the unlawfulnels of reducing the natives
to servitude; and that he might denonfirate the
sincerity of his conviction, he relinquished all the
Indians who had fallen to his own {hare in the di.
vision of the inhabitants among their conquerors,
declaring that he ihould ever bewail his own niiif
fortune and guilt, in having exercised for a no-
ment this impious dominion over his fellow crca
tures.. iFroml that time, he was the avowed pa-
tron of the Indians; and, by his bold interpc!i-
tions in their behalf, as well as by the rcfpeti d!e
to his abilities and character, he had often th'
merit of fctting fme lbounds to the cxccflcs o:
his countrymen. He did not fail to rcimonlira.ll
warmlly aainit the proceedings of Albuquerque,

a i11,,

' IHerrera, (Iec. i. lil. ix .

c . '1' Touron. T in. ( elnle. "

I'AnmerilquC, toI. i. p. *52. . l'.rAug. DI)axih i;(ill;

[iik.
d(I la ml;'unI.lil 1.: Ia l rovilncia dc St. Jano de JV\/lC:i , j

, 3 4. ll,, 1' dc,
1 i': . I.l'ib. x, c. 12.

and, though he soon found that attention to his B 0 0 K
own interest rendered him deaf to admonition, he III.
did not abandon the wretched people whose cause 'r6
he had espoused. He instantly set out for Spain, '517.
with the moRt sanguine hopes of opening the eyes
and softening the heart of Ferdinand, by that
firiking picture of the oppreflion of his new
fubjecqs, which he would exhibit to his view*.

-HE easily obtained admittance to the king, whom Solicits

he found in a declining state of health. Withtheircauft
much freedom, and no less eloquence, he repre- of Spain.
tented to him all the fatal effets of the reparii-
mientos in the New World, boldly charging him
with the guilt of having authorised this impious
mealure, which had brought misery and deiruc-
tion upon a numerous and innocent race of men,
whom Providence had placed under his protec-
tion. Ferdinand, whole mind as well as body
was much enfeebled by his diifemper, was greatly
alarmed at this charge of impiety, which at ano-
ther juncture he would have deipifed. He liften-
ed with deep compunction to the discourse of Las
Casas, and promised to take into attentive con-
fideration the means of redrefling the evil of which
he complained. But death prevented him from
executing his resolution. Charles of Austria, to
whom all his paternal crowns devolved, resided at
that time in his paternal dominions in the Low
Countries. Las Casas, with his ulual ardour, pre-
pared immediately to let out for Flandcrs, in or-
der to occupy the ear of the young monarch,
when cardinal Ximens, who, as regent, affiumed
the reins of government in Caflile, commanded
him to desist from the journey, and engaged to
hear his complaints in perlobn

H w

* IIcrrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. 12. Dec. 2. lib. i. c. ii,
)Davila Padilla lilt. p. 304.

B O 0 K HE accordingly weighed the matter with atten.

III. tion equal to its importance; and as his impetuous

'^m-' mind delighted in schemes bold and uncommon,
The r7ula- he soon fixed upon a plan which aflonifhed the
tions of ministers trained up under the formal and cautious
Cardinal
ximens. adiniliflration of Ferdinand. Without regarding

ciLher the rights of Don Diego Columbus, or the
regulations eftablified by the late king, he resolved
to fend three persons to America, as fuperinten-
dents of all the colonies there, with authority, as-
ter examining all circumfiances on the spot, to de-
cide finally with refpe&E to the point in queflion.
It was a matter of deliberation and delicacy to
chufe men qualified for such an important Rlation,
As all the laymen fettled in America, or who had
been consulted inl the adminifiration of that de-
partment, had given their opinion that the Spa-
niards could not keep poffeflion of their new let-
Llements, unless they were allowed to retain their
dominion over the Indians, he saw that he could
not rely on their impartiality, and determined to
commit the trust to ecclefiaflics. As the Domini-
cans and Franciscans had already espoused oppo,
site fides in the controversy, he, from the iame
principle, excluded both there fraternities from
the commiilion, He confined his choice to the
ilonks of St. Jerome, a finall, but repeiletable
or('lc in Spain. W'ith the afitance of their gc-
nc'r:-!, and inl collcert wiiih Las Calas, he booin
pitchlcd t1p)On threce perlOis whom he deemed equal
to ehc chalr;. 'T'o( thIem he joincd Zuazo, a pri-
rvltc lawyer of difiinguificd probity, with un-
bouideil power to rcIgnlate all judicial proceedings
in t Cec colonies. Ias Calas was appointed to a(
c),,l pany them, with tie title of Protcd1or of the

li rrer, (

c. 2. ll'. ii. c. 3.
* licrlrrn, dcu. 2. lib, ii. c. 3.

To vest such extraordinary powers as might B O O K

at once overturn the system of government efta- III
blifhed in the New World in four persons, who, r
from their humble condition in life, were little in- Ti, aSm7
titled to possess this high authority, appeared to n"einwhich

they' were

Zapata, and other ministers of the late king, a excutd.
measure so wild and dangerous, that they refused
to issue the dispatches necessary for carrying it into
execution. But Ximenes was not of a temper pa-
tiently to brook opposition to any of his fchcmcs.
Iec sent for the refractory miniflers, and addrcffed
them in such a tone, that in the utmofi confterna-
tion they obeyed his orders-. The fuperintcnd-
ents, with their afibciate Zuazo, and Las Casas,
failed for St. Domingo. Upon their arrival, the
first ad of their authority was to set at liberty all
the Indians who had been granted to the Spanifn
courtiers, or to any person not refding in Ame-
rica. This, together with the information which
had been received from Spaiu concerning the
object of the commission, spread a general alarm.
The colonies concluded that they were to be de-
prived at once of the hands with which they car-
ried on their labour, and that, of consequence,
ruin was unavoidable. But the fathers of St. Je-
rome proceeded with such caution and prudence,
as soon diflipated all their fears. They dilcovered,
in every ftep of their condudt, a knowledge of
lthe world, and of affairs, .which is seldom acquired
in a cloifler; and displaycd a moderation and
gcntleneis still more rare, among persons trained
u'1 in the solitude and autlerity of a monastic life.
Their cars were open to information from every
cuartcr, they compired the different accounts
xhlich they received, and, after mature confi-
deration of the whole, they were fully fatisfed
lhat the fiatc of the colony rendered it impofli-

ble
* HIcrrc;ra, dc. 2li. ii. c. 6.

B O O K ble to adopt the plan proposed by Las Casas, and

IIL recommended by the cardinal. They plainly per.
^*ó ^ ceived that the Spaniards fettled in America ecre

' so few in number, that they could neither worlk

the mines which had been opened, nor cultivate
the country; that they depended for both upon
the labour of the natives, and if deprived of it,
they must instantly relinquish their conquefis, or
give up all the advantages which they derived
from them; that no allurement was so powerful
as to surmount the natural aversion of the Indians
to any laborious effort, and that nothing but the
authority of a mailer could corpel them to work;
and if they were not kept constantly under the eve
and discipline of a superior, so great was their.na-
tural'liftleffnefs and indifference, that they would
neither attend to religious instruction, nor observe
those rites of christianity which they had been al-
ready taught. Upon all those accounts, they found
it necessary totolerate the repartimientos, and to 1us-
ftr the Indians to remain under fubjeeion to their
Spanish matters. They used their utnoft endea-
vours, however, to prevent the fatal eifcts of this
eftabliflment, and to secure the Indians the confo-
lation of the best treatment compatible with a
slate of servitude. For this purpose, they rcvived
former regulations, they preicribed new ones, they)
negleEced no circumfiance that tended to min.ilcx
the rigour of the yoke; and, by their authorin'
thcirexample, and their exhortations, they labourcd
to inlpire their countrymen with fentinicnts of c'i-
ty and gcntlcncels towards lte unhappy people up-
on wholf indufiry they dependcd. Zuazo, il his
department, iccondcd the endeavours of the finpc
intendcnts. lHe reformed the courts of juflicc i,
Iuch a manner as to render their decisions equnili
ble as well as expeditious, and introduced varl
ous regulations which greatly improved tllhillt'!'1l

polk'

police of the colony. The fatisfalion with his B o o K
condut, and that of the superintendents, was now lI.
universal among the Spaniards fettled in the New
World, and all admired the boldness of Ximenes, 517'
in having departed froln the ordinary path of bufi-
ness in forming his plan, as well as his lagacity in
pitching upon perobns, whose wvifdoni, moderationr
and dilinteref'ednefs rendered them worthy of
this high trufl *.

LAS CASAS alone was difatisfied. The pru-LasCafas
dential considerations 'which influenced the super- difhthr.
intendents, made no impreflion upon him. He re-
garded their idea of accommodating their conduct
to the state of the colony, as the maxim of an un-
hallowed timid policy, which tolerated what was
unjust, because it was beneficial. He contended,
that the Indians were by nature free, and, as their
protector, he required the superintendents not to
bereave them of the common privilege of humani-
ty. They received his most vehemrent remonftran-
ces without emotion, and adhered firmly to their
own systen. The Spanish planters did not bear
with him so patiently, and were ready to tear hini
in pieces for infifling in a requisition so odious
to them. Las Casas, in order to icreen himnlelf
from their rage, found it necessary to take fheltcr
in a convent; and perceiving that all his efforts in
America were firuitlefs, he soon set out for Europe,
with a fixed resolution not to abandon the protec-
tion of a people whom he deemed to be cruelly
oppressed t.

HAD Ximenes retained that vigour of mind His negoci
'ith which he usually applied to business, Las 'i°onswt

thle minis-
Casas mull have met with no very gracious rce-tcrsotchar-

ception les V.

lHerrcra, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 15. Remcfal. Iilt. Gener.

lib. c. 14, 15, i6.
'I 'ltsrla, dcc. 2. lib, ii. c. i6.

B O 0 K ception upon his return to Spain. But he fo'.nd

III. the cardinal languishing under a mortal difiemper,

T and preparing to refiga his authority to the you i'
5S7' king, who was daily expected from the I.o;

Countries. Charles arrived, took poffeflion of lthl
government, and, by the death of Ximcncs, los
a minister, whose abilities and integrity intidted
him to diret his affairs. Many of the Flenimi
nobility had accompanied their sovereign to Spain,
From that warm predileEtion to his countrynicn,
which was natural at his age, he conlulted the!n
with refpeA to all the transactions in his new
kingdom, and they, with an indiscreet eagernels,
intruded themselves into every bufilefs, and seized
almost every department of administration ~*. The
direcion of American affairs was an object too
alluring to escape their attention. Las Casas ob-
served their growing influence, and though pro-
jedors are usually too sanguine, to conduct lheir
schemes with much dexterity, he possessed a buRP
ling indefatigable acivity, which sometimes ac-
complifhes its purposes with greater success, thall
the most exquisite discernment and address. He
courted the Flemish ministers with assiduity. Hc
teprefented to them the absurdity of all the ma-
ims hitherto adopted with refpee to the govcrnl
ment of America, and particularly the dcfecs of
that arrangement which Ximenes had introduced,
The memory of Ferdinand was odious to the Flcm-
ings. The luperior virtue and abilities of Ximc-
nes had long been the objet of their envy. They
fondly wished to have a plausible pretext for con-
demning the measures, both of the monarch and
of the miniitcr, and of reflecing some dilcrc il
on their political wifdolm. The friends of D)on
Diego Columbus, as well as the Spanish courtiers,

v 1ho
* IIif. of Charles V. vol. ii. p. 43.

who had been dissatisfied with the cardinal's admi- B O O K
niftration, joined Las Casas in censuring the scheme III.
of fending fuperintendants to America. This uni- 7r'
on of so many interests and passions was irrefifli- 5'
ble; and in consequence of it, the fathers of St.
Jerome, and their associate Zuazo, were recalled.
Roderigo de Figueroa, a lawyer of some eminence,
was appointed chiefjudge of the island, and receiv-
ed instructions, in compliance with the request of
Las Casas, to examine once more, with the utmost
attention the point in controversy between him and
the people of the colony, with refpea to the treat-
ment of the natives; and in the mean time to do
every thing in his power to ilevi:te their susser-
ing, and prevent the extinction of the race .

Tis was all that the zeal of Las Casas could Schemcof

procure, at that junEture, in favour of the Indians. filiplynies
The impossibility of carrying on any improvement with ne-
in America, unless the Spanish planters couldroes'
command the labour of the natives, was an infu-
perabie objection to his plan of treating them as
free subjects. In order to provide some remedy for
this, without which he found it was in vain to
mention his scheme, Las Casas proposed to purchase
a sufficient number of negroes fiom the Portuguese
settlements on the coast of Africa, and to trani-
port them to America, in order that they mightl
be employed as slaves in working the mines and
cultivating the ground. One of the first advan-
tages which the Portuguese had derived from their
dicoveries in Africa, arose from the trade in slaves.
Various circuniftances concurred in reviving this
odious commerce, which had been long abolished
in Europe, and which is no less repugnant to the
feelings of humanity, than to the principles of re-
ligion. As carly as the year one thousand five hun-

Vor. I. Q, dred

J< -rrera,dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 6 9,9, z2. lib. iii.. 7. 8.

B O O K dred and three, a few negroe-flaves had been fei:t

IIr into the New WorldI. In the year one thoufaud
v^'C five hundred and eleven, Ferdinand permitted the

15X7' importation of them in great numbers t. They

were found to be a more robust and hardy race
than the natives of America. They were more ca-
pable of enduring fatigue, more patient under fcr-
vitude, and the labour of one negro was compu-
ted to be equal to that of four Indians t. Cardinal
Ximenes, however, when solicited to encourage
this commerce, peremptorily rejeted the propo-
fltion, because he perceived the iniquity of reduc-
ing one race of men to slavery, while he was con-
fulting about the means of restoring liberty to ano-
ther II. But Las Casas, from the inconsistency na-
tural to men who hurry with headlong impetuo-
fity towards a favourite point, was incapable of
making this diliindtion. While he contended ear-
neftly for the liberty of the people born in one
quarter of the globe, he laboured to enslave the
inhabitants of another region ; and in the warmth
of his zeal to save the Americans from the yoke,
pronounced it to be lawful and expedient to im-
pose one still heavier upon the Africans. Unfor-
tunately for the latter, Las Cafas's plan was adopt-
ed. Charles granted a patent to one of his Flemifi
favourites, containing an exclusive right of import-
ing four thousand negroes into America. He fold
his patent to some Genoese merchants for twenty-
five thousand ducats, and they were the first who
brought into a regular form that commerce for
slaves between Africa and America, which has since

I,.3 been carried on to such an amazing extent §.

Las Ca.as BUT the Genoese merchants, conducting their
lentingla. operations, at first, with the rapacity of nlonopo-
houicrs to li ts,
ItiH aniola.

* Herrera dec. I. lib. v. c. 12. 11[ Iid. lib. viii. c. 9.

:1 Ibid. lib. x. c. 5. j1 Ibid. dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 8.
Ibid. lib. ii. c. 20.

lifts demanded such an high price for negroes, B 0 0 K
that the number imported into Hispaniola made III.
no great change upon the state of the colony. Las -
Casas, whose zeal was no less inventive than inde- '5'7.
fatigable, had recourle to another expedient for
the relief of the Indians. He observed, that nmoft
of the persons who had fettled hitherto in America,
were soldiers and sailors employed in the di'cove-
ry or conquest of the country; the younger sons of
noble families, allured by the profpeEt of acquiring
sudden wealth; or desperate adventurers, whomn
their indigence or crimes forced to abandon their
native land. Instead of such men, who were dif-
solute, rapacious, and incapable of that fober per-
fevering industry which is requisite in forming new
colonies, he proposed to supply the new settlements
in Hispaniola and the other islands with a fuffici-
ent number of labourers and husbandmen, who
should be allured by suitable premiums to remove
thither. These, as they were accuflomed to fa-
tigue, would be able to perform the work, to which
the Indians, from the feebleness of their conftitu-
tion, were unequal, and might soon become ufefu
and opulent citizens. But though Hilipaniola flood
much in need of a recruit of inhabitants, hav-
ing been visited at this time with the hfmall-pox,
which fwvept off many of the natives, and though
Las Casas had the countenance of the Flemilh nli-
niflers, this fchemc was defeated by the bishop of
Burgos, who thwarted all his projcSs '.

LAS CASAS now difpaired of procuring any re- Fornns the

lief for the Indians in those places where the Spa- 'idl1
niards were already fettled. The evil was become
so inveterate there, as not to admit of a cure. But
luch dilcovcries were daily making in the conti-
nent, as gave an high idea both of its extent and
populoufuels. In all thole vail regions there was

CQ2 but
Hlerrera, dcc. 2. lib, ii. c. 2. ,:

B O O K but one feeble colony planted; and except a small

III. spot on the isthmus of Darien, the natives still oce
"-' cupied the whole country. This opened a new and

5' more ample field for the humanity and zeal of Las

Casas, who flattered himself that he might prevent
a pernicious system from being introduced there,
though he had failed of success in his attempts to
overturn it, where it was already eflablifhed. Full
of this idea, he applied for a grant of the unoccu-
pied country, firetching along the sea-coast from
the gulf of Paria, to the wefiern frontier of that
province now known by the name of Santa Martha.
He proposed to fettle there with a colony compo-
fed of hufhandmen, labourers and ecclesiastics. He
engaged, in the space of two years, to civilize ten
thousand of the natives, and to instruCt them so
thoroughly in the arts of social life, that from the
fruits of their indufiry, an annual revenue of fifteen
thousand ducats should arise to the king. In ten
years, he expe&ed that his improvements would
be so far advanced, as to yield annually sixty thou.
sand ducats. He flipulated, that no tailor or fol-
dier mhould ever be permitted to fettle in this dif-
trite; and that no Spaniard fould enter it without
his permission. He even projeced to clothe the
people whom he took along with him in rome pe-
culiar garment, which did not resemble the Spa-
niih dress, that they might appear to the natives to
be a different race of men from those who had
brought so many calamities upon their country.
From this scheme, of which I have traced only the
great lines, it is manifefi that Las Casas had formed
ideas concerning the method of treating the Indi-
ans, similar to those by which the Jesuits afterwards
carried on their great operations in another part of
the fame continent. He ilppofed that the Euro-
peans, by availing thenifelves of that afcendait

which
1 Ilc<rrer, dec, 2. lib. iv. c. 2.

which they possessed in consequence of their fupe- B O O K
rior progress in science and improvement, might III
gradually form the minds of the Americans to
relish those comforts of which they were destitute, 157'
might train them to the arts of civil life, and ren-
der them capable of its fundcion.

BUT to the bishop of Burgos and the council of Favourabl

the Indies this project appeared not only chimeri- receivd-
cal, but dangerous in a high degree. They deem-
ed the faculties of the Americans to be naturally
so limited, and their indolence so excessive, that
any attempt to infiruEt or improve them would be
fruitless. They contended that it would be ex-
tremely imprudent to give the command of a counr
try extending above a thousand miles along the
coast, to a fanciful, presumptuous enthusiast, a
firanger to the affairs of the world, and unac-
quainted with the arts of government. Las Casas,
far from being difeouraged with a repulse, which
he had reason to expect, had recourse once more
to the Flemish favourites, who zealously patronized
his scheme, merely because it had been rejeted by
the Spanish ministers. They prevailed with their 1519.
master, who had lately been raised to the Imperial
dignity, to refer the consideration of this measure
to a fele&t number of his privy counsellors; and as
Las Casas excepted against the members of the
council of the Indies, as partial and interestcd, all
of them were excluded. Tihe decision of men
chosen by recommendation of the Flemings, was
perfectly conformable to their sentiments. They
warmly approved of Las Cafas's plan; and gave
orders for carrying it into execution, but rcetrinted
the territory allotted him to three hundred miles
along the coast of Cumana, allowing him, howe-
ver, to extend it as far as he pleased towards the
interior parts of the country*.

* Gomara I-Hif. Gencr. c. 77. IHerrcra, dec 11. lib. iv. c.
3. Ovicdo, lib. xix. c. 5.

:BOOK THTS determination did not pass uncenfured.

III. Almost every person who had been in the Weft In-

t'*-s' dies exclaimed againfi it, and supported their opi-
A ifol7n nion so confidently, and with such plausible rea-
deliberation sons, as made it advifeable to pause and review the
Ctoelmid gs fubjedc more deliberately. Charles himself, though
treating the accustomed, at this early period of his life to adopt
Indians. the sentiments of his miniflers with such fubmiflion

and deference as did not promile that dcecifiv vi-
gour of mind which distinguished his riper years,
began to suspect that the eagerness with which the
Flemings took part in every affair relating to Ame-
rica, flowed from some improper motive, and dif-
covered an inclination to examine in perion into
the state of the question concerning the charaicer
of the Americans, and the proper manner of treat-
June 0o. ing them. An opportunity of making this inquiry,

with great advantage, soon occurred. Quevedo,
the bishop of Darien, who had accompanied Pe-
drarias to the continent in the year one thousand
five hundred and thirteen happened to land at Bar-
celona, where the court then resided. It x\ as soon
known, that his sentiments concerning the talents
and dispositions of the Indians differed fioin thole
of Las Casas; and Charles naturally concluded,
that by confironting two refpedtable perlfns, who,
during their long refidcncc in America, had ftll
leisure to oblcrve the manners of the people whom
they pretended to delcribe, he might be able to
(lifcovcr which of them had formied his opinion
with the greatest dil'ernment and accuracy.

A D A Y for this folenn audience was appointed.

The emperor appeared with extraordinary pomlp,
and took his feat on a throne in the great hall oft lie
p,:llice. I-is principal courtiers attenided. D)on
Piego Columbus, admiral of the Iadies, was lilii-
tioned to be prctent. Thl bifhiop of Daricn was
called upon first to deliver his opinion. -He, in a

fhlort

ihort discourse, lamented the fatal desolation of B O K
America, by the extinction of so many of its in- III.
habitants; he acknowledged that this must be im- ~r
puted, in some degree, to the exceflive rigour '5'7
and inconsiderate proceedings of the Spaniards;
but declared, that all the people of the New
World, whom he had seen either in the continent
or in the islands, appeared to him to be a race of
men marked out, by the inferiority of their ta,
!ents, for servitude, and whom it would be im-
poflible to inflruat or improve, unless they were
kept under the continual infpeaion of a matier.
Las Casas, at greater length, and with more ser-
vour, defended his own system. He rejeted
with indignation the idea that any race of men
was born to servitude, as irreligious and inhumane.
He asserted, that the faculties of the Americans
were not naturally despicable, but unimproved;
that they were capable of receiving inftrution
in the principles of religion, as well as of acquir-
ing the indufiry and arts which would qualify
them for the various offices of social life; that the
mildness and timidity of their nature rendered
them so submissive and docile, that they might be
led and formed with a gentle hand. He profef-
fed, that his intentions in proposing the scheme
now under consideration were pure and difinte-
reited; and though, from the accomplishment of
his designs, ineftinable benefits would result to
the crown of Castile, he never had claimed, nor
ever would receive any rcconpcnce upon that ac-
count.

CHARLES, after hcealing both, and consulting TIh fciieme
wilh his niiniflers, did not think himlelf fuflici-of Lns CA.5

applovCd of

ently informed to cflablifih any general arrange- Is'.o
mcnt with relpeft to the fiate of the Indians ; but
as he had perfet confidence in the integrity of
Las Calas, and as even the bishop of Darien ad-

mitted

B 0 0 Kmitted his scheme to be of such importance, that a

III. trial should be made of its effects, he issued a pa-
^T'- tent, granting him the diftrit in Cumana formerly

J517. mentioned, with full power to establish a colony

there according to his own plan*.

His prepa- LAS CASAS pushed on the preparations for his
rations for voyage with his usual ardour. But, either from

his own inexperience in the condut of affairs, or
from the secret opposition of the Spanish nobility,
who universally dreaded the success of an inflitu-
tion that might rob them of the industrious and
useful hands which cultivated their estates, his
progress in engaging hufoandmen and labourers
was extremely flow, and he could prevail on no
more than two hundred to accompany him to Cu-

mana.

Departsfor NOTHING, however, could damp his zeal.
Andreets With this slender train, hardly sufficient to take
with fomi- poffeflion of such a vast territory, and altogether
leas. unequal to any attempt towards civilizing its inha-

bitants, he set fail. The first place at which he
touched was the island of Porto-Rico. There he
received an account of a new obflacle to the exe-
cution of his scheme, more insuperable than any
he had hitherto encountered. MX hen he left Ame-
rica in the year one thousand five hundred and fe-
ventcen, the Spaniards had little intercourse with
any part of the continent, except the countries ad-
jacent to the gulph of Darien. But as every
species of internal induflry began to flagnate in
HI-ifpaniola, when, by the rapid decrease of the
natives, the 'Spaniards were deprived of thole
hands with which they had hitherto carried on
thcil operations, this prompted them io try

various

* Hcrrera, dec. 2. ii. iv. . 3, 4, 5. Argenfola Ann;lIe
de Aragon, 74, 97. Rcmifal Hilt. Gener. lib. ii. c. 19, 2^

various expedients for supplying that loss. Confi- B O O K
derable numbers of negroes were imported; but, III.
on account of their exorbitant price, many of the s
planters could not afford to purchase them. In or- 517-
der to procure slaves at an easier rate, some of these
fitted out vessels to cruise along thecoaft of the con-
tinent. In places where they found themselves in-
ferior in strength, they traded with the natives, and
gave European toys in exchange for the plates of
gold which they wore as ornaments; but, wherever
they could surprise or overpower the Indians, they
carried them off by force, and fold them as fiaves
in Hispaniola*. In those predatory excursions the
most atrocious acts of violence and cruelty were
committed. The Spanish name was held in detef-
tation all over the continent. Whenever any ships
appeared, the inhabitants either fled to the woods,
or ruffed down to the shore in arms, to repel those
hated disturbers of their tranquillity. They forced
tbme parties of the Spaniards to retreat with preci-
pitation; they cut off others; and in the violence
of their resentment againfl the whole nation, they
murdered two Dominican missionaries, whose zeal
had prompted them to fettle in the province of
Cumanat. This outrage against perfbns revered
for their fan6tity, excited such indignation among
the people of Hispaniola, who, notwithtfanding all
their licentious and cruel proceedings, were pof-
le'scd with a wonderful zeal for religion, and a fu-
perftitious refpe&t for its ministers, that they deter-
nined to infli&t exemplary punishment, not only
upon the perpetrators of that crime, but upon the
whole nation. With this view they gave the com-
mand of five ihips and three hundred men to Diego
Ocampo, with orders to lay wafle the country of
Cumana with fire and sword, and to transport all

the
HeI-rrera, dec. iii. lib. ii. c. S. * Oviedo Hill. lib. X 9. c. 3-

B O O K the inhabitants as slaves to Hispaniola. This ar

III.- ament Las Casas found at Porto Rico, in its way

to the continent; and as Ocampo refused to defer
5'17' his voyage, he immediately perceived that it would

be impoflible to attempt the execution of his paci-
sic plan in a country which was the feat of war
and desolation*.

icth April. IN order to provide againfg the effets of this
fulounto unfortunate incident, he set fail immediately for
them. St. Domingo, leaving his followers cantoned out

among the planters in Porto Rico. From many
concurring causes, the reception which LasCaias
met with in Hispaniola was very unfavourable. In
his negotiations for the relief of the Indians, he
had censured the conduEt of his countrymen fettled
there with such honest severity, as rendered hin
luniverfally odious to them. They confidered their
own ruin as the inevitable consequence of his fuc-
cess. They were now elated with hope of receiving
a large recruit of slaves from Cumana, which must
be relinquished if Las Casas was aflifed in fettling
his projeced colony there. Figueroa, in confe-
quence of the inffructions he had received in Spain,
had made an experiment concerning the capacity
of the Indians, which was rcprefented as dccifive
againflt tli sysem of Las Casas. He collceed i:
Hiflpaniola a good number of the natives, and set-
tied themn in two villages, leaving them at pcrfefc
liberty, and will the uncontrouled direction so
their own accions. But that people, accuflomcd
to a mode of lite cxtremely difle-cnt, incapabl
of assuming new habits at once, and deje&ccd too
\ith their i lon mlisfortunes, as well as thole o(
their counltry, exerted lo little iiidluftiy in (ull-
vating the ground, appeared lo devoid of lolici-
lude or forcfilht in providing for their o\vl waill;,
and were such l\ rangers to arranlgemelt in condclut-

' ll:rrcra, dec ;.: lib, ix . c. 8, 9.

ing their affairs, that the Spaniards pronounced B O 0 K
them incapable of being formed to live like men III
in social life, and confidered them as children, who ^
ihould be kept under the perpetual tutelage of '57'
persons superior to themselves in wisdom and fa-
gacity..
NOTWITHSTANDING all those circumstances, Finalmif-

carriage of

which alienated the people to whom he applied his cheme.
from himself and from his measures, Las Casas,
by his activity and perfeverancc, by some concef-
sions, and manythreats, obtained at length a small
body of troops to proteEt him and his colony at
their first landing. 'But upon his return to Porto-
Rico, he found that the diseases of the climate had
been fatal to several of his people; and that others
having got employment in that island, refused to
ibllow him. With the handful that remained, he
set fail and landed in Cumana. Ocampo had exe-
cuted his commission in that province with such
barbarous rage, having massacred many of the
inhabitants, sent others in chains to Hispaniola,
and forced the reft to fly for shelter to the woods,
that the people of a small colony, which he had
planted at a place which he had named Toledo,
were ready to perish for want in a desolated coun-
try. There, however, Las Casas, was obliged to
fix his residence, though deserted both by the
Iroops appointed to protect him, and by those
under the commland of Ocampo, who foresaw and
dreaded the calamities to which he must be ex-
polcd in that wretched station. He made the first
provision in his power for the fafcty and fubfifience
of his followers; but as his utmost efforts availed
little towards securing either the one or the other,
he returned to Hilpaniola, in order to bflicit more
tffclual aid for the prelfrvation of men, who
fToni confidence in him had ventured into a poll

of
* Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. x. c. 5.

B 0 K of so much dangel. Soon after his departure, the

III. natives, having discovered the feeble and defence-
'-T"~ less state of the Spaniards, assembled secretly, at-

57' 7 tacked them with the fury natural to men exafpc-

rated by many iniuries, cut off a good nuniber,
and compelled the reft to fly in the utmost confler-
nation to the illand of Cubagua. The small co.
lony fettled there, on account of the pearl fishery,
catching the panic with which they had been
seized, abandoned the island, and not a Spaniard
remained in any part of the continent, or adjacent
islands, from the gulph of Paria, to the borders of
Darien. Astonished at such a fucceflion of difafl
ters, Las Casas was ashamed to shew his face aftcr
this fatal termination of all his splendid fchenes,
He thut himself up in the convent of the Domini-
cans at St. Domingo, and ioon after assumcd the
habit of that orderk.

THOUGH the expulsion of the colony fronm

Cumana happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-one, I have chosen to trace
the progress of Las Cafas's ncgociations from their
first rife to their final iflec without initcrruption,
His fyftemi was the olbjeEt of long and attentive
difcuflion ; and though his efforts in behalf of the
oppresscd Americans, partly from his own rafhndis
and imprudence, and partly from the malevolent
pppofition of his advcrfaries, were not attended
withI that fuccls which he promised with too lan-
guine conidci'cc, they gave rile to various nreu-
latiotis \llich we're of lolbl benefit to that tinhlap.
py peopl'. 1 return now o t tle history ol( tli'
Spa:ifh difcovcries, as ltecy occur in lthe order of
tilmlcl.

T) II(;

* IIcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. x . c .

5 ec. 3. lib. ii. c. 3, 4, 5'

O vicdo lHilt. lib. :i\x. c. 5. (on;iir;, c. 77. Dayilli l.ull,.
lilb i. . 97. R7 ' cl l ilHill. G( n. li. i 1. c. 22, 23.

'* I-lcrrcra, dec. 2. lib, x. c. 5. p. 329.

DIEGO VELASQUEZ, who conquered Cuba in B 0 O K
the year one thousand five hundred and eleven, III.
still retained the government of that island, as
the deputy of Don Diego Columbus, though he New,,s7o-
seldom acknowledged his superior, and aimed atvcri, to-
rendering his own authority altogether indepen-wefs".'
dent ". Under his prudent administration Cuba
became one of the molt flourilhinlg of the Spa-
nifh settlements. The fame of this allured many
persons from the other colonies, in hopes of find-
ing there either some permanent establishment,
or some employment for their activity. As Cuba
lay to the weft of all the islands occupied by the
Spaniards, and as the ocean, which firetches be-
yond it towards that quarter, had not hitherto
been explored, these circumstances naturally in-
vited the inhabitants to attempt new difcovcrics.
An expedition for this purpose, in which adivity
and resolution might conduct to sudden wealth,
was more suited to the genius of the age, than the
patient industry requisite in clearing ground, and
manufacuring sugar. Instigated by this pirit,
several officers, who had served under Pcdrarias in
Darien, entered into an affocialion to undertake a
voyage of discovery. They persuadcd Firanccifco
Hernandez Cordova, an opulent planter in Cuba,
and a man of difiinguifled courage, to join with
them in the adventure, and chole him to be their
commander. Velasquez not only approved of
the design, but assisted in carrying it on. As
the veterans from Darien wcre extremely indigent,
he and Cordova advanced money for purchasing
three finall vessels, and finunifliing thenm xwith every
thing requisite either for traffic or for war; a hun-
(ted and ten men embarked on board of them,
and failed from St. Jago de Cuba, on the cighth

of
Ilerrcr., dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19.

B O O K of February one thousand five hundred and seven.

II. teen. By the advice of their chief pilot, Antoiio
s*(v AaAlaminos, who had served under the first admiral

'517' Columbus, they flood direCtly weft, relying on

the opinion of that great navigator, who uniformn
ly maintained that a westerly course would lead to
the most important discoveries.

ON the twenty-firft day after their departure

from St. Jago, they saw land, which proved to be
Cape Coloche, the eastern point of that large penin-
fula projecting from the continent of America,
Yucatan. which still retains its original name of Yucatali.

As they approached the more, five canoes canle
off full of people decently clad in cotton gar.
ments; an aflonilhing fpedacle to the Spaniards,
who had found every other part of America pof.
sessed by naked savages. Cordova endeavoured
by small presents to gain the good will of these
people. They, though amazed at the strange ob-
jets now presented for the first time to their
view, invited the Spaniards to visit their habita-
tions, with an appearance of cordiality. They
landed accordingly, and as they advanced into the
country, they observed with new wonder some
large houses built with flone. But they soon
found that, if the people of Yucatan had made
progress in improvement beyond their country-
men, they were likewise more artful and warlike.
For though the cazique received Cordova wilt
many tokens of friendifip, he had posted a conli-
derable body of his iubjedts in ambush behind a
thicket, who upon a signal given by him, rufhcdf
out and attacked the Spaniards with great bold-
ness, and some degree of martial order. At
the first flight of their arrows, fiftecn of the Spa-
niards were wounded ; but the Indians were flruck
with such terror by the sudden cxplofion of the
firc-arms, and bo surpriscd at the exccution done

by

by them, by the cross-bows, and by the othern o o K
Weapons of their new enemies, that they fled 111.
precipitately, and Cordova quitted a country '""
where he had met with such a fierce reception, can,
carrying off two prisoners, together with the or- iBy.
naments of a finall temple, which he plundered
in his retreat.

HE continued his course towards the weft with-
out losing fight of the coast, and on the sixteenth
day arrived at Campeachy. There the natives
received them more hospitably; but the Spaniards
were much firprifed that on all the extensive
coast along which they had failed, and which they
imagined to be a large island, they had not obferv-
cd any river ". As their water began to fail, they
advanced in hopes of finding a supply; and at
length they discovered the mouth of a river at Po-
tonchan, tome leagues beyond Campeachy.

CoRDOVA landed all his troops in order to pro-
tet the sailors while employed in filling the casks;
but notwithstanding this precaution, the natives
rushed down upon them with such fury, and in
such numbers, that forty-feven of the Spaniards
were killed upon the spot, and one man only of
the whole body escaped unhurt. Their com-
mander though wounded in twelve different
places, direced the retreat with pretence of mind
equal to the courage with which he had led them
on in the engagement, and with much difficulty
they regained their flhips. After this fatal re-
pulle, nothing remained but to haften back to
Cuba with their shattered forces. In their passage
thither they fuflered the nioft ccx-luilite diltrefs
for want of water, that men

c ounded and lickly,

slut up in Ithall vecflls, and cxpofed to the heat
of the torrid zone, cal be luppolcl to endure.

Solmec
Sec NOTI1 XXVI.

B3 O OK Some of them, finking under these calamities

III. died by the way; Cordova, their commander, ex.

~'~'^" pired soon after they landed in Cuba i.
Voyageof NOTWITHSTANDING the disastrous conclusion
Crijalva. of this expedition, it contributed rather to ani.

mate than to damp a spirit of enterprize among
the Spaniards. They had discovered an extenlive
country, situated at no great distance from Cuba,
fertile in appearance, and possessed by a people
far luperior in improvement to any hitherto
known in America. Though they had carried on
little commercial intercourse with the natives,
they had brought off some ornaments of gold, not
considerable in value, but of singular fabric.
These circumfiances, related with the exaggera-
tion natural to men desirous of heightening the
merit of their own exploits, were more than sus-
ficient to excite romantic hopes and expectations.
Great numbers offered to engage in a new expe-
dition. Velasquez, Solicitous to distinguish him-
self by some service 1o meritorious, as might en-
title him to claim the government of Cuba inde-
pendent of the admiral, not only encouraged
their ardour, but at his own expence fitted out
four flips for the voyage. Two hundred and
forty volunteers, among whom were several per-
sons of rank and fortune, embarked in this en-
terprife. The command of it was given to Juan
de Grijalva, a young man of known merit and
courage; with inftruetions to observe with attention
the nature of the countries which he fiould disco-
ver, to barter for gold, and if circumfiances were

inviting,

I Hcrrcra, dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 17, 18. Hiflor. Vcrdladcr:

dela Conquifta de la Ncuva El)ana por Bernal )iaz. dtl CdI
tillo, cap. 1. 7. Oviedo. Iilb. xvii. c. 3. Gominaa, c. 52
P. Martyr de infulis nupcr inventis, p. 329.

inviting, to fettle a colony in fome'proper station. B O O K
He failed from St. Jago de Cuba on the eighth of III.
April one thousand five hundred and eighteen. s
The pilot Alaniinos held the fame course as in the '51'
former voyage, but the violence of the currents Difcovcrs
carrying the ships to the south, the first land which New Spain.
they made was the island of Coz-wmel, to the east of May 1.
Yucatan. As all the inhabitants fled to the woods
and mountains at their approach, they made no
long stay there, and without any remarkable occur-
rence they reached Potonchan on the opposite fide
of the peninsula. The desire of avenging their
countrymen who had been slain there, concurred
iwith their ideas of good policy, in prompting them
to land, that they might chastise the Indians of
that diflri& with such exemplary rigour, as might
firikc terror into all the people around them. But
though they diflcnbarked all their troops, and car-
ried a-fihore tome field-pieces, the Indians fought
with such courage, that the Spaniards gained the
, iatory with difficulty, and were confirmed in
their opinion that the inhabitants of this country
would prove more formidable enemies than any
they had met with in other parts of America.
From Potonchan, they continued their voyage to-
wards the wefl, keeping as near as poflible to the
hore, and caRing anchor every evening, from
dread of the dangerous accidents to which they
might be exposed in an unknown sea. During the
day, their eyes were turned continually towards
land, with a mixture of surprise and wonder at the
beauty of the country, and the novelty of the ob-
jeas which they beheld. Many villages were
Icattered along the coafi, in which they could dif-
tinguifi loulfs of flone that appeared white and
lofty at a dinfance. In the warmth of their admi-
ration, thev fancied thele to be cities adorned with
towrers and pinaclcs; and one of the soldiers

VoJ. 1. R hap-

B O O K pening to remark that this country resembled Spair:

III in its appearance, Grijalva, with universal ap-
'Tr^ plause called it New Spain, the name which still

5 diflinguifhes this extensive and opulent province

June 9. of the Spanish empire in America. They landed
Tabasco. in a river which the natives called Tabasco, and

the fame of their victory at Potonchan having
reached this place, the Cazique not only received
them amicably, but beflowed presents upon them
of such value, as confirmed the high ideas which
the Spaniards had formed with refpeet to the
wealth and fertility of the country. These ideas
were raised fill higher by what occurred at the
place where they next touched. This was confi-
derably to the weft of Tabasco, in the province
Guaxaca. since known by the name of Guaxaca. There

they were received with the refped paid to fupe-
rior beings. The people perfumed them as they
landed with incense of gum copal, and prefcltecd
to them as offerings the most choice delicacies of
their country. They were extremely fond of
trading with them, and in fix days the Spaniards
obtained ornaments of gold, of curious work-
manship, to the value of fifteen thousand pesos,
in exchange for European toys of small price,
The two prisoners whom Cordova had brought
from Yucatan, had hitherto served as interpreters;
but as they did not underhand the language of
this country, the Spaniards learned from the na-
tives by signs, that they were fubjeats of a great
monarch called Montezuma, whole dominion ex-
tended over that and many other provinces. Lcav-
ing this place, with which he had so much realbo
to be pleased, Grijalva continued his course to-
Jule 19. wards the weft. He landed on a finall island,

which he named the island of facrificcs, becauli
there the Spaniards, beheld for the first time, tle
horrid fpe6tacle of human viinms, which thc bar-

barous

barous fuperfiition of the natives offered to their B O 0 K
gods. He touched at another small island, which II.
he called St. John de Ulua. From this place he "
dispatched Pedro de Alvarado, one of his officers, St. ohlrde
to Velasquez,, with a full account of the important ulua.
dilcoveries which he had made, and with all the
treasure that he had acquired by trafficking with
the natives. After the departure of Alvarado, he
himlfclf, with the remaining vessels, proceeded a-
long the coast as far as the river Panuco, the coun-
try fiill appearing to be well peopled, fertile, and
opulent.

SEVERAL of Grijalva's officers contended, that Reao¢iniSr,

it was not enough to have discovered those de- a colony
lightful regions, or to have performed, at their dif- t11"'.
ferent landing-places, the empty ceremony of tak-
ing poflefiion of them for the crown of Castile, and
that their glory was incomplete, unless they plant-
ed a colony in some proper station, which might
not only secure the Spanish nation a footing in the
country, but, with the reinforcements which they
were certain of receiving, might gradually iubjeC
the whole to the dominion of their sovereign. But
the Iquadron had now been above five months at
Tea; the greatest part of their provisions was ex..
hautted, and what rcmanied of their stores bo much
corrupted by the heat of the climate, as to be al-
most unfit for use; they had lolt fobie men by
death; others were sickly; the country was crowd-
ed with people who seemed to be intelligent as well
as brave, .d thcy

! \ere under the government of

one powerful monarch, who could bring them to
ad againfl their invaders with united force. To
plant a colony under to many circurnflances of dif-
advantage, nas to expose it to inevitable defiruc-
lion. Grijalva, though possesld both of ambition
and courage, was dcftitute of the tuperior talents
capable of formllng or executing such a great plan.

R 2 He

B O O K He judged it more prudent to return to Cuba, hav

III. ing fulfilled the purpose of his voyage, and ac-
'-r'- compliihed all that the armament which he com-

s''' manded enabled him to perform. He returned to

St. Jago de Cuba, on the twenty-fixth of Ocober,
from which he had taken his departure about fix
months before*.

Preparati- THIS was the longest as well as the most success-
therexpe- ful voyage which the Spaniards had hitherto made
jition. in the New World. They had discovered that

Yucatan was not an island as they had supposed,
but part of the great continent of America. From
Potonchan they had pursued their course for many
hundred miles along a coast formerly unexplored-,
firetching at first towards the weft, and then turn-
ing to the north; all the country which they had
discovered appeared to be no less valuable than ex-
tensive. As soon as Alvarado reached Cuba, Ve-
lafquez, transported with success so far beyond his
moit sanguine expectations, immediately dispatch-
ed a person of confidence to carry this important
intelligence to Spain, to exhibit the rich produc-
tions of the countries which had been difeovered
by his means, and to solicit such an increase of
authority as might enable and encourage him to
attempt the conquest of them. Without waiting
the return of his messenger, or for the arrival of
Grijalva, of whom he was become so jealous or
distrustful, that he resolved no longer to employ
him, he began to prepare such a powerful arma-
ment, as might prove equal to an enterprise of so
much danger and importance.

BUT as the expedition upon which Velafqucz
was now intent, terminated in conquests of greater

moment

Herrera, dec. 1l. lib. iii. c. i, 2, 9, o1. Bernal ])iaz,
c. 8-17. Oviedo Ilitl. lib. xvii. c. 9. . Gomara, c. 4,'-

moment than what the Spaniards had hitherto at- B 0 0 K
chieved, and led them to the knowledge of a peo-
ple, who, if compared with such of the Americans '*
as were then known, may be confidered as highly
civilised; it is proper to pause before we proceed
to the history of events extremely different from
those which we have already related, in order to
take a view of the slate of the New World when
first discovered, and to contemplate the policy and
manners of the rude uncultivated tribes that occu-
pied all the parts of it, with which the Spaniards
were at this time acquainted.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK IV.

THE
I ISTO R Y

O F
A M E R IC A.

B K IV.

TWENTY-SIX years had now elapsed finceB 00 K
Columbus conduaed the people of Europe to IV.
the New World. During that period the Spa- r"'
niards had made great progress in exploring its of America
various regions. They had visited all the islands we'e thn
scattered in different clutters through that part of
the ocean which flows in between North and South
America. They had failed along the eaflern coast
of the continent fiom the river De la Plata to the
bottom of the Mexican gulf, and had found that
it firetched without interruption through this vast
portion of the globe, They had discovered the
great Southern Ocean, which opened new prof-
pets in that quarter. They had acquired btme
knowledge of the coast of Florida, which led them
to obfcrve the continent as it extended in an op-
pofite direaion; and though they pufied their
discoveries no farther towards the north, other

nations

B3 K nations had visited those parts which they ne-

Iv. gle&ed. The English, in a voyage, the motives
^-i-y and success of which ihall be related in another

part of this History, had failed along the coast
of America from Labrador to the confines of Flo-
rida; and the Portuguese, in quest of a shorter
passage to the East Indies, had ventured into the
northern seas, and viewed the fame regions"
Thus at the period where I have chosen to take
a view of the state of the New World, its extent
was known almost from its northern extremity
to thirty-five degrees south of the equator. The
countries which firetched fiom thence to the
southern boundary of America, the great empire
of Peru, and the extensive dominions fulje6t to
the sovereigns of Mexico, were flill undifco-
vered.

ITh vast WHEN we contemplate the New World, the
theNeow first circumstance that strikes us is its immense
World. extent. It was not a finall portion of the earth,

so inconsiderable that it might have elcaped the
observation or research of former ages, which
Columbus discovered. He made known a new
hemisphere, of greater extent than either Europe,
or Asia, or Africa, the three noted tiivifions of
the ancient continent, and not inuch inferior il
dinenfions to a third part of the habitable globe.

AMERICA is remarkable not only for its nlagni-

tude, but for its position. It stretches from the
northern polar circle to a high southern latitude,
above fifteen hundred miles beyond the farthell
extremity of the old continent on that fide of the
line. A country of such extent pafles through all
the climates capable of becoming the habitation of
ynan, and fit for yielding the various productions

peculinr
Ilerrera, dec. I. lib. vi. c. ii.

peculiar either to the temperate or to the torrid B O O K
regions of the earth. IV.

NEXT to the extent of the New World, the '--i

grandeur of the objects which it prefeuts to view Gand ob-
is molt apt to firike the eye of an 9bferver.rentsto
Nature seems herb to have carried on her opera-view.
lions with a bolder hand, and to have distinguish-
ed the features of this country by a peculiar mag-
nificence. The mountains of America are much Itsmoun-
superior in height to those in the other divifions'tain,
of the globe. Even the plain of Quito, which
may be confidered as the base of the Andes, is
elevated farther above the sea than the top of
the Pyrenees. 'This stupendous ridge of the An-
des, no less remarkable for extent than eleva-
tion, riles in different places more than one third
above the Pike of Teneriffe, the highest land in
the ancient hemisphere. The Andes may literal-
ly be said to hide their heads in the clouds; the
florms often roll, and the thunder burits below
their summits, which, though exposed to the rays
of the fun in the center of the torrid zone, are
covered with everlasting snows '.

FROM those lofty mountains descend rivers ver.

proportionally large, with which the fireams in
the ancient continent are not to be compared,
either for length of course, or the vail body of
water which they roll towards the ocean. The
5Maragnon, the Orinoco, the Plata, in South
America, the Miffifippi and St. Laurence in
North America, flow in such spacious channels,
that, long before they feel the influence of the
tide, they resemble arms of the sea rather than
;ivcrs of frcfh water t.

THE

* See NOTE XXVII.
)1 See NOTE XXVIII.

BOO K THE lakes of- the New World are no less cc.

1V. fpicuous for grandeur than its mountains and
'^y rivers. There is nothing in other parts of the

globe which relclibles the prodigious chain oif
lakes in North America. They may properly be
termed inland ieas of fresh water; and even those
of the second or third class in magnitude, are of
larger circuit than the greatcft lake of the ancient
continent.

THE New WMorld is of a form extremely fa.

Jts ,,,, f -vourable to commercial intercourse. When a
v;,u;.l)leito continent, like Africa, is composed of one vast
cicrcc:. solid mass, unbroken by arms of the sea pene-

trating into its interior parts, with few large ri-
vers, and thole at a considerable diitance from
each other, the greater part of it seens defiined
to remain for ever uncivilized, and to be debar.
red from any aFtive or enlarged communication
-with the relt of mankind. When, like Europe,
a continent is opened by inlets of the ocean of
vast extent, such as the Mediterranean and Baltic;
or when, like Asia, its coast is broken by deep
bays advancing far into the country, such as the
Black Sea, the gulfs of Arabia, of Persia, of
Bengal, of Siam, and of Leotang; when the fur-
rounding fcas arc fillcd wvih large and fertile il-
lands, and the continent iffelf watered with a va-
riety of navigable rivers, tlofe' regions may be
laid: to pofFcfswhitcver can facilitate the progrclf
of their inhabitants in commerce and improvement.
In all thcfe rel'pects America may bear a compa-
nilon wilh the other quarters of the globe. The
gulf of Mlexico, which flows in between North and
:out h America, may he conlidered as a Mcditer-
ranean lea, whlic l opens a maritime cooimmerce witli
anl the fertile countries 1)b vIhich it is incircled.
'.T'he iflinds lf;itcredd ii it arc inferior only to thlof

ii!

it the Indian Archipelago, in number, in magni- B O K
ude, and in value. As we firetch along the IV,
northern division of the American hemisphere, '-
the Bay of Chefapeak presents a spacious inlet,
which conduids the navigator far into the interior
arts of provinces no lets fertile than extensive-;
and if ever the progress of culture and population
fball mitigate the extreme rigour of the climate in
the more northern diftrits of America, Hudson's
Bay may become as subservient to the commercial
intercourse in that quarter of the globe, as the
Baltic is in Europe. The other great portion of
the New World is encompassed on every fide by
thefea, except one narrow neck, which separates
the Atlantic from the Pacific Ocean; and though
t be not opened by spacious bays or arms of the
ea, its interior parts are rendered acceflible by a
umber of large rivers, fed by so many auxiliary
ireams, flowing in such various directions, that,
without any aid from the hand of industry and art,
n inland navigation may be carried on through
all the provinces from the river De la Plata to the
gulfof Paria. Nor is this bounty of nature con.
ined to the southern division of America; its
northern continent abounds no less in rivers which
re navigable almost to their sources, and by its
innmcinfe chain of lakes provision is made for an
inland communicatiop, more extensive and com-
modious than in any quarter of the globe. The
countries firetching from the gulf of Darien on
one fide, to that of California on the other, which
sori the chain that binds the two parts of the
Ancrican continent together, are not destitute of
peculiar advantages. Their coast on one fide is
anaflcd by the Atlantic Ocean, on the other by
'lie Pacific. Some of their rivers flow into the
fornier, tonie into the latter, and secure to them
ll tlhe commercial benefits that may result from a
t'lmiuntlicatioi with both.

Buo

B O OK BUT what most distinguishes America from othci

Iv. parts of the earth, is the peculiar temperature ot
.-r- its climate, and the different laws to which it i<
Tempera-
tureofits fubje& with refpet to the diltribution of heat and
.irna'c!. cold. We cannot determine precisely the portion

of heat felt in any part of the globe, merely by
measuring its distance from the equator. The cli.
mate of a country is affected, in tome degree, by
its elevation above the sea, by the extent of conti-
nent, by the nature of the foil, the height of ad-
jacent mountains, and many other circumfirnces.
The influence of these, however, is, from various
causes, less considerable in the greater part of the
ancient continent; and from knowing the position
of any country there, we can pronounce with more
certainty what will be the warmth of its climate,
and the nature of its produicions.

Predomi- THE maxims which are founded upon obferva.
· CoI. tion of our hemisphere will not apply to the other.

There, cold predominates. The rigour of the
frigid zone extends over half of that which ihould
be temperate by its position. Countries where the
grape and the fig ftiould ripen, are buried under
snow one half of the year; and the lands situated
in the fame parallel with the nmof fertile and bcf
cultivated provinces in Europe, are chilled with
perpetual frosts, which almofi destroy the powcr
of vegetation . As we advanced to those parts
of America which lie in the fame parallel with
the provinces of Asia and Africa, blessed with an
uniform enjoyment of such genial warmth as is
inoll friendly to life and vegetation, the dominion
of cold continues to be felt, and winter, though
during a fiort period, often reigns with cxtrclee
fcvcrity. If we procced along the American con-
tinent into the torrid zone, we shall find the cold

prcvalcint
See NOTE XXIX.

prevalent in- the New World extending itself also B o K
to this region of the globe, and mitigating the Iv.
excess of its fervour. While the negro on the '
coast of Africa is scorched with unremitting heat,
the inhabitants of Peru breathes an air equally
mild and temperate, and is perpetually shaded
under a canopy of grey clouds, which intercept
the fierce beams of the fun, without obftruding
his friendly influence- . Along the eafrern coait
of America, the climate, though more similar to
that of the torrid zone in other parts of the earth,
is nevertheless considerably milder than those
countries of Asia and Africa which lie in the lame
latitude. If from the southern tropic we continue
our progress to the extremity of the American con-
tinent, we meet with frozen seas, and countries
horrid, barren, and scarcely habitable for cold,
sooner than in the north t.

VARIOUS causes combine in rendering the cli- Causes o:
mate of America so extremely different from- thatthis'
of the ancient continent. Though the utmolf
extent of America towards the north be not yet
discovered, we know that it advances nearer to the
pole than either Europe or Asia. The latter have
large seas to the north, which arc open during part
ofthe year; and even when covered with ice, the
wind that blows over them is lesc intensely cold
than that which blows over land in the fame high
latitudes. But in America the land firetches from
the river St. Laurence towards the pole, and
spreads out inmmenfely to the weft. A chain of
enormous mountains, covered with snow and ice,

runs

* Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. p. 453. Anson's Voyage, p.

t Anson's Voyage, p. 74; and Voyag de Qduiros, chez Hist.
ti. des Voyages, tomn. xiv. p. 83. Richard Hilt. Natur. d-
A ir i ;* 3.5, &c.

B O K runs through all this dreary region. The wind, ir

IV. pafling over such an extent of high and frozen laud
^-atr becomes so impregnated with cold, that it acquire:

a piercing keenness, which it retains in its progref
through warmer climates, and is not entirely nliti
gated until it reach the Gulph of Mexico. Ovet
all the continent of North America, a north-welf
terly wind and excessive cold are fynonymiious
terms. Even in the most sultry weather, the mo-
ment that the wind veers to that quarter, its pene.
trating influence is felt in a transition from heat to
cold, no less violent than sudden. To this power.
ful cause we may ascribe the extraordinary donri
nion of cold, and its violent inroads into the fou
them provinces in that part of the globe .

OTHER cauies no lcfs remarkable, diminish tL

acaive power of heat in those parts of the Ancrica
continent which lie between the tropics. i a!
that portion of the globe, the wind blows in a
invariable direction from east to weft. As thi
wind blows its course across the ancient continent
'it arrives at the countries which firetch along tih
western shore of Africa, inflamed with all the ier
particles which it hath collected from the fulr
plains of Asia, and the burning sands in the Afi
can defarts. The coast of Africa is, accordingl
the region of the earth which feels the mot ftrcll
heat, and is expoled to the unmitigated ardour
the torrid zone. But this fame wind which brini
filch an acceflion of warmth to the countries ly)i
between the river of Senegal and Cafraria, tralv
les the Atlantic Occan before it reaches the Aicr
can fhorc. It is cooled in its passage over this 'a
body of water, and is felt as a refreshing gale al°o
the coasts of Brasil- -, and Guiana, rcnderilg tl1'

coulltntI

* Clarlcvoix I-ill. de Nov. Fr. iii. i65'. l; ln. genr
Voyages, torn. xv. 215, &c. 1'' Sec NOTE XXX.

countries, though among the warmest in America, B 0 O K
temperate, when compared with thole which lie iv.
oppolite to them in Africa . As this wind ad- T"
vances in its couric across America, it meets with
immense plains, covered with impenetrable forefis,
or occupied by large rivers, mariles, and l-tgnat-
ing vwaters, where it can recover no conidlerable
degree of heat. At length it arrives at the Andes,
which run from north to louth throngh the whole
continent. In palling over their elevated and fi'o-
zen summits, it is so thoroughly cooled, that the
greater part of the countries beyond them hardly
feel the ardour to which they teem exposed by their
situation t. In the other provinces of Americ.:,
from Tierra Firmne weftvard to the Mexican en-
pire, the heat of the climate is tempered, in fobme
places, by the elevation of the land above the sea,
in others, by their extraordinary humidity, and
in all, by the enormous mountains scattered over
this trad. The islands of America in the torrid
zone are either small or mountainous, and are
fanned alternately by refreshing sea and land-
breezes.

TiHE causes of the extraordinary cold towards
the southern limits of America, and in the leas
beyond it, cannot be alcenrained in a nanner
equally satisfying. It was long supposed that a
vast continent, diftiuguifhed by the name of Terra
Auli frais Incognita, lay between the fouiherm cx-
trelity of America and the Antari-tic pole. Tlhe
lame principles which account for the extraordi-
nary degree of cold in the northern regions of
America, were employed in order to explain that
which is, felt at Cape Holr' and the adjacent coun-

tries.

* See NOTE XXXI.
' Acofta Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. ii. c. it. Buffon Il'1

Naturelle, &c. tom. ii. 512, &C, ix. 107, &c. Olborn's Col-
let. of Voyages, ii. I. 868.

B O O K tries. The immense extent of the southern conti.

IV. nent, and the large rivers which it poured into
"n" the ocean, were mentioned and admitted by phi.

lofophers, as causes sufficient to occasion the uni-
fual sensation of cold, and the still more uncon-
mon appearances of frozen seas in that region of
the globe. But the imaginary continent to which
such influence was ascribed, having been searched
for in vain, and the space which it was supposed
to occupy, having been found to be an open sea,
new conjectures must be formed with refped to the
causes of a temperature of climate so extremely
different from that which we experience in coun-
tries removed at the fame distance from the oppo.
site pole *.

Condition AFTER contemplating those permanent and cha.
whtvenfirft racteriftic qualities of the American continent
difcovre. which arise from the peculiarity of its situation.

and the disposition of its parts, the next objet that
merits attention is its condition when firit disco-
vered, as far as that depended upon the induflry
and operations of man. The effets of human
ingenuity and labour are more extensive and con-
fiderable, than even our vanity is apt at firfr to
imagine. When we survey the face of the habi.
table globe, no small part of that fertility and beau-
ty, which we ascribe to the hand of nature, is the
work of man. His efforts, when continued through
a fuccefflon of ages, change the appearance ani
improve the qualities of the earth. As a great
part of the ancient continent has long been occu-
pied by nations far advanced in its arts and indus-
try, our eye is accustomed to view the earth in
that form which it affumcs when rendered fit to be
the residence of a numerous race of men, and to
supply them with nourishment.

BuT
# Sec NOTE XXXII.

BUT in the New World, the slate of mankind B O O K

was ruder, and the afpeft of Nature extremely IV.
different. Throughout all its vast regions, there

, °

, . i i i

r Rude and

were only two monarchies remarkable for extent uncultiva-
of territory, or distinguished by any progress in ted
improvement. The reft of this continent was pof-
fefled by small independent tribes, destitute of arts
and industry, and neither capable to correct the
defets, nor desirous to meliorate the condition of
that part of the earth allotted to them for their
habitation. Countries, occupied by such people,
were almofl in the fame state as if they had been
without inhabitants. Immense forests covered a
great part of the uncultivated earth; and as the
hand of industry had not taught the rivers to run
in a proper channel, or drained off the stagnating
water, many of the most fertile plains were over-
flowed with inundations, orconverted into marshes.
In the southern provinces, where the warmth of
the fun, the moisture of the climate, and the ser-
tility of the foil, combine in calling forth the most
vigorous powers of vegetation, the woods are so
choked with its rank luxuriance, as to be almost
impervious, and the surface of the ground is hid
from the eye under a thick covering of ihrubs
and herbs and weeds. In this slate of wild unaf-
fifled nature, a great part of the large provinces
in South America, which extend from the bottom
of the Andes to the sea, flill remain. The Euro-
pean colonies have cleared and cultivated a few
spots along the coast, but the original inhabitants,
as rude and indolent as ever, have done nothing
to open or improve a country, possessing almost
every advantage of situation and climate. As we
advance towards the northern provinces of Ame-
rica, Nature continues to wear the fame unculti-
vated arped, and in proportion as the rigour of the
climate increases, appears more delblate and horrid.

VOL. I. S There,

B 0 O K There, the foreils, though not encumbered with

IV. the fame exuberance of vegetation, are of equal
~'T~s extent; prodigious marihes overspread the plains,

and few marks appear of human activity in any
attempt to cultivate or embelliih the earth. No
wonder that the colonies tent from Europe were
aflonifhed at their first entrance into the New
World. It appeared to them waste, solitary, and
uninviting. When the English began to fettle in
America, they termed the countries of which
they took possession, The Wilderness. Nothing but
their eager expectation of finding mines of gold,
could have induced the Spaniards to penetrate
through the woods and marshes of America, where,
at every ftep, they observed the extreme difference
between the uncultivated face of Nature, and that
which it acquires under the forming hand of in-
duftry and art..

Unwlole- THE labour and operations of man not only im-
some. prove and embellish the earth, but render it more

wholesome, and friendly to life. When any re-
gion lies neglected and deflitute of cultivation, the
air flagnates in the woods, putrid exhalations arise
from the waters; the surface of the earth, loaded
with rank vegetation, feels not the purifying in-
fluence of the fun; the malignity of the diftem-
pers natural to the climate increases, and new ma-
ladies no less noxious are engendered. Accord-
ingly) all the provinces of America, when firfl
discovered, were found to be remarkably un-
healthy. This the Spaniards experienced in every
expedition into the New World, whether defiined
for conquefl or settlement. Though by the natu-
ral constitution of their bodies, their habitual tem-
perance, and the persevering vigour of their
minds, they were as much formed as any people

inS
See NOTE XXXIII.

in Europe for astive service in a sultry climate, B 0 0 K
they felt severely the fatal and pernicious qualities IV
of those uncultivated regions through which they T
marched, or where they endeavoured to plant co-
lonies. Great numbers were cut off by the un-
known and violent diseases with which they were
infected. Such as survived the deitrudive rage
of those maladies, were not exempted from the
noxious effects of the climate. They returned to
Europe, according to the description of the early
Spanish historians, feeble, emaciated, with lan-
guid looks, and complexions of such a ficklv
yellow colour, as indicated the unwholelome
temperature of the countries where they had re-
fided".

THE uncultivated state of the New World as- Its animais.

feted not only the temperature of the air, but the
qualities of its productions. The principle of life
seems to have been less adtive and vigorous there,
than in the ancient continent. Notwithstanding
the vast extent of America, and the variety of its
climates, the different species of animals peculiar
to it are much fewer in proportion, than those of
the other hemisphere. In the islands, there were
only four kinds of quadrupeds known, the largest
of which did not exceed the size of a rabbit. On
the continent, the variety was greater, and though
the individuals of each kind could not fail of mul-
tiplying exceedingly, when almost unmolested by
men, who were neither io numerous, nor lo united
in society, as to be formidable enemies to the ani-
mal creation, the number of difiinC species must
be confidered as extremely finall. Of two hun-
dred differcnt kinds of animals spread over the
face of the earth, only about one third exiled

S 2 in

* Gomara Hist. c. 20. 22. Oviedo Hist. lib. ii. c. 13. lib.
v. c. Io. P. MIirtyr, Epilt. 545. Decad. p. 176.

B 0 0 Kin America, at the time of its discovery*. Nature

IV. was not only less prolific in the New World, but
^-T^ {she appears likewise to have been less vigorous in

her producions. The animals originally belong-
ing to this quarter of the globe appear to be of an
inferior race, neither so robust, nor so fierce, as
those of the other continent. America gives birth
to no creature of such bulk as to be compared
with the elephant or rhinoceros, or that equals
the lion and tyger in strength and ferocityt. The
Tapyr of Brasil, the quadruped of the first mag-
nitude in the New World, is not larger than a
calf of fix months old. The Puma and Jaguar,
its fiercest beafis of prey, which the Europeans
have inaccurately denominated lions and tygers,
possess neither the undaunted courage of the for-
mer, nor the ravenous cruelty of the latter t.
They are inactive and timid, hardly formidable to
man, and often turn their backs upon the least
appearance of refiflance [. The fame qualities in
the climate of America which flinted the growth,
and enfeebled the spirit, of its native animals,
have proved pernicious to such as have migrated
into it voluntarily from the other continent, or have
been transported thither by the Europeans§. The
bears, the wolves, the deer of America, are not
equal in size to those of the Old World¶. Most
of the domestic animals, with which the Europeans
stored the provinces wherein they fettled, have
degenerated with refped to bulk or quality, in

a coun-

* Buffon Hist. Naturelle, tom. ix. p. 86. 1t See

NOTE XXXIV. .1 Buffon Hilt. Natur. tom. ix. p.
87. Margravii Hill. Nat. Brasil, p. 229. [ Buffon Hilt.
Natur. ix. 13. 203. Acolla Hill. lib. iv. c. 34. Pifonis
Hifi. p. 6. Herrera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. i. lib. x. c. 13.

§ Churchill, v. p. 691. Ovalle Relat. of Chili Church. iii.

p.Io. Sommario de Oviedo, c. 14-22. Voyage du Des
Marchais, iii. 229. ¶ Buffon Hill. Natur. ix. 103.
Kalm Travels, i. 202. Biot Voy. d ?Y'-·nce Equinox, p. 339.

a country whose temperature and foil seem to be B 0 0
less favourable to the strength and perfedtion of IV.
the animal creation *. T.

THE fame causes which checked the growth and Infeasand

reptiles

the vigour of the more noble animals, were friend-
ly to the propagation and increase of reptiles and
infects. Though this is not peculiar to the New
World, and those odious tribes, the offspring of
heat, moisture, and corruption, infest every part
of the torrid zone; they multiply faster, perhaps,
in America, and grow to a more monstrous bulk.
As this country is, on the whole less cultivated,
and less peopled, than the other quarters of the
earth, the active principle of life waftes its force
in productions of this inferior form. The air is
often darkened with clouds of infecs, and the
ground covered with Shocking and noxious rep-
tiles. The country around Porto-Bello swarms
with toads in such multitudes, as hide the surface
of the earth. At Guyaquil, snakes and vipers are
hardly less numerous. Carthagena is infested with
numerous flocks of bats, which annoy not only
the cattle but inhabitants t, In the islands, legi-
ons of ants have, at different times, consumed
every vegetable production I, and left the earth
entirely bare, as if it had been burnt up with fire,
The damp forests, and rank foil of the countries
on the banks of the Orinoco and Maragnon, teem
with almost every offensive and poisonous creature,
which the power of a sultry fun can quicken into
life §.

THB

* See NOTE XXXV. F Voyagede Ulloa, tom. i,
p. 89. Id. p. 147. Herrera, dec. If. lib. ii. c. 3. 19.

t See NOTE XXXVI. § Voyage de Condamine,

p. 167. Gumilla, iii. 120, &c. Hist. gener. des Voyages,
xiv. 317. Dumont Memoires fur l Louifiane, i. o08. Sorne
mario de Oviedo, c. 52-62.

O O K THE birds of the New World are not diftin-
IV. guifhed by qualities so conspicuous and charate-

riftical, as those which we have observed in its
Bids. quadrupeds. Birds are more independent of man,

and less asseted by the changes which industry and
labour make upon the state of the earth. They
have a greater propensity to migrate from one
country to another, and can gratify this infiindt of
their nature without difficulty or danger. Hence
the number of birds common to both continents is
much greater than that of quadrupeds; and even
such as are peculiar to America nearly resemble
those with which mankind were acquainted in
similar regions of the ancient hemisphere. The
American birds of the torrid zone, like those of
the fame climate in Afa and Africa, are decked in
plumage, which dazzles the eye with the vivid
beauty of its colours; but nature, satisfied with
cloathing them in this gay dress, has denied mofi
of them that melody of found, and variety of
notes, which catches and delights the ear. The
birds of the temperate climates, there, in the fame
manner as in our continent, are less splendid in
their appearance, but, in compensation for that
defedt, have all the power and fwectnefs of music
in their voice. In some diftri&s of America the
unwholesome temperature of the air feelms to be
unfavourable even to this part of the creation.
The number of birds is less than in other coun-
tries, and the traveller is firuck with the amazing
solitude and silence of its forests*. It is remark-
able, however, that America, while the quadru-
peds are so dwarfifh and dastardly, should produce
the Condor, which is intitled to pre-eminence over

all

* Bouguer Voy. au Pcrou, 17. Chanvalon, Voyage a la

Martinique, p. 96. Warren Defcript. Surinam. Osborn's
Collca. ii. 924. Lettres Elis. xxiv. p. 339. Cllarlev. Ilitt.
de la Nouv. France, iii, I55.

all the flying tribe, in bulk, strength, and in cou- B 0 O K
rage -. IV.

THE foil, in a continent so extensive as Ameri-

ca, muff of course be extremely various. In each
of its provinces, we shall find some distinguishing
peculiarity, the description of which belongs to
those who write their particular history. In gene-
ral we may observe, that the moiflure and cold,
which predominate so remarkably in all parts of
America, muff have great influence upon the na-
ture of its foil; countries lying in the fame pa-
rallel with those regions which never feel the ex-
treme rigour of winter in the ancient continent,
are frozen over in America during a great part of
the year. Chilled by this intense cold, the ground
never acquires warmth sufficient to ripen the fruits,
which are found in the corresponding parts of the
other continent, If we would rear in America,
the productions which abound in any particular
diftria of the world, we must advance several de-
grees nearer to the line than in the other hemif-
phere, as it requires such an increase of heat to
counterbalance the natural frigidity of the foil
and climate t. At the Cape of Good Hope, feve-
ral of their plants, and fruits peculiar to the coun-
tries within the tropics, are cultivated with fuc-
cess; whereas at St. Augustine, in Florida, and
Charles-Town, in South-Carolina, though confi-
derably nearer to the line, they cannot be brought
to thrive with equal certainty t. But, if allowance
be made for this diversity, the foil of America is
naturally as rich and fertile as in any part of the
earth. As the country was thinly inhabited, and

by

Voyage de Ulloa, i. 363. Voyage de Condamine, 17S.

Buffon Hilt. Nat. xvi. 184. Voyage du Des Marchais, iii.
20o. t. See NOTE XXXVII. : See NOTE XXXVIII,

B o o Kby a people of little indufiry, who had none of

IV. the domestic animals, which civilized nations rear
~r-' in such vast numbers, the earth was not exhausted

by their consumption. The vegetable productions,
to which its fertility gave birth, often remained
untouched, and being suffered to corrupt on its
surface, returned with increase into its bosom*.
As trees and plants derive a great part of their
nourishment from air and water, if they were not
destroyed by man and other animals, they would
render to the earth more, perhaps, thsn they take
from it, and feed rather than impoverish it. Thus
the unoccupied foil of America, might go on en-
riching for many ages. The vast number as well
as enormous size of the trees in America, indi-
cate, the extraordinary vigour of the foil in its
native slate. W-hen the Europeans firit began to
cultivate the New World, they were aflonifhed at
the luxuriant power of vegetation in its virgin
mould; and in several places the ingenuity of the
planter is still employed in diminishing and wafting
its superfluous fertility, in order to bring it down
to a state fit for useful culture t.

How was HAVING thus surveyed the state of the New
peopled? World at the time of its discovery, and confidered

the peculiar features and qualities which diftin-
guilh and charaterife it, the next inquiry that
merits attention is, H-low was America peopled?
By what course did mankind migrate from the
one continent to the other ? and in what quarter
is it most probable that a communication was
opened between them?

x Buffon, Hist. Natur. i. 242. Kalm, i. 151.
l' Charlcvoix, I-Iift. de Nouv. Fran. iii. 405. Voyage dlu

Des Marclais. iii. 229. Lery ap. Dc Bry, part iii. p. 174.
See NOTE XXXIX.

WE know, with infallible certainty, that all B 0 0 K
the human race spring from the fame source, and IV.
that the descendants of one man, under the pro- -r
tetion as well as in obedience to the command Notraditi-
of Heaven, multiplied and replenished the earth. ingitano
But neither the annals nor the traditions of na-th"m'fev*"
tions reach back to those remote ages, in which
they took pofTeffion of the different countries
where they are now fettled. We cannot trace the
branches of this firfl family, or point out with
certainty the time and manner in which they divid-
ed and spread over the face of the globe. Even
among the most enlightened people, the period of
authentic hiflory is extremely short, and every
thing prior to that is fabulous or obscure. It is
not fprprifing, then, that the unlettered inhabi-
tants of America, who have no solicitude about
futurity, and little curiosity concerning what is
past, should be altogether unacquainted with their
own original. The Californians and Efkimaux,
in particular, who occupy those countries in
America which approach nearest to the ancient
continent, are so remarkably rude, that it is al-
together vain to search among them for such in-
formation as might discover the place from
whence they came, or the ancestors of whom
they are descended *. Whatever light has been
thrown on this subje&t, is derived, not from the
natives of America, but from the inquisitive ge-
nius of their conquerors.

WHEN the people of Europe unexpeaedly dif- Varioat
covered a New World, removed at a vast dif-t'"°'
tance from every part of the ancient continent
which was then known, and filled with inhabi-
tants whose appearance and manners differed re-
markably fiom the reft of the human fpecics,
the queflion concerning their original became

naturally
* Venegas Hilt, of California, i. 60.

13 OK naturally an object of curiosity and attention.

IV. The theories and speculations of ingenious men
^T^ó with refpeat to this fubje&, would fill many vo-

lumes; but are often so wild and chimerical, that
I should offer an insult to the understanding
of my readers, if I attempted either to enume-
rate or to refute them. Some have prefurptu.
oufly imagined, that the people of America were
not the offspring of the fame common parent
with the reft of mankind, but that they formed a
separate race of men distinguishable by peculiar
features in the conflitution of their bodies, as well
as in the charaóceriftic qualities of their minds,
Others contend, that they are descended from
some remnant of the antediluvian inhabitants of
the earth, who survived the deluge, which swept
away the greatest part of the human species in the
days of Noah; and prepofieroufly suppose rude,
uncivilised tribes, scattered over an uncultivated
continent, to be the most ancient race of people
on the earth. There is hardly any nation fiom
the north to the south pole, to which some anti-
quary, in the extravagance of conjecEure, has not
alcribed the honour of peopling America, The
Jews, the Canaanites, the Phoenicians, the Car-.
thaginians, the Greeks, the Scythians, in antient
times are supposed to have fettled in this western
world. The Chinese, the Swedes, the Norwe-
gians, the Welsh, the Spaniards, are said to have
Itnt colonies thither in latter ages, at different pe-
riods, and on various occasions. Zealous advo-
cates ltand forth to support the refpecEive claims
of thofl people; and though they reft upon no
bctter foundation than the casual refenblalnce of
fomc cuflorns, or the fuppolcd affinity between a
few words in their different languages, much eru-
dition and more zeal have been employed, to
little purpose, in defcnce of the oppofile flyefinl

Th'lioid

iofe regions of conjeAure and controversy be- B o o K
n not to the historian. His is a more limited IV.
ovince, confined to what is eflabliihed by cer- -
n or highly probable evidence. Beyond this I
1 not venture, in offering a few obfcrvations,
ich may contribute to throw some light upon
curious and much agitated queflion.
1. THER E are authors who have endeavoured by Ought not
re conjeaures to account for the peopling Offoundedon
erica. Some have supposed that it was origi- mere con-
ly united to the ancient continent, and disjoin- j¢"
from it by the shock of an earthquake, or the
uption of a deluge. Others have imagined,
t ome vessel being forced from its course by
violence of a westerly wind, might be driven
accident towards the Americau coast, and have
en a beginning to population in that desolate
tinent'. But with refpeft to all those systems,
svain either to reason or inquire, because it is
offible to come to any decision. Such events
they suppose are barely possible, and may have
pened. That they ever did happen, we have
evidence, either from the clear testimony of
ry, or from the obscure intimations of tra,
on.
.NoTHING can be more frivolous or uncer-oronrc-

semblance

than the attempts to discover the original osos manners,
Americans, merely by tracing the rcfenm-
bce between their manners and thote of any
'icular people in the ancient continent. If we
pose two bodies of men, though in the mofi
ote regions of the globe, to be placed in a
:of society similar in its degree of improve-

lment,

PaIrons Remains of Japhet, p. 240. Ancient Univerf
vxx. xx. . 64. P. Feyjoo Teatro Critico, torn. v. p.
c. Acolta Hill. Moral. Novi Orbis, lib. i. c. 16, 9,.

B O O K ment, they mufl feel the fame wants, and e

Iv. the fame endeavours to supply them. The f
,?VT objeEts will allure, the fame passions will anir

them, and the fame ideas and sentiments will;
in their minds. The character and occupati
of the hunter in America must be little differ
from those of an Asiatic, who depends for f
fifience on the chace. A tribe of savages on
banks of the Danube mufi nearly resemble
upon the plains washed by the Miffifippi. Infi
then of presuming, from this similarity, that th
is any affinity between them, we should only c
elude, that the disposition and manners of
are formed by their situation, and arise from I
state of society in which they live. The morn
that begins to vary, the character of a people
change. In proportion as it advances in impro
ment, their manners refine, their power and
lents are called forth. In every part of the ea
the progress of man hath been nearly the fa
and we can trace him in his career from the
Simplicity of savage life, until he atttains the
duftry, the arts, and the elegance of polished
ciety. There is nothing wonderful then in
similitude between the Americans and the
barous nations of our continent. Had L
Garcia, and many other authors, attended tot
they would not have perplexed a fubjedt w
they pretend to illufirate, by their fruitless en
vours to cflablifh an affinity between variousr
of people in the old and new continent, upo0
other evidence than such a resemblance in t
manners as necessarily arises from the fimilaril
their condition. There are, it is true, amongg
ry people tome cufloms, which, as they do not
from any natural xwant or desire peculiar to the
tuation, mlay be denominated usages of arbitrar
ftitution. If between two nations fettled in Ie

rts of the earth, a perfect agreement with re- B o K
ea to any of these should be discovered, one IV.
ght be led to fufpe& that they were connected '--
some affinity. If a nation were found in Ame-
a that consecrated the seventh day to religi-
reft, if in another the first appearance of a
moon was celebrated with festivity, we might
ly ftippofe that the former had derived its
owledge of this usage of arbitrary institution from
Jews, while the latter might be confidered as
thing more than an expreflion of joy natural
man on the return of the planet which guides
d cheers him in the night. The instances of
aoms, merely arbitrary, common to the inhabi-
Its of both hemispheres, are, indeed, so few,
dfo equivocal, that no theory concerning the
plation of the New World ought to be found-
upon them.
,. THE theories which have been formed withorofrelii-
pe to the original of the Americans, from ob- ous ritei
ation of their religious rites and practices, are
less fanciful, and destitute of solid foundation.
en the religious opinions of aly people are
iher the result of rational inquiry, nor derived

the inftrudions of revelation, they must
s be wild and extravagant. Barbarous na-
sare incapable of the former, and have not
ableffed with the advantages arising from the
ter. Still, however, the human mind, even
ereits operations appear mofl wild and capri-
os, holds a course so regular, that in every
and country the dominion of particular paffi-
swill be attended with linilar effets. The fa-
of Europe or America, when filled with fu-
ritious dread of invisible beings, or with in-
iitive solicitude to penetrate into the events of
Urity, trembles alike with fear, or glows with
atience. He has recourse to rites and praEtices

of

B O O K of the fame kind, in order to avert the vengeane

IV. which he supposes to be impending over him,
y "' to divine the secret which is the obje& of his c

riofity. Accordingly, the ritual of fuperftitio
in one continent, seems, in many particulars,
be a transcript of that established in the other, a
both authorise similar institutions, sometimes
frivolous as to excite pity, sometimes so bloo
and barbarous as to create horror. But with
supposing any consanguinity between such dif
nations, or imagining that their religious cere
nies were conveyed by tradition from the one
the other, we may ascribe this uniformity, whi
in many instances seems very amazing, to the
tural operation of superstition and enthusiasm u
the weakness of the human mind.

Not peopled ' 4. WE may lay it down as a certain principle
by any nati- this inquiry, that America was not peopled by a
ohighlyzd nations of the antient continent, which had ma

considerable progress in civilization. The in
bitants of the New World were in a state of to
ety so extremely rude, as to be unacquainted w
those arts which are the first essays of human
genuity in its advance towards improvemn
Even the most cultivated nations of America w
firangers to many of those simple inventions, whi
were almost coeval with society in other part
the world, and were known in the earliest peri
of civil life. From this it is manifest, that
tribes which originally migrated to Amer
came off from nations which must have been
less barbarous than their posterity, at the ti
when they were first discovered by the Europea
For, although the elegant and refined arts n
decline or perilh, amidll the violent shocks ofth
revolutions and disasters to which nations are x
fed, the necessary arts of life, when once tlhy 11
been introduced among the people, are never I

INo

None of the vicissitudes in human affairs assec B 0 0 K
these, and they continue to be praftifed as long as IV.
the race of men exists. If ever the use of iron had 'r- '
been known to the savages in America, or to their
progenitors, if ever they had employed a plough,
a loom, or a forge, the utility of these inventions
would have preserved them, and it is impossible
that they Should have been abandoned or forgot-
ten. We may conclude then, that the Americans
sprung from some people, who were themselves in
such an early and unimproved flage of society, as
to be unacquainted with all the necessary arts
which remained unknown among their poflerity.

5. IT appears no less evident, that America was norfromthe
not peopled by any colony from the more southern gooth'f our
nations of the ancient continent. None of the continent.
rude tribes fettled in that part of our hemisphere
can be supposed to have visited a country so re-
mote. They possessed neither enterprise, nor inge-
nuity, nor power, that could prompt them to un-
dertake, or enable them to perform, such a distant
voyage. That the more civilized nations in Asia
orAfrica are not the progenitors of the Americans
smanifefi, not only from the observations which
have already made concerning their ignorance of
he most simple and necessary arts, but from an
dditional circumstance. Whenever any people
ve experienced the advantages which men enjoy,
ytheir dominion over the inferior animals, they
n neither subsist without the nourishment which
hey afford, nor carry on their operations inde-
endent of their ministry and labour. According*
, the first care of the Spaniards when they fettled
America, was to flock it with all the domestic
inmals of Europe, and if prior to them, the Tyri-
s, the Carthaginians, the Chinese, or any other
olifhed people, had taken poffeflion of that con-

tinent,

B OO K tinent, we fould have found there the animals

IV. peculiar to those regions of the globe where they
Tr*'d ' were originally feated. In all America, however,

there is not one animal, tame or wild, which pro-
perly belongs to the warm, or even the more tem.
perate countries of the ancient continent. The
camel, the dromedary, the horse, the cow, were
as much unknown in America, as the elephant or
the lion. From which it is obvious, that the peo-
ple who first fettled in the western world did not
issue from the countries where those animals
abound, and where men, from having been long
accustomed to their aid, would naturally confider
it, not only as beneficial, but as indispensably ne-
ceffary to the improvement, and even the prefer.
vation of civil society.

Thetwo 6. FROM confidering the animals with which
continents
feemtobe America is stored, we may conclude that the near-
mot conti- eft point of contact between the old and new con.
guous to-
wards the tinents is towards the northern extremity of both
north. and that there the communication was opened

and the intercourse carried on between them. Al
the extensive countries in America which lie withi
the tropics, or approach near to them, are fille
with indigenous animals of various kinds, entire1
different from those in the corresponding region
of the ancient continent. But the northern pro
vinces of the New World abound with many o
the wild animals which are common in such part
of our hemisphere as lie in a similar fituatio
The bear, the wolf, the fox, the hare, the dec
the elk, and several other species frequent the f
refts of North America, no less than those in tli
north of Europe and Asia *. It seems to be ev
dent thea, that the two continents approach eac

oth
* Buffon Hist. Nat. ix. p. 97, &c.

other in this quarter, and are either united, or so B 0 0 K
nearly adjacent, that these animals might pals from IV.
the one to the other. r

7. THE actual vicinity of the two continents is Tlis afcer.

so clearly established by modern discoveries, astainsd by
removes the chief difficulty with refpe&t to the
peopling of America. While those immense re-
gions which firetched eastward from the river
Oby to the iea of Kamchatka were unknown, or
imperfeatly explored, the north east extremities
of our hemisphere were supposed to be so far dif-
tant from any part of the New World, that it was
not easy to conceive how any communication
should have been carried on between them. But
the Ruffians, having fubje&ed the wefiern part of
Siberia to their empire, gradually extended their
knowledge of that vail country, by advancing to-
wards the eafl into unknown provinces. These
were discovered by hunters in their excursions as-
ter game, or by soldiers employed in levying the
taxes, and the court of Moscow estimated the
importance of those countries only by the small
addition which they made to its revenue. At length,
Peter the Great ascended the Ruffian throne. His
enlightened, comprehensive mind, intent upon
every circumfiance that could aggrandize his em-
pire, or render his reign illustrious, discerned con-
sequences of those discoveries, which had escaped
the observation of his ignorant predeceflbrs. He
perceived, that in proportion as the regions of Asia
extended towards the eafi, they must approach
nearer to America; that the communication be-
tween the two continents, which had long been
learched for in vain, would probably be found in
this quarter, and that by opening this intercourse,
tome part of the wealth and commerce of the wel-
tern world might be made to flow into his dorni-

VOL. I. 1' nions

O O K nions by a new channel. Such an object suited
Iv. a genius that delighted in grand schemes. Peter
^^ir* drew up inftrudions with his own hand for prose-

cuting this design, and gave orders for carrying it
into execution-.

His successors adopted his ideas, and pursued

his plan. The officers whom the Ruffian court
employed in this service, had to struggle with tb
many difficulies, that their progress was extreme-
ly flow. Encouraged by some faint traditions
among the people of Siberia, concerning a fuc.
cefsful voyage in the year one thousand fix hun-
dred and forty-eight, round the north-eaif promon-
tory of Asia, they attempted to follow the fame
course. Vessels were fitted out, with this view, at
different times, from the rivers Lena and Kolyma;
but in a frozen ocean, which nature seems not to
have destined for navigation, they were exposed to
many disasters, without being able to accomplifi
their purpose. No vessel fitted out by the Ruffian
court ever doubled this formidable Cape t; we
are indebted for what is known of those extreme
regions of Asia, to the discoveries made in excur-
sions by land. In all those provinces, an opinion
prevails, that countries of great extent and fertility
lie at no considerable distance from their own coafis.
These the Ruffians imagined to be part of America;
and several circumifances concurred not only in
confirming them in this belief, but in persuading
them that some portion of that continent could
not be very remote. Trees of various kinds, un.
known in those naked regions of Asia, are driven
upon the coast by an easterly wind. By the fame
wind, floating ice is brought thither in a few
days; flights of birds arrive annually from the

fame

* Muller Voyages et Decouvertes par les Ruffes, tom. i. p.
4, 5. 14I. -t See NOTE XL.

fame quarter; and a tradition obtains among the B o O K
inhabitants, of an intercourse formerly carried on IV.
with some countries situated to the east.

AFTER weighing all these particulars, and com-

paring the position of the countries in Asia which
they had discovered, with such parts in the north-
weft of America as were already known, the Ruffian
court formed a plan, which would have hardly
occurred to any nation less accustomed to engage
in arduous undertakings, and to contend with great
difficulties. Orders were issued to build two vef-
fels at Ochotz, in the sea of Kamchatka, to fail
on a voyage of discovery. Though that dreary
uncultivated region furnished nothing that could
be of uie in conftruCing them, but some larch
trees; though not only the iron, the cordage,
the fails, and all the numerous articles requisite
for their equipment, but the provisions for vic-
tualling them, were to be carried through the im-
mense defarts of Siberia, along rivers of difficult
navigation, and roads almost impassable, the man-
date of the fpvereign, and the perseverance of the
people, at last surmounted every obstacle. Two
vessels were finished, and, under the command of un74'
the captains Behring and Tfchirikow, failed from
Kamchatka in quest of the New World, in a quar-
ter where it had never been approached. They
Ihaped their course towards the east; and though
a flormi soon separated the vessels, which never re-
joined, and many difafiers besel them, the ex-
pectations from the voyage were not altogether
frustrated. Each of the commanders discovered
land, which to them appeared to be part of the
American continent; and, according to their
observations, it feenis to be situated within a few
degrees of the north-west coalt of California.
Each set onme of his people afiorc ; but in one

T 2 place

BO K place the inhabitants fled as the Ruffians ap,

IV. proached; in another, they carried off those who
~'^S~ landed, and destroyed their boats. The violence

of the weather, and the distress of their crews
obliged both to quit this inhospitable coast. In
their return they touched at several islands, which
stretched in a chain from east to weft between coun-
try which they had discovered and the coast of
Alia. They had some intercourse with the natives,
who seemed to them to resemble the North Ame-
ricans. They presented to the Ruffians the calu-
imet, or pipe of peace, which is a symbol of friend-
ihip universal among the people of North Ame-
rica, and an usage of arbitrary institution, pecu-
liar to them.

THE islands of this new Archipelago have been

frequented by the Ruffian hunters since that time;
but the court seemed to have relinquished its
scheme of prosecuting discoveries in this quarter.
It was unexpectedly resumed in the year one
thousand seven hundred and fixty-eight, and cap-
tain Krenitzin had the command of two finall
vessels fitted out for that purpose. In his voyage
outward he held nearly the fame course with the
former navigators, he touched at the fame islands,
observed their situations and productions more
carefully, and discovered several new islands, with
which they had not fallen in. Though he did not
proceed so far to the east as to revisit the country
which Behring and Tfchirikow supposed to be
part of the American continent, yet, by returning
in a courlf considerably to the north of theirs, he
correced tbme capital mitfakes into which tley
had fallen, and contributed to facilitate the pro-
grefs of future navigators in those seas *.

T1'i t
* Sec NOTE XLT.

THUS the poffibilityofa communication between B O O K
the continents in this quarter relts no longer upon IV.
mere conjeture, but is eflabliJhed by undoubted -_-
evidence*. Some tribe, or some families of wan-
dering Tartars, from the refilefs spirit peculiar to
their race, might migrate to the nearest islands, and,
rude as their knowledge of navigation then was,
might, by passing from one to the other, reach at
length the coast of America, and give a beginning
to population in that continent. The distance be-
tween the Marian or Ladrone islands and the near-
eft land in Asia, is greater than that between the
part of America which the Ruffians discovered, and
the coast of Kamchatka; and yet the inhabitants of
those islands are manifestly of Asiatic extra&. If,
notwithstanding their remote situation, we admit
that the Marian islands were peopled from our con-
tinent, distance alone is no reason why we should
hesitate about admitting that the original of the
Americans may be from the fame source. It is
probable that future navigators in those seas, by
steering farther to the north, may find that the
continent of America approaches frill nearer to
Asia. According to the information of the bar-
barous people, who inhabit the country about the
north-ealt promontory of Asia, there lies, off the
coast, a small island, to which they fail in less than
a day. From that, they can descry a large conti-
nent, which, according to their description, is co-
vered with forests, and pofcifed by people. whose
language they do not understand t. By them they
are supplied with the skins of martens, an animal
unknown in the northern parts of Siberia, and
which is never found but in countries abounding
with trees. If we could rely on this account, we
might conclude that the American continent is fc-

paratcd

Muller's Voyages, torn. i. 248, &c. 267. 276.
Muller's Voy. ct I)ccouv. i. 166.

B O O K parated from ours only by a narrow firait, and all

IV. the difficulties with refpet to the communication
Ts~~' between them would vanish. Perhaps the merit

of ascertaining this is reserved for the sovereign
now feated on the throne of Peter the Great, who,
by perfecing his plan, may add this splendid event
to those which already distinguish her reign.

Another IT is likewise evident from recent discoveries,
communi- that an intercoufe between our continent and Ame-
cation by
the north- rica might be carried on with no less facility from
weft. the north-wefl extremities of Europe. As early
A. D S30. as the ninth century, the Norwegians discovered

Greenland, and planted colonies there. The com-
munication with that country, after a long inter-
ruption, was renewed in the last century. Some
Lutheran and Moravian missionaries, prompted
by zeal for propagating the Christian faith, have
ventured to fettle in this frozen and uncultivated
region *. To them we are indebted for much cu-
rious information with refpea to its nature and
inhabitants. We learn that the north-west coast
of Greenland is separated from America by a very
narrow strait; that, at the bottom of the bay into
which this strait conduEts, it is highly probable
that they are united t; that the inabitants of the
two countries have intercourse with one another;
that the Efquimaux in America perfectly refem-
ble the Greenlanders in their aspet, dress,
and mode of living; that some sailors, who had
acquired the knowledge of a few words in the
Greenlandiih language, reported that these were
A. D. 764. underfiood by the Efquimaux; that, at length,

aMoravian missionary, well acquainted with the
language of Greenland, having visited the coun-
try of the Efquimaux, found, to his aftoniflunent,

that

* Crantz Hist. of Greenl. i. 242. 244. Prevot Hist. Gen,
des Voyages, tom. xv. 152, not. (96.) t Eggede, p. 2, 3.

that they spoke the fame language with the Green- B o o K
landers, and were in every refpe& the fame peo- IV.
pie, and he was accordingly received and enter-
tained by them as a friend and a brother*.

BY these decisive fa6ts, not only the confangui-

nity of the Efquimaux and Greenlanders is eita-
blilhed, but the possibility of peopling America
from the north of Europe is demonfirated. If
the Norwegians, in a barbarous age, when science
had not begun to dawn in the north of Europe,
possessed such naval skill as to open a communica-
tion with Greenland, their anceflors, as much
addiEted to roving by sea, as the Tartars are to
wandering by land, might at some more remote
period, accomplish the fame voyage, and fettle a
colony there, whose descendents might in pro-
grefs of time, migrate into America. But if,
inflead of venturing to fail directly from their
own coast to Greenland, we suppose that the Nor-
wegians held a more cautious course, and ad.
vanced from Shetland to the Feroe Islands, and
from them to Iceland, in all which they had
planted colonies, their progress may have been
so gradual, that this navigation cannot be confi,
dered as either longer or more hazardous, than
those voyages which that hardy and enterprising
race of men is known to have performed in eve-
ry age.

8. THoUGH it be possible that America mayprobably

have received its first inhabitants from our conti- peopled
nent, either by the north-west of Europe or the rOrtlfh
north-east of Asia, there seems to be good reason
for supposing that the progenitors of all the
American nations, from Cape Horn to the south-
crn confines of Labrador, migrated from the lat-
ter rather than the former. The Efquimaux are

the
i Crantz Hist. of Grcenl. . 261, 262.

B O O K the only people in America, who, in their asped

Iv. or character, bear any resemblance to the nor-
"T- ' them Europeans. They are manifefily a separate

species of men, diftin& from all the nations of
that continent, in language, in disposition, and
in habits of life. Their original, then, may war-
rantably be traced up to that iource which I have
pointed out. But, among all the other inhabi-
tants of America, there is luch a firiking fimili-
tude in the form of their bodies, and the qualities
of their minds, that, notwithfianding the diverfi-
ties occasioned by the influence of climate, or
unequal progress in improvement, we mufl pro-
nounce them to be descended from one source.
There may be a variety in the shades, but we
can every where trace the fame original colour.
Each tribe has something peculiar which diflin-
guifhes it, but in all of them we difeern certain
features common to the whole race. It is re-
markable, that in every peculiarity, whether in
persons or dispositions, which charadterife the
Americans, they have some refeniblance to the
rude tribes scattered over the north-east of Asia,
but almost ione to the nations fettled in the nor-
thern extremities of Europe. We may, therefore,
refer them to the former origin, and conclude
-that their Asiatic progenitor, having fettled in
those parts of America, where the Ruffians have
discovered the proximity of the two continents,
spread gradually over its various regions. This
account of the progress of population in America,
coincides with the traditions of the Mexicans con-
cerning their own origin, which, imperFec as
they are, were preserved with more accuracy,
and merit greater credit, than thole of any people
in the New World. According to them, their
ancestors came from a remote country, iituatcd
to the north-ealf of Mexico. They point out their

various

various itations as they advanced from this, into B O O K
the interior provinces, and it is precisely the fame IV.
route which they must have held, if they had been -r-
emigrants from Asia. The Mexicans, in defcrib-
ing the appearance of their progenitors, their
manners, and habits of life at that period, exa6tly
delineate those of the rude Tartars, from whom I
suppose them to have Iprung+.

THtUS have I finished a disquisition which has

been deemed of so much importance, that it would
have been improper to omit it in writing the his-
tory of America. I have ventured to inquire, but
without presuming to decide. Satisfied with of-
fering conjectures, I pretend not to establish any
Iyftem. When an investigation is, from its na-
ture, so intricate and obscure, that it is impossible
to arrive at conclusions which are certain, there
may be some merit in pointing out such as are pro-
bable -f.

THE condition and character of the American Condition
nations, at the time when they became knownand charac-

ter of the

to the Europeans, deserve more attentive confi- Americans.
deration, than the inquiry concerning their ori-
ginal. The latter is merely an object of curiosity,
the former is one of the moit important as well
as inftruaive researches, which can occupy the
philosopher or hiflorian. In order to complete
the history of the human mind, and attain to a
perfcEt knowledge of its nature and operations,
we nmufi contemplate man in all thole various situ-
ations wherein he has been placed. We muff
follow him in. his progress through the different

stages

Acofla Hist. Nat. & Mor. lib. vii. c. a, &c. Garcia

Origen de los Indios, lib. v. c. 3. Torquemada Monar. Ind.
lib, i. c. 2, &c. Boturini Benaduci Idea de ulna I-ift. de la
AImer. Septentr. § xvii. p. 127.
'1' Memoircs fur la Louifianc, par Dumont, tom. i.p. 119.

B O K flages of society, as he gradually advances from

IV. the infant state of civil life towards its maturity
'--rC^ and decline. We mutl observe at each period,

how the faculties of his underfianding unfold,
we must attend to the efforts of his active powers,
watch the motions of affetion as they rife in his
breast, and mark whither they tend, and with
what ardour they are exerted. The philosophers
and historians of ancient Greece and Rome, our
guides in this as well as every other disquisition,
had only a limited view of this subjet, as they
had hardly any opportunity of surveying man in
his rudest and most early state. In all those re.
gions of the earth with which they were acquaint.
ed, civil society had made considerable advances,
and nations had finished a good part of their ca-
reer before they began to observe them. The
Scythians and Germans, the rudest people of
whom any antient author has transmitted to us an
authentic account, possessed flocks and herds, had
acquired property of various kinds, and, when
compared with mankind in their primitive slate,
may be reckoned to have attained to a great de-
gree of civilization.

Less im- BUT the discovery of the New World enlarged
proved than the sphere of contemplation, and presented nations
in any part
ofthe earth. to our view, in flages of their progress, much less

advanced than those wherein they have been ob-
served in our continent. In America man appears
under the rudest form in which we can conceive
him to subsist. We behold communities jufi
beginning to unite, and may examine the senti-
ments and actions of human beings in the infancy
of social life, while they feel but iniperfetlly the
force of its tics, and have scarcely relinquiflhed
their native liberty. 'That state of primaeval
simplicity, which was known in our continent
only by the fancifill delcription of poets, really

cxiflcd

existed in the other. The greater part of its in- B o o K
habitants were strangers to indufiry and labour, IV.
ignorant of arts, and almost unacquainted with "T'
property, enjoying in common the blessings which
flowed spontaneously from the bounty of nature.
There were only two nations in this vait conti-
nent which had emerged from this rude slate, and
had made any considerable progress in acquiring
the ideas, and adopting the institutions, which
belonged to polished societies. Their government
and manners will fall naturally under our review
in relating the discovery and conquest of the Mex-
ican and Peruvian empires; and we shall have
there an opportunity of contemplating the Ame-
ricans in the state of the highest improvement to
which they ever attained.

AT present, our attention and researches ihallThis inquiry
be turned to the small independent tribes whichth. rd to
occupied every other part of America. Among tribes.
there, though with some diversity in their charac-
ter, their manners and inflitutions, the slate of
society was nearly similar, and so extremely rude,
that the denomination of Savage may be applied
to them all. In a general history of America, it
would be highly improper to describe the condi-
tion of each petty community, or to invefiigate
every minute circumstance which contributes to
form the chara&er of its members. Such an in-
quiry would lead to details of immeasurable and
tiresome extent. The qualities belonging to the
people of all the different tribes have such a near
resemblance, that they may be painted with the
fame features. Where any circumstances seem to
constitute a diversity in their chara6cer and man-
ners worthy of attention, it will be sufficient to
point those out as they occur, and to inquire into
the caufcs of such peculiarities.

IT

B OO K IT is extremely difficult to procure satisfying

IV. and authentic information, concerning nations
i-t'y^ while they remain uncivilized. To discover their
obtainin, true characer under this rude form, and to colledr
information, the features by which they are distinguished, re-

quires an observer polfefled of no less impartiality
than discernment. For, in every flage of society,
the faculties, the sentiments and desires of men
are so accommodated to their own state, that they
become standards of excellence to themselves, they
affix the idea of perfeiflon and happiness to those
attainments which resemble their own, and where-
ever the obje&ts and enjoyments to which they
have been accustomed are wanting, confidently
pronounce a people barbarous and miserable.
Hence the mutual contempt with which the mem-
bers of communities, unequal in their degrees of
improvement, regard each other. Polished na-
tions, conscious of the advantages which they de-
rive from their knowledge and arts, are apt to
view rude nations with peculiar scorn, and, in the
pride of superiority, will hardly allow either their
occupations, their feelings, or their pleasures, to
be worthy of men. It has seldom been the lot of
communities, in their early and unpolifhed fiate,
to fall under the observation of persons, endowed
with force of mind superior to vulgar prejudiccs,
and capable of contemplating man, under whate-
ver aspe&t he appears, With a candid and difccrn.
ing eye.

froin the in- Tni . Spaniards, who firfr visited Ameri-
tl,,'1t, of ca, and who had an opportunity of behold-
fclIr.,, ing its various tribes, while entire and unflib-

dued, were far from pofffliing the qualites rc-
quifite for observing the striking fpcctacle prc-
sented to their view. Neither the age in which
they lived, nor the nation to which they belong-
ed, had made such progrcls in true tciencc, as

inl)ircs

inspires enlarged and liberal sentiments. The con- B 0 0 K
querors of the New World were mostly illiterate IV.
adventurers, deflitute of all the ideas which ihould '-^ -
have directed them in contemplating obje&s, so
extremely different from those with which they
were acquainted. Surrounded continually with
danger, or firuggling with hardships, they had
little leisure, and less capacity for any speculative
inquiry. Eager to take possession of a country of
such vatl extent and opulence, and happy in find-
ing it occupied by inhabitants lb incapable to de-
fend it, they hastily pronounced them to be a
wretched order of men, formed merely for fervi-
tude; and were more employed in computing the
profits of their labour, than inquiring into the
operations of their minds, or the reasons of their
cufloms and institutions. The perlons who pene-
trated at subsequent periods into the interior pro-
vinces, to which the knowledge and devaflations
of the first conquerors did not reach, were general-
ly of a similar charater; brave and enterprising
in an high degree, but so uninformed as to be little
qualified either for observing or describing what
they beheld.

NOT only the incapacity, but the prejudices of and tlc;r
the Spaniards, rendered their accounts of the peo- prejudices'
pie of America extremely defecive. Soon after
they planted colonies in their new conquerts, a
difference in opinion arose with refpet to the
treatment of the natives. One party, solicitous to
render their servitude perpetual, represented them
as a brutish, obilinate race, incapable either of ac-
quiring religious knowledge, or of being trained
to the functions of social life. The other, full of
pious concern for their conversion, contended
that, though rude and ignorant, they were gentlc,
aflectionatc, docile, and by proper inflrutltions
and regulations, might be formed gradually into

good

B OO K good Chrifltians and useful citizens. This contro.

IV. verfy, as I have already related, was carried on
b"a'T^ with all the warmth which is natural, when atten-

tion to interest on the one hand, and religious zeal
on the other, animated the disputants. Most of
the laity espoused the former opinion; all the ec-
clefiaftics were advocates for the latter; and we
shall uniformly find that, accordingly as an author
belonged to either of those parties, he is apt to
magnify the virtues or aggravate the defecs of
the Americans beyond measure. Those repugnant
accounts increase the difficulty of attaining a per-
sect knowledge of their charadcer, and render it
necessary to peruse all the descriptions of them by
Spanish writers with distrust, and to receive their
information with some allowance.

and from ALMOST two centuries elapsed after the disco-
tfe fyilo very of America, before the manners of its in-
phers. habitants attracted, in any considerable degree,

the attention of philosophers. At length, they
discovered that the knowledge of their condition
and chara&er might enable them to fill up a con-
fiderable charm in the hiflory of the human fpe-
cies, and lead to speculations no less curious than
important. They entered upon this new field of
study with great ardour; but, instead of throw-
ing light upon the subjet, they have contributed,
in some degree, to involve it in additional oblcu-
rity. Too impatient to inquire, they hafiened to
decide; and began to erec systems, when they
should have been searching for fats on which to
eftablifl their foundations. Struck with the ap-
pearance of degeneracy in the human species
throughout the New World, and aflonifled at be-
holding a vast continent occupied by a naked,
feeble, and ignorant race of men, some authors of
great name have maintained, that this part of the
globe had but lately emerged from the fca, and

he

come fit for the residence of man; that every B o o K
thing in it bore marks of recent original; and IV.
that its inhabitants, lately called into existence, ''
and Rill at the beginning of their career, were un-
worthy to be compared with the people of a more
ancient and improved continent*. Others have
imagined, that, under the influence of an unkind-
ly climate, which checks and enervates the prin-
ciple of life, man never attained in America the
perfection which belongs to his nature, but re-
mained an animal of an inferior order, defective
in the vigour of his bodily frame, and deititute of
sensibility, as well as of force, in the operations
of his minds-. In opposition to both these, other
othcr, philosophers have supposed that man arrives
at his highest dignity and excellence long before
he reaches a fate of refinement; and, in the rude
implicity of tavage life, displays an elevation of
lentiment, an independence of mind, and a warmth
of attachment, for which it is vain to search a-
nongthe members of polished focietiest. They
seem to confider that as the most perfect fate of
man which is the leaf civilized. They describe
the manners of the rude Americans with such rap-
ture, as if they propoied them for models to the
elt of the species. These contradiEtory theories
ave been proposed with equal confidence, and
ncommon powers of genius and eloquence have
een exerted in order, to clothe them with an ap-
earance of truth.
As all those circumstances concur in rendering
r inquiry into the state of the rude nations in
nerica intricate and obscure, it is necessary to
ary it on with caution. When guided in our
eearches by the intelligent oblervations of the

l~ S~sew

M.de. Buffon I-ift. Nat. iii. 484, &c. ix. 103. 114.
t M. de P. RecherchesPhilof. fur les Americ. Iaztflili.
i M. Rousseau.

B O O K few philosophers who have visited this part of the

IV. globe, we may venture to decide. When obliged
_s\r to have recourse to the superficial remarks of vul-

gar travellers, of sailors, traders, buccaneers, and
missionaries, we muff often pause, and con]paring
detached fats, endeavour to discover what they
wanted sagacity to observe. Without indulging
conjecture, or betraying a propensity to either
system, we must study with equal care to avoid
the extremes of extravagant admiration, or of fu-
percilious contempt, for those manners which we
dcfcribe.

Method ob- IN order to condu& this inquiry with greater
served in the
inquiry. accuracy, it Ihould be rendered as simple as pofTi-

ble. Man exified as an individual before he be-
came the member of a community; and the qua-
lities which belong to him under his former capa-
city should be known, before we proceed to exa-
mine those which arise from the latter relation.
This is peculiarly necessary in investigating the
manners of rude nations. Their political-union is
so incomplete, their civil inflitutions and regula-
tions so few, so simple, and of such small authority,
that they ought to be viewed rather as independent
agents than as members of a regular society. 'Tic
charater of a savage results almofl entirely from
his ientiments or feelings as an individual, and i{
but little influenced by his imperfec subjection tc
government and order. I hfall condu&t my re
searches concerning the manners of the American
in this natural order, proceeding gradually fro!i
what is simple to what is more complicated.

I SHALL confider, I. The bodily confiitulti

of the Americans in those regions now und1
review. II. The qualities of their minds. II
Their donieftic flae. IV. Their political hlate all
inffitutions. V. Their system of war, and publ

fecurit

security. VI. The arts with which they were B 0 K
acquainted. VII. Their religious ideas and infti- IV.
tutions. VIII. Such singular detached curfoms as
are not reducible to any of the former heads.
IX. I flall conclude with a general review and
estimate of their virtues and defects.

I. THE bodily conflitution of the Americans.- Theconfti.

tution of

The human body is less affeeted by climate than their bo-
that of any other animal. Some animals are con- dies.
finedito a particular region of the globe, and cannot
cxift beyond it; others, tho' they may be brought
to bear the injuries of a climate foreign to them,
cease to multiply when carried out of that diftriEt,
which Nature destined to be their mansion. Even
such as seem capable of being naturalized in various
climates, feel the effect of every remove from their
proper station, and gradually dwindle and dege-
nerate from the vigour and perfection peculiar to
their species. Man is the only living creature
whose frame is at once so hardy and so flexible,
that he can spread over the whole earth, become
the inhabitant of every region, and thrive and
multiply under every climate. Subjec, however,
to the general law of Nature, the human body
is not intirely exempt from the operation of cli-
mate, and when exposed to the extremes either of
heat or cold, its size or vigour diminishes.

THIr first appearance of the inhabitants of the Complcxi-

New World, filled the discoverers with such afto-0"' aS
nifhment, that they were apt to imagine then a
race of men different from those of the other he-

iflphere. Their complexion is of a reddish brown,
nearly rcfcmbling the colour of copper*. The
hair of their heads is always black, long, coarle,

Vo,. I. U and
*Oviedo Somario, p. 46, D. Life of Columbus, c. 24.

B O O K and lank. They have no beard, and every part

IV. of their body is perfectly smooth. Their persons
_v-is_ are of a full size, extremely fireight, and well pro-

portioned . Their features are regular, though
often distorted by absurd endeavours to improve
the beauty of their natural form, or to render their
aspeCt more dreadful to their enemies. In the
Morefeeble, iflads, where four-footed animals were both few

and small, and the earth yielded her productions
almost spontaneously, the constitution of the na-
tives, neither braced by the active exercises of the
chace, nor invigorated by the labour of cultivation,
was extremely feeble and languid. On the conti-
nent, where the forests abound with game of vari-
ous kinds, and the chief occupation of many tribes
was to pursue it, their frame acquired greater
firmness. Still, however, the Americans were
more remarkable for agility than firength. They
refemnbled beasts of prey, rather than animals form-
ed for labour t. They were not-only averse to
toil, but incapable of it; and when rouzed by
force from their native indolence, and compelled
to work, they funk under talks which the people
of the other continent would have performed with
ease . This feebleness of the constitution was
universal among the inhabitants of those regions
in America which we are surveying, and may be
confidered as charaderiftic of the species there §.

THE beardless couttenance and smooth skin of

the American seems to indicate a defect of vi-
gour, occasioned by some vice in his frame. He
is destitute of one sign of manhood and of firengtlh.

This

*See NOTE XLII. *1 See NOTE XLIII.

Oviedo Som. p. 51, C. Voy. de Correal, ii. 138. WVa-
ser's Description, p. 31.

§ B. Las Cali Brev. Relac. p. 4. Taurquein. Monar. i.

58o. Oviedo Somario, p. 41. Ilift. lib. iii. c. 6. lHrrcr,
dec, i. lib. ix. c. 5. Simon, p. 41.

This peculiarity, by which the inhabitants of the B O 0 g
New World are distinguished from the people of Iv.
all other nations, cannot be attributed, as some ^-
travellers have supposed, to their mode of subsist-
ence. For though the food of many Americans
be so extremely insipid, that they are altogether
unacquainted with the use of salt, rude tribes in
other parts of the earth have subsisted on aliments
equally simple without this mark of degradation,
or any apparent symptom of a diminution in their
vigour :.

As the external form of the Americans leads us Less appe-

to fufpeet that there is some natural debility int'e
their frame, the smallness of their appetite for
food has been mentioned by many authors as a
confirmation of this suspicion. The quantity
of food which men consume varies according
to the temperature of the climate in which they
live, the degree of acivity which they exert,
and the natural vigour of their conflitutions.
Under the enervating heat of the torrid zone,
and when men pass their days in indolence and
cafe, they require less nourishment than the ac-
tive inhabitants of temperate or cold countries.
But neither the warmth of their climate, nor
their extreme laziness, will account for the un-
common defea of appetite among the Americans.
The Spaniards were aftonifned upon observing
this, not only in the islands, but in several parts of
the continent. The constitutional temperance
of the natives far exceeded, in their opinion,
the abflinence of the most mortified hermits t;
while, on the other hand, the appetite of the
Spaniards appeared to the Americans insatiably
Voracious; and they affirmed, that one Spaniard

U z devoured

Charlev. i-lft. de Nouv. Fr. iii. 310.

t Ramufio, iii. 304, F. 306, A. Simon Conquifta, &c.
P. 29. Hakluyt, iii. 468. 508.

,B.0 O K devoured more food in a day than was fufficieit

IV. for ten Americans i.

^^-r^ A proof of some feebleness in their frame fill
Lefce'T - more firiking, is the insensibility of the Americans
desire. to the charms of beauty, and the power of love.

That passion which was destined to perpetuate life,
to be the bond of social union, and the source
of tenderness and joy, is the most ardent in the
human breast; and though the perils and hard.
ships of the savage state, though excessive fa-
tigue, on some occasions, and the difficulty at
all times of procuring subsistence, may seem to be
advere to this pailion, and to have a tendency to
abate its vigour, yet the rudest nations in every
other part of the globe seem to feel its influence
more powerfully than the inhabitants of the New
7World. The negro glows with all the warmth of
desire natural to his climate; and the most unculti-
,vated Asiatics discover that'fenfibility, which, from
their situation, we should expe& them to have felt.
But the Americans are in an amazing degree,
firangers to the force of this first initint of nature.
In every part of the New World the natives treat
their women with coldness and indifference. They
are neither the objects of that tender attachment
which takes place in civilized society, nor of that
ardent desire conspicuous among rude nations.
Even in climates where this passion usually ac-
quires its greatest vigour, the savage of America
views his female with disdain, as an animal of a
le's noble Species. He is at no pains to win her
favour by the afliduity of courtship, and frill lets
solicitous to prefcrve it by indulgence t and gentle-

ness.

HI errera, dec. I. lib. ii. . 6.

1 ' Hennepin Mceurs de Sauvages, 32, &c. Roclhtort I-ill.

tles Isles Antilles, p. 461. Voyage de Corcal, ii. 141. Ka-
niufio, iii. 309. F. Lozano Defcr. del. Gran Chaco, 71.
Falkncr's Defer. of Patagon, p. I25. Lctterc di P. Catanco
ap. Muratori I. 3. Chriltian. Felice, i. 305.

ness. Missionaries themselves, notwithstanding the B 0 O K
austerity of monastic ideas, cannot refrain from Iv,
expressing their aftoniihment at the dispassionate T '
coldness of the American young men in their in-
tercourfe with the other sex*. Nor is this reserve
to be ascribed to any opinion which they entertain
with relfpet to the merit of female chastity. That
is an idea too refined for a savage, and suggested
by a delicacy of sentiment and affection to which
he is a stranger.

BUT in inquiries concerning either the bodily Refletions

or mental qualities of particular races of men, twiith ref
there is not a more common or more reducing er-
ror, than that of ascribing to a single cause, those
charadteriitic peculiarities, which are the effect of
the combined operation of many causes. The cli-
mate and foil of America differ, in so many refpesis;
from those of the other hemisphere, and this differ-
ence is so obvious and striking, that philosophers
of great eminence have laid hold on this as fuffici-
ent to account for what is peculiar in the conftitu-
tion of its inhabitants, They reft on physical causes
alone, and confider the feeble frame and languid
desire of the Americans, as consequences of the
temperament of that portion of the globe which
they inhabit. But the influence of political and
moral causes ought not to have been overlooked.
These operate with no less cffect than that on which
they reft as a full explanation of the singular ap-
pearances which have been mentioned. Wherever
the state of lociety is such as to create many wants
and desires, which cannot be satisfied without rce
gular exertions of industry, the body accustomcd
to labour becomes robust and patient of fatigue.
In a more simple state, where the demands of mcel

are

Chanvalon. p. 5i. Lett. Ecli.l toni. xxiv. i . Tertre,
ii. 377. Vcnegal. i. 81. Kibas -ilt. tie lo0 Triuil; p. i.

B O O K are so few and so moderate, that they may be gra-

IV. tified, almost without any effort, by the fpontane-

ous productions of nature, the powers of the body
are not called forth, nor can they attain their pro-
per firength. The natives of Chili and of North-
America, the two temperate regions in the New
World, who live by hunting, may be deemed an
active and vigorous race, when compared with the
inhabitants of the isles, or of those parts of the
continent where hardly any labour is requisite to
procure subsistence. The exertions of a hunter
are not, however, so regular, or so continued, as
those of persons employed in the culture of the
earth, or in the various arts of civilized life, and
though his agility may be greater than theirs, his
firength is on the whole inferior. If another di-
re6tion were given to the active powers of man in
the New World, and his force augmented by ex-
ercife, he might acquire a degree of vigour which
he does not in his present slate possess. The truth
of this is confirmed by experience. Wherever
the Americans have been gradually accustomed to
hard labour, their confiitutions become robust, and
they have been found capable of performing such
talks, as seemed not only to exceed the powers of
such a feeble frame as has been deemed peculiar to
their country, but to equal any effort of the na-
tives, either of Africa or of Europe*.

THE fame reasoning will apply to what has been

observed concerning their slender demand for
food. As a proof that this ihould be ascribed, as
much to their extreme indolence, and often total
want of occupation, as to any thing peculiar in the
physical ftrusiure of their bodies, it has been ob-
served, that in'thofe diftri6ts, where the people of
America are obliged to exert any unusual effort of

activity,
+ Sec NOTE XLIV.

a&tivity, in order to procure subsistence, or where- B O O K
ver they are employed in severe labour, their ap- IV.
petite is not inferior to that of other men, and, in -T
some places, it has firuck observers as remarkably
voracioust,

THE operation of political and moral causes is

itill more conspicuous, in modifying the degree of
attachment between the sexes. In a state of high
civilization, this passion inflamed by restraint, re-
fined by delicacy, and cherished by fashion, occu-
pies and engrosses the heart. It is no longer a
simple inftinE of nature; sentiment heightens the
ardour of desire, and the most tender emotions
of which our frame is susceptible, soothe and agi-
tate the foul. This description, however, applies
only to those, who, by their situation, are ex-
empted from the cares and labours of life. Among
persons of inferior order, who are doomed by
their condition to incessant toil, the dominion of
this passion is less violent, and their solicitude to
procure subsistence, and to provide for the first
demand of nature, leaves little leifqre for attend-
ing to its second call. But if the nature of the
intercourse between the sexes varies so much in
persons of different rank in polished societies, the
condition of man, while he remains uncivilized,
muff occasion a variation still more apparent. We
may well suppose, that amidst the hardships, the
dangers, and the simplicity of savage life, where
subsistence is always precarious, and often scanty,
where men arc almost continually engaged in the
pursuit of their enemies, or in guarding againfl
their attacks, and where neither dress nor reserve
are employed as arts of female allurement, that
the attention of the Americans to their women

would

* Gumilla, li. 12. 70. 237. Lafitau, i. 515. Ovalle
Cliurcl. iii.8l. Muratori, i. 295.

B d ' K would be extremely feeble, without imputing this

Iv. solely to any physical defect or degradation in
k'r'T" their frame.

IT is accordingly observed, that in those coun-

tries of America, where, from the fertility of the
foil, the mildness of the climate, or some farther
advances which the natives have made in improve-
ment, the means of subsistence are more abundant,
and the hardships of savage life, are less severely
felt, the animal passion of the sexes becomes more
ardent. Striking examples of this occur among
some tribes feated on the banks of great rivers
well stored with food, among others who are mal-
ters of hunting-grounds abounding so much with
game, that they have a regular and plentiful supply
of nourishment with little labour. The superior
degree of security and affluence which they enjoy,
is followed by their natural efitcds. The pafions
implanted in the human frame by the hand of na-
ture acquired additional force; new tafles and de-
fires are formed; the women, as they are more
valued and admired, become more attentive to
dress and ornament; the men, beginning to feel
how much of their own happiness depends upon
them, no longer disdain the arts of winning their
favour and affietion. The intercourse of the lexes
becomes very different from that which takes place
among their ruder countrymen ; and as hardly any
restraint is imposed on the gratification of dclire,
either by religion, or laws, or decency, the diflo-
lutenefs of their manners is exccflive'.

None of NOTWITHSTANDING the feeble make of the
fcd.Le- Americans, almost none of theni are deformed,

or mutilated, or defetiive in any of their ienles.
All travellers have been firuck with this circunl-

llancc,

' * iet 389. Charlev. iii. 42z. Dumont lcrnm. fur Lcui-
fianc, i. 155.

fiance; and have celebrated the uniform fymnmetry B O O K
and perfecion of their external figure. Some IV.
authors search for the cause of this appearance in s"
their physical condition. As the parents are not
exhausted, or over-fatigued with hard labour, they
fuppole that their children are born vigorous and
found. They imagine, that in the liberty of fa-
vage life, the human body, naked and unconfin?
ed from its earliest age, preserves its natural form;
and that all its limbs .and members acquire a jus-
ter proportion, than when fettered with artificial
restraints, which stint its growth, and distort its
shape . Something, without doubt, may be a-
fcribed to the operation of these causes; but the
true reasons of this apparent advantage, which is
common to all savage nations, lie deeper, and are
closely interwoven with the nature and genius of
that state. The. infancy of man is so long and
so helpless, that it is extremely difficult to rear
children among rude nations. Their means of
subsistence are not only scanty, but precarious.
Such as live by hunting mult range over extensive
countries, and shift often from place to place. The
care of children, as well as every other laborious
talk, is devolved upon the women. The difiref-
res and harclfhips of the savage life, which are of-
ten such as can hardly be supported by persons in
full vigour, niuft be fatal to thole of more tender
age. Afraid of undertaking a talk so laborious,
and of such long duration, the women in some
parts of America, extingufh the first lparks of that
life which they are unable to cherish, and by the
ule of certain herbs procure frequent abortions t.
Scifible that only flout and well-formed children
havce force of conflitution to struggle through such

an

" Pfo. p. . . 11 E1is's Voyage to I-udfon's Bay, 198.
ltrrcra, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 4.

B O O K an hard infancy, other nations abandon or destroy

IV. such of their progeny as appear feeble or defective,

as unworthy of attention*. Even when they en.
deavour to rear all their children without diftinc.
tion, so great a proportion of the whole number
periihes under the rigorous treatment which must
be their lot in the savage state, that few of those
who laboured under any original frailty attain the
age of manhood f. Thus, in polished societies,
where the means of fubfiflence are secured with
certainty, and acquired with ease; where the ta-
lents of the mind are often of more importance
than the powers of the body; children are pre.
served notwithstanding their defecs or deformi.
ty, and grow up to be useful citizens. In rude
nations, such persons are either cut off as soon as
they are born, or becoming a burden to them.
selves and to the community, cannot long protra8
their lives. But in those provinces of the Nes
World where, by the efiablifhment of the Euro.
peans, more regular provision has been made foi
the subsistence of the inhabitants, and they art
restrained from laying violent hands on their chil
dren, the Americans are so far from being eni
nent for any superior perfeftion in their form, tha
one should rather iufpec fonie peculiar imbecilli
ty in the race, from the extraordinary number o
individuals who are deformed, dwarfifh, mutilat
ed, blind, or deaf 4.

uniformity HOWEVER feeble the conflitution of the Ame
of their ap..
earanc,. ricans may be, it is remarkable, that there is Icl

variety in the human form throughout the Nes
World, than in the ancient continent. When Cc
lumbus and the other discoverers firt viiited the dil

fcrcl

* Guinilla -lift. ii. 234. 'l'ho's Hilft. of Paraguay, &
Churchill'W Colle. vi. 108.

-| Creuxii HiFl. Canad(. p. 57.
I Voyage de Ulloa, i. 232.

ferent countries of America which lie within the B O K
torrid zone, they naturally expected to find people IV.
of the fame complexion with those in the corre- 1.r^
fponding regions of the other hemisphere. To their
amazement, however, they discovered that Ame-
rica contained no negroes *; and the cause of this
singular appearance became as much the object of
curiosity, as the fa& itself was of wonder. In
what part or membrane of the body that hu-
mour resides which tinges the complexion of the
negroe with a deep black, it is the business of ana.
tomifis to inquire and describe. The powerful
operation of heat appears manifestly to be the cause
which produces this striking variety in the human
species. All Europe, almost the whole of Asia,
and the temperate parts of Africa, are occupied
by men of a fair complexion. All the torrid zone
in Africa, some of the warmer regions adjacent to
it, and a few countries in Asia are filled with peo-
ple of a deep black colour. If we trace the nati-
ons of our continent, making our progress from
cold and temperate countries towards those parts
which are exposed to the influence of vehement
and unremitting heat, we shall find, that the ex-
treme whiteness of their skin soon begins to dimi-
nifh; that its colour deepens gradually as we ad-
vance; and after passing through all the successive
gradations of ihade terminates in an uniform un-
varying black. But in America, where the agency
of heat is checked and abated by various causes,
which I have already explained, the climate seems
to be deflitute of that force which produces such
wonderful effects on the human frame. The co-
0our of the natives of the torrid zone, in America,
can hardly be said to be of a deeper hue than that
of the people in the more temperate parts of their
continent. Accurate observers, who had an op-

portunity
* P. Martyr. dec. p. 71.

513 0 K portunity of viewing the Americans in very diffe.

IV. rent climates, and in countries far removed from
'-rV each other, have been struck with the amazing si.

milarity of their figure and aspect .

BUT though the hand of Nature has deviated so

little from one standard in fashioning the human
form in America, the creation of fancy hath been
various and extravagant. The fame fables that
were current in the ancient continent, have been
revived with refpecd to the New World, and Ame.
rica too has been peopled with human beings of
monfirous and fantastic appearance. The inha.
bitants of certain provinces were described to be
pigmies of three feet high ; those of others to be
giants of an enormous size. Some travellers pub.
lifhed accounts of a people with only one eye,
others pretended to have discovered men without
heads, whose eyes and mouths were planted in
their breasts. The variety of Nature in her pro.
dutions is, indeed, so great, that it is prefunptuous
to set bounds to her fertility, and to reject indifl
criminately every relation that is not perfectly con.
sonant to our own limited observation and experi.
ence. But the other extreme, of yielding an
hasty assent, on the slightest evidence, to whatecer
has the appearance of being strange and marvel.
lous, is no less unbecoming a philosophical inquir-
er, as, in eveCry period, men arc more apt to be bc.
trayed into error, by their weakne's in believing
too much, than by their arrogance in believing too
little. In proportion as fcicnce extends, and na-
ture is examined with a difccrning eye, the won.
ders that aniulecd ages of ignorance dilappear. 'T '
talcs of credulous travellers concerning America
arc forgottcn; the nonflies which they delClibo
have been learchcl for in vain ; and thoil provinl

COe
Sec NOTE XLV.

ces where they pretend to have found inhabitants of BE 0
singular forms, are now known to be pofleffed by IV:
people no wife different from the otherAmericans*.

THOUGH these relations may, without dilcuffion
be rejected as fabulous, there are other accounts
of such varieties in the human fpccies in some parts
of the New World, which reil upon better evi-
dence, and merit more attentive examination.
This variety has been particularly obfcrved in
three different difiriEts. The firfi of these is si-
tuated in the isthmus of Darien, near the centre of
America. Lionel Wafer, a travellerpoffeffed of
more curiosity and intelligence than we should
have expeEted to find in an aflociate of Bucca-
neers, discovered there a Iinall but singular race of
men. They are of low nfature, according to his
description, of a feeble make, incapable of endur-
ing fatigue. Their colour is a dead milk white;
not resembling that of fair people among Euro-
peans, but without any tincure of a blush or fan-
guine complexion. Their skin is covered with a
fine hairy down of a chalky white, the hair of
their heads, their eye-brows, and eyc-lafhes, are
of the fame hue. Their eyes are of a singular
form, and so weak, that they can hardly bear the
light of the fun; but they fee clearly by moon-
light, and are most aLive and gay in the night.-.
No race similar to this has been discovered in any
other part of America. Cortes, indeed, found
omen persons exactly resembling the white people
of Darien, among the rare and monfirous animals
which Montezuma had colleScd . But as the
power of the Mexican empire extended to the
provinces bordering on the isthmus of Darien,
they were probably brought from thence. Singu-

lar

* See NOTE XLVI. t Wafer Defcript. of I11h.
ap. Dampier, iii . p46. G Cortes ap. Ramul; iii. p.
'41. E.

B 0 0 K lar as the appearance of those people may be, they

IV. cannot be confidered as constituting a diftin& fpe-
%t.-r^ cies. Among the negroes of Africa, as well as the

natives of the Indian islands, nature sometimes pro-
duces a small number of individuals, with all the
chara&eriftic features and qualities of the white
people of Darien. The former are called Albinos by
the Portuguese, the latter Kackerlakes by the Dutch.
In Darien the parents of those Whites are of the
fame colour with the other natives of the country;
and this observation applies equally to the anoma-
lous progeny of the negroes and Indians. The
fame mother who produces some children of a co-
lour that does not belong to the race, brings forth
the reft of the complexion peculiar to her coun-
try*. One conclusion may then be formed with
refpeat to the people described by Wafer, the
Albinos and the Kackerlakes; they are a degenerat-
ed breed, not a separate class of men; and from
some disease or defec of their parents, the pecu-
liar colour and debility which mark their degrada-
tion is transmitted to them. As a decisive proof
of this, it has been observed, that neither the
white people of Darien, nor the Albinos of Afii-
ca, propagate their race: their children are of the
colour and temperament peculiar to the natives of
their refpe&ive countriest.

THE second diftrit that is occupied by inhabi-

tants differing in appearance from the other people
of America, is situated in a high northern latitude,
extending from the coast of Labrador towards the
pole, as far as the country is habitable. The pco.
ple scattered over those 'dreary regions, are known
to the Europeans by the name of Efquimiaux. They

theon,

M Margrav. Hist. Rer Nat. Bras. lib. viii. c. 4.

't Wafer, p. 348. Demanet. Hist. de l'Afrique, ii. 34'
Rechercl, Philof. fur les Amer. ii. i. &c.

themselves, with that idea of their own superiority, B O O K
which consoles the rudeit and most wretched na- IV.
tions, assume the name of Keralit or Men. They
are of a middle size and robust, with heads of a
disproportioned bulk, and feet as remarkably small.
Their complexion, though swarthy, by being con-
tinually exposed. to the rigour of a cold climate,
inclines to the European white, rather than to the
copper colour of America, and the men have
beards which are sometimes bushy and long*.
From these marks of diftindtion, as well as from
one still less equivocal, the affinity of their lan-
guage to that of the Greenlanders, which I have
already mentioned, we may conclude, with some
degree of confidence, that the Efquimaux are a
race different from the reft of the Americans.

WE cannot decide with equal certainty concern-
ing the inhabitants of the third diftrid, situated at
the southern extremity of America. These are the
famous Patagonians, who, during two centuries
and a half, have afforded a subjed of controversy
to the learned, and an object of wonder to the
vulgar. They are supposed to be one of the wan-
dering tribes, which occupy the vait, but leait
known region of America, which extends from the
river De la Plata to the Straits of Magellan. Their
proper fiation is in that part of the interior coun-
try, which lies on the banks of the river Negro;
but in the hunting season they often roam as far as
the itraits which ieparate Terra del Fuego from the
main-land. The firfi accounts of this people were
brought to Europe by the companions of Magel-
lanf, who described them as a gigantic race above
eight feet high, and of firength in proportion to

their

Ellis Voy. to Hudi. Bay, p. 13I, 139. De la Potherie,

.

i.p. . 79. Wales Journ. of a Voy. to Churchill River.
1il. Tranf. vol. Ix. o09.
I' Falkncr's Description of Patagonia, p. o12.

B O O their enormous size. Among several tribes of Ali-

IV. mals, a disparity in bulk, as considerable, may be
^Tr^ observed. Some large breeds of horses and dogs

exceed the more diminutive races in stature and
strength as far as the Patagonian is supposed to rife
above the usual standard of the human body. 13ut
animals attain the highest perfe&ion of their fpe-
cies, only in mild climates, or where they find the
most nutritive food in greatest abundance. It is
not then in the uncultivated waste of the Magcl-
lanic regions, and among a tribe of unprovideut
savages, that we ihould exped to find man, pof-
fessing the highest honours of his race, and diflin.
guifhed by a superiority of size and vigour, far be.
yond what he has reached in any other part of the
earth. The most explicit and unexceptionable
evidence is requisite, in order to establish a fadt,
repugnant to those general principles and laws,
which seem to effede the human frame in every other
instance, and to decide with refped to its nature
and qualities. Such evidence has not hitherto been
produced. Though several persons, to whose tef-
timony great refpeft is due, have visited this part
of America, since the time of Magellan, and have
had interviews with the natives; though some have
affirmed, that lich as they saw were of gigantic fta-
ture, and others have formed the fame conclusion
from measuring their footsteps, or the fl<eletons of
their dead; yet their accounts vary from each other
in so many essential points, and are mingled with
so many circumftanccs manifeft!y falfc or fabulous,
as detract much from their credit'. On the other
hand, some navigators, and those among the mofl
eminent of their order for discernment and accu.
racy, have afIerted that the natives of Patagonia
with whom they had intercour'e, though ftotu

amt
'o See NOTE XLVII.

and well made, are not of such extraordinary size B o o K
as to be diftinguified from the reft of the human IV.
species. The existence of this gigantic race of~'rT
men, seems, then, to be one of those points in
natural history, with refpe&t to which a cautious
inquirer will hesitate, and will chufe to suspend
his assent until more complete evidence fall de-
cide, whether he ought to admit a fa&t, seemingly
inconsistent with what reason and experience have
discovered concerning the firudture and condition
of man, in all the various situations in which he
has been observed.

IN order to form a complete idea with refper Their fate

to the constitution of the inhabitants of this and °f halth'
the other hemisphere, we should attend not only
to the make and vigour of their bodies, but confi-
der what degree of health they enjoy, and to what
period of longevity they usually arrive. In the
simplicity of the savage slate, when man is not
oppressed with labour, or enervated by luxury, or
disquieted with care, we are apt to imagine that
his life will flow on almost untroubled by disease
or suffering, until his days be terminated in ex-
treme old age, by the gradual decays of nature.
We find, accordingly, among the Americans, as
well as among other rude people, persons, whose
decrepit and shrivelled form teems to indicate an
extraordinary length of life. But as most of them
are unacquainted with the art of numbering, and
all of them as forgetful of what is pall, as they
are improvident for what is to co:me, it is impossible
to ascertain their age with any degree of preci-
sion *. It is evident, that the period of their lon-

VOL. I. X gevity

* Ulloa, Notlc. Amcric. 323. Bancroft Nat. Hist. of Gui-
ana, 334.

B 0 K gevity must vary considerably, according to the

IV. diversity of climates, and their different modes of
^n"'- subsistence. They seem, however, to be every

where exempt from many of the difiempers which
afflid polished nations. None of the maladies,
which are the immediate offspring of luxury or
sloth, ever visited them; and they have no names
in their languages by which to distinguish this nu-
merous train of adventitious evils.
Diseases. BUT, whatever be the situation in which man

is placed, he is born to susser; and his difea'es,
in the savage state, though fewer in number, are,
like those of the animals whom he nearly refem-
bles in his mode of life, more violent, and more
fatal. If luxury engenders and nourishes dif-
tempers of one species, the rigour and difireffes
of savage life bring on those of another. As men,
in this state, are wonderfully improvident, and their
means of subsistence precarious, they often pass
from extreme want to exuberant plenty, accord-
ing to the vicissitudes of fortune in the chace, or
to the variety in the productions of the seasons.
Their inconsiderate gluttony in the one situation,
and their severe abfiinence in the other, are equal-
ly pernicious. For, though the human conflitu-
tion may be accuflomed by habit, like that of
animals of prey, to tolerate long famine, and then
to gorge voraciously, it is not a little asse6ted by
such sudden and violent transitions. The firength
and vigour of savages are, at tome seasons, im-
paired by what they susser from scarcity of food:
at others, they are afflicted with disorders arising
from indigefiion and superfluity of gross aliment.
These last are so common, that they may be con-
fidered as the unavoidable consequence of their
mode of subsisting, and cut off considerable num-

bcrs

bers in the prime of life. They are likewise ex- B 0 O K
tremely subjed to consumptions, to pleuretic, IV.
asthmatic, and paralytic disorders , brought on e'r
by the immoderate hardships and fatigue which
they endure in hunting and in war; or owing to
the inclemency of the seasons to which they are
continually exposed. In the savage state, hard-
Ihips and fatigue violently assault the conflitution.
In polished iocieties, intemperance undermines'it.
It is not easy to determine which of them operates
with most fatal effect, or tends most to abridge
human life. The influence of the former is cer-
tainly nmot extensive. The pernicious confe-
quences of luxury reach only a few members in
any community, the distresses of savage life are
felt by all. As far as I can judge, after very mi-
nute inquiry, the general period of human life is
shorter among savages, than in well-regulated and
industrious societies.

ONE dreadful malady, the feverefi scourge,

with which, in this life, offended Heaven chaf-
tens the indulgence of criminal desire, seems to
have been peculiar to the Americans. By com-
municating it to their conquerors, they have not
only amply avenged their own wrongs, but by
adding this calamity to thoSe which formerly em-
bittered human life, they have, perhaps, more
than counterbalanced all the benefits which Eu-
rope has derived from the discovery of the New
World. This distemper, from the country in
which it first raged, or from the people by whom
it was supposed to have been spread over Europe,
has been IBmetiines called the Neapolitan, and
sometimes the French Difealse. At its first appcar-

X 2 ance,

*Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 364. Lafitau, ii. 360. De la Po-
therie, ii. 37.

B OOK ance, the infeEtion was so malignant, its fymp-

Iv. toms so violent, its operation so rapid and fatal,

as to baffle all the efforts of medical Ikill. Afto-
nifhment and terror accompanied this unknown
affliEtion in its progress, and men began to dread
the extintion of the human race by such a cruel
visitation. Experience,' and the ingenuity of phy-
ficians gradually discovered remedies of such vir-
tue as to cure or mitigate the evil. During the
course of two centuries and a half, its virulence
seems to have abated considerably. At length, in
the fame manner with the leprosy, which raged in
Europe for some centuries, it may waste its force
and disappear; and in some happier age, this wef-
tern infecion, like that from the East, may be
known only by description*.

Power and II. AFTER confidering what appears to be pe-
qualities of
their minds. culiar in the bodily constitutions of the Ame-

ricans, our attention is naturally turned towards
the powers and qualities of their minds. As the
individual advances from the ignorance and
imbecility of the infant slate, to vigour and ma-
turity of understanding, something similar to this
may be observed in the progress of the species.
With refped to it, too, there is a period of in-
fancy, during which several powers of the mind
are not unfolded, and all are feeble and defec-
tive in their operation. In the early ages of so-
ciety, while the condition of man is simple and
rude, his reason is but little exercised, and his
desires move within a very narrow sphere. Hence
arise two remarkable charaderiftics of the human
mind, in this state. Its intellectual powers are
extremely limited; its emotions and efforts are
few and languid. Both thele diftinótions are con-

fpicuons
* See NOTE XLVIII.

fpicuous among the rudest and most unimproved ofB O O K
the American tribes, and constitute a firiking part IV.
in their description. --.

WHAT, among polished nations, is called fpe- ntelletual

culative reasoning or research, is altogether un: facultiesvc-
known in the rude Itate of society, and never be- rlimite.
comes the occupation or amusement of the human
faculties, until man be so far improved as to have
secured, with certainty, the means of subsistence,
as well as the poffeflion of leisure and tranquillity.
The thoughts and attention of a savage are con-
fined within the small circle of objects, immediate-
ly conducive to his preservation or enjoyment.
Every thing beyond that, escapes his observation,
or is perfecly indifferent to him. Like a mere
animal, what is before his eyes interests and affecs
him; what is out of fight, or at a distance, makes
no impression -. There are several people in Ame-
rica whose limited understandings seem not to be
capable of forming an arrangement for futurity;
neither their solicitude nor their foresight extend so
far. They follow blindly the impulse of the ap-
petite which they feel, but are entirely regardless
of distant consequences, and even of those removed
in the least degree from immediate apprehension.
While they highly prize such things as serve pre-
sent use, or minister to present enjoyment, they set
no value upon those which are not the objelt of
some immediate want t. When, on the approach
of the evening, a Caribbee feels himself disposed to
go to reft, no consideration will tempt him to fell
his hammoc. But, in the morning, when he is
sallying out to the business or pastime of the day,

he

' Ulloa Noticias Americ. 222. *1' Venegas

His. of Calif. i. 66. Sepp. Church. Coll. v. 693. Borde
Defer. des Caraibes, p. 6. Ellis Voy. 194.

B 0 0 Khe will part with it for the slightest toy that catches

IV. his fancy . At the close of winter, while the im-
^^^ preflion of what he has suffered from the rigour

of the climate is fresh in the mind of the North
American, he sets himself with vigour to prepare
materials for ereting a comfortable hut to protet
him against the inclemency of the succeeding sea-
son; but as soon as the weather becomes mild, he
forgets what is pafl, abandons his work, and ne-
ver thinks of it more, until the return of cold
compels him, when too late, to resume it f.

IF in concerns the most intereiting, and seem-

ingly the most simple, the reason of man, while
rude and deflitute of culture, differs so little from
the thoughtless levity of children, or the improvi-
dent inftind of animals, its exertions in other di-
reEtions cannot be very considerable. The objects
towards which reason turns, and the disquisitions
in which it engages, must depend upon the fiate
in which man is placed, and are suggested by his
necessities and desires. Disquisitions, which ap-
pear the most necessary and important to men in
one slate of society, never occur to those in ano-
ther. Among civilized nations, arithmetic or the
art of numbering, is deemed an essential and ele-
mentary science, and in our continent, the inven-
tion and use of it reaches back to a period so remote
as is beyond the knowledge of history. But among
favagcs, who have no property to estimate, no
hoarded treasures to count, no variety of objects
or multiplicity of ideas to enumerate, arithmetic
is a fupcrfluous and useless art. Accordingly,
among iome tribes in America, it seems to be quite
unknown. There are many who cannot reckon

farther

* Labat. Voyages, ii. i

r4, i 5. Tertre, ii. 385.
T lAdair Hist. of Amer. Indians, 417.

farther than three; and have no denomination to B 0 0 K
diftinguilh any number above it . Several can IV.
proceed as far as ten, others to twenty. When V
they would convey an idea of any number beyond
these, they point to the hair of their head, intimat-
ing that it is equal to them, or with wonder de-
clare it to be so great that it cannot be reckoned f.
Not only the Americans, but all nations, while ex-
tremely rude, seem to be unacquainted with the
art of computation *. As soon, however, as they
acquire such acquaintance or connection with a va-
riety of obje&s, that there is frequent occasion to
combine or divide them, their knowledge of num-
bers increases, so that the state of this art among
any people may be confidered as one standard, by
which to eflimate the degree of their improvement.
The Iroquois, in North America, as they are much
more civilized than the rude inhabitants of Brasil,
Paraguay, or Guiana, have likewise made greater
advances in this refpet; though even their arith-
metic does not extend beyond a thousand, as in
their petty tranfations they have no occasion for
any higher number§. The Cherokee, a less con-
fiderable nation on the fame continent, can reckon
only as far as a hundred, and to that extent have
names for the several numbers; the smaller tribes
in their neighbourhood can rife no higher than
ten |1.

IN other refpeds, the exercise of the underfiand- No abftraQ

ing among rude nations is fiill more limited. The idCa.
first ideas of every human being must be such as

he

* Condam. p. 67. Stadius up. de Bry, ix. 128. Lery.

ibid. 251. Biet. 362. Lettr. Edif. 23. 214. t Dumont
Louis. i. I87. Herrera, dec. i. lib. iii. c. 3. Bict. 396.
Bordlc 6. :: This is the cafe with the Greenlanders,
Crantz. i. 225. and with the Kamchatkadales, M. 1'Abb:
Chappe, iii. 17. Charlcv. Nouv. France, iii. 402. |I Adair
ift. of Amcr. Indians, 77. See NOTE XLIX.

B 0 0 K he receives by the senses. But, in the mind of

Iv. man, while in the savage slate, there seem to be
^'^TT hardly any ideas but what enter by this avenue.

The objects around him are presented to his eye.
Such as may be subservient to his use, or can gra-
tify any of his appetites, attra6t his notice; he views
the reit without curiosity or attention. Satisfied
with confidering them under that simple mode, in
which they appear to him, as separate and detached,
he neither combines them so as to form general
classes, nor contemplates their qualities apart, nor
bestows a thought upon the operations of his own
mind concerning them. Thus, he is unacquainted
with all the ideas which have been denominated
universal, abJiradt, or of reflection. The range of
his understanding must, of course, be very con-
fined, and his reasoning powers be employed mere-
ly on what is sensible. This is so remarkably the
cafe with the ruder nations of America, that their
languages, (as we ihall afterwards find) have not a
word to express any thing but what is material or
corporeal. Time, space, fubJiance, and a thousand
other terms which represent abftrad and universal
ideas, are altogether unknown to them *. A naked
savage, cowering near the fire in his miserable cab-
bin, or stretched under a few branches which afford
him a temporary ihelter, has as little inclination as
capacity for useless speculation. His thoughts ex-
tend not beyond what relates to animal life; and
when they are not diredted towards some of its
concerns, his mind is totally inacive. In situation,
iwhere no extraordinary effort, either of ingenuity
or labour is requisite, in order to satisfy the
simple demands of nature, the powers of the
mind are so feldon roused to any exertion, that
the rational faculties continue almost dormant and

unex-
* Condam. p. 54.

gnexercifed. The numerous tribes scattered over B O o K
the rich plains of South-America, the inhabitants IV.
of some of the islands, and of several fertile plains
on the continent, come under this description.
Their vacant countenance, their flaring unexpref-
five eye, their lifeless inattention, and total ignor-
ance of subje&s, which seem to be the first which
should occupy the thoughts of rational beings,
made such impression upon the Spaniards, whey
they firfl beheld those rude people, that they con-
fidered them as animals of an inferior order, and
could not believe that they belonged to the human
species*. It required the authority of a papal
bull to countera& this opinion, and to convince
them that the Americans were capable of the func-
tions, and intitled to the privileges of humanityt.
Since that time, persons more enlightened and im-
partial than the difcoverors or conquerors of Ame-
rica, have had an opportunity of contemplating
the mofI savage of its inhabitants, and they have
been aflonifhed and humbled, with observing how
nearly man, in this condition, approaches to the
brute creation. But in feverer climates, where
subsistence cannot be procured with the fame ease,
where men must unite more closely, and at with
greater concert, necessity calls forth their talents,
and sharpens their invention, so that the intelligent
powers are more exercised and improved. The,
North-Americans and natives of Chili, who inha-
bit the temperate regions in the two great diftrias
of America, are people of cultivated and inlarged
nldcriftandings, when viewed in comparison with
I'me of those feated in the islands, or on the banks
of the Maragnon and Orinoco. Their occupations
arc more various, their iyltcm of policy, as well as

of

"F Herrera, dec 2. ,2. ii. c. 15.
'' Torquemn. 1ond. Ind. iii. 198.

B 0 0 K of war, more complex, their arts more numerous.

IV. But, even among them, the intellectual powers are
^'!" extremely limited in their operations, and unless

when turned directly to those objects which interest
a savage, are held in no eflimation. Both the
North-Americans and Chilefe, when not engaged
in some of the functions b.longing to a warrior or
hunter, loiter away their time in thoughtless indo-
lence, unacquainted with any other subjea worthy
of their attention, or capable of occupying their
minds.. If even among them, reason is so much
circumscribed in its exertions, and never arrives,
in its highest attainments, at the knowledge of
those general principles and maxims, which serve as
the foundation of science, we may conclude, that
the intelletual powers of man in the savage state
are destitute of their proper object, and cannot
acquire any considerable degree of vigour and en-
largement.

.Atve es- FROM the fame causes, the active efforts of the
forts of the mind are few, and, on molt occasions, languid. If
inafeuid. we examine into the motives which rouze men to

activity in civilized life, and prompt them to per-
severe in fatiguing exertions of their ingenuity or
strength, we {hall find that they arise chiefly from
acquired wants and appetites. These are numer-
ous and importunate, they keep the mind in per-
petual agitation, and, in order to gratify them,
invention must be always on the stretch, and in-
duftry must be incessantly employed. But the
desires of imnple nature are few, and where a fa-
vourable climate yields alloft spontaneously what
suffices them, they scarcely stir the foul, or excite
any violent emotion. Hence the people of fevcral
tribes in America wafle their life in a liftlcfs indo-
lence. To be free fiom occupation, seems to be
all the enjoymient towards which they aspire. They

will
* Lafitau, ii a.

ill continue whole days stretched out in their B O K
alocs, or feated on the earth, in perfect idle- IV.
fs, without changing their posture, or railing their rm-
es from the ground, or uttering a single word".
SUCH is their aversion to labour, that neither ImProv-
e hope of future good, nor the apprehension ofde
ture evil, can surmount it. They appear equally *
different to both, discovering little solicitude, and
king no precautions to avoid the one, or to secure
e other. The "ravings of hunger may rouse
em; but as they devour, with little diflindion,
atever will appease its inftindive demands, the
ertions which these occasion are of ihort dura-
n. Destitute of ardour, as well as variety of
fire, they feel not the force of thole powerful
rings which give vigour to the movements of the
ad, and urge the patient hand of industry to
revere in its efforts. Man, in tome parts of
erica, appears in a form so rude, that we can
cover no effe&s of his aEtivity, and the princi-
of underffanding which should dire&t it, seems
rdlyto be unfolded. Like the other animals,
has no fixed residence; he has erecqed no ha-
ation to ihelter him from the inclemency of the
ather; he has taken no measures for securing a
rtai subsistence; he neither sows nor reaps; but
rMs about as led in search of the plants and
ts which the earth brings forth in succession;
inl quest of the game which he kills in the
sis, or of the fish which he catches in the
?rs.
ri ls description, however, applies only to rome some varic-
es. Man cannot continue long in this ifate of(t.aY o
e and uninformed infancy. He was made bfrthfc.t
utry and aCtion, and the powers of his nature,
ell as the neceflity of his condition, urge him

to
]3ouguer Voy. au Perou, o02. Borde, iS.

n 0 0 K to fulfil his destiny. Accordingly, among mol

IV. of the American nations, especially those feated i
S-rS- rigorous climates, some efforts are employed, ani

some previous precautions are taken, for fecurin
iubfiftence. The career of regular industry is be
gun, and the laborious arm has made the fir:
essays of its power. Still, however, the improvi
dent and slothful genius of the savage state predo
minates. Even among those more impro0e
tribes, labour is deemed ignominious and degrac
ing. It is only to work of a certain kind that
man will deign to put his hand. The greater pa;
is devolved entirely upon the women. One half
the community remains inastive, while the othe
is oppressed with the multitude and variety of ii
occupations. Thus their industry is partial, an
the foresight which regulates it, is no less limiter
A remarkable instance of this occurs in the chi
arrangement with refpe6t to their manner of livin
They depend for their subsistence, during one pa
of the year, on fishing; during another, on hun
ing; during a third, on the produce of their agi
culture. Though experience has taught them
foresee the return of those various seasons, at
to make some provision for their refpeSive e
gencies, they either want sagacity to proporti
this provision to their consumption, or are
incapable of any command over their appetit,
that, from their inconsiderate walle, they oft
feel .the calamities of famine as severely as I
rudest of the savage tribes. What they luf
one year does not augment their industry,
render them more provident to prevent finmi
difireftics. This inconsiderate thoughtleffilels
bout futurity, the cfift of ignorance and l

ca

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 38 ct. Lctir .

ldi. 398. '9G- I)
of N. France, Ofioorn'sCullc. i;. So. Dela P'othcric, ii

aufe of sloth, accompanies and characterizes man B 0 0 K
nevery flage of lavage life*; and by a caprici- IV.
us singularity in his operations, he is then least -r-'
licitous about supplying his wants, when the
eans of satisfying them are most precarious, and
rocured with the greatest difficulty t.
III. AFTER viewing the bodily constitution ofThe'rfocial
e Americans, and contemplating the powers of fate
heir minds, we are led, in the natural order ofin-
uiry, to confider them as united together in foci-
y. Hitherto our researches have been confined
o the operations of understanding refpeting
hemfelves, as individuals, now they will extend
othe degree of their sensibility, and affection to-
ards their species.
THE domeflic state is the first and most simple Domestic
ormofhuman association. The union of the fexes,ni
mong different animals, is of longer or shorter
uration in proportion to the ease or difficulty of
earing their offspring. Among those tribes where
he season of infancy is short, and the young soon
cquire the vigour or agility, no permanent union
formed. Nature commits the care of training up
leoffspring to the mother alone, and her tender-
els, without any other afliftance, is equal to the
alk, But where the state of infancy is long and
elplefs, and the joint afliduity of both parents is
quifite in tending their feeble brood, there a more
nuimate conneCtion takes place, and continues un-
1 the purpose of nature be accomplished, and the
ew race grow up to full maturity. As the infan-
of man is more feeble and helpless than that of
y other aninal, and he is dependent, during a
uch longer period, on the care and foresight of his

parents,

Bancroft's Nat. Hist. of Guiana, 326. 333.
'I See NOTE L.

B O O K parents, the union between husband and wife cam.

XV. early to be confidered, not only as a solemn, but

as a permanent contrat. A general slate of pro
miifcuous intercourse between the sexes never exi.
ed but in the imagination of poets. In the infanc
of society, when men, destitute of arts and indui
try, lead a hard precarious life, the rearing of thei
progeny demands the attention and efforts of botl
parents; and if their union had not been formec
and continued with this view, the race could no
have been preserved. Accordingly, in America
even among the rudest tribes, a regular union be
tween husband and wife was univerlal, and thb
rights of marriage were understood and recognized
In those diftri&s where subsistence was scanty, an
the difficulty of maintaining a family was great, th
man confined himself to one wife. In warmer o
more fertile provinces, the facility of procuring foot
concurred with the influence of climate, in induc
ing the inhabitants to increase the number ofthei
wives,. In some countries the marriage unior
subsisted during life; in others, the impatienceo
the Americans under refiraint of any species, toge
ther with their natural levity and caprice, prompt
ed them to dissolve it on very flight pretexts, Wn
often without assigning any cause t.

Condition of BUT whether they confidered the obligation o
women. this contraSt as perpetual, or only temporary, th

condition of women was equally humiliating an
miserable. Whetherman has been improved byth
progress of arts and civilization in society, is a qucl
tion, which, in the wantonness of disputation, ha
been agitated among philosophers. That wonic
are indebted to the refinements of polilhed manner

so

* Lettr. Edit. 23. 318. Lafitau Moeurs, i. 554. Lery ap'
Bry, iii. 234. Journal Grillet et Bechamel, p. 88.

't Lafitau, i. 580. JoutelJourn. Hiltor. 345. Lozano Defc
del Gran Chaco, 7o. Hennepin Moeurs des Sauvages. p. 30. 3

for a happy change in their state, is a point which B o o K
can admit of no doubt. To despise and to degrade IV.
the female sex, is the chara6teriftic of the savage '.sT
slate in every part of the globe. Man, proud of ex-
celling in firength and in courage, the chief marks
of pre-eminence among rude people, treats woman,
as an inferior, with disdain. The Americans, per-
haps from that coldness and insensibility which has
been confidered as peculiar to their conflitution,
add negleEt and harshness to contempt. The most
intelligent travellers have been firuck with this in-
attention of the Americans to their women. It is
not, as I have already observed, by a studied display
oftendernefs and attachment, that the American
endeavours to gain the heart of the woman whom
he wifles to marry. Marriage itself, instead of be-
ing an union of affection, and interest between
equals, becomes, among them, the unnatural con-
junetion of a master with his slave. It is the ob-
servation of an author, whose opinions are defer-
vedly of great weight, that wherever wives are
purchased, their condition is extremely depressed *.
'hey become the property and the slaves of those
who buy them. In whatever part of the globe this
custom prevails, the observation holds. In coun-
tries where refinement has made tome progress,
women, excluded from society, and ihut up in I'e-
questered apartments, are kept under the vigilant
guard of their mailers. In ruder nations, they are
degraded to the meanest funcdions. Among many
people of America the marriage-contraCt is proper-
ly a purchase. The man buys his wife of her pa-
rents. Though unacquainted with the ule of mo-
ney, or with such commercial tranfadlions as take
place in more improved focicty, he knows how to
give an equivalent for any object which he defircs
1opoflefs. In some places the suitor devotes his

service
* Sketches of Hill. of Man, i. 184.

B O O K service for a certain time to the parents of the maid

IV. whom he courts; in others, he hunts for them occa-
'-'rS-' fionally; or assists in cultivating their fields, and

forming their canoes; in others, he offers presents of
such things as are deemed moit valuable on account
of their ufefulnefsor rarity'. In return for thele: he
receives his wife; and this circumstance, added to
the low eflimation of women among savages, leads
him to confider her as a female servant whom he has
acquired, and whom he has a title to treat as an in.
ferior. In all unpolifhed nations, it is true, the
functions in domeflic oeconomy, which fall natural.
ly.to the ihare of women, are so many, that they
are tubjecEed to hard labour, and must bear more
than theirfull portion of the common burden. But
inAmerica their condition is so peculiarly grievous,
and their depression so complete, that servitude is
a name too mild to describe their wretched state.
A wife, among most tribes, is no better than a
beast of burden, destined to every office of labour
and fatigue. While the men loiter out the day in
Iloth, or spend it in amulement, the women arc
condemned to incessant toil. Talks are imposed
upon them without pity, and services are received
without complacence or gratitude f. Every cir.
cumftance reminds women of this mortifying in-
feriority. They must approach their lords with re-
verence; they must regard them as more exalted
beings, and are not permitted to eat in their pre.
fence t. Therearediftrics inAmericawhere thisdo.
minion is to grievous, and so sensibly felt that fomn
women, in a wild emotion of maternal tendernels,

have

* Lafitau Mocurs&c. i. 56o. &c. Charlev. iii. 285, &c. Hier
rera, dec. 4. lib. iv. c. 7. Dunont, ii. 1 56.

-I Tertre, ii. 382. Borde Relat. des Mocursdcs Caraibes. p. 21
Bict, 357. Condaminc, p. 10. e'crmin. i. 79.

4 Gumilla, i. 153. Barrere, 164. Labat.Voy.ii.78. Chlui
nalon, 51. Tcrtrc, ii. 300.

have destroyed their female children in their in- B O O K
fancy, in order to deliver them from that into- IV.
lerable bondage to which they knew they were -r
doomed". Thus the first institution of social life
is perverted. That tfate of domeflic union to-
wards which nature leads the human fpecics, in
order to soften the heart to gentleness and huma-
nity, is rendered so unequal, as to establish a cruel
diflindtion between the tfexes, and which forms the
one to be harlh and unfeeling, and humbles the
other to servility and subjeCtion.

IT is owing, perhaps, in iome measure, to this Their wo

slate of depreflion, that women in rude nations are men not
far fronm being prolific t. The vigour of theirpllii
conflitution is exhausted by exceflive fatigue, and
the wants and distresses of savage life are ito iu-
merous, as to force them to take various precau-
tions in order to prevent too rapid an increase of
their progeny. Among wandering tribes, or such
as depend chiefly upon hunting for fubfiflence, the
mother cannot attempt to rear a tecond child, un-
til the first has attained such a degree of v'igour as
to be in fbine mealure independent of her care.
From this motive, it is the universal pralice of the
American women to nurse their children during
ieveral yearst; and as they seldom marry early,
the period of their fertility is over, before they can
finish the long but necessary attendance upon two
or three 'ucccffive children §. Among fomle of ll
lealt polished tribes, whose indufiry and forcfight
does not extend so far as to make any regular pro-
vision for their own fubfilence, it is a maxim not

VOL. I. Y to

* Gumilla, ii. 233. 238. IIerrera, dec. 7. lib. isx. c. 4.
1 Lafitau, i. 59o. Charilvoix, iii. 304.
:1 Hcrrcra, dec. 6. lib. i. c. 4.
§ Charlev. iii. 303. Duiont Mrcm. fur Louifianc, ii. 7.

Denys Hi-l. N;tur. de l'Amcrique, &c. ii. 365. Charle6 . 1.ilt,
de Pl'ra.. ii. 422.

B O O Kto burden themselves with rearing more than two

IV. children*; and no such numerous families as are
4kT' frequent in civilized societies, are to be found a-

mong men in this state t. When twins are born,
one of them commonly is abandoned, because the
mother is not equal to the talk of educating both f.
When a mother dies while ihe is nursing a child,
all hope of preserving its life fails, and it is buried
together with her in the fame grave §. As the pa-
rents are frequently exposed to want by their own
improvident indolence, the difficulty of sustain-
ing their children becomes so great, that it is not
uncommon to abandon or destroy them ||. Thus
their experience of the difficulty of training up an
infant to maturity, amidfi the hardships of savage
life, often flifles the voice of nature among the
Americans, and suppresses the firong emotions of
parental tenderness.

Parentalaf- BUT, though necessity compels the inhabitants
ilia"duty. of America thus to set bounds to the increase of

their families, they are not deficient in affedion and
attachment to their offspring. They feel the pow-
er of this inftin& in its full force, and as long as
their progeny continue feeble and helpless, no peo-
ple exceed them in tenderness and care¶. But in
rude nations, the dependence of children upon
their parents is of ihorter continuance than in po-
lifhed societies. When men must be trained to
the various funtions of civil life by previous dif-
cipline and education, when the knowledge of

abfirufe

* Techo's Account of Piraguay, &c. Church. Colled. vi.
108. Lett. Edif. 24. 20. Lozano Defcr. 92.

1I Maccleur's Journal, 63.
:$ Lettr. Edif. x. 200. See NOTE LI.
§ Charlev. iii. 368. Lctt. Edif. x. 200. P. Melch. Ier-
nandez Memor. de Cheriqui. Colbert, Collet. Orig. Palp. i.

11 Vcnegas Hilt. of Calliforn. i. 82.
I[ Gumilla, i. 211. Bict. 390.

abstruse sciences must be taught, and dexterity in B 0 0 K
intricate arts mufl be acquired before a young IV.
man is prepared to begin his career of adtion, "i-'
the attentive feelings of a parent are not confined
to the years of infancy, but extend to the efta-
blifhment of his child in the world. Even then
his solicitude does not terminate. His protec-
tion may still be requisite, and his wisdom and ex-
perience still prove useful guides. Thus a perma-
nent connection is formed; parental tenderness is
exercised, and filial refpe&t returned, throughout
the whole course of life. But in the fimplicitv of
the savage state, the afletion of parents, like the
inflinClive fondness of animals, cealcs almotl en-
tirely as soon as their offspring attain maturity.
Little infllruion fits them for that mode of life to
which they arc destined. The parents, as if their
duty were accomplished, when they have conduc-
ted their children through the helpless years of in-
fancy, leave then afterwards at entire liberty:
They seldom advifs or admonish, they never chide
or chastise them. They fufler them to be ablblute
mailers of their own aftions'. In an Anierican
hut, a father, a mother, and their pofrcrity, live
together like persons affcmbled by accident, with-
out seeming to feel the obligation of the duties mu-
tually arising from this connection P. As filial
love is not cheriihed by the continuance of itien-
tion or good offices, the recollection of bcilcfits
received in early infancy is too faint to excite it.
Conscious of their own liberty, and impatient of
restraint, the youth of America are accufomned to
at as if they were totally independent. Their
parents are not objects of greater regard than othcr

Y 2 pcrfons.

* Charlev. iii. 272. Biet. 390. Gumilla, i. 212. La-

fitau, i. 602. Creuxi, Hist. Canad. p. 71. Flrnaldez, Re-
lac. Iift. de los Chequit. 33.

t Charlcvy Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 273,

B O 0 K persons. They treat them always with neglect

IV. and often with such harshness and insolence, as
'-r to fill those who have been witnesses of their con-

duct with horror%. Thus the ideas which seem
to be natural to man in his savage state, as they
result from his circumstances and condition in
that period of his progress, affect the two capital
relations in domestic life. They render the union
between husband and wife unequal. They short-
ten the duration, and weaken the force of the con-
neetion between parents and children.

olitcalin. IV. FROM the domestic state of the Americans,
ftitutions. the transition is natural to the consideration of their

civil government and political institutions. In
every inquiry concerning the operations of men
when united together in society, the first object of
attention should be their mode of subsistence. Ac-
cordingly as that varies, their laws and policy mull
be different. The inftitiutions suited to the ideas
and exigencies of tribes, which subsist chiefly by
fishing or hunting, and which have hardly formed
a conception of any species of property, will be
much more simple than those which must take
place when the earth is cultivated with regular in-
duflry, and a right of property, not only in its pro-
duCtions, but in the foil itself, is completely afcer-
tained.

Mode of ALL the people of America, now under review,
fubfiftencc. belong to the former class. But though they may

all be comprehended under the general denomina-
tion of savage, the advances which they had made
in the art of procuring to themselves a certain and
plentiful subsistence, were very unequal. On the
vast plains of South America, man appears in one

of

* Gunilla, i. 212:. Tertrc, ii. 376. Charlev. Hiil. de N.

France, iii. 309. Charlcv. Hill. de Parag. i. 15. Lczano,
Defcrip. del Grand Cliaco, p. 68. Ioo, loi. Fernand. Re-
lac. Hillor. de lob Chiquit. 426.

of the rudest states in which he has been ever ob- B O O K
served, or, perhaps, can exist. Several tribes de- Iv.
pend entirely upon the bounty of nature for tub- r-~
ifteJice. They dilcover no solicitude, they em-
ploy little foresight, they scarcely exert any indus-
try, to secure what is necessary for their support.
The Topayers of Brasil, the Gzaxeros of Tierra-
Firne, the Caiguas, the Moxos, and several other
people of Paraguay, are unacquainted with every
species of cultivation. They neither sow nor plant.
Even the culture of the manioc, of which caffada
bread is made, is an art too intricate for their in-
genuity, or too fatiguing to their indolence. The
roots which the earth produces spontaneously, the
fruits, the berries, and feeds, which they gather in
the woods, together with lizards and other reptiles,
which the heat engenders in a fat foil, moistened
by frequent rains, supply them with food during
some part of the yearl. At other times they sub- By tfhing
sift by fishing; and nature seems to have indulged
the laziness of the people, by the liberality with
which she minilters, in this way, to their wants.
The vast rivers of South America abound with an
infinite variety of the most delicate fish. The
lakes and marfiles, formed by the annual overflow-
ing of the waters, are filled with all the different
species, where they remain liut up, as in natural
reservoirs, for the use of the inhabitants. They
swarm in such shoals, that in some places they are
catched without art or induflryt. In others, the
natives have discovered a method of ilfecting the
water with thejuice of certain plants, by which the

inx

Nicuthoff. Hi(t. of Brasil. Church Col. ii. 134. Simon.

Conquifla de Tierra F'irnie, p. 166. Techo, Account of
';iraguay, &c. Church. vi. 78. Icilr. Edif. 23. 384. 1o.
19o. Lozano, 1)clcrip. del Gran Ciaco, p. Si. Rib;s,
Ililtor. de los triunfos, &c. p. 7.
'1 See NOTE LII.

B o O K fish are so intoxicated, that they float on the fur-

IV. face, and are taken with the hand*. Some tribes
^T''' have ingenuity enough to preserve them without

salt, by drying or smoking them upon hurdles over
a flow firet. The prolific quality of the rivers in
South America induces many of the natives to re-
fort to their banks, and depend almost entirely
for nourishment on what their waters supply with
such profufion+t. In this part of the globe, hunt-
ing seems not to have been the first employment
of men, or the first effort of their invention and
labour to obtain food. They were fishers before
they became hunters; and as the occupations of
the former do not call for equal exertions of aai-
vity, or talents, with those of the latter, people in
that state appear to possess neither the fame degree
of enterprise, nor of ingenuity. The petty na-
tions adjacent to the Maragnon and Orinoco, are
manifefly the most inactive and least intelligent of
all the Americans.
By hunting. NONE but tribes contiguous to great rivers can

sustain themselves in this manner. The greater
part of the American nations, dispersed over the
forefls with which their country is covered, do not
procure subsistence with the fame facility. For al-
though there soress, especially in the fouthcrn
continent of America, are flored plentifully wvith
game§, considerable efforts of activity and ingc-
nuity arc requisite in purfiuit of it. Neccflity in-
cited theml to the one, and taught them the other.
H-unting became their principal occupation; and as
it called forth firenuous exertions of courage, of
force, and of invention, it was deemed a function

110

See NOTET LITT. I Corntl;am. 9. Gu-

mill,, ii. 37. iLetr. Edif. 14. 199. 23. 328. Acugn;, Rclat.
de la ltiv. des Anaz. 138. it Barrcre, Rdat. ds
Fr. Eq<|in. p.: 15. § P. Martyr. Dccad. p. 324·
Cunlilla, ii. 4., &c. Accugna, i. 156.

no less honourable than necessary. This was pe- B o0 K
culiar to the men. They were trained to it from IV.
their earliest youth. A bold and dextrous hunter T
ranked next in fame to the distinguished warrior,
and an alliance with the former is often courted
in preference to one with the latter4. Hardly
any device, which the ingenuity of man has dif-
covered for ensnaring or destroying wild animals,
was unknown to the Americans. While engaged
in this favourite exercise, they ihake off the indo-
lence peculiar to their nature, the latent powers
and vigour of their minds are roused, and they be-
come aftive, persevering, and indefatigable. Their
sagacity in finding their prey, and their address in
killing it, are equal. Their reason and their senses,
being constantly direted towards this one objet,
the former displays such fertility of invention, and
the latter acquire such a degree of acuteness, as ap-
pear almost incredible. They discern the foot-
steps of a wild beast, which escape every other eye,
and can follow them with certainty through the
pathless forest. If they attack their game openly,
their arrow seldom errs from the marks ; if they
endeavour to circumvent it by art, it is almost im-
poflible to avoid their toils. Among several tribes,
their young men were not permitted to marry, un-
til they had given such proofs of their skill in hunt-
ing as put it beyond doubt that they were capable
of providing for a family. Their ingenuity always
on the firetch, and sharpened by emulation, as
well as necefity, has fitruck out many inventions,
which greatly facilitate luccels in the chafe. The
most singular of thcle is the discovery of a poifbn,
in which they dip the arrows employed in hunting.
The flightcif wound with those envenomed fhafis

is

Charlev. I-iftoire de la N. France, iii. I 15.

'1' Bict Voy. de l''r;nce Equin. 357. Davics'l)ifov. of the
River of Alnmz. Purcllitl iv. p. 1287.

O O0 K is mortal. If they only pierce the skin, the blood
IV. fixes and congeals in a moment, and the strongest
'^~'T animal falls motionless to the ground. Nor does

this poison, notwithstanding its violence and sub-
tlety, infeat the flesh of the animal which it kills.
That may be eaten with perfec safety, and retains
its native relish and qualities. All the nations along
the Maragnon and Orinoco are acquainted with
this composition, the chief ingredient in which is
the juice extracted from the root of curare, a fpe-
cies of withe*. In other parts of America, they
employ the juice of the manchenille for the fame
purpose, and it operates with a no less fatal activi-
ty. To people possessed of those secrets, the bow
is a more deftru5tive weapon than the musket, and
in their skilful hands, does great execution among
the birds and beafis which abound in the forests of
America.

By Agricul- BUT the life of a hunter gradually leads man to
ture. a state more advanced. The chafe, even where

prey is abundant, and the dexterity of the hunter
much improved, affords but an uncertain main-
tenance, and at some seasons it must be suspended
altogether. If a savage trufls to his bow alone
for food, he and his family will often be reduced
to extreme diftrels§. Hardly any region of the
earth furnishes man spontaneously with what his
wants require, in the mildest climates, and most
fertile foils, his own induflryand foresight nmuf
be exerted, in tbme degree, to Iecure a regular
supply of food. Their experience of this lur-
mounts the abhorrence of labour natural to
savage nations, and compels them to have rc-
courle to culture, as subsidiary to hunting. In
particular situations some finall tribes may lublil

by

* Gumilla, ii. i, &c. Condam. 208. Rccherch. Phi-
lo i. 239. Bancroft Nat. Hill. of Guiana, 281, &c.

§ Scc N0 E LIV.

by fishing, independent of any production of the B 0 o K
earth, railed by their own industry. But through- IV.
out all America, we scarcely meet with any nation T"'
of hunters, which does not praaife some species
of cultivation.

THEIR agriculture, however, is neither exten-The,.vious

five nor laborious. As game and fish are theirfruitsof
principal food, all they aim at by cultivation, is totuc1'
iupply alny occasional defect of these. In the fou-
thern continent of America, the natives confined
their industry to rearing a few plants, which, in a
rich foil and warm climate, were easily trained to
maturity. The chief of these is Maize, well
known in Europe by the name of Turkey or In-
dian wheat, a grain extremely prolific, of simple
culture, agreeable to the tafle, and affording a
firong hearty nourishment. The second is the
manlioc, which grows to the size of a large Ihrub,
or small tree, and produces roots somewhat re-
fembling parsnips. After carefully squeezing out
the juice, there roots are grated down to a fine
powder, and formed into thin cakes, called Caf-
fi(da bread, which, though insipid to the taflc,
proves no contemptible food `. As the juice of
the manioc is a deadly poilon, some authors have
cclebrated the ingenuity of the Americans, inl con-
verting a noxious plant into wholclbme nourish-
nient. But it should rather be confidered as one
of the delceratc expedients for procuring fubfif-
ecncc, to which neceflity reduces rude nations;
or, perhaps, men were led to the ule of it by a
progrels, in which there is nothing marvellous.
One species of manioc is altogether free of any
poilonous quality, and may be eaten without any

preparation

Sloane Till. ofJ;ain. Introl. p. i S. L;bat. i. 394. Acofla

Ilfl. Ind. Occiil. NLtur. lib. iv. c. 17. Ulloa, i. 62. Aublet
uilen. fur lc Magnioc. 'lill. dcs Plantcs, tom. ii. p. 65, &c.

33 O K preparation but that of roafling it in tne emoei;

IY. This it is probable, was firfl used by the Ameri
^-ir--' cans as food; and necessity having gradually taugh

them the art of separating its pernicious juice froll
the other species, they have by experience foulc
i: to be the nmot prolific as well as the nmoft noU
rifhing plant of the two '. The third is the plaii.
tain, which though it rifes to the height of a tree,
is of such quick growth, that in less than a year it
re.wards the indufiry of the cultivator with its frui;,
This, when roafied, supplies the place of bread,
and is both palatable and nourifling '. The fourth
is the potatoe, who'e culture and qualities are too
well known to need any description. The fifth is
pimelno, a frnall tree, yiclding a strong aromatic
Ipice. The Americans, who, like other inhabi.
tants of warm climates, delight in whatever is hot
and of poignant flavour, deem this seasoning a
ncceffary of life, and mingle it copiously with
every kind of food they take §.

Sucr- are the various productions, which were

the chief object of culture among the hunting
tribes on the continent of America, and with a
moderate exertion of active and provident induif
try, thefl might have yielded a full supply to the
wants of a numerous people. But men accuflomcd
to the free and vagrant life of hunters, are incapa-
ble of regular application to labour; and confider
agriculture as a flconclary and inferior occupation.
Accordingly the provision for tibfiftence, arifillg
fromn culiivation, was lo limited and lcanty anioli;
the Americans, that, upon any accidental failure
of their usual luccels in hunting, they were olifil
reduced to extreme dilrcls.

Ix

] yrnrlvr Idccnad. 301. La alt. i. 4.11. (>9uill;, iii. 19.
.Malchlica Milic Indian;l, 6('14. Sec NOTE LV.

l Sce NOTE LVI. § Gunilla, iii, 171. Acolla, lib. i.
<* ;!;1.

IN the islands, the mode of subsisting was confi- B O K
rably different. None of the large animals which IV.
ound on the continent were known there. Only 'r
ur species of quadrupeds, besides a kind of small
nib dog, existed in the islands, the biggeit of
ich did not exceed the size of a rabbit `. To
ut such diminutive prey, was an occupation
hich required no effort cither of adtivity or cou-
ge. The chief employment of a hunter in the
es was to kill birds, which on the continent are
cemed ignoble game, and left chiefly to the pur-
it of boyss. This want of animals, as well as
eir peculiar situation, led the islanders to depend
rincipally upon fishing for their fubfiftencee.
heir rivers, and the lea with which they are fur-
ounded, supplied them with this species of food.
It iome particular feafols, turtle, crabs, and other
ell-fifh, abounded in luch numbers, that they
ould support thenifelves with a facility in which
heir indolence delighted§. At other times, they
te lizards, and various reptiles of odious forms I[.
o fishing, the inhabitants of the island added
oie degree of agriculture. MaizeS , manioc, and
other plants, were cultivated in the fame manner
as on the continent. But all the fruits of their in-
duftry, together with what their foil and climateTheir ; gri-
produced 1pontaneoufly, afforded them but a scan- culture
IV maintenance. Though their demands for foodimit
were very sparing, they hardly railed what was
IlTsiciet for their own consumption. If a few Spa-
niards fettlcd in any diflri6, iuch a small addition
of fipcrnumicrary mouths, loon exhaufled their
Icanty stores, and brought on a famine.

Two

* Ovicdlo, lib. :ii. in proem. lJ Ribas His. ie los
"illlphl. 1]. 13. DeC t Pohlcrire, ii. 33. iii. o. :1 Ovi-
tlo, lib. xiii. c. i. (;oniiim r Iill. Gcner. c. 28. § Go-
nlaria llilt. Gener. c. 9. Iat;al, ii. 22r, &c. Oviedo,
l iii. c. 3. ¶I Sec NOTE LVIT.

B O O K Two circumstances, common to all the savage

IV nations of America, concurred with those which I
ITr"ó have already mentioned, not only in rendering

of itsim" their agriculture imperfeCt, but in circumscribing
perfedion. their power in all their operations. They had no

tame animals; and they were unacquainted fiti
the use of metals.

Thewant IN other parts of the globe, man, in his rudef
of tane ani- slate appears as lord of the creation, giving lav to

various tribes of animals, which he has tamed and
reduced to iubjeaion. The Tartar foilows his
prey on the horse which he has reared ; or tends
his numerous herds, which furnish him both wiih
food and clothing; the Arab has rendered the ca-
mel docile, and avails himself of its persevering
ifrength; the Laplander has formed the rein-deer
to be subservient to his will; and even the peo-
ple of Kamchatka have trained their dogs to la-
bour. This command over the inferior creatures
is one of the nobleti prerogatives of man, and
among the greatefi efforts of his wisdom and
power. Without this, his dominion is incomplete.
He is a monarch, who has no fubjeets; a mailer,
without fcrvants, and mutt perform every opera.
tion by the ifrength of his own arm. Such was
the condition of all the rude nations in America,
Their rcafbn was lo little improved, or their union
so incomplete, that they seem not to have been
conscious of the fupcriority of their nature, and
fuffcred all the animal creation to retain its liberty,
without cflablifhing their own authority over aly
one fpecics* Moll of the animals, indeed, \which}
have been rendered donieflic in our continent, do
not cxift in the New World; but thole pecu-
liar to it arc neither so fierce, nor lb forili-
dable, as to have exempted theii fiom fcrvitudc.
'here arc Ibme animals of the la)c lpcecics
i1l both continents. But the rcin-deer, which

hasg

as been tamed and broken to the yoke in the B O O K
ne hemisphere, runs wild in the other. The bi- IV.

of America is manifefily of the fame species "-"
ih the horned cattle of the other hemisphere *.
hefe, even among the rudest nations in our con-
nent, have been rendered domestic; and in confe-
aence of his dominion over them, man can ac-
nplifh works of labour with greater facility, and
asmade a vast addition to his means of fubfiitence.
he inhabitants of many regions in the New
Torld, where the bilbn abounds, might have de-
ved the fame advantages from it. It is not of a
ture so indocile, but that it might have been
ailed to be as fublervient to man as our cattle t.
uta savage, in that uncultivated slate wherein the
nericans were discovered, is the enemy of the
her animals, not their superior. He watfes and
froys, but knows not how to multiply or to go-
ra them §.
THIS, perhaps, is the most notable diftintion
tween the inhabitants of the Ancient and New
orlds, and a high pre-eminence of civilized men
ve such as continue rude. The greatest opera-
nsof man in changing and improving the face
nature, as well as his noft considerable efforts in
tivating the earth, are accomplilhed by means of
eaid which he receives from the animals whonl he
rtamied and employs in labour. It is by their
englh that he subdues the flubborn foil, and con-
ns the dclert or marsh inlo a fruitful field. But
D, in his civilized slate, is so accufiomed to the
ice of the donim(tic animals, that he feldone re-
ds upon the vail benefits which he derives from

it.

Biiffon, Artic. lifnz. j* Nouv. I)ccouvcrte per

"II1 9,

p . . K li. i. 207. § IBufron -ilt. Nait.

I H-is. Pniii,,. It P.lit. des Etablinfft. dcs Europ. dans
deux Ildcs, vi. 3('4.

B O O Kit. If we were to suppose him; even when nmo

IV. improved, to be deprived of their useful miniltri
'-ir" his empire over nature inuft in some measure ceaft

and he would remain a feeble animal, at a lofshoi
to subsist, and incapable of attempting such ardu
ous undertakings as their assistance enables himi
execute with ease.

Wantof the IT is a doubtful point, whether the dominiono
uf'ul me- man over the animal creation, or his acquiringt

use of metals, has contributed most to extend
power. The asra of this important discovery
unknown, and in our hemisphere very remote.
is only by tradition, or digging up some rudei
ftruments of our forefathers, that we learn t
mankind were originally unacquainted with ther
of metals, and endeavoured to supply the w'a!t
them by employing flints, shells, bones, alido:h
hard substances, for the fame purposes which ni
tals serve among polished nations. Nature co
pletes the formation of some metals. Gold, fili
and copper, are found in their perfect state, in
clefts of rocks, in the fides of mountains, or
channels of rivers. These were accordingly t
metals first known, and firit applied to use.
iron, the molt serviceable of all, and to which mi
is molt indebted, is never discovered in its peri
form; its gross and stubborn ore must feel twi
the force of fire, and go through two laborii
procefies, before it becomes fit for use. Manll
long acquainted with the other metals, before
acquired the art of fabricating iron, or attaili
such ingenuity as to perlfed an invention, to wli!
he is indebted for those instruments wherewith
filbdues the earth, and commands all its ilila
tants. But in this, as \well as in many i-fprceds,!
inirciority of the Americans was conspicuous.
the
h avage tribes, calLtcrcd over the continent

illa,

flands, were totally unacquainted with the metals B o O K
which the foil produces in great abundance, if we IV.
except some trifling quantity of gold, which they s *
picked up in the torrents that descended from
their mountains, and formed into ornaments.
Their devices, to supply this want of the service-
able metals, were extremely rude and aukward.
The most simple operations was to them an under-
taking of immense difficulty and labour. 2To
fell a tree with no other infiruments than hat-
chets of stone, was employment for a monthl.
Toform a canoe into shape, and to hollow it, con-
fumed years; and it frequently began to rot before
they were able to finish it t. Their operations in
agriculture were equally flow and defedive. In a
country covered with woods of the hardest timber,
the clearing of a fm all field derfined for culture re-
quired the united efforts of a tribe, and was a work
of much time and great toil. This was the business
of the men, and their indolence was satisfied with
performing it in a very slovenly manner. The la-
bour of cultivation was left to the women, who
after digging, or rather stirring the field, with
wooden mattocks, and flakes hardened in the fire,
sowed or planted it; but were more indebted for
the increase to the fertility of the foil, than to their
own rude industry *.

AGRICULTURE, even when the firength of

man is seconded by that of the animals which he
has fubje&ed to the yoke, and his power aug-
mented by the use of the various infiruments
with which the discovery of metals has furnish-
ed him, is fiill a work of great labour; and it is
with the sweat of his brow that he renders the

earth

Gumilla, iii. 196.

t Borde Relat. des Caraibes, p. 2z.
t Gumilln, iii. 166, &c. Lcttr. Edif. xii. Io.

B O O I earth fertile. It is not wonderful, then, that peo.

IV. pie destitute of both these advantages should have
'-T' made so little progress in cultivation, that they must

be confidered as depending for subsistence on fish-
ing and hunting, rather than on the fruits of their
own labour.

Political in- FROM this description of the mode of fubfifling
ftinfonsfa~ among the rude American tribes, the form and
this itate. genius of their political institutions may be deduc-

ed, and we are enabled to trace various circum-
fiances of diftindion between them and more civi-
lized nations.

x.Divided I. THEY were divided into small independent
ntoifmua- communities. While hunting is the chief source
ties. of subsistence, a vast extent of territory is requisite

for fupportilng a finall number of people. In pro-
portion as men multiply and unite, the wild ani-
mals, on which they prey, diminish, or fly at a
greater distance from the haunts of their enemy.
The increase of a society in this slate is limited by
its own nature, and the members of it must either
.disperse, like the game which they pursue, or fall
upon some better method of procuring food, than
by hunting. Beasts of prey are by nature folitarn
and unsocial, they go not forth to the chaie in herds,
but delight in those reccffes of the forest where they
can roam and deflroy undisturbed. A nation of hun-
ters resembles them, both in occupation and in
genius. They cannot form into large communi-
ties, because it would be impossible to find fuh-
fiflence, and they must drive to a distance every ri
val who may encroach on those domains, which
they confider as their own. This was the ftatc o
all the American tribes, the numbers in each were
finall, though scattered over vafi countries; the
were far removed from one another, and engage

in

in perpetual hostilities or rivalfhip*. In America, B O O K
the word nation is not of the fame import as in IV.
other parts of the globe. It is applied to small so.- "'"
cieties, not exceeding, perhaps, two or three hun.
dred persons, but occupying provinces larger than
obme kingdoms in Europe. The country of Gui-
ana, though of larger extent than the kingdom of
France, and divided among a great number of na-
tions, did not contain above twenty-five thousand
inhabitantst. In the provinces which border on
the Orinoco, one may travel several hundred miles
in different directions, without finding a single hut,
or observing the footfieps of a human creature 5.
In North-America, where the climate is more ri-
gorous, and the foil less fertile, the desolation is
ilill greater. There vast journeys of some hun-
dred leagues have been made through uninhabited
plains and forefis §. As long as hunting continues
to be the chief employment of man to which he
trusts for subsistence, he can hardly be said to have
occupied the earth II,

2. NATIONS which depend upon hunting are unc
strangers to the idea of property. As the animals quaitle

with the

on which the hunter feeds are not bred under his idea of pro-
infpedion, nor nourished by his care, he can claim perty.
no right to them, while they run wild in the forest.
Where game is so plentiful that it may be catched
with little trouble, men never dream of appropri-
ating what is of small value, or of easy acquisition.
Where it is so rare, that the labour or danger of
the chafe requires the united efforts of a tribe, or
village, what is killed is a common itock, belong-

VOL. I. Z ing

* Lozano, Dcfcrip. del Gran Chaco, 59, 62. Fernandcz,

Relac. Hilt. de los Chiquit. 162. *1' Voyages tie
Marchais, iv. 353. t Gumilla, ii. io1.

M§ . Fabry, quoted by Buffon, iii. 488. Lafitau, ii. 79.

3offu, Travels through Louisiana, i. I i. See NOTE LVIII.
11 See NOTE LIX.

B O 0 King equally to all, who by their skill or their cou.

IV. rage,. have contributed to the success of the excur-
-''s lion. The forest, or hunting grounds, are deem-

ed the property of the tribe, from which it has a
title to exclude every rival nation. But no indi-
vidual arrogates a right to any diftriEt of there, in
preference to his fellow-citizens. They belong
alike to all; and thither, as to a general and un-
divided store, all repair in quelf of sustenance.
The fame principles, by which they regulate their
chief occupation, extend to that which is fubordi.
nate. Even agriculture has not introduced among
them a complete idea of property. As the men
hunt, the women labour together, and after they
have shared the toils of the seed-time, they enjoy
the harvest in common*. Among tonme tribes, the
increase of their cultivated lands is deposited ina
public granary, and divided among them, at flated
times according to their wantst. Among others,
though they lay up separate flores, they do not ac-
quire such an exclusive right of property, that
they can enjoy superfluity, while those around
them susser want.t. Thus the diftinftions arising
from the inequality oF possessions are unknown.
The terms rich or poor enter not into their lan-
guage, and being firangers to property, they are
unacquainted with that, which is the great objeS
of laws and policy, as well as the chief motive
.which induced mankind to establish the various
grrangeiments of regular government §.
fighcrenfe 3. PEOPLE in this slate retain a high sense of

t.(laeitY equality and independence. Wherever the idea
pcndelnc. of property is not efiablifhed, there can be no

diftindion

' Dr. Ferguson's Essay, 125.. * Gumilla, i. 265.
Brickcll, Hilt. of N. Carol. 327. See NOTE LX.

:. Dcrnys, Hill. Natur. ii. 392, 393. § P. Mar-

tyr, I)ecad. p. 45. Vcneg. I-lilt. of Californ. i. 66. Llcy,
Navig. in Brasil, c. 17.

diflintaion among men, but what arises from per- B 0 0 K
fonal qualities. These can be conspicuous only on IV
such occasions as call theri forth into exertion. In '^~
times of danger, or in affairs of intricacy, the wis-
dom and experience of age are consulted, and pre-
scribe the measures which ought to be pursued.
When they take the field againfi the enemies of
their country, the warrior of most approved cou-
rage leads the youth to the combat . If they go
forth in a body to the chafe, the most expert and
adventurous hunter is foremost, and directs their
motions. But during seasons of tranquillity and
inaction, when there is no occasion to display those
talents, all pre-eminence ceases. Every circum-
stance indicates, that all the members of the com-
munity are on a level. They are clothed in the
fame simple garb. They feed on the fame plain
fare. Their houses and furniture are exactly fimi-
lar. No distinction can arise from the inequality
of possessions. Whatever forms dependence on
one part, or constitutes superiority on the other,
is unknown. All are freemen, all feel themselves
to be such, and assert with firmness the rights
which belong to that condition t. This sentiment
of independence is imprinted so deeply in their
nature, that no change of condition can eradicate
it and bend their minds to servitude. Accuf-
tomed to be absolute maflers of their own conduct,
they disdain to execute the orders of another, and
having never known control, will not submit to
corredciont. Many of the Americans, when they
found that they were treated as slaves by the Spa-

Z z niards,

* Acofa, Hifl. lib. vi. c. 19. Stadius, Hist. Brasil, lib.

ii. c. 13. Dc Bry, iii. pi. o1. Biet, 361. ' Labat.
vi. 124. Bricccll, Hill. of Carol. 310.

:. See NOTE LXI.

B K niards died of grief; many destroyed themselves

IV. in despair ".
`\_s~ 4. AMONG people in this state, government can
Senfeob- affb ume little authority, and the sense of civil i'b-
impereet. ordination must remain very imperfect. While

the idea of property is unknown, or incompletely
conceived, and the spontaneous produtions of
the earth, as well as the fruits ofindufiry, are con-
lidered as belonging to the public flock, there can
hardly be any such subjed of difference or discus-
sion among the members of the fame community,
as will require the hand of authority to interpose
in order to adjust it. Where the right of separate
and exclusive possession is not introduced, the
great objeEt of law and jurifdidion does not exifi.
When called into the field, either in their own
defence, or to invade the territories of their ene-
mies, when engaged in the toil and dangers of
the chaie, the members of a tribe perceive'that
they are part of a political body. They are con-
fcious of their own connetion with the compa-
nions in conjun6lion with whom they aft; and
they follow and reverence such as excel in con-
dud and valour. But during the intervals between
such common efforts, they are scarcely conscious
of the ties of political uniont. No visible form
of government is established. The names of ma-
giflrat4 and fubjedi are not in use. Every one
seems to enjoy his natural independence almost
entire. If a scheme of public utility be proposed,
the members of the community are left at liberty
to chule whether they will assist or not in carrying
it into execution. No statute imposes any fcrvice

as

* Oviedo, lib. iii. c. 6. p. 97. Vega, Conquift. de la Flo-

rida, i. 30. ii. 416. Labat, ii. 138. Benzo Hilt. Nov. Orb.
lib. iv. c. 25.

*'I Lozano, Defcr. del Grand Chaco, 93. Mclendcz Tefo-
ros Vcrdaderos, ii. 23. See NOTE LXII.

as a duty, no compulsory laws oblige them to per- B o o K
form it. All their resolutions are voluntary, and IV.
flow from the impulse of their own minds *. The --r
Ifit ftep towards eflablifhing a public juiifdiEtion
has not been taken in those rude societies. The
right of revenge is left in private hands f: If vio-
lence is committed, or blood is shed, the commu-
nity does not assume the power either of inflicting
or of moderating the punishment. It belongs to
the family and friends of the person injured or
slain to revenge the wrong, or to accept of the
reparation offered by the aggressor. If the elders
interpose, it is to advise, not to decide, and it is
seldom their councils are listened to; for as it is
deemed pusillanimous to susser an offender to el-
cape with impunity, resentment is implacable and
everlasting . The object of government among
savages is rather foreign than domestic. They do
not aim at maintaining interior order and police
by public regulations, or the exertions of any per-
manent authority, but labour to preserve such
union among the members of their tribe, that they
may watch the motions of their enemies, and act
against them with concert and vigour.

SucH was the form of political order eflablifhed pTopat

among the greater part of the American nations. descriptions
In this slate were most of the tribes, spread over'apply
the vast provinces extending eastward of the Mif-
fiffippi, from the mouth of the St. Laurence to
the confines of Florida. In a similar condition
were the people of Brasil, the inhabitants of Chili,
and several tribes in Paraguay and Guiana, and in
the countries which ftrctch from the mouth of the

Orinoco

Charlev. Iifi. N. France, iii. 266. 268.

l l-Icrrcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 8. t Charlvy.

Hill. N. France, iii. 271, 272. Lafit. i. 486. Ctfrii Hist.
de Nucvo Reyno de Granada, 226.

B O O K Orinoco to the peninsula of the Yucatan. Amongo

IV. such an infinite number of petty associations, there
"s;r may be peculiarities which conflitute a diftinssion,

and mark the various degrees of their civilization
and improvement. But an attempt to trace and
enumerate these would be vain, as they have not
been observed by persons, capable of discerning
the minute and delicate circumstances, which serve
to discriminate nations resembling one another in
their general character and features. The defcrip-
tion which I have given will apply, with little va-
riation, to the policy of every people in America,
which to fishing and hunting had added Tome de-
gree of agriculture.

RUDE and imperfe& as those institutions may

appear, several tribes were not so far advanced in
their political progress. Among all those petty
nations which trusted for subsistence entirely to
fishing and hunting without any species of culti-
vation, the union was so incomplete, and their
sense of mutual dependence so feeble, that hardly
any appearance of government or order can be
discerned in their proceedings. Their wants are
few, their objects of pursuit simple, they form
into separate tribes, and at together, from in-
flinCt, habit, or conveniency, rather than from
any formal concert and association. To this class
belong the Californians, several of the small na-
tions in the extensive country of Paraguay, some
of the people on the banks of the Orinoco, and
on the river St. Magdalene, in the new kingdom
of Granada .

Some irre- BUT though among these laft-mentioned tribes
gular ap- there was hardly any shadow of regular govcrn-
pearanlces,

ment, and even among those which I first defcrib-

cd,

* Vcnegas, i. 68. Lcttr. Edif. ii. 176. Techo. HiSl. of
Parag. Churchil, vi. 78. Ilit. Gen. dca Voyages, xiv. 74.

ed, its authority is slender, and confined within B O0 K
narrow bounds, there were some places in Ame- IV.
rica where it was carried far beyond the degree T
which seems natural to rude nations. In survey-
ing the political operations of man, either in his
savage or civilized fiate, we discover singular and
excentric infitutions, which flart as it were from
their itationi and fly off so wide that we labour
in vain to bring them within the general laws of
any fyflem, or to account for them by those prin-
ciples which influence other communities in a
nimilar situation. Some instances of this occur
among those people of America, whom I have
included under the common denomination of fa-
vage. These are so curious and important that I
shall describe them, and attempt to explain their
origin.

IN the New World, as well as in other parts of Particularly
the globe, cold or temperate countries appear to il some of

the warmer

be the favourite feat of freedom and independence. regions.
There the mind, like the body, is firm and vigo-
rous. Conscious of their own dignity, and capa-
ble of the greatest efforts in asserting it, men aspire
to independence, and their stubborn spirits stoop
with reluctance to the yoke of servitude. In warm-
er climates, by whose influence the whole frame
is so much enervated, that present pleasure is the
supreme felicity, and mere repose is enjoyment,
men acquiesce, almost without a firuggle, in the
dominion of a superior. Accordingly, if we pro-
ceed from north to south along the continent of
America, we shall find the power of those vcfted
with authority gradually incrcafing, and the spirit
of the people becoming more tame and paflive.
In Florida, the authority of the sachems, caziqucs,
or chiefs, was not only permanent, but hcredi-
tary. They were diffinguifhed by peculiar orna.
menlts, they enjoyed prerogatives of various kinds,

and

B O O K and were treated by their fubjeas with that reve-

IV. rence, which people accustomed to fubjeaion, pay

' to a master-. Among the nation of the Natchez,

Among the
Natchz. situated on the banks of the Mississippi, a diffe-

rence of rank took place, with which the northern
tribes were altogether unacquainted. Some fami.
lies were reputed noble, and enjoyed hereditary
dignity. The body of the people was confidered
as vile, and formed only for subjection. This dif-
tingtion was marked by appellations which inti-
mated the high elevation of the one state, and the
ignominious depression of the other. The former
were called RespeCtable, the latter, the Stinkards.
The great Chief, in whom the fupremeauthority was
veited, is reputed to be a being of superior na-
ture, the brother of the Sun, the sole obje&t of their
worship, They approach him with religious ve.
neration, and honour him as the representative of
their deity. His will is a law, to which all submit
with implicit obedience. The lives of his sub-
jeas are so absolutely at his disposal, that if any
one has incurred his displeasure, he comes with
profound humility and offers him his head. Nor
does their dominion end with their lives; their
principal officers, their favourite wives, together
with many domestics of inferior rank, are facri-
siced at their tombs, that they may be attended
in the next world by the fame persons who served
them in this; and such is the reverence in which
they are held, that those victims welcome death
with exultation, deeming it a recompence of their
fidelity and a mark of diftinsion, to be feleled
to accompany their deceased maftert. Thus a

perfec

* Cardenas y Cano Enfuyo Chrinol. a la ift. de Florida,

p. 46. Le Moyne de Morgues Jeones Floridae. Ap. de Bry,
p...l, 4, &c. Charlev. .Hist. N.. Franre, iii. 467, 468.

t Dumont Memoir Hist. fur Louifiane, i. 175. Charlev.
Hist. N. France, iii. 419, &c. Lettr. Edif. 20. Io6. it.

perfet defpoti'mi, with its full train of fuperfti-B OO K
tion, arrogance and cruelty, is eltablifhed among Iv.
the Natchez, and by a singular fatality, that peo- '
pie has tafted of the worst calamities incident to
polished nations, though they themselves are not
far advanced beyond the tribes around them in
civility and improvement. In Hispaniola, Cuba, in the
and the larger islands, their caziques or chiefs"lands'
poflefied extensive power, The dignity was tranf-
mitted by hereditary right from father to son. Its
honours and prerogatives were considerable. Their
fubjecs paid great refpe& to the caziques, and
executed their orders without hesitation or re-
serve*. They were diflinguifhed by peculiar or-
naments, and in order to preserve or augment the
veneration of the people, they had the address to
call in the aid of superstition to uphold their au-
thority. They delivered their mandates as the
oracles of heaven, and pretended to possess the
power of regulating the seasons, and of difpen-
sing rain or sunshine, according as their fubjedls
flood in need of them.

IN rome parts of the continent, the power of In Bogota;

the caziques seems to have been as extensive as in
the isles. In Bogota, which is now a province of
the New kingdom of Granada, there was fettled
a nation, more considerable in number, and more
improved in the various arts of life, than any peo-
ple in America except the Mexicans and Peruvi-
ans. They subsisted chiefly by agriculture. The
idea of property was introduced among them, and
its rights secured by laws, handed down by tradi-
tion, and observed with great care P. They lived
in large towns. They were clothed in a decent

manner,

* Herrera, dec. I. lib. i. c. 16. lib. iii. c.44. p. 88. Life

of Columb. ch. 32. t Piedrahia Hist. de las conquift
del N. reyno dc Gran. p. 46.

B O K manners and their houses may be termed commo-

IV. dious, when compared with those of the people
'1T around them. The effeas of this uncommon ci-

vilization were conspicuous. Government had
assumed a regular form. A jurifdidion was efta-
blifhed, which took cognizance of different crimes,
and punished them with rigour. A diflinition of
ranks was known; their chief, to whom the Spa-
niards gave the title of monarch, and who merited
that name on account of his splendour as well as
power, reigned with absolute authority. He was
attended by officers of various conditions; he never
appeared in public without a numerous retinue;
he was carried in a fort of palanquin with much
pomp, and harbingers went before him to sweep
the road and strew it with flowers. This uncom-
mon pomp was supported by presents or taxes re-
ceived from his subje&s, to whom their prince
was such an object of veneration, that none of
them presumed to look him directly in the face,
or ever approach him but with an averted coun-
tenance*. There were other tribes on the fame
continent, among which, though far less advanc-
ed than the people of Bogota in their progress
towards refinement, the freedom and indepen-
dence, natural to man in his savage state, was much
abridged, and their caziques had assumed extensive
authority.

Caute of IT is not easy to point out the circumstances, or
thofeirrc- to discover the causes which contributed to intro-
eaances. duce and eflablifh among each of those people a

form of government so different from that of the
tribes around them, and so repugnant to the genius
of rude nations. If the persons who had an op-
portunity of observing them, in their original

ftatc,

* Herrera, dec. 6. lib . c. .

c. ib. v. c. 56. Piedraliita
c. 5. P. 25, &c. Gomara Hill.. c. 7z.

ate, had been more attentive and more discern- B 0 0 K
g, we might have received information from IV.
em sufficient to guide us in this inquiry. If the 'Iv
rantfaions of people, unacquainted wi-t' the use
f letters, were not involved in impenetrable ob-
urity, we might have derived some information
om that source. But as nothing fatisfataory can
egathered, either from the accounts of the Spa-
iards, or from their own traditions, we mull have
ecourfe to conjectures, in order to explain the
regular appearances in the political state of the
eople whom I have mentioned. As all thole
ribes which had loft their native liberty and inde-
endence were feated in the Torrid Zone, or in
untries approaching to it, the climate may be
ppofed to have had some influence in forming
heir minds to that servitude, which seems to be
he deltiny of man in those regions of the globe.
ut though the influence of climate, more powerful
ban that of any other natural cause, is not to be
verlooked; that alone cannot be admitted as a
lution of the point in question. The operations
f men are so complex, that we muff not attribute
e form which they affunme, to the force of a fin-
le principle or cause. Although defpotilin be
onfined in America to the Torrid Zone, and to
he warm regions bordering upon it, I have alrea-
y oberved that these countries contain various
ibes, tome of which possess an high degree of
eedom, and others are altogether unacquainted
ith the restraints of government. The indolence
nd timidity peculiar to the inhabitants of the
lands, rendered them so incapable of the lenti-
ents or efforts necefflry for maintaining indepen-
clice, that there is no occasion to search for any
ther cauel of their tame fubmiflion to the will of
superior. The fubjetiion of the Natchcz, and of
he people of Bogota, seems to have been the con-

fcq(ucece

B O O K sequence of a difference in their state from that of

IV. the other Americans. They were fettled nations,

^"' ftefiding constantly in one place. Hunting was not

the chief occupation of the former, and the latter
seem hardly to have trusted to it for any part of
their fubfiflence. Both had made such progrefsin
agriculture and arts, that the idea of property was
introduced in some degree in the one community,
and fully established in the other. Among people
in this itate, avarice and ambition have acquired
objects, and have begun to exert their power;
views of interest allure the selfish; the desire
pre-eminence excites the enterprising; dominion
is courted by both; and paflions unknown to man
in his savage state prompt the interested and am.
bitious to encroach on the rights of their fellow.
citizens. Motives, with which rude nations are
equally unacquainted, induce the people to submit
tamely to the usurped authority of their superiors.
But even among nations in this ltate, the spirit of
subje&s could not have been rendered so obfe.
quious, or the power of rulers so unbounded, with.
out the intervention of fuperfition. By its fatal
influence, the human mind, in every stage of its
progress, is depressed, and its native vigour an
independence subdued. Whoever can acquire the
direction of this formidable engine, is secure o
dominion over his species. Unfortunately for the
people whose institutions are the subjet of in
quiry, this power was in the hands of their chiefs
The caziques of the isles could put what responses
they pleased into the mouths of their C(imis 0
gods; and it was by their interposition, and i
their name, that they imposed any tribute or bur
den on their people ~. The great chief of th
Natchez was the principal minister as well as th

rcprcfcntativ
:J Hcrrera, dec. i. lib, iii. c. 3.

eprefentative of the Sun, their deity. The re- B o o K
ea which the people of Bogota paid to their IV.
onarchs, was inspired by religion, and the heir r»'
pparent of the kingdom was educated in the in-
ermnol recess of their principal temple, under
ch aufiere discipline, and with such peculiar
ights, as tended to fill his fubjeas with high fen-
ments concerning the faniity of his character,
nd the dignity of his flation *. Thus fuperflition,
hich, in the rudest period of society, is either al-
ogether unknown, or wafles its force in childish
nmeaning pracices, had acquired such an afcen-
ant over those people of America, who had made
me little progress towards refinement, that it be-
methe chief instrument of bending their minds
an untimely servitude, and fubjeded them, in
beginning of their political career, to a defpo.
fm hardly less rigorous, than that which awaits
ations in the last stage of their corruption and
eline.
V. AFTER examining the political institutions Tli;rartof
fthe rude nations in America, the next objeCt of" wa
ttention is their art of war, or their provision for
blic security and defence. The small tribes dif-
erfed over America are not only independent and
nconneced, but engaged in perpetual hoflilities
ith one and another t. Though strangers to the
ea of separate property vested in any individual,
erudeft of the American nations are well ac-
uainted with the rights of each community to its
wndomains, This right they hold to be perfeCt
d exclusive, entitling the poffeflor to oppose the
croachment of neighbouring tribes, As it is of
e utmost consequence to prevent them from de-
roying or disturbing the game in their hunting

grounds,

Piedrahita, p. 27.
t Ribaa Hist. de los triump. p. 9.

B o O K grounds, they guard this national property with

IV. jealous attention. But as their territories are e
"-0-r'^ tensive, and the boundaries of them not caci

ascertained, innumerable subjects of dispute arift
which seldom terminate without bloodshed. Eve!
in this simple and primitive slate of society, irte
reft is a source of discord, and often promptsi
vage tribes to take arms, in order to repel or pt
niih such as encroach on the forests or plains, q
which they trust for subsistence.

The:rmo. B UT interest is not either the mofi frequent
tivc-, Tcr - the most powerful motive of the incessant hofii
gainBg mIr
wXa. ties among rude nations. These mull be impute

to the paflion of revenge, which rages with ful
violence in the breast of savages, that eagerness
gratify it may be confidered as the diflinguifhii
charaateriftic of men in their uncivilized fat
Circumstances of powerful influence, both in th
interior government of rude tribes, and in thei
external operations against foreign enemies, co
cur in cherishing and adding strength to a pafio
fatal to the general tranquillity. When the rig
of redrefling his own wrongs is left in the han
of every individual, injuries are felt with exquifi
sensibility, and vengeance exercised with unrelei
ing rancour. No time can obliterate the memo
of an offence, and it is seldom that it can bee

From the plated but by the blood of the offender. In ca
f(piritof rying on their public wars, savage nations arec

vngn fuenced by the fame ideas, and animated wi

the fame spirit, as in prosecuting private veng
ance. In imhall communities, every man is touc
ed with the injury or affront offered to the bo
of whicll he is a member, as if it were a pcrlon
attack upon his own honour or safety. The dcf
'of revenge is communicated from breast to brca
and soon kindles into rage. As fccble focicties c
take the field only in finall parties, each wali

is conscious of the importance of his own arm, B O K
and feels that to it is committed a considerable por- IV.
tion of the public vengeance. War, which between T'
extensive kingdoms is carried on with little animo-
ilty, is prosecuted by firall tribes with all the ran-
cour of a private quarrel. The resentment of na-
tions is as implacable as that of individuals. It Henceth.
may be dissembled or suppressed, but is never ex- feroci
tinguihed; and often, when least expec'ed or
dreaded, it burfis out with redoubled fury ". ,V hen
polished nations have obtained the glory of victory,
or have acquired an addition of territory, they
may terminate a war with honour. But savages
are not satisfied until they extirpate the commu-
nity, which is the objed of their rage. They fight
not to conquer, but to destroy. If they engage in
hoPiilities, it is with the resolution never to fee the
face of the enemy in peace, but to prosecute the
quarrel with immnortal enmity f. The desire of
vengeance is the firfl, and almost the only princi-
ple, which a savage instils into the minds of his
children , This grows up with him as he ad-
vances in life; and as his attention is direEted to
few objects, it acquires a degree of force unknown
among men whole passions are dissipated and weak-
ened by the variety of their occupations and pur-
suits. The desire of vengeance, which takes pof-
session of the heart of savages, refcmblcs the in-
ftinCtive rage of an animal, rather than the paflion
of a man. It turns, with undilcerning fury, even
against inanimate objects. If hurt accidentally by

a fionc,

Boucher H;si. Nat. de N. France, p. 93. Charlev. Hilt.

deN. France, iii. 215, 251. Lcry ap 1)c ]Bry, iii. 204. Creux.
}Hit. Canad. p. 72. Lozano D)lcr. del Gran. Cliaco, 95.
IIcnnep. MOcL'uIS des Sauv. 40. ('

C FharleI. Hill. N. Fr.

1" 251. C dqlcn. . O8. ii. 126. BaIrrcrc, p. 170. 173.

: Chlarlcv. N. Fr. iii. 326. Lcry ap de Bry, iii. 236. Lo-
zano I-lit. del'arag, i. 144.

B 0 OK a stone, they often seize it in a transport of anger,

I-. and endeavour to wreak their vengeance upon it*.
`"` If struck with an arrow in battle, they will tear it

from the wound, break and bite it with their teeth,
and dash it on the ground t, With respeCt to their
enemies, the rage of vengeance knows no bounds.
When under the dominion of this pafiion, man be-
comes the most cruel of all animals. He neither
pities, nor forgives, nor spares,

THE force of this pafiion is so well understood

by the Americans themselves, that they always ap-
ply to it, in order to excite their people to take
arms. If the elders of any tribe attempt to rouze
their youth from sloth, if a chief wishes to allure
a band of warriors to follow him in invading an
enemy's country, the molt persuasive topics of their
martial eloquence are drawn from revenge. " The
bones of our countrymen,' fay they, " lie unco-
vered; their bloody bed has not been washed clean.
Their spirits cry against us; they must be appeal:
ed. Let us go and devour the people by whom
they were slain. Sit no longer inactive upon your
mats; lift the hatchet, console the spirits of the
dead, and tell them that they shall be avenged ."

nd their ANIMATED with such exhortations, the youth
perpetuity. snatch their arms in a transport of fury, raii'e the

song of war, and burn with impatience to embrue
their hands in the blood of their enemies. Pri-
vate chiefs often assemble finall parties, and invade
a hostile tribe, without consulting the rulers of
the community. A single warrior, prompted by
caprice or revenge, will take the field alone, and
inarch several hundred miles, to surprise and cut
off a firaggling enemy §. The exploits of a noted

warrior,

L* Tery ap Dc Bry, iii. 190.

-1T Lcry al De Bry, iii. 208. IHerrera, dec. I. lib. vi. C .
:. Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 216, 217, Lcry ap ) 13ry,
iii. 204. § See NOTE LXIII,

warrior, in such solitary excursions, often form the B O O K
chief part of the hifiory of an American campaigns; IV¥.
and their elders connive at such irregular sallies, as
they tend to cherish a martial spirit, and accuflom
their people to enterprise and dangert. But when
a war is national, and undertaken by public au-
thority, the deliberations are formal and flow.
The elders assemble, they deliver their opinions in
solemn speeches, they weigh with maturity the na-
ture of the enterprise, and balance its beneficial or
disadvantageous consequences with no incon-idera-
ble portion of political discernment and sagacity.
Their priests and soothsayers are consulted, and
sometimes they ask the advice even of their wo-
men~. If the determination be for war, they pre-
pare for it with much ceremony. A leader offers
to condu& the expedition, and is accepted. But
no man is constrained to follow him; the refolu-
.tion of the community to commence hostilities ini-
poses no obligation upon any member to take part
in the war. Each individual is fiill master of his
own condu&, and his engagement in the service is
perfeetly voluntary§.

THE maxims by which they regulate their mili- Mode of

tary operations, though extremely different from rYi."" "o
those which take place among more civilized and
populous nations, are well suited to their own poli-
tical state, and the nature of the country in which
they ad. They never take the field in numerous
,bodies, as it would require a greater effort of fore-
liglit and induflry, than is usual among lavages,-to
provide for their subsistence, during a march of
bloPe hundred miles through dreary forests, or

VOL. I. A a during

* See NOTE LXIV. 1 .Boffi, i. 140. Lcry ap

Dc Bry, 215. Henicpin Moeurs des Sauv. 4r. Lafilau,'ii.
I69. :J Charlev. llill. N. Fr. iii. 215. 268. Bict,
36,, 380. C lIv . Nr.
N , 2 7, 18.

-B O O Kduring a long voyage upon their lakes and rivers

IV. Their armies are not encumbered with baggage or
^r" military stores. Each warrior, besides his arms,

carries a mat and a small bag of pounded maize,
and with these is completely equipped for any ser.
vice. While at a difiance from the enemies fron.
tier, they disperse through the woods and support
themselves with the game which they kill, or the
filh which they catch. As they approach nearer to
the territories of the nation, which they intend to
attack, they colled their troops, and advance with
greater caution. Even then the), proceed wholly by
firatagem and ambuscade. They place not their
glory in attacking their enemies with open force.
To surprise and destroy is the greatest merit of a
commander, and the higheit pride of his followers.
War and hunting are their only occupations, and
they condu'c both with the fame spirit and the fame
arts. They follow the track of their enemies
through the forest. They endeavour to discover
their haunts, they lurk in some thicket near to
these, and with the patience of a sportsman lying
in wait for game, will continue in their fiation day
after day, until they can rush upon their prey when
most secure, and least able to resist them. If they
meet no firaggling party of the enemy, they ad-
vance towards their villages, but with such folici-
tude to conceal their approach, that they often
creep on their hands and feet through the woods,
and paint their skins of the fame colour with the
withered leaves, in order to avoid detection . If
so fortunate as to remain unobserved, they set on
fire their huts in the dead of night, and massacre
the inhabitants, as they fly naked and defenceless
from the flames. If they hope to effect a retreat
without being purlued, they carry off some prifoncrs,

whom

' Charlev. Hilt. N. Fr. iii. 237, 238. Ilennep. Mocurs
tcl( Sauv. p. 59.

whom they reserve for a more dreadful fate. But B O O K
if, notwithstanding all their address and precautions IV-
they find that their motions are discovered, that ^T
the enemy has taken the alarm, and is prepared to
oppose them, they usually deem it most prudent
to retire. They regard it as extreme folly to meet
an enemy who is on his guard, upon equal terms,
or to give battle in an open field. The most dif-
tinjuiiled success is a disgrace to a leader, if pur-
chased with any considerable loss of his followers®;
and they never boafi of a victory if stained with the
blood of their own countrymen t. To fall in bat-
tle, instead of being reckoned an honourable death,
is a misfortune which fubjeds the memory of a
warrior to the imputation of rashness or impru-
dence e.

THIS system of war was universal in America, Notowing

and the small uncivilized tribes, dispersed through toanydfcage
all its different regions and climates, display more
craft than boldness in carrying on their hostilities.
Struck with this conduct, so opposite to the ideas
and maxims of Europeans, several authors contend
that it flows from a feeble and dastardly spirit pe-
culiar to the Americans, which is incapable of any
generous or manly exertion §. But when we re-
flet that many of these tribes, on occasions which
call for extraordinary efforts, not only defend them-
selves with obstinate resolution, but attack their en-
emies with the most daring courage, and that they
possess fortitude of mind superior to the sense of
danger or the fear of death, we mufi ascribe their
habitual caution to some other cause than conftitu-
tional timidityll. The number of men in each tribe

Aa z is

* See NOTE LXV. ; Charlev. Hist. N. Fr.
iii. 238. 307. lBie. 381. Lafitau Matnrs des Sauv. ii. 28.

:t Charlcv. ii. 376. Sec NOTE LXVI. § Re-

chcrches Philof. iir les Anicric. I, 115. Voyage de March.
i,. 410. II Lafilau Mcurs de S3auv. ii. z48, 249.
Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 307.

"B O' O Xis o sm.all, the difficulty of rearing new members,

IV. 'amidst the hardships andsdangers of ravage life, ib
`r-· .great, that the life of a citizen is extremely .pre-

cious, and the ,preservation of it becomes a capital
object in their.policy. 'Had the point of honour
'been the fame *among.the feeble American tribes,
asamoug the powerful:nations of Europe, had they
been taught, in contempt of danger and death, to
court fame or victory, they must have been ruined
by maxims, ill adapted to their condition. But
,wherever their communities are more populous, so
*that they can a&E with considerable force, and cal
fultain the loss of several of their members, without
'being sensibly ,weakened, the military operations
·of the Americans more 2nearly resemble those of
other nations. The Brafilians, as well as the tribes
'situated on the banks of the river de la Plata, often
take the field in such numerous bodies, as deserve
the name of armies :. They defy their enemies
'to the combat, engage in regular battles, and main-
tain the conflict with that desperate ferocity, which
'is-natural to men, who have: no idea of war but
- that of exterminating their enemies, and who never
'give or take quarter t. .In the powerful empires
.of 'Mexico and Peru, great armies were alfembled,
"frequent battles were fought, and the theory as
well as practice. of war "were different from what
- took place in those petty societies which assume the
name of nations.

Incapable of BUT though vigilance and attention are the qua-
cipldcdif- lites chiefly req.ifite, where the objeót of war is to

deceive and to surprise; and though the Americans,
when aating singly, display an amazing degree of
.address in concealing their own motions, and dif-
covering those of an enemy, yet it is remarkable

that,

* Fabri Veriff. Defcrip. Indite ap dc Bry, vii. p. 42.
J See NOTE LXVII.

that, when they take, the field.in parties, they call B O K.
seldom be brought to observe the precautions most IV.
etfential to their own security. Such is the diffi,-
culty of accustoming savages to subordination, or.
to a&t in concert; such is their impatience under
refiraint, and fach is their caprice and presumption,
that it is rarely they can be brought to conform
themselves to the counsels and direscions of their
leaders. They never station centinels around the
place where they reft at night, and after marching
Ibme hundred miles to surprise an enemy, are often
surprised themselves, and cut off, while funk in as
profound sleep as if they were not within reach of
danger .

IF notwithflanding this negligence and security,

which often frustrate their most artful schemes,
they catch the enemy unprepared, they rush upon
them with the utmost ferocity, and tearing off the
scalps of all those who fall victims to their rage f,
they carry home those strange trophies in triumph.
These they preserve as monuments, not only of
their own prowess, but. of the vengeance which their
arm has infliced upon the people who were objects
of public refetmnent .. They are frill more soli-
citous to seize prisoners. During their retreat, if
they hope to assec it unmolested, these are com-
monly exempt from any infilt, and treated with
fonie degree of humanity, though guarded with the
mofl strict attention.

BUT after this temporary suspension, their rage Trcntml, t

rekindles with new fury. As soon as they ap- ofprifo"r.
proach their own frontiers, iome of their number
are dispatched to inform their countrymen with
respect to the success of the expedition. Then the
prisoners begin to feel the vwretchednefs of their

condition.

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 236, 237j. Lttr. Edlf. 17. 308.

2o. 130. Lafit. Moeurs, i. 47. La ii. ona, i. 176,
't See NOTE LXVIII. I Lafitau Moeurs, ii. 256.

BO O0 K condition. The women of the village, together

Iv. with the youth who have not attained the age of

s bearing arms, assemble, and forming themielves

into two lines, through which the prisoners muff
pass, beat and bruise them with flicks and tfones
in a cruel manner-. After this first gratification
of their rage against their enemies, follow lamenta-
tions for the loss of such of their own countrymen
as have fallen in the service, accompanied with
words and aftions which seem to exprels the utmost
anguish of grief. But in a moment, upon a signal
given, their tears cease, they pass, with a sudden
and unaccountable transition, from the depths of
sorrow to transports of joy, and begin to celebrate
their viotory with all the wild exultation of a barba-
rous triumph I. The fate of the prisoners remains
flill undecided. The old men deliberate concern-
ing it. Some are deifined to be tortured to death,
in order to satiate the revenge of the conquerors;
some to replace the members which the communi-
ty has loft in that or former wars. They who are
refcrved for this milder fate, are led to the huts of
those whose friends have been killed. The women
meet them at the door, and if they receive them,
their sufferings are at an end. They are adopted
into the family, and, according to their phrase, are
feated upon the mat of the deceased. They assume
his name, they hold the fame rank, are treated
hencfcorward with all the tenderness due to a fa-
ther, a brother, a husband, or a friend. But if, ei-
ther from caprice, or an unrelenting desire of re-
rvnge, the women of any family refute io accept of
the prilbner who is offered to them, his doom is
fixed. No power can then have him from torture
and death.

Thlcr ;ndif- WHI LE their lot is in fuflenfc, the prisoners
Il.ccccon-themfelves appear altogether unconcerned about
cling tllcheir at
slte, what

I,alahntan, ii. 184. JCharlev. Hill. N. Fr. ii. 241.
Lafitau Mcaurs, ii. 264.

what may befal them. They talk, they eat, theyB O 0 K
sleep, as if they were perfedtly at ease, and no IV.
danger impending. When the fatal sentence is 'r
intimated to them, they receive it with an unalter- and forti-
ed countenance, raise their death-fong, and pre-.tdenu'r
pare to susser like men. Their conquerors assem-
ble as to a solemn feflival, resolved to put their
courage to the utmofi proof, A scene ensues, the
bare description of which is enough to chill the
heart with horror, wherever men have been ac-
customed, by milder institutions, to refpe&t their
lpecies, and to melt into tenderness at the fight of
human sufferings. The prisoners are tied naked to
a stake, but so as to be at liberty to move around
it. All who are present, men, women, and chil-
dren, rush upon them like furies. Every species
of torture is applied that the rancour of revenge
can invent. Some burn their limbs with red-hot
irons, some mangle their bodies with knives, others
tear their flesh from their bones, pluck out their
nails by the roots, and rend and twist their sinews.
They vie with one another in refinements of tor-
ture. Nothing sets bounds to their rage, but the
dread of abridging the duration of their vengeance
by hastening the death of the sufferers: and such is
their cruel ingenuity in tormenting, that by avoid-
ing indufirioufly to hurt any vital part, they often
prolong this scene of anguish for several days. In
bpite of all that they susser, the victims continue to
chant their death-fong with a firm voice, they boast
of their own exploits, they insult their tormentors
for their want of skill in avenging their fiiends and
relations, they warn them of the vengeance which
awaits them, on account of their death, and excite
their ferocity by the mofl provoking reproaches
and threats. 'To dilplay undaunted fortitude in
lich dreadful situations is the noblest triumph of a
warrior. To avoid the trial by a voluntary death,

B 0 0 Kor to shrink under it, is deemed infamous and

Iv. cowardly. If any one betray yrnmptoms of timi.
''-r- dity, they often dispatch him at once with con-

tempt, as unworthy of being treated like a man *.
Animated with those ideas, they endure without a
groan, what it seems almost impossible that human
nature should sustain. They appear to be not on-
ly insensible of pain, but to court it. " Forbear,
said an aged chief of the Iroquois, when his insults
had provoked one of his tormentors to wound him
with a knife, forbear there flabs of your knife, and
rather let me die by fire, that those dogs, your allies,
from beyond the tea, may learn by niy example to
Aufer like men t." This magnanimity, of which
there are frequent inflances among the American
warriors, infiead of exciting admliration, or calling
forth sympathy, exhtaperates the fierce Ipirits of their
torturers to frefhi ats of cruelty, V Weary at
length of contending with men, whose constancy
of mind they cannot vanquish, some chief in a rage,
puts a period to their sufferings, by dispatching
them' with his dagger or club§.

Sat themes THIS barbarous tcene is often succeeded by one
prisoners. no less shocking. As it is impossible to appease

the full lpirit of revenge which rages in the heart of
a savage, this frequently prompts the Americans
to devour those unhappy perforls, who have been
the vinimns of their cruelty. In the ancient world,
tradition has preserved the memory of barba-
rous nations of canibals, who fed on human flesh.
But in every part of the New World, there were
people to whom this custom was familiar. It

prevailed

* De la Potherie, ii. 237. iii. 48. t Colden. I-Iit. of
Five Nations, i. 2co. 1 Voyages de Lallnt. i. 236.

Clarlev. Hifl. N. Fr. iii. 243, &c. 385, Lafitau, Mccurs,

ii. 265. Creuxij, Hist. Canad. 1. 73. lIennlp. Macurs des
Sauv. p. 64, &. hot. i. 233, &c. Tertrc, ii. 405. Dc
la Potherie, ii. 22, &c.

prevailed in the southern continent %, in several of B O O K
the ifladids-t, and in various diftrits of North- IV.
Americat. Even in those parts, where circuem-
fiances, with which we are unacquainted, had in
a great measure abolished this practice, it seems to
have been so well known, that it is incorporated
into the idiom of their language. Among the Iro-
quois, the phrase by which they express their refo-
lulion of making war against an enemy is, " Let
us go and eat that nation." If they solicit the aid'
of a neighbouring tribe, they invite it to " eat
broth made of the flesh of their enemies §." Nor,
ivas the praftice peculiar to rude unpolifhed tribes,
the principle from which it took rife, is so deep-
ly rooted in the minds of the Americans, that
it subsisted in Mexico, one of the civilized em-
pires in the New World, and relics of it may be
discovered among the more mild inhabitants of
Peru. It was not scarcity of food, as iome au-
thors imagine, and the importunate cravings of
hunger, that forced the Americans to those horrid
repaits on their fellow-creatures. Human flesh was
never used as common food in any country, and
the various relations concerning the people, who
reckoned it among the stated means of subsistence,
flow from the credulity and mistakes of travellers.
The rancour of revenge first prompted men to
this barbarous ascion ||. The fiercelt tribes de-
voured none but priolners taken in war, or such as
they regarded as enemies ¶. Women and children

who

* Stadius np dc Bry, iii. 123. Lcry, ibid. 210. Biet, 384.
Lettr. Edif. 23. 341. lPil, 8. Condilm. 84. 97. Ribas,
Hlill. de los Iriunlph. 4.73. t Life of Columb. 529.
Mart. Dec. p. 18. Tcrtre, ii. 405. 1 I)umont, Meni.
i. 254. Charlev. Ilit,. N. F'r. i. 259. ii. 14. ii. .21. De la
Pothleric, iii. So. ' Charlev. Ilill. N. Fr. iii. 208, 209.
Lettr. Edif. 23. p. 277. I)c lt Polllrie, ii. 298. See NOTE
LXIX. 3

Biut, 383. Bi.i;co, Cociverfion de Pilitu,
P. 28. Bancroft, Nat. Hill, of Cuiana;, jp. i5, &c.

¶ Sec NOTE LXX.

B 0 O K who were not the objeds of enmity, if not cut off

IV. in the fury of their first inroad into an hoflile coun-
S~-r try, seldom suffered by the deliberate effeAs of

their revenge .

THE people of South America gratify their re-

venge in a manner somewhat different, but with no
less unrelenting rancour. Their prisoners, after
meeting at their firfi entrance with the fame rough
reception as among the North-Americans -, are
not only exempt from injury, but treated with the
greatest kindness. They are feasted and caressed,
and iome beautiful young women are appointed to
attend and solace them, It is not easy to account
for this part of their condulc, unless we impute it
to a refinement in cruelty. For, while they fceln
studious to attach their prisoners to life, by supply-
ing them with every enjoyment that can render it
agreeable, their doom is irrevocably fixed. On a
day appointed, the victorious tribe assembles, the
captive is brought forth with great solemnity, he
views the preparations for the sacrifice with as
much indifference, as if he himself were not the
viitim, and meeting his fate with undaunted firm.
ness, is dispatched with a single blow. The mo-
ment he falls, the women seize the body, and
drcfs it for the feast, They bifinear their children
with the blood, in order to kindle in their bosons
a hatred of their enemies, which is never extin-
guiihed, and all join in feeding upon the flcfh
with amazing greediness and exultation i. To
devour the body of a flaughtcred enemy, they
deem the most complete and exquisite gratifica-
tion of revenge. Wherever this practice prcvails,

caplives

i' Bie, 382. Iandlini, Vita d; Anmcrico, 84. t 1ctr
405. Ierniiin, DL)icrip.. de Suriln. i. 5.1.

S' S:ltlius ;ia (de Bry, iii. pI. 10. 123.
:j Stadius a;p tic dlry, iii. 128, &c. ,Lcry, ibid. 210.

captives never escape death, but they are notBOOK
tortured with the fame cruelty as among the IV.
tribes which are less accustomed to such horrid _-y
feasts %.

As the couftancy of every American warrior
may be put to such severe proof, the great object
of education and discipline in the New World is
to form the mind to 'uftain it. When nations
carry on war with open force, defy their ene-
mies to the combat, and vanquish them by the
superiority of their skill or courage, soldiers are
trained to be a6tive, vigorous, and enterprising.
But in America, where the genius and maxims
of war are extremely different, paflive fortitude
is the quality in highest eflimation. Accordingly,
it is early the study of the Americans to acquire
a talent, which will enable them to behave like
men, when their retblution shall be put to the
proof. As the youth of other nations exercise
themselves in feats of activity and force, those
of America vie with one another in exhibitions
of their patience under fufiferings. They harden
their nerves by those voluntary trials, and gra-
dually accufloin themselves to endure the sharpest
pain, without complaining. A boy and girl will
bind their naked arms together, and place a
burning coal between them, in order to try who
firit discovers such impatience as to shake it osss.
All the trials, cufomnary in America, when a
youth is admitted into the class of warriors, or
when a warrior is promoted to the dignity of
captain or chief, are accommodated to this idea
of manliness. They are not displays of valour,
but of patience; they are not exhibitions of
their ability to offend, but of their capacity to
susser. Among the tribes on the banks of the

Orinoco,
' See NOTE LXX[. -t Charlev. ITill. N. Fr. ii. 307.

B O O K Orinoco, if a warrior aspires to the rank of cap.

IV. tain, his probation begins with a long fast, more
'-,r' rigid than any ever observed by the most abftemi.

ous hermit. At the close of this, the chiefs aft
femble, each gives him three laThes with a large
whip, applied so vigorously, that his body is al-
m'ost flayed, and if he betrays the least symptom
of impatience or even sensibility, he is disgraced
for ever, and reje&ed as unworthy of the ho-
nour. After some interval, the constancy of the
candidate is proved by a more excruciating trial.
He is laid in a hammoc with his hands bound fast,
an innumerable multitude of venomous ants, whose
bite occasions exquisite pain, and produces a vi-
olent inflammation, are thrown upon him. The
judges of his merit fitad around the hammoc,
and, while these cruel insets fasten upon the moll
ferifible parts of his body, a sigh, a groan, an
iivoluntary motion expressive of what he suffers,
would exclude him from the dignity which he
is ambitious to obtain. Even after this evidence
of his fortitude, it is not deemed to be complete-
ly afcertaiied, but must stand another test more
dreadful than any he has hitherto unrdergone.
He is again suspended in his hammoc, and co-
vered with leaves of the palmetto. A fire of
linking herbs is kindled underneath, so as he
may feel its heat, and be involved in smoke.
Though scorched and almost suffocated, he must
continue to endure with the fame patient inlen-
fibility. Many perish in this rude essay of their
firmncfs and courage, but such as go through it
with applause, receive the enigns of their new
dignity with much solemnity, and are ever after
regarded as leaders of approved resolution, whole
behaviour, in the nioft trying situations, will do

honour

honour to their country . In North-America, B o0 O
the previous trial of a warrior is neither so for- Iv.
mal, ,nor so revere. Though even there, before C
a youth is permitted to bear arms, his patience
and fortitude are proved by blows, by fire, and
by insults, more intolerable to a haughty spirit
than both f.

THE amazing steadiness with which the Ame-
ricans endure the most exquisite torments, has
induced some authors to suppose that, from the
peculiar feebleness of their frame, their fenrfbi-
lity is not so acute as that of other people; as
women, and persons of a relaxed habit, are ob-
served to be less affected with pain than robust
men, whose nerves are more firmly braced. But
the constitution of the Americans is not lb difte-
rent, in its texture, from that of the reft of the
human species, as to account for this diversity in
their behaviour. It flows from a principle of ho-
nour, instilled early and cultivated with such care,
as to inspire man in his rudest ifate with an he-
roic magnanimity, to which philosophy hath en-
deavoured, in vain, to form him, when more
highly improved and polished. This invincible
constancy he has been taught to confider as the
chief diftinti on 9of man, and the highest attain-
ment of a warrior. The ideas which influence
his condu&, and the pafilons which take pofielf
ion of his heart, -are few. They operate ofcourle
with more decisive effect, than when the mind is
crowded with a multiplicity of objets, or dif-
traated by the variety of its pursuits; and when
everymotive-that operates with force on the mind
of a savage, prompts them to susser with dignity,

they

Gumilla, ii. 286, &c. Biet, 376, 'c.
t Charle. I-lit. N. Fr. iii. 219.

BO O K they will bear what might seem to be impossible

IV. for human patience to fufraiii. But wherever the
^*tr' fortitude of the Americans is not roused to exer-

tioan by their ideas of honour, their feelings of
pain are the fame with those of the reft of nan-
kind i. Nor is that patience undei sufferings for
which the Americans have been so justly celebrat.
ed an universal attainment. The conflancy of
many of the vi&ims is overcome by the agonies
of torture. Their weakness and lamentations
complete the triumph of their enemies, and re.
flede disgrace upon their country t.

Wafted by THE perpetual hostilities carried on among the
their ere American tribes are producive of very fatal es

-fees. As their imperfect induflry does not sup.
ply them with any superfluous store of provisions
even in seasons of tranquillity, when the irrup
tion of an enemy desolates their cultivated lands
or disturbs them in their hunting excursions, fuel
a calamity reduces a community, naturally un
provident and destitute of resources, to extrem,
want. All the people of the diftrid that is in
vaded, are frequently forced to take refuge ii
woods or mountains, which can afford them n
subsistence, and where many of them perilh. No
withstanding their excessive caution in conduflin
their military operations, and the solicitude(
every leader to preserve the lives of his follo1
ers, as they seldom enjoy any intervals of pcac,
the loss of men among the Americans is confide
able in proportion to the degree of populatio
Thus famine and the sword combine in thiniir
their numbers. All their tribes are feeble, ar

nial

* See NOTE L1XITI.
I- Charl':v. IIi t. N F.

F i. i. 24. 385. De la PolthI
iii. 48.

many which were once powerful have gradually t 0 0 K
wafted away and at last disappeared. Nothing IV.
now remains of several nations, which were once
considerable, but the name .

SENSIBLE of this continual decay, there areRecruittheir

tribes which endeavour to recruit their national adoptingy
force when exhausted, by adopting prisoners taken pt"ifoners
in war, and by this expedient prevent their total
extincEion. The pra&ice, however, is not uni-
verfally received. Resentment operates more
powerfully among savages, than considerations of
policy. Far the greater part of their captives was
antiently sacrificed to their vengeance, and it is
only since their numbers began to decline fatl, that
they have adopted milder maxims. But such as
they do naturalize, renounce for ever their native
tribe, and assume the manners as well as passions
of the people by whom they are adopted f, so en-
tirely, that they often join them in their expedi-
tions against their own countrymen. Such a fud-
den transition, and so repugnant to one of the mofl
powerful inflinss implanted by nature, would ap-
pear strange among any people; but, among the
members of finall communities, where national
enmity is violent ,and deep-rooted, it is more unac-
countable. It seems however, to result naturally
from the principles upon which war is carried on
in America. When nations aim at exterminating
their enemies, no exchange of prisoners can ever
take place. From the moment one is made a
prisoner, his country and his friends con ider him
as dead §. lie has incurred indelible dilgrace by
luffering bimfelf to be furprlilcd or to be taken by

an

Charlev. Hill. N. Fr. iii. 20i, 203. 429. Gumilla, ii.

227, Vc.

t Cllarlcv. Hil. N. Fr. iii. ,45', &c. Lafit, ii. 308.
g See NOTE LXXIII.

BOOK an enemy; and were he to.return home, after

IV. such a stain upon his honour, his .nearefi rela-
_.r- .tiodns would not receive, or even acknowledge

that they knew himn. .Some tribes were still more
rigid, and if a prisoner returned, the infamy
which he had brought on his country was expi-
ated, by putting him instantly to death t. As the
unfortunate captive is thus an out-cast from his
own country, and the ties which bound him to it
?are irreparably broken, he feels less reluEtance in
-sor.ning a new connecion with people, ;who, as
an evidence of their friendly sentiments, not only
deliver him from a cruel death, but offer to admit
him to all the rights of a fellow-citizen. The per.
.fe fiimilarity of manners among savage nations
facilitates, and completes the union, and induces a
captive to transfer not only his allegiance, but his
,afe tion, to the community into the bosom of
which he is received.

Thcirinfe- :BUT though war be the chief occupation of
riority in men in their rude state, and to excel in it, their
Eeda- . highest diftinaion and pride, their inferiority is
ionss. always manifelt when they engage in competition

.with polished nations. Destitute of that forefigh
which dilcerns and provides for remote events
itlraogers to the union and mutual confidence re
quifite.in forming any extensive plan of operations
and incapable of the subordination no less requiifm
.in carrying into execution such plans, savage n;
.*tions may astonish a disciplined enemy by thel
valour, but feldoin prove formidable to him b,
-their conduct, and whenever the contefi is of o10I
continuance, mutl yield to superior art§. li
empires of Peru and Mexico, though their progrcl
in civilization, when measured by the Europealn

Afiatl

· Lahont. ii. 85, x86. I- HIrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c
p. 173. § See NOTE LXXIV.

Asiatic standards, was inconfiderable,.acquired such B 0 0 K
an ascendency over the rude tribes around them, IV.
that they iubjeted most of them with great facili- nr
ty to their power. When the people of Europe
over-ran the various provinces of America, this fu-
periority was fiill more conspicuous. Neither the
courage nor number of the natives could repel a
handful of invaders. The alienation and enmity,
prevalent among barbarians, prevented them from
uniting in any common scheme of defence, and
while each tribe fought separately, all were sub-
dued.

VI. THE arts of rude nations unacquainted with Teir arts,

the use of metals, hardly merit any attention on
their own account, but are worthy of onme notice,
as far as they serve to display the genius and man-
ners of a people. The first difirefs a savage mufl Dres and
feel, will arise from the manner in which his bodyornament6
is affected, by the heat, or cold, or moisture of
the climate under which he lives; and his first care
will be, to provide rome covering for his own de-
fence. In the warmer and more mild climates of
America, none of the rude tribes were clothed.
To most of them Nature had not even fuggefced
any idea of impropriety in being altogether unco-
vered *. As under a mild climate there was little
need of any defence from the injuries of the air,
and their extreme indolence fiunned every species
of labour to which it was not urged by absolute ne-
ccflity, all the inhabitants of the ifes, and a confi-
derable part of the people oil the continent, re-
mained in this slate of naked simplicity. Others
were satisfied with tome flight covering, such as
decency required. But though naked, they were
not unadorned. They dressed their hair in many
different forms. They faflened bits of gold, or

VOL. I. B b fhclls,

* Lery Navigat. ap de Bry, iii. p. 164. Life of Colum-
bus, c. 24. Venegas Hil. of Californ. p. ;o.

B O K shells, or Ihining stones, in their ears, their notes,

IV. and cheeks*. They slained their skins with a
,_B» great variety of figures; and they spent much time,

and submitted to great pain, in ornamenting their
persons in this fantaflic fanner. Vanity, however,
which finds endless occupation for its ingenuity and
invention, in nations where dress has become a com-
plex and intricate art, is circumscribed within so
narrow bounds, and confined to so few articles
among naked savages, that they are not satisfied
with those simple decorations, and have a wonder..
ful propensity to alter the natural form of their bo-
dies. This pracice was universal among the rudest
of the American tribes. Their operations for that
purpose begin as toon as an infant is born. By
compressing the bones of the skull, while frill soft
and flexible, some flatten the crown of their heads;
tome squeeze them into the shape of a cone; others
mould them as much as possible into a square
figure t; and they often endanger the lives of
their posterity by their violent and absurd efforts
to derange the plan of Nature, or to improve upon
her designs. But in all their attempts either to a-
dorn or to new-model their persons, it seems to
have been less the object of the Americans to please,
or to appear beautiful, than to give an air of dig-
nity and terror to their afpeat. Their attention to
drcfs had more reference to war than to gallantry.
The difference in rank and estimation between the
two sexes was so great, as extinguished, in some
measure, their solicitude to appear mutually amia-
able. The man deemed it beneath him to adorn his
person, for the fake of one on whom he was ac-

cuflomed

L Lery ap. de Bry. iii. 165. Lettr. Edifiantes, 20. 223.

I Oviedo Hist. lib. iii. c. 5. Ulloa, i. 329. Voyage de La-

bat. ii. 72. Charlevoix, iii. 323. Gumilla, i. 197, &c.
.cugna Relat. de la Riv. des Ainaz. ii. 83. Lawson's Voy.
to Carolina, p. 33.

customed to look down as a slave. It was when Boo 0
the warrior had in view to enter the council of his IV.
nation, or take the field against its enemies, that '
he assumed his choicest ornaments, and decked his
person with the nicest care*. The decorations of
the women were few and simple; whatever was
precious or splendid was reserved for the men.
In several tribes the women were obliged to spend
a considerable part of their time everydayin adorn-
ing and painting their husbands, and could bellow lit-
tle attention upon ornatmenting thenfelves. Among
a race of men bo haughty as to despise, or so cold
as to neglec them, the women naturally became
careless and slovenly, and the love of finery and
show, which has been deemed their favourite pas-
sion, was confined chiefly to the other sext. To
deck his person was the diftinEtion of a warrior, as
xwell as one of his nmoft serious occupations 1. In
one part of their dress, which, at first fight, appears
the noft singular and capricious, the Americans
have dilcovered considerable sagacity in providing
againif the chief inconveniencies of their climate,
which is often sultry and moitl to excess. All the
the different tribes, which remain unclithed, are
accultomed to anoint and rub their bodies with the
grease of animals, with viscous gums, and with
oils of different kinds. By this they check that pro-
fuse pertpiration, which, in the torrid zone, waftes
the vigour of the frame, and abridges the period of
human life. By this too they provide a defence
againfi the extreme moiflure during the rainy sea-
son§. They likewifc, at certain seasons, temper
paint of cifferent colours with thole untuous sub-

B b 2 fiances,

' Wafer's Voyage, p. ,r.z. ILery ap. de Bry, iii. 167.

Charlev. Hilt, N. Fran. iii. 216. 222. t Charlcv.
Hilt. de la Nouv. France, iii. 278. 327. Lafitau, ii. 53.
Kalm's Voyage, iii, 273. Lery ap. de Bry, iii. 169, 170.
Purch. Pilgr. iv. 1287. Ribas Hilt. de los triumph, &c. 472.

1 See NOTE LXXV. § See NOTE LXXI.

B O O K stances, and bedaub themselves plentifully with

IV. that composition. Sheathed with this impenetra-
'-r^-' ble varnish, their skins are not only protected from

the penetrating heat of the fun, but, as all the in-
numerable tribes of insets have an antipathy to
the smell or tafle of that mixture, they are deliver-
ed fiom their teazing persecution, which, amidst
forests and marshes, especially in the warmer re-
gions, must have been altogether intolerable in
their state of nakednesss.
PHabitations; THE next obje& to dress that will engage the at-

tention of a savage, is to prepare some habitation
that may afford him shelter by day and a retreat at
night. Whatever is connected with his ideas of
personal dignity, whatever bears any reference to
his military character, the savage warrior deems an
object of importance. Whatever relates only to
peaceable and inactive life, he views with perfect
indifference. Hence, though finically attentive to
dress, he is little solicitous about the elegance or dif-
position of his habitation. Savage nations far from
that slate of improvement, in which the mode of
living is confidered as a mark of diftindion, and
unacquainted with those wants, which require a
variety of accommodation, regulate the confiruc-
tion of their houses according to their limited ideas
of necessity. Some of the American tribes were so
extremely rude, and had advanced so little beyond
the primeval simplicity of nature, that they had no
houles at all. Iuring the day, they take shelter fiom
the fcorciing rays of the fun under thick trees; at
night they form a shed with their branches and
leaves t. In the rainy season they retire into covers,
formed by the hand of nature, or hollowed out by
their own indufiry~. Others who have no fixed a-

bode,

* Labat, ii. 73. Gumilla, i. 190. 202. Bancroft Nat.
lHilt. of Guiana, 81, 280. '( See NOTE LXXVII.
:t Lettres Edif. . 273. Venegas Hilt. of Califor, i. 76.

Iozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco, p. 55. Lettres Edif ii. 176.
Gumnilla, i. 383. Branc'roft Nat. Hilt. of Guiana, 277.

bode, and roam through the forefis in quest of game, B o o K
sojourn in temporary huts, which they ere& with Iv.
little labour, and abandon without any concern. _
The in habitants of those vast plains, which are de,
luged by the overflowing of the rivers during the
heavyrains that fall periodically between the tropics,
raise houses upon piles fafiened in the ground, or
places them among the boughs of trees, and are thus
safe amidst that wide extended inundation which
surrounds them*. Such were the first essays of the
rudest Americans towards providing themselves
with habitations. But even among tribes which
were more improved, and whose residence was be-
come altogether fixed, the firu&ure of their houses
was extremely mean and simple. They were wretch-
ed huts, sometimes of an oblong, and sometimes
of a circular form, intended merely for shelter,
with no view to elegance, and little attention to
conveniency. The doors were so low, that it was
necessary to bend, or to creep on the hands and
feet in order to enter them. They were without
windows, and had a large hole in the middle of the
roof, to convey out the finoke. To follow travel-
lers in other minyte circumftapces of their defcrip-
tion, is not only beneath the dignity of history,
but would be foreign to the object of my researches.
One circumflance merits attention, as it is singular,
and illustrates the chara6der of the people. Some of
their houses were so large as to contain accommo-
dation for fourscore or a hundred persons. These
were built for the reception of different families,
which dwelt together under the lame roost, and
often around a common fire, without Ieparate apart-
Jnents, or any kind of screen or partition between
the spaces which they refpeqively occupied. As
soon as men have acquired ditint ideas of proper-
ty; or when they are so much attached to their

females,

* Gumilla, i. 225. Herrera, dec. i. lib. ix. c. 6. OviedQ
Sommar, p. 53. C. j See NOTE LXXVIII.

B O O K females, as to watch them with care and jealousy,

IV. families of course divide and fettle in separate
'T^r houses, where they can secure and guard whatever

they wish to preserve. This singular mode of ha-
bitation may therefore be confidered not only as
the effe& of that community of goods which sub-
fifled among the several people in America, but as
a proof of inattention and indifference towards their
women. If they had not been accustomed to per-
sect equality, such an arrangement could not have
taken place. If their sensibility had been apt to
have taken alarm, they would not have trusted the
virtue of their women amidil the temptations and
opportunities of such a promiscuous intercourse. At
the fame time, the perpetual concord, which reigns
in habitations where so many families are crowded
together, is surprising, and affords a firiking evi-
dence that they muff be people of either a very
gentle, or of a very phlegmatic temper, who, in
such a situation, are unacquainted with animosity,
brawling and discord +.
Their arms. AFTER making some provision for his dress and

habitation, a avage will perceive the necessity of
preparing proper arms with which to assault or re-
pel an enemy. This, accordingly has early exer-
cifed the ingenuity and invention of all rude na-
tions. The first offensive weapons were doubtless
such as chance presented, and the first efforts of art
to improve upon these, were extremely aukward
and fiiplc. Clubs made of some heavy wood,
flakes hardened in the fire, lances whose heads
were armed with flint or the bones of some animal,
are weapons known to the rudefi nations. All
these, however, were of ute only il close encoun-

ter,

* Journ de Grillet & Becha mel dans la Goyane, p. 65. Ia-

fitau McBuis, ii. 4. Torquern. Monarq. i. 247. Journal -fill.
de Joutel, 217. Lery -lilt. Brazil, ap de J3ry, iii. 238. Lo-
ano. Defcr. del Gran Chaco. 67.

ter. But men wished to annoy their enemies while B O O K
at a distance, and the bow and arrow is the molt IV.
early invention for this purpose. This weapon is in k
the hands of people, whose advances in improve-
ment are extremely inconsiderable, and is familiar
to the inhabitants of every quarter of the globe. It
is remarkable, however, that Tome tribes in Ame-
rica were so destitute of art and ingenuity, that
they had not attained to the discovery of this fim-
pie invention i, and seem to have been unacquaint-
ed with the use of any missive weapon. The fling,
though in its conftrulion not more complex than
the bow, and among many nations of equal anti-
quity, was little known to the people of North
America t, or the islands, but appears to have been
used by a few tribes in the southern continent *.
The people in some provinces of Chili, and those
of Patagonia, towards the southern extremity of
America, use a weapon peculiar to themselves.
They fasten stones about the size of a sift to each
end of a leather thong of eight feet in length, and
swinging there round their heads, throw them with
such dexterity that they seldom miss the obje&t at
which they aim §. ,

AMONG people who had hardly any occupation Theirdo-

but war or hunting, the chief exertions of their in- meflic uten
vention Ij, as well as industry, were naturally di-
rected towards there objects. With refpea to every
thing else, their wants and desires were io limited,
that their invention was not upon the firetch. As
their food and habitations were perfetly simple,
their domestic utensils were few and rude. Some
of the southern tribes had discovered the art of

forming

* Piedrahita Conq. del Nuevo Rcyno, 9, 12. *'t Naufr.

de Als. Nun Cabcca (Je vaca, c. x. p. 12. :t Picdrah.
I'. 6. See NOTE LXXIX. § Ovalle's Relation of
Chili. Church. Collea. iii. 82. Falkier's Defcrip. of Pata-
onp. 1' 30. 11 See NOTE LXXX.

B O 0K forming vessels of earthen ware, and baking them

IV. in the fun, so as they could endure the fire. In
D'^ ' North America, they hollowed a piece of hard

Drefiing
their food. wood into the form of a kettle, and filling it with

water, brought it to boil by throwing red-hot flones
into it*. There vessels they used in preparing part
of their provisions; and this may be confidered as
a ftep towards refinement and luxury, for men in
their rudest slate were not acquainted with any
method of dressing their victuals, but by roasting
them on the fire; and among Ieveral tribes in

Confruc- America, this is the only ipecies of cookery yet
tion of their known t. But the master-piece of art, among the

savages of America, is the conftrudion of their
canoes. An Efkimaux, shut up in his boat of
whale-bone, covered with the skins of ieals, can
brave that stormy ocean, on which the barrenness
of his country compels him to depend for the chief
part of his subsistence t. The people of Canada
venture upon their rivers and lakes in boats made
of the bark of trees, and so light that two men can
carry them wherever ihallows or catarads obftruA
the navigation [I. In these frail vessels they under-
take and accomplish long voyages §. The inha-
bitants of the isles and of the southern continent
form their canoes by hollowing the trunk of a large
tree, with infinite labour, and though in appear-
ance extremely aukward and unwieldy, they pad-
dle and fleer them with such dexterity, that Euro-
peans well acquainted with all the improvemicts
in the science of navigation, have been aflonifled
at the rapidity of their motion, and the quickcf's
of their evolutions. Their piroures, or war-boais,
are so large as to carry forty or fifty men ; their

canioes

Charley. I-ift. of N. Fr. iii. 332. ' f See NOT!
LXXXI. 1 El;is Voy. 133. 11 See NOTE LXXXI

§ Lafitau Moeurs, &c. ii. 213.

canoes employed in fishing and in short voyagesB O o K
are less capacious*. The form as well as materials IV.
of all these various species of vessels is well adapted rs
to the service for which they are destined; and the
more minutely they are examined, the niechanifm
of their ftrudure, as well as neatnels of their fa-
brit, will appear the more admirable.

BUT, in every attempt towards industry amongLitlelTerft

theAmericans, one firiking quality in their cha-ithwhIlC
ra&ter is conspicuous. They apply to work with-to labour
out ardour, carry it on with little activity, and,
like children, are easily diverted from it. Even in
operations which seem the most interesting, and
where the most powerful motives urge them to vi-
gorous exertions, they labour with a languid lift-
leffnefs. Their work advances under their hand
with such flownels, that an eye-witnels compares
it to the impercepticle progrels of vegetation t.
They will spend so many years in forming a canoe,
that it often begins to rot with age before they
finiih it. They will susser one part of a roof to
decay and perish, before they complete the other t.
The slightest manual operation consumes a vafl
length of time, and what in polifled nations
would hardly be an effort of industry, is among
savages an arduous undertaking. This slowness of
the Americans in executing works of every kind
may be imputed to various causes. Among fa-
vages, who do not depend for fubfiflence upon the
eflbrts of regular industry, time is of so little im-
portance, that they set no value upon it; and pro-
vided they can finilh a dcfign, they never regard
how long they are employed about it. The tools
which they employ arc It aukward and deftecive,
that every work in which they engage must nccef-

farily

Labat Voyages, ii. 91, &c. 131. t Gumilla, ii,
297. 1 Uorde Rclua. leI Caraibes, p. z2.

B O O K farily be tedious. The hand of the most indufiri;

IV- ous and skilful artist, were it furnified with no
`'-'T better infirument than a flone hatchet, a ihell, or

the bone of some animal, could hardly perse& the
most simple work. It is by length of labour, that
he must endeavour to supply his defe& of power.
But, above all, the cold phlegmatic temper pecu-
liar to the Americans renders their operations lan-
guid. It is almost impossible to rouze them from
that habitual indolence in which they are funk;
and unless when engaged in war or hunting, they
seem incapable of exerting any vigorous effort.
Their ardour of application is not so great as to
call forth that inventive spirit which suggests expe-
dients for facilitating and abridging labour. They
will return to a talk day after day, but all their
methods of executing it are tedious and operose *.
Even since the Europeans have communicated to
them the knowledge of their infiruments, and
taught them to imitate their arts, the peculiar
genius of the Americans is conspicuous in all
their attempts. They may be patient and affi-
duous in'labour, they can copy with a servile and
minute accuracy, but discover little invention, and
no talents for dispatch. In spite of instruction and
example, the spirit of the race predominates; their
motions are naturally tardy, and it is vain to urge
them to quicken their pace. Among the Spaniards
in America, the work of an Indian is a phrase by
which they describe any thing, in the execution of
which an immense time has been employed, and
much labour wafted t.
Their reli- VII. No circumfiance refpe&ing rude nations

" has been the object of greater curiosity than their

religious tenets and rites; and none, perhaps, has
been to imperfectly underflood, or rcprelentcd

with

* See NOTE LXXXIII. j' Voyage de Ulloa, i. 335.
Lenlr. Edif. &c. 15. 348.

th so little fidelity. Priests and missionaries are B 0 0 K
e persons who have had the best opportunities of IV.
rying on this inquiry, among the most uncivi- 'if"
ed of the American tribes. Their minds en-dffculties
fled by the dodtrines of their own religion, and in thiiin-
bituated to its inflitutions, are apt to difcoverquiY'

nething that resemble those objects of their ve-

ration, in the opinions and rites of every people.
hatever they contemplate, they view through
e medium, and draw and accommodate it to
eir own system. They fludy to reconcile the
fitutions, which fall under their observation, to
ir own creed, not to explain them according to
rude notions of the people themselves. They
ribe to them ideas which they are incapable of
ring, and suppose them to be acquainted with
inciples and fadts, which it is impossible that
ey Iould know. Hence, even among the most
barous nations in America, obme missionaries
ave been induced to believe, that they had disco-
red traces, no lets diflind than amazing, of their
quaintance with the sublime mysteries and pe-
iar institutions of Christianity. From their
n interpretation of certain expressions and ce-
monies, they concluded that there people had
me knowledge of the doitrine of the Trinity, of
incarnation of the Son of God, of his expia-
y sacrifice, of the virtue of the cross, and of the
cacy of the sacraments . In such unintelligent
d credulous guides as thee, we can place little
ilidence.
BUT, even when we make our choice of con-
ilors with the greatest care, we must not follow
cm with implicit faith. An inquiry into the re-
gious notions of rude nations is involved in

peculiar

Vengas, i. 88.92. Torquemada, ii. 445. Garcia Origen.
Hlerrcra, dcc. 4. lib. ix. c. 7. dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 7.

B 0 0 Kpeculiar intricacies, and we must often pause i

eV. order to separate the fadts which our informers n
^'^nr' late, from the reasonings with which they are ai

companied, or the theories which they build upD
them. Several pious writers, more attentive
the importance of the subjeCt than to the conditio
of the people whose sentiments they were endea
vouring to discover, have bestowed much unpro
fitable labour in researches of this nature*.

Confined to THERE are two fundamental doctrines, upoi
twoarticles. which the whole system of religion, as far as it cat

be discovered by the light of nature, is eftablithed
The one refpeó{s the being of a God, the othe
the immortality of the foul. To discover the idea
of the uncultivated nations under our review wit
regard to these important points, is not only an ob
jet of curiosity, but may afford inftrucion. T
these two articles I shall confine my researches
leaving subordinate opinions, and the detail of Il
cal superstitions, to more minute inquiries. Who

Tfhbein ever has had any opportunity of examining intoth
7f God.

religious opinions of persons in the inferior rank
of life, even in the most enlightened and civilize
nations, will find that their system of belief is de
rived from inftruftion, not discovered by inquir
That numerous part of the human species whos
lot is labour, whose principal and almost sole oc
cupation is to secure subsistence, views the arrange
ment and operations of nature with little refleftio
and has neither leisure nor capacity for enterit
into that path of refined and intricate fpeculatio
which conducs to the knowledge of the principle
of natural religion. in the early and most rude p
riods of lavage life, such disquisitions are altogeth
unknown. When the intelleaual powers arc ju
beginning to unfold, and their first feeble cxcrtio
are directed towards a few objeóts of primary necc
fit) and use ; when the faculties of the mind arc

limlite
* Sec NOTE LXXXIV.

ited, as not to have formed abftra6t or general B O O K
eas; when language is so barren, as to be defti- Iv.
te of names to diftinguilh any thing that is not
rceived by some of the senses; it is prepofierous
expeEt that man ihould be capable of tracing
th accuracy the relation between cause and es-
1; or to suppose that he ihould rife from the
templation of the one to the knowledge of the
er, and form just conceptions of a Deity, as
eCreator and Governor of the Uuivelre. The
ea of creation is so familiar, wherever the mind
enlarged by science, and illuminated with reve-
ion, that we seldom reflet how profound and
ruse this idea is, or confider wvhat progress man
l have made in obfzrvation and research, before
could arrive at any knowledge of this elemen-

principle in religion. Accordingly, several
bes have been diliovered in America, which
e no idea whatever of a Supreme Being, and
rites of religious worship. Inattentive to that
gnificent fpedtacle of beauty and order present-
to their view, unaccuflomed to reflet either
on what they themselves are, or to inquire who
the author of their exifience, men, in their fa-
e slate, pass their days, like the animals around
in, without knowledge or veneration of any
erior power. They have not in their languages
name for the Deity, nor have the molt accu-
observers been able to discover any practice or
itution which seemed to imply that they recog-
ed his authority, or were Iblicitous to obtain
favour*. It is only among men in the most

uncultivated

iet, 539. Lery ap de Bry, ii. 221. NieuhoIf. Churcl.
ii. 132. Lettr. Edif. 2. 177. Id. 12, 13 Vcnegas, i.
Lozano Defcript. del Gran. Chaco, 59. F'ernand. Mif-
deChiquit. 39. Gumilla, ii 156. Rochefort Hifl. des
e?. p. 468. Margrave H-ist. in Ap)pcnd. de Chillienfibus,
Ulloa Notic. Americ. 335. &c. Barrerc, 218, 219.
COrt Voy. to Guiana. PurIc. Pilgr. . i p. 1273. Ac-
ofBrafil, by a Portuguese. Ibid. p. 1289. Jones's
Tna, p. 59. See NOTE LXXXV.

O O K uncultivated slate of nature, and while their
IV. telleatual faculties are so feeble and limited as ha
^rSm^ ly to elevate them above the irrational creati

that we may discover this total inlenfibility to
impressions of any invisible power. But the hun
-mind, formed for religion, soon opens to the
ception of ideas, which are destined, whel c
redted and refined, to be the great source of cor
lation amidst the calamities of life. Among 'o
of the American tribes, frill in the infancy of
provement, we discern apprehensions of some
visible and powerful beings. These apprehend
are originally indifiind and perplexed, and fe
to be suggested rather by the dread of impend
evils, than to flow from gratitude for bleflings
ceived. While Nature holds on her course withi
form and undisturbed regularity, men enjoy
benefits resulting from it, without enquiriig c
cerning its cause. But every deviation from 1
regular course rouzes and astonishes them. WV
they behold events to which they are not aci
tomed, they search for the reasons of them \
eager curiosity. Their understanding is unabl
penetrate into these; but imagination, a more
ward, and ardent faculty of the mind, dec
without hesitation. It ascribes the extraordi&
'occurrences in nature to the influence of inil
beings, and supposes that the thunder, the hi
cane, and the earthquake, are effects oftheil
terpofition. Some such confused notion of pit
or invisible power, superintending over thof
tural calamities which frequently delolatc tlhe c
and terrify its inhabitants, may be traced a
many rude nations*. But betides this, thlc
ters and dangers of savage life are lb manly
men often find thernfclves in situations lo for'
ble, that the mind, ienfible of its own weak

* See NOTE LXXXVI.

has no resource but in the guidance and protection B O O K
of wisdom and power superior to what is human, IV.
Dejeted with calamities which oppress him, and *
exposed to dangers which he cannot repel, the fa-
vage no longer relies upon himself; he feels his
own impotence, and fees no profpet of being ex-
tricated, but by the interposition of tome inv-isible
arm. Hence, in all unenlightened nations, the firit
rites or practices which bear any resemblance to
aats of religion, have it for their object to avert
evils which men susser or dread. The Manitous
or Okkis of the North Americans were amulets or
charms, which they imagined to be of ifch virtue,
as to preserve the persons who repose confidence in
them from every disastrous event, or they were
confidered as tutelary spirits, whose aid they might
implore in circumflances of distress¢ . The Cemis
of the islanders were reputed by them the authors of
every calamity that afflits the human race; they.
were represented under the mofi frig htful forms, and
religious homage was paid to them with no other
viexv than to appease these furious deities t. Even
among those tribes whose religious system was more
enlarged, and who had formed tome conception of
benevolent beings, delighted with conferring bene-
fits, as well as of malicious porwers prone to inflic
evil; fuperilition still appears as the offspring of
fear, and all its efforts were employed to avert cala-
mities. They were persuaded thattheir good deities,
prompted by the beneficence of their nature, would
bestow every blefling in their power, without folici-
ation or acknowledgment; and their only anxiety
asto sbothe and deprecate the wrath of the powers
honl they regarded as the enemies of mankind I:.

SUCH

Chlrlev. N. Fr. iii. 343, &c. Creuxii Hii. Canad. p.
'&c. . Oviedo, lib. iii. c. i. p. ill. P. M.rtyr,
. p.102, &c. : Telrfl, ii. 365. Bordrc, p. 14.
le of Virginia, by a Native, book iii. p. ;2, 33. )Dunont,
165. Bancroft Nat. lil. of Guiana, 309.

B O O K SUCH were the imperfea conceptions of the

IV. greater part of the Americans with refpe& to the
^^~s~^ interpositions of invisible agents, and such, almost

universally, was the mean and illiberal objeEts of
their fuperfiitions. Were we to trace back the ideas
of other nations to that rude slate in which hifiory
first presents them to our view, we should discover
a surprising resemblance in their tenets and praai-
ces; and should be convinced, that, in similar cir-
cumrnances, the faculties of the human mind hold
nearly the fame course in their progress, and arrive
at almost the fame conclusions. The imprecfions
of fear are conspicuous in all the systems of fuperili-
tion formed in this situation. And the most exalted
notions of men rife no higher than to a perplexed
apprehension of certain beings, whose power,
though supernatural, is limited as well as partial.

Remarkable BUT, among other tribes, which have been
diversity in longer united, or have made greater progress in
their religi- .
eusnotions. improvement, we discern Come feeble pointing to-

wards more just and adequate conceptions of the
power that presides in nature. They seem to per-
ceive that there must be some universal cause to
whom all things are indebted for their being. If
we may judge by tome of their expreflions, they
appear to acknowledge a divine power as the
maker of the world, and the disposer of all events.
They denominate him the Great Spirit. But
these ideas are faint and confused, and when the)
attempt to explain them, it is manifest, that amonl
them the word spirit has a meaning very diflerell
from that in which we employ it, and that thcJ
have no conception of any deity but what is cor
poreal. They believe their gods to be of tlh
human form, though of a nature morc excel
lent than man, and retail such wild incohercl

fable

Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 343. Sagard, Voy. du Pays dI
gIurons, 226.

fables concerning their funcnions and operations, B 0 0 K
as are altogether unworthy of a place in hiflory. IV
Even among thele tribes, there is no ellablilhed '"-'
form of public worship; there are no temples
crected in honour of their deities ; and no minii-
ters peculiarly consecrated to their service. They
have the knowledgc, however, of several super-
flitious ceremonies and praCtices handed down
to them by tradition, and to these they have re,
course with a childish credulity, when rouzed by
any emergence from their usual insensibility, and
excited to acknowledge the power, and to in-
plore the proteCtion of superior beings .

'TiE tribe of the Natchez, and the people Of S:tcmof

Bogota had advanced beyond the other unculti- te at
vated nations of America in their ideas of reli-
gion, as well as in their political inflitutions;
and it is no less difficult to explain the cause of
this diflindlion than of that which we have al-
ready confidered. The Sun was the chief obje&L
of religious worship among the Natchez. In their
temples swhich were cotnfiruded with loie in g-
nificence, and decorated with various ornaments,
according to their mode of architecture, they pre-
cirvcd a perpetual fire, as the purCef emblemi of
their divinity. Miniilers were appointed to watch
and feed this sacred flame.

The first findtion of' the great chief of the na-

tion, every morning, was an ad of obcyflice to
the stun; and fcftivals returned at flatcd Ifalols
whlich were celebrated by the whole conmuniiy
with olemnl but unbloody rites l). This is tli
niofn refined fpccics of iiperilitioil klnown il

VOL. I. C c America,

i Clharlv. N. Fr. iii. 345. Collen, i. 17. 1 Du-

mont, i. 158, &c. Charlcv. N. Fr. 3. 417, &c. 429. La-
litau, i. 167.

B 00 K America, and, perhaps, one of the most natural

IV. as well as most seducing. The fun is the appa.

rent source of the joy, fertility, and life, diffused
through nature, and while the human mind, in its
early essays towards inquiry, contemplates and
admires his universal and animating energy, its
admiration is apt to flop short at what is visible,
without reaching to the unseen cause; and pays
that adoration to the most glorious and beneficial
work of God, which is due only to him who
formed it. As fire is the purest and moll active
of the elements, and in some of its qualities and
effects resembles the fun, it was, not improperly,
chosen to be the emblem of his powerful opera-
tion. The ancient Persians, a people far superior,
in every refpe&, to that rude tribe whose rites I
am describing, founded their religious fyflem on
similar principles, and established a form of public
worship, less gross and exceptionable than that of
any people destitute of guidance from revelation.
This surprising co-incidence in sentiment between
two nations, in such different flates of improve-
ment, is one of the many singular and unaccount-
able circumstances which occur in the history of
human affairs.

AMONG the people of Bogota, the fun and

moon were likewise, the chief objeats of venera-
tion. Their fyfiem of religion was more regular
and complete, though less pure than that of the
Natchez. They had temples, altars, priests, la-
crifices, and that long train of ceremonies, which
fuperflition introduces wherever fie has fully es-
tablifhed her dominion over the minds of mlen.
But the rites of their worfllip were cruel and
bloody. They offered human victins to their de-
ities, and many of their praaices nearly refemlblcd
the barbarous inflitutions of the Mexicans, the

genius

genius of which we {hall have an opportunity of B 0 0 K
confidering more attentively in its proper place*. IV.

WITH refpeEt to the other great doctrine of re-
ligion, concerning the immortality of the foul, the Te.ir ,ids

cowcerning

sentiments of the Americans were more united: the iniomr-
the human mind, even when least improved and "lOs fth
invigorated by culture, ihrinks from the thoughts
of dissolution, and looks forward with hope and
expectation to a fate of future exillence. This
fentirnent, resulting from a secret conlcioufnefs of
its own diguity, from an inftintive longing after
immortality, is universal, and maybe deemed na-
tural. Upon this, are founded the most exalted
hopes of man in his highest late of improvement;
nor has nature withheld from him this fboohing
consolation, in the moftl early and rude period of
his progress. WXe can trace this opinion from one
extremity of America to the other. In tome re-
gions more faint and obscure, in others more per-
fecctly developed, but no where unknown. The
most uncivilized of its savage tribes do not appre-
hend death as the extinlCtion of being. All hope
for a future and more happy slate, where they shall
be for ever exempt from the calamities which em-
bitter human life in its present condition. This
they figure as a delightful country, blefied witli
perpetual spring, whose forefis abound with game,
vliofe rivers lfw\rm with fish, where famine is ne-
ver felt, and uninterrupted plenty shall be enjoyed
without labour or toil. But as men, in forming
their firfl iinperl'scl ideas concerning the invilible
world, suppose that there they shall continue to
feel the llame dcfires, and to be engaged in the
anme occupations ; they naturally aferibe eminence
and diflinction, in that slate, to the lame qualities

C c 2 and

Picdlrahlia, Conq. del N. Rcyno, p. 17, &c. Ierrera,
dec. 6. lib. v. c. 6.

B O K and talents which are here the objeEt of their es-

IV. teem. The Americans, accordingly, allotted the
'i-T ' hhigheft place, in their country of spirits, to the

skilful hunter, to the adventurous and successful
warrior, to such as had surprised and slain the
greatest number of enemies, who had tortured
many of their captives, and devoured their flesh l.

Induc them Theie notions were so prevalent, that they gave
to buhy rife to an univerial custom, which is, at once, the

tl-ms, &-c.
with the strongest evidence that the Americans believe in a
dead. future state, and the befl illufiration of what they

expe&t there, as they imagine, that the dead begin
their career anew in the world whither they are
gone, that they may not enter upon it defenceless
and unprovided, they bury with them their bow,
their arrows, and other weapons uled in hunting
or war; they depofite in their tombs the skins or
ituffs of which they make garments, Indian corn,
manioc, venison, domestic utensils, and whatever
is reckoned among the neceflarics in their simple
mode of Life f. In tome provinces, upon the de-
ccale of a cazique or chief, a certain number of his
wives, of his favourites, and of his saves, were
put to death, and interred together with him, that
he might appear with the fame dignity in his future
flation, and be waited upon by the fame attend-
ants I-. This persuasion is so deep-rooted, that

many

* Lery ap de Bry, iii. 222. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 351,

&c. Ie la Potherie, ii. 45, &c. iii. 5. -'l Chroni-
ca tie Cieca dc Leon, c. 28. Sagard, 288. Creux. Hist.
Canad. p. 91. Rochefort, I-Iil. des Antilles, 568. Biet,
.39I. Ie la Potheric, ii. 44. iii. 8. Blanco, Converf. de
PI initu, p. 35. .1 Duniont, Louifiane, i. 280,
&c. Ovicdo, lib. v. c. 3. Gornara. Hilft. Gun. c. 28.
P. Mart. decad. 304. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 421. Herreri,
(ldt. i. lib. iii. c. 3. P. Mclchior Hernandez, Memor. de
Cliriqui. Coll. Orig. Papers, i. Chron. de Cicca de Leon,
c. 33.

many of their retainers offer themselves as vb- B 0 K
luntary vieims, and court the privilege of ac- IV.
companying their departed mailer, as an high ~r-
diftincction. It has been found difficult, on some
occasions, to set bounds to this enthusiasm of as-
fedtionate duty, and to reduce the train of a fa-
vourite leader to such a number as the tribe could
afford to spare .

AMONG the Americans, as well as other uncivi- Supelrlition

connected

lized nations, many of the rights and observances with dcvo-
which bear some resemblance to adts of religion, tioI.
have no conneEtion with devotion, but proceed
from a fond desire of prying into futurity. The
human mind is moit apt to feel, and to discover
this vain curiosity, when its own powers are most
feeble and uninformed. Astonished with occur-
rences; of which it is unable to comprehend the
cause, it naturally fancies that there is something
myflerious and wonderful in their origin. Alarm-
ed at events, of which it cannot discern the issue
or the consequences, it has recourse to other means
of discovering them, than the exercise of its own
sagacity. Wherever fuperitition is so eflablifhed
as to form a regular system, this desire of pene-
trating into the secrets of futurity is connected
with it. Divination becomes a religious at.
Priests, as the miniflers of heaven, pretend to
deliver its oracles to men. They are the only
soothsayers, augurs, and magicians, who poflcls
the sacrcd and important art of dilcloling what is
hid fiomn other eyes.

BUT, among rude nations, whio pay no vencra- This dc-

tion to any superintending power, and who have jptmnt
no eflabliifed rites or miniftcrs of religion, thcir thiir pliin.
curiosity to discover what is future and unknown cians
is chcrifhcd by a different principle, and derives

t relgth
Sec NOTE LXXXVII.

B O O K strength from another alliance. As the diseases of

IV. men, in the savage slate, are like those of the ani-
'.'"r~ mal creation, few but extremely violent, their im-

patience under what they susser, and solicitude for
the recovery of health, soon inspired them with ex-
traordinary reverence for such as pretended to un-
derftand the nature of their maladies, or to pre-
serve them from their sudden and fatal effecs.
These ignorant pretenders, however, werefuch utter
firangers to the ftruature of the human frame, as
to be equally unacquainted with the causes of its dif-
orders and the manner in which they will terminate.
Enthufiafn, mingled frequently with some portion
of craft, supplied what they wanted in science.
They imputed the origin of diseases to supernatural
influence, and prescribed or performed a variety of
niyfterious rites, which they gave out'to be of pow-
er sufficient to remove them. The credulity and love
of the marvellous, natural to uninformed men, fa-
voured the deception, and prepared them to be
the dupes of their'impofture. Among savages,
their first physicians are a kind of conjurers or wiz-
ards, who boast that they know what is past, and
can foretell what is to come. Incantations, sorcery,
and mummeries of diverse kinds, no less firange
than frivolous, are the means which they employ
to expel the imaginary causes of malignity*; and,
relying upon the efficacy of these, they predidt
iwith confidence what will be the fate of their delud-
ed patients. Thus fuperflition in its earliest form
flowed from the solicitude of man to be delivered
fiom present distress, not from his dread of evils
nwaiting him in a future life, and was originally in-
grafted on medicine, not on religion. One of the
firfl, and most intelligent hiflorians of America

was

X P. Melch. Hcrnandez Memorial de Chcriqui. Collct.

Qrig. Pap. i.
k .

was struck with this alliance between the art ofB 0 0 K
divination and that of physic, among the people IV.
of Hispaniola . But this was not peculiar to --~
them. The Alexis, the Piayas, the Autmoins, or
whatever was the distinguishing name of their di-
viners and charmers in other parts of America,
were all the physicians of their refpe&ive tribes, in
the fame manner as the Buhitos of Hispaniola. As
their funCtion led them to apply to the human
mind when enfeebled by sickness, and as they
found it, in that season of dejection, prone to be
alarmed with imaginary fears, or amused with vain
hopes, they easily induced it to rely with implicit
confidence on the virtue of their spells, and the
certainty of their predictions t.

WHENEVER men acknowledge the reality ofaradudl1y

supernatural power and discernment in one in-
stance, they have a propensity to admit it in
others. The Americans did not long suppose the
efficacy of conjuration to be confined to one subjet.
They had recourse to it in every situation of dan-
ger or distress. When the events of war were
peculiarly disastrous, when they met with unfore-
seen disappointments in hunting, when inundation
or drought threatened their corps with deflrution,
they called upon their conjurers to begin their in-
cantations, in order to discover the caules of those
calamities, or to foretell what would be their issue §,
Their confidence in this delusive art gradually in-
creased, and manifefled itfelfin all the occurrences,
of life. When ipvolved in any difficulty, or about

to

* Oviedo, lil. v. c. i. l- Herrera. dec. i. lib iii. c.

4. Osborne, Coll. ii. 860. Dumont, 1. 169, &c. Charley.
N. Fr. iii. 361. 364, &c. Lawson, N. Carol. 214. Ribas,
Triumph. p. 17. Biet, 386. De la Pothcric, ii. 35, &c.

§ Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 3. Dumont, i. 173. Fernand. Re-
luc. de los Chiquui5. p. 40. Lozano, 84. Margrave, 279.

B O O K to enter upon any tranfadion of moment, every in.

IV. dividual regularly consulted the forcerer, depended
""T upon his initrutions to extricate him from the

former, and to dire& his condut in the latter.
Even among the rudest tribes in America, Iuperfii-
tion appears in this form, and divination is an art
in high esteem. Long before man had acquired
such knowledge of a deity as inspires reverence and
leads to adoration, we observe him firetching out
a presumptuous hand to draw aside that veil with
which providence kindly conceals its purpoles from
human knowledge; and we find him labouring,
v ith fruitless anxiety, to penetrate into the myfie-
ries of the divine adminiflration. To disccrn,
and to worship a superintending power, is an evi-
dence of the enlargement and maturity of the hu-
man understanding; a vain desire of prying into
futurity, is the error of its infancy, and a proof of
its weakncfs.

FROM this weakness proceeded, likewise, the

faith of the Americans in dreams, their obferva-
tion of omens, their attention to the chirping
of birds and the cries of animals, all which
they suppose to be indications of future events,
and if any one of these prognostics is deemed
hnfavourable, they instantly abandon the pursuit
of those measures on which they are most eagerly
bent%.
Detached VIII. BUT if we would form a complete idea of

soln the uncultivated nations of America, we mufI not

pass unobfcrved Tome singular cuifoms, which,
though universal and charaiteriflic, could not be
reduced, with propricty, to any of the articles

iiito

* Charlcv. N. Fr. iii. 2(6'. 353. SLta(iiis, ap de Bry, iii.

12c. Crcultxi, Hifi. Cali. . 4. Teclo, lifi. of Pl1 Jg.
Cliurch. Coll. vi. 37. Dc 1,a 'oticric, iii. 6.

into which I have divided my inquiry concerning B O o K
their manners. IV.

AMONG savages, in every part of the globe, ~v
the love of dancing is a favourite passion. As a L'es
great part of their time languiihes away in lifilets
indolence, Vwihlout any occupation to rouze or in-
terest them, they delight univerlally in a pafiinie
uwhich calls forth the acqive powers of their nature
into exercise. The Spaniards, when they first vi-
fited Anerica, were astonished at the fondness of
the natives for dancing, and beheld iith wonder
a people, cold and unanimated in most of their
other pursuits, kindled into life, and exert them-
lelves with ardour, as often as this favourite
amusement recurred. Among them, indeed, danc-
ing ought not to be denominated an arnuetment.
It is a serious and important occupation, which
mingles in every occurence of public or private
life. If any intercourse be necessary between
two American tribes, the embaffadors of the one
approach in a solemn dance, and present the ca-
lumet or emblem of peace; the sachems of the
other receive it with the fame ceremony*. If
war is denounced against an enemy, it is by a
dance, exprefiive of the resentment which they
eel, and of the vengeance which they meditatet.
f the wrath of their gods is to be appcared, or
their beneficence to be celebrated; if they re-
oice at the birth of a child, or mourn the death
of a fieind l, they have dances appropriated to
clh of ticle situations, and suited to the different
ctiineits with which they are then ainimated.

it'

De nl Pothlcri I-ilt. ii. 17, &c. Charlev. N. F'r. ii. 21 r.
;'.: la lolitan. i. 100. 137. Henncpin. I)ccou. 1,t9, &c.

('lrle . N. Fr. iii. 298. Lafitau, i. 523.
Joutcl, 343. Gonmara, lilt. Gcn. c. 196.

B O O K If a person is indisposed, a dance is prefcrlbed as

IV. the most effectual means of restoring him to health;
,l-~' and if he hirnfelf cannot endure the fatigue of such

an exercise, the physician or conjurer performs it in
his name, as if the virtue of his adivity could be
transferred to his patient-.

ALL their dances are imitations of some ation;

and though the music by which they are regulated,
is extremely simple and tiresome to the ear by its
dull monotony, some of their dances appear won-
derfully expressive and animated. The war-dance
is, perhaps, the most ftrikig. It is the reprefenta.
tion of a complete American campaign. The de-
parture of the warriors from their village, their
march into the enemy's country, the caution with
which they encamp, the address with which they
flation some of their party in ambush, the manner
of furprizing the enemy, the noise and ferocity of
the combat, the fealping of those who are slain,
the seizing of priloners, the triumphant return of
the conquerors, and the torture of the vicims,
are successively exhibited. The performers enter
with such enthusiastic ardour into their several
parts, their gcftures, their countenance, their
voice, are so wild and so well adapted to their va-
rious situations, that Europeans can hardly be-
lieve it to be a mimic scene, or view it without
emotions of fear and horror t.

BUT however expreflive ftme of the American

dances may be, there is one circumstance in tlihc
remarkable, and connected with the charactcr ol
the race. The songs, the dances, the anlulc
plents of other nations, exprcflive of the fcntiniciil

whlict

; Dcnys Hist. Nat. 189. Briclcll, 372. De ]l Pothlcr
ii. 36.

' De la Potherie, ii X l6. Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 297. L
litiu, i. 523.

hich animate their hearts, are often adapted to B 00 K
play or excite that sensibility which mutually Iv-
taches the sexes. Among some people, such is 'T
e ardour of this passion, that love is almost the
le object of festivity and joy; and as rude na- *
ons are firangers to delicacy, and unaccustomed
adifguife any emotion of their minds, their dances
reoften extremely wanton and indecent. Such
sthe Calenda, of which the natives of Africa are
passionately fond-; and such the feats of the
ancing girls, which the Asiatics contemplate with
much avidity of desire. But, among the Ame-
cans, more cold and indifferent to their females,
ro causes which I have already explained, this
affion mingles but little with their festivals and
aRimes. Their songs and dances are mostly so-
ern and martial, they are conneded with tome
fthe serious and important affairs of life t, and
aving no relation to love or gallantry, are seldom
ommon to the two sexes, but executed by the men
d women apart§. If, on some occasions, the
omen are permitted to join in the festival, the
harater of the entertainment is still the fame,
nd no movement or gesture is expressive of at,
achnent, or encourages familiarity I1.
AN immoderate love of play, especially at games Paffon for
hazard, which seems to be natural to all people amin'
naccuftomed to the occupations of regular indus-
ry, is likewise universal among the Americans.

The

Adanfon, Voy. to Senegal, p. ill. 287: Labat, Voyages,
463. Sloane Hill. Nat. of Jam. Introd. p. 48. Fermin,
eript. de Surin. i. p. 39. -1 Defcript. of N. France.
lorne, Coil. ii. 883. Charley. N. Fr. iii. 84. § Wa-
r's Account of Isthmus, &c. 169. Lery ap de Bry, iii. 177.
0tano, Hifl. de Parag. i. 149. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c.
dec. 4. lib. x. c. 4. See NOTE LXXXVIII. 11 Bar.,
re, lr. Equin. p. 191.

B' OO K The fame causes, which so often prompt perlons

IV. at their ease in civilized life to have recourse to

this pastime, render it the delight of the savage.
The former are independent of labour, the latter
do not feel the necelfity of it, and as both are un-
employed, they run with transport to whatever is
of power to fiir and agitate their minds. Hence
the Americans, who at other times are so indiffe.
rent, so phlegmatic, so silent, and so difinterefied,
as soon as they engage in play become rapacious,
impatient, noily, and almost frantic with eager4
ness. Their furs, their domestic utensils, thcir
clothes, their arms, are flaked at the gaming-ta-
ble, and when all is lofi, high as their sense of in-i
dependence is, in a wild emotion ofdefpair or of
hope, they will often rilf their personal liberty,
upon a single callt. Among several tribes, Iuch]
gaming parties frequently recur, and become their
inoft acceptable entertainment at every great fcfti-
val. Superfitiion, which is apt to take hold of
those paflions which are moit vigorous, frequently
lends its aid to confirm and strengthen this favou-
rite inclination. Their conjurers are accufonmcd
to prcfcribe a folenin match at play, as one of
the most efficacious niethods of appeasing their
gods, or of rcfioring the sick to health 1.

and for FROM caul'es similar to tholi which render them
drnking. fond of play, the Americans are extremely addit-

ed to drunkenness. It feemns to have been one of
the firfi exertions of human ingenuity to dilcover
some composition of an intoxicating quality; and
there is hardly any nation so rude, or so cleflitute
of invention as not to have succeeded in this fatal
rclcarch. ''The most barbarous of the Anlerican

tribes

C1h Chrlcv. N. Fr. iii. 261. 318. Lifitau, ii. 33^, &.

Ribes, ''rium;i. 13. Brickell, 335. ' j Charlie'. N.
F'r. iii. 2ó3,.

ibes have been so unfortunate as to attain this art; B O O K
d even those who are so deficient in knowledge, IV.
to be unacquainted with the method of giving -
inebriating strength to liquors by fermentation,
n accomplish the fame end by other means.
e people of the islands of North America, and
California, used, for this purpose, the finoke
tobacco, drawn up with a certain instrument
to the nofirils, the fumes of which ascending
to the brain, they felt all the transports and
nzy of intoxication @. In ahnoft every other
t of the New World, the natives pofeffecd
art of extracting an intoxicating liquid fromi
aize or the manioc root, the fame lubflances
hich they convert into bread. The operation
which they effect this, nearly relembles the
mon one of brewing, but with this diffe-
nce, that in place of yeft, they use a nauseous
sion of a certain quantity of maize or ra-
oc chewed by their women. The saliva ex-
ts a vigorous fermentation, and in a few days
eliquor becomes fit for drinking. It is not dif-
eeable to the taste, and when swallowed in
ge quantities is of an intoxicating quality.
s is the general beverage of the Americans,
icli they diftinguifi by various names, and
rwhich they feel such a violent and insatiable
ire, as it is not ealy either to conceive or de-
be. Among polished nations, where a fuccef-
a of various functions and amulements keep
mind in continual occupation, the desire for
log drink is regulated, in a great measure,
the climate, and increases or diminiihes ac-
ding to the variations of its temperature. In

warm

Oviedo Hist. ap Ramus. iii. 1 3. Venegas, i. 68. Nau-
*i Cabeca de Vaca, cap. 26. See NOTE LXXXIX.
'ius ap de Bry, iii. ill. Lery, ibid. 175.

B O O K warm regions, the delicate and sensible frame

IV. the inhabitants does not require the fiimulation
r'-sB fermented liquors. In colder countries, the con

tution of the natives, more robust and more fli
gish, stands in need of generous liquors to quicd
and animate it. But among savages, the defir(
something that is of power to intoxicate, is,
every situation the fame. All the people of Ai
rica, whether natives of the torrid zone, or ir
bitants of its more temperate regions, or pl
by a harder fate in the severe climates toward
northern or southern extremity, appear to
equally under the dominion of this appeti
Such a limilarity of taste, among people in
difflrent lituations, muf be ascribed to thei
encc of tonme moral cause, and cannot be c
dered as the effeEt of any physical or confil
onal want. While engaged in war or in the c
the savage is often in the most interefiing fit
ons, and all the powers of his nature are rouz
the mofl vigorous exertions. But those anim
scenes are succeeded by long intervals of re
during which the warrior meets with nothing
he deems of sufficient dignity or importance to
rit his attention. He languishes and mopes in
season of indolence. The posture of his bo
an emblem of the slate of his mind. In on
mate, cowering over the fire in his cabin; i
other, firetched under the shade of some tree
dozes away his time in sleep, or in an unthi
joyless inactivity, not far removed from it.
itrong liquors awake him from this torpid
give a brisker motion to his spirits, and eulive
inore thoroughly than cither dancing or

* Gumilla, i. 257. Lozano Defcrip. de Gran C

156. 103. Ribas, 8. Ulloa, i. 249. 337. Marchais,
Fernandlez Milrion. delasChiiuit. 35. Barrcre, p. 203.
co Convert: de Piritu, 31.

ing, his love of them is excessive. A savage, when E O IK
not engaged in action, is a pensive melancholy Iv.
animal; but as soon as he taftes, or has a profpcd e
of taking, the intoxicating draught, he becomes
gay and frolicsome: . Whatever be the occasion,
or pretext, on which the Americans assemble, the
meeting always terminates in a debauch. Many
of their festivals have no other object, and they
welcome the return of theni with transports of
joy. As they are not accuftonled to refirain any
appetite, they set no bounds to this. The riot
often continues without intermiflion several days:
and whatever be the fatal effeAs of their excess,
they never cease from drinking as long as one drop
of liquor remains. The perfbns of greatest emi-
nence, the most distinguished warriors, and the
chiefs most renowned for their wisdom, have no
more command of themselves than the most ob-
fcure member of the community. Their eagerness
for present enjoyment renders them blind to its fa-
tal consequences; and tholc very men, who, in
other situations, feern to possess a force of mind
niore than human, are in this instance inferior to
children in foresight, as well as consideration, and
mere slaves of brutal appetite t. When their pas-
sions, naturally strong, are heightened and inflam-
ed by drink, they are guilty of the most enormous
outrages, and the festivity feldoni concludes with-
out deeds of violence, or bloodfihed I.

BUT, amidif this wild debauch, there is one
circumftancc remarkable; the women, in most of
the American tribes, are not permitted to partake
of it §. Their province is to prepare the liquor,
to serve it about to the gucfis, and to take care of
their husbands and friends, when their rcalbn is

over-

Melendez Teforos Verdl;d. iii. 369. 1- Rilas, 9.

Ulloa, i. 338. :t Lettr. Edif. ii. r78. Torqutle lria
o1n. Ind. i. 335. § Sec NO fE XC.

B O O K overpowered. This exclusion of the women from

IV. an enjoyment so highly valued by savages, may be
^'T4J juflly confidered as a mark of their inferiority, and

as an additional evidence of that contempt with
which they were treated in the New WVorld. The
people of North America, when firit dilcoverd,
were not acquainted with any intoxicating drink;
but as the Europeans early found it their interest
to supply them with ipirituous liquors, drunken-
nels toon became as univerlal among them as
aniong their countrymen to the south; and their
women having acquired this new taste, indulge it
with as little decency and moderation as the
nen 4.

Puttodeath Ir were endless to enumerate all the detached
theaged and customs which have excited the wonder of travel-
incurable.

lers in America; but I cannot omit one fecmingly
as singular as any that has been mentioned. Whcn
their parents and other relations become old, or
labour under any distemper which their slender
knowledge of the healing art cannot remove, they
cut short their days with a violent hand, in order
to be relieved from the burden of supporting and
tending them. This pradtice prevailed among
the ruder tribes in every part of the continent,
from I-ludfon's Bay to the river De la Plata; and
howevr shocking it may be to thole fentimcnts 0o
tenderness and attachment, which, in civilizcd
lile, we are apt to conlider as congenial with our
frame, the condition of man in the savage fianc
leads and reconciles himi to it. The lame hard-
ships and difficulty of procuring fubfiftencc, which
deter savages, in some cales, from rearing tleir
children, prompt them to destroy the aged and in-
firm. The declining slate of the one is as hclpllcl

aC

* Hutchinson, Hi-.l oF Mafiachuf. 469. Lafitau, ii. 125
SagardL 146.

as the infancy of the other. The former are no B O 0 K
less unable than the latter to perform the fuuc- IV.
tions that belong to a warrior or hunter, or to en-

l

dure those various difireifes in which savages are
so often involved, by their own want of foresight
and industry. Their rnlations feel this; and inca-
pable of attending to the wants or weakneifes of
others, their impatience under an additional bur-
den prompts them to extinguish that life which
they find it difficult to fusain. This is not re-
garded as a deed of cruelty, but as an aft of mer-
cy. An American, broken with years and infir-
mities, conscious that he can no longer depend on
the aid of thole around him, places hinfelf con-
tentedly in his grave; and it is by the hands of his
children or nearest relations that the thong is pul-
led, or the blow inflicted, which releases him for
ever from the sorrows of life*.

IX. AFTER contemplating the rude American Gencralefta-

tribes in such various lights, after taking a view ofmatcofthlti
their cufloms and manners from so many different
fiations, nothing remains but to form a general es-
timate of their character, compared with that of
more polifled nations. A human being, as he
comes originally from the hand of nature, is every
where the fame. At his first appearance in the
slate of infancy, whether it be among the rudest
savages, or in the most civilized focicty, we can
difccrn no quality which marks any diflinlCion or
fupcriority. The capacity of improvement seems
to be the fanme; and the talents he may afterwards
acquire, as well as the virtues he may be rendered
capable of exerciting, depend entirely upon the
flaec of society in which he is placed. To this
Itate his mind naturally accommodates itlflf, and

VOL. I. D d from

* Caffani H-Iif. de N. Rcyno dc Gran. p. 30o. Pifo, p.
6. EllisVoy. 19. Guinilla, i. 333.

B O K from it receives its discipline and culture. In pro"

I-. portion to the wants which it accustoms a human

' being to feel, and the functions in which thef:

engage him, his intelleAual powers are called
forth. According to the connections which it eti
tablifhes between him and the reft of his species,
the affections of his heart are exerted. It is only
by attending to this great principle, that we can
discover what is the charadter of man in every dif-
ferent period of his progress.

Intelletual IF we apply it to lavage life, and measure the
powers. attainments of the human mind in that state by this

standard, we fliall find, according to an obferva-
tion which I have already made, that the intellec-
tual powers of man muff be extremely limited in
their operations. They are confined within the
narrow sphere of what he deems necefiary for sup-
plying his own wants. Whatever has not rome re.
lation to thee, neither attrats his attention, nor is
the object of his inquiries. But however narrow
the bounds may be within which the knowled ge of
a lavage is circumscribed, he possesses thoroughly
that fmrall portion of it which he has attained. It
was not communicated to him by formal infiruc-
tion; he does not attend to it as matter of mere
speculation and curiosity; it is the result of his own
observation, the fruit of his own experience, and
accommodated to his condition and exigencies.
While employed in the atlive occupations of war
or hunting, he often finds himself in difficult and
perilous situations, fiom which the efflrts of his
own sagacity must extricate him. I-He is frequently
engaged in mcafircs where every flep depends
upon his own ability to decide, where he mull- rely
solely upo.I his own penetration to difccrn thi dcan-
gers to which he is exposed, and upon his own
wisdom in providing againlt them.

As

As the talents of individuals are exercised and B o 0 K

improved by such exertions, much political wi:- Iv.
dom is said to be displayed in conducing the as-p,'- '
fairs of their finall communities. The council of talnts.
old men in an American tribe, deliberating upon
its interests, and determining with refpet to peace
orwar, has been compared to the senate in more po-
lifhed rcpublics. The proceedings of the former,
we are told, are often no less formal and sagacious
than those of the latter. Great political wildon is
exhibited in pondering the various measures pro-
posed, and in balancing their probable advantages,
against the evils of which they-may be producItive.
Much address and eloquence are employed by the
leaders, who aspire at acquiring such confidence
with their countrymen, as to have an aicendant in
those affembliesi'. But, among savage tribes, the
field for displaying political talents cannot be ex-
ten five. Where the idea of private property is un-
known, and no criminal jurifdlition is ellablified,
there is hardly any funtiion of internal govern-
nient to exercise. Where there is no commerce,
and scarcely any intercourle among separate tribes;
where enmity is implacable, and hostilitics are car-
ried on altnofti wihout interimifsion; there will be
few points of public concern to adjufi with lhcir
neighbours; and that department of their affirs
which may be denominated foreign, cannot be It
iitricate as to require any rceined policy in con-
ducting it. Where individuals arc bo thonghtlels
and in provident as seldom to take cffeitual precau-
tions for l.-prelervalion, it is in vain to cxpect
that public nieaflres and deliberations will be re-
kiilatecl by the contemplation of remote events.
It is; the genius of tavages to a6t from the impullt
of' prcclt pafion. They have neither foreliyght

D d z lor
* Charlev. N, Fr. iii. 289, &et.

B O O K nor temper to form complicated arrangements with

IV. refpedt to their future condut. Theconfultations
'^_r of the Americans, indeed, are so frequent, and

their negociations are so many i, and so long pro-
tracted, as to give their proceedings an extraordi-
nary alpe& of wisdom. But this is not owing so
much to the depth of their schemes, as to the
coldness and phlegm of their temper, which ren-
ders them flow in determiningt. If we except
the celebrated League, that united the Five Na-
tions in Canada into a Federal Republic, which
lhall be confidered in its proper place, we can dif-
cern few such traces of political wildom, among
the rude American tribes, as discovers any great
degree of foresight or extent of intellectual abi-
lities. Even among them, we shall find public
measures more,frequently directed by the impe-
tuous ferocity of their youth, than regulated by
the experience and wisdom of their old men.
Degree of As the condition of man in the savage state is

unfavourable to the progress of the understanding,
it has a tendency likewile, in some refpeAs, to
check the exercise of affection, and to render the
heart contracted. The itrongeft feeling in the
mind of a savage is a sense of his own independ-
ence. He has sacrificed so small a portion of his
natural liberty by becoming a member of society,
that he remains, in a great degree, the sole mailer
of his own actions 't.. He often takes his refolu-
tions alone, without consulting, or feeling any
connection with the perolns around him. In many
of his operations, he fiands as much detached
from the refl of his species, as if he had formed
no union with them. Conscious how little he de-
pends upon other men, he is apt to view them with

a carelcfs
* See NOTE XCI. -I- Charlev. N. Fr. iii. z7i.

Ft i'rnaudez Million. de loe Chiquit. 33.

acarelefs indifference. Even the force of his mind B O O K
contributes to increase this unconcern, and as he IV.
looks not beyond himself in deliberating with re-
fpeEt to the part which he should aft, his solicitude
about the consequences of it seldom extends far-
ther. He pursues his own career, and indulges
his own fancy, without inquiring or regarding
whether what he does be agreeable or oflenfive to
others, whether they may derive benefit, or re-
ceive hurt from it. Hence the ungovernable ca-
price of savages, their impatience under any fpe-
cies of restraint, their inability to suppress or ,mo-
derate any inclination, the scorn or negledt with
which they receive advice, their h;gh eflimation
of themfelvcs, and their contempt of other men.
Among them, the pride of independence pro-
duces almost the fame effect with intereftednefs
in a more advanced state of society, it refers
every thing to a man himself, and renders the gra-
tification of his own wishes the measure and end
of his condut.

To the fame cause may be imputed the hardness Hardness of

of heart, and insensibility, remarkable in all fa-heart
vage nations. Their minds, rouzed only by strong
emotions, are little susceptible of gentle, delicate,
or tender affecions*. Their union is so incom-
lete, that each individual afts as if he retained all
is natural rights entire and undiminished. If a
favour is conferred upon him, or a service per-
formed for his behoof, he receives it with much
fatisfaifon, because it contributes to his enjoy-
ment; but this sentiment extends not beyond him-
self, it excites no lelfe of obligation, he neither
feels gratitude, nor thinks of making any return t.
Even, among persons the most closely connedtcd,

there

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 309. i' Ovicdo Ilift. lib. xvi. 9.
z. See NOTE XCII.

BO O0 K there is little correspondence or exchange of those

IV. good offices which strengthen attachment, mollify

the heart, and sweeten the intercourse of life.
Their high ideas of independence nourish a fullen
reserve, which keeps them at a difiance fiom each
other. The nearest relations are mutually afraid
to make any delland, or to bolicit any lcrvice *,
left it Thould be confidered by the other as im-
posing a burden, or laying a restraint upon his
will.
Insensibility. I HAVE already remarked the influence of this

hard unfeeling temper upon domeflic life, with
refpedt to the connection between hulbaud and
wife, as well as that between parents and clildren.
Its effects are no less conspicuous, in the perform-
ance of those mutual offices of tenderness which
the infirmities of our nature fiequently exaOt.
Among some tribes, when any of their number are
seizcd with a ditnemper, they are generally aban-
doned by all around them, who, carelels of their
recovery, fly in the utmofi consternation from the
supposed danger of infeEtion 1-. But even where
they are not thus deserted, the cold indifference
with which they are attended can afford them lit-
tle consolation. No look of fnympathy, no sooth-
ing expreflions, no officious ferviccs contribute to
alleviate or to make them forget their luffcringsl.
Their nearest relations will often refuse to lub)nil
to the finallefi inconveiency, or to part with the
least trifle, however nitch it may tend to their ac-
commodation or relief §. So little is the breast of
a savage fufceptiblc of thole lentinlelts lwhich

prompt

* De la Potherie, iii. 28. j Leitr.e d( P. Catanco ap

\4 'ratori Chriiltian, i. 309. Tertrc, ii. 41. Loz:',;o, ico.
llcrrcra, (lc. 4. lib. iii. c. 5. dec. 5 I .

i v. c. 2. Fak-

ncr's D)clcript. oJ I'atagoiiia, 98. - . (urnilla, i. 329.
Lozano, loo. § Glica Origcn, &c. 90. Herrera,
dec. 4. lib. viii. c. 5.

prompt men to that feeling attention which miti- B o O
gates distress, that, in some provinces of Ameri- IV.
ca, the Spaniards have found it necessary to in- ^-r
force the common duties of humanity, by positive
laws, and to oblige husbands and wives, parents
and children, under tevere penalties, to take care
of each other during their sickness'. The fame
harshness of temper is fiill more conspicuous in
their treatment of the animal creation. Prior to
their intercourse with the people of Europe, the
North Americans had some tame dogs, which ac-
companied them in their hunting excursions, and
served them with all the ardour and fidelity pecu-
liar to their species. But, inflead of that fond at-
tachment, which the hunter naturally feels towards
those useful companions of his toils, they requite
their services with negled, feldon feed, and never
caress them -. In other provinces, the Americans
have become acquainted with the domeflic animals
of Europe, and avail thcmfelves of their service;
but it is universally obtfrved that they always treat
them harshly a, and never employ any method ei-
ther for breaking or managing them, but force and
cruelty. In every part of the deportment of man
in his savage state, whether towards his equals of
the human species, or towards the animals below
him, we recognise the fame chara:ter, and trace
the operations of a mind, intent on its own grati-
fications, and regulated by its own caprice, with-
out much attention or le;nfibility to the sentiments
and feelings of the beings around him.

A FTER explaining how unfavourable the savage Taciturnity.

slate is to the cultivation of the understanding, and
to the improvement of the heart, I should not have
thought it neceflary to mention what may be deem-

ed

* Cogullodo Hill. de Yucathan, p. 300. ' Charley.
N. Fr. iii. 119. 337. :. Ulloa Notic, American. 312.

B O O K ed its lefter defets, if the character of nations, as

IV. well as individuals, were not often more diftintly

marked by circumstances apparently trivial, than
by those of greater moment. A savage, frequently,
placed in situations of danger and difireis, depend-
ing on himself alone, and wrapt up in his own
thoughts and schemes, is a serious melancholy ani-
mal. His attention toothers is small. The range
of his own ideas is narrow. Hence that taciturnity
which is so disgusting to men accustomed to the
open intercourse of social conversation. When
not engaged in action, the Americans often fit
whole days in one posture, without opening their
lips*. When they go forth to war, or to the chace,
they usually march in a line at some distance from
one another, and without exchanging a word. The
fame profound silence is observed when they row
together in a canoe -. It is only when they are
animated by intoxicating liquors, or rouzed by the
jollity of the feitival and dance, that they become
gay and converfible.
Cunning. To the fame causes may be imputed the refined

cunnigig with which they form and execute their
schemes. Men, who are not habituated to a liberal
communication of their own sentiments and wishes,
arc apt to be so diftrufiful, as to place little confi-
dence in others, and to have recourse to an infidi-
ous craft, in accomplishing their own purposes. In
civilized life, those persons, who, by their situation,
have but a few objects of pursuit on which their
minds incessantly dwell, are motl remarkable for
low artifice in carrying on their little projedts.
Among savages, whose views are equally confined,
and their attention no le's persevering, those cir-
cumflances must operate still more powerfully;
and gradually accuflom them to a disingenuous

lubtlcty
* Voyage de Bouguer, 102. t' Oharlcv. iii 340,

subtlety in all their tranfaaions. The force of B O 0
this is increased by habits which they acquire in IV.
carrying on the two mofi interesting operations r
wherein they are engaged. With them war is a
system of craft, in which they trust for success to
stratagem more than to open force, and have their
invention continually on the firetch to circumvent
and surprise their enemies. As hunters, it is their
constant object to enflare, in order that they may
defiroy. Accordingly, art and cunning have been
universally observed as distinguishing charadóer-
iftics of all.lavages. The people of the rude
tribes of America are remarkable for their ad-
dress and duplicity. Impenetrably secret in form-
ing their measures, they pursue them with a pa-
tient undeviating attention, and there is no re-
finement of dissimulation which they cannot em-
ploy, in order to insure their success. The ina-
tives of Peru were engaged above thirty years, in
concerting the plan of their infurreaion, under
the vice-royalty of the marquis de Villa-Garcia,
and though communicated to a great number of
all different ranks, no indication of it ever tranf-
pired during that long period; no man betrayed
his trust, or by an unguarded look, or rash word,
gave rife to any fulpicion of what was intended*.
1The dissimulation and craft of individuals is no
lels remarkable than that of nations. When set
upon deceiving, they wrap themselves up so arti-
ficially, that it is impossible to penetrate into their
intentions, or to detect their designs t.

BUT if there be defedts or vices peculiar to the virtues,
savage slate, there are, likewile, virtues which it

inlpires,

* Voyage.de Ulloa, ii. 30. t Gumilla, i. 162,
Charlev. iii. o09.

B O O K inspires, and goodqualities, to the exercise of which

1-. it is friendly. The bonds offociety fit so loose upon
`--Tr' the members of the more rude American tribes,
pfredt "that they hardly feel any restraint. Hence the spirit

of independence, which is the pride of a savage,
and which he confiders as the unalienable preroga-
tive of man. Incapable of controul, and disdain-
ing to acknowlege any superior, his mind, though
limited in its powers, and erring in many of its
pursuits, acquires such elevation by the conscious-
ness of its own freedom, that he aCts on some oc-
cafions with astonishing force, and perfeverence,
and dignity.
Fortitude, As independence nourishes thishigh spirit among

savages, the perpetual wars in which they are en-
gaged call it forth into action. Such long intervals
of tranquillity as are frequent in polished Societies,
are unknown in the savage itate. Their enmities,
as I have oblerved, are implacable and immortal,
The valour of the youth is never allowed to rust in
inaciion. The hatchet is always in their hand,
either for attack or defence. Even in their hunting
excursions, they niuf be on their guard against
surprise from the hostile tribes, by which they are
surrounded. Accuflomed to continual alarms, they
grow familiar with danger, and courage becomes
an habitual virtue, resulting naturally from their
Situation, and firengthened by constant exertions.
The mode of displaying fortitude may not be the
fame in small and rude commniuities, as in more
powerrful and civilized states. Their fyflemi of war,
and standard of valour may be formed upon dif-
ferent principles, but in no situation does the hu-
man mind rife more iuperior to the fenle of danger,
or the dread of death, than in its mot fiilple anid
uucultivated flat.

ANOT'HER

ANOTHER virtue remarkable among savages, is B O 0 K
attachment to the community of which they are IV.
members. From the nature of their political unionl, '--v)
one might expect this tie to be extremely feeble. Attarm"nt
But there are circuinftances which render the in- comnunity.
fluence, even of their loose mode of affociaticn,
very powerful. The American tribes are ihMall;
combined against their neighbours, in proficution
of ancient enmities, or in avenging recent injuries,
their interests and operations are neither numerous
nor complex. Thele are objects, which the uncul-
tivated understanding of a Iavage can comprehend.
His heart is capable of forming connections, which
are so little diffused. He assents with warmth to
public measures, dicated by passions, similar to
thole which influence his own condut. Hence the
ardour with which individuals undertake the most
perilous service, when the community deems it
necessary. Hence their fierce and deep-rooted an-
tipathy to the public enemies. Hence their zeal
for the honour of their tribe, and that love of their
country, which prompts them to brave danger
that it may triumph, and to endure the moif ex-
quiiite torments without a groan, that it may not
be dilgraccl.

H'i uts, in every situation wIhere a human beingsadti6faio
can be placed, even the mofR unfavourable, therewith their

own conld i,r

are virtues that peculiarly belong to it; there aretion.
affccions whicl it calls forth; there is a species of
happinels which it yields. Nature, with imofi bene-
ficent intention, conciliates and forIms the mind to
its condition, the ideas and wishes of man extend
not beyond that state of focicly to which he is
habituated. ¥What it pretcnts as otuies of contenl-
plation or enjoyment, fill and satisfy his mind, and
le can hardly conceive any other mode of life to be
plcafant or even tolerable. The Tartar, accustomcd

to

B 0 0 K to roam over extensive plains, and to fubfiif on the

1-. produc of his herds, imprecates upon his enemy

~ as the greatest of all curies, that he may be con

demned to reside in one place, and to be nouriihec
with the top of a weed. The rude Americans
fond of their own pursuits, and satisfied with theji
own lot, are equally unable to comprehend the in
tention or utility of the various accommodations
which, in more polished society, are deemed effen
tial to the comfort of life. Far from complaining
of their own situation, or viewing that of men in;
more improved ffate with admiration or envy, the)
regard themselves as the standard of excellence, a!
beings the best entitled, as well as the most per
feEtly qualified, to enjoy real happiness. Unaccuf
tomed to any restraint upon their will or their
actions, they behold with amazement the inequality
of rank, and the subordination which take place ii
civilized life, and confider the voluntary fubmifiiol
of one man to another, as a renunciation, no lefi
base than unaccountable, of the firfi diftiiinion o0
humanity. Void of foresight, as well as free frorr
care themselves, and delighted with that state ol
indolent security, they wonder at the anxious pre.
cautions, the unceasing indufRry, and complicates
arrangements of Europcals, in guarding againfl
diflant evils, or providing for future wants, and
exclaim against their preposterous folly, in thus
multiplying the troubles, and increasing the labour
of life . This preference of their own manners i
conipicuous on every occasion. Even the names
by which the various nations wish to be diflin.
guifhed are affurned from this idea of their owr
pre-eminence. The appellation which the Iroquoi
give to themselves is, the chief of men f. Caraibe

th(

* Charlev. N. Fr. iii. 308. Lahontan, ii. 97.
j Colden, i. 3.

the original name of the fierce inhabitants of the B O O K
windward islands, signifies tle wzearlikepeople %. The iV.
Cherokee, from an idea of thcir own superiority,
cail the Europeans Nothinzgs, or the accurfrd race,
and assume thernfelves the name of The beloved
people f. The fame principle regulated the notions
of the other Americans concerning the Europeans;
for although, at first, they were filled with afconili-
meat at their arts, and with dread of their power,
they soon came to abate their etimlation of men,
whose maxims of life were so different from their
own. Hence they called them the firoth of the lea,
men without father or mother. They supposed,
that either they had no country of their own, and
therefore invaded that which bclonged to others t;
or, that, being destitute of the neceflaries of life at
home, they were obliged to roam over the ocean,
in order to rob such as were more amply provided.

MEN, thus satisfied with their condition, are far
from any inclination to relinquish their own habits,
or to adopt those of civilized life. The transition
is too violent to be fuddeuly made. Even where
endeavours have been used ;o w.cain a lavase from
his own cufoins, and to renderthe accormmodations
of polished society faniliar to hinm; even wlhere he
has been allowed to taflc of ithof'c plcaiires, and
has been honoured with those difHtiutions, which
are the chief oljects of our desire, he droops and
languishes undcr the restraint of law. s and soIrs,
he Ieizes the firfl opportunity of breaking loose
from themi, and returns with transport to the forelt
or the wild, where he can enijoy a carclcts alnd un-
controulcd freedom §.

Tin us
'I'l TUS

Roclhefort I-ifl. cdIc Antilles, 455. '* Adair, Hilft. of

Anier. Indians, p. 32. l. Bcrlzon. Hilt. Novi Orbis,
lib. iii. c. 2I. § Charlcv. N.
-'r. iii. 322.

B O O K THUS I have finished a laborious delineation of

IV. the character and manners of the uncivilized tribes

' scattered over the vail continent of America. -L

this, I aspire not at rivalling the great masters whlo
have painted and adorned savage life, either in
boldness of design, or in the glow and beauty of
their colouring. I am satisfied with the more
humble merit of having persisted with patient in-
duftry, in viewing my subje&t in many various
lights, and in collecting from the mofl accurate
observers such detached and often minute features,
as might enable me to exhibit a portrait that refem-
bles the original.

cautinwith BEFORE I close this part of my work, one obfer-
refpea to vation more-is necessary, in order to jullify the
thisinqtiry. conclusions which I have formed, or to prevent the

mistakes into which such as examine them may
fall. In contemplating the inhabitants of a country
so widely extended as Anlerica, great attention
should be paid to the diversity of climates under
which they are placed. The influence of this I
have pointed out with refpe&t to several important
particulars, which have been the object of relearch;
but even where it has not been mentioned, it ought
not to be overlooked. The provinces of America
are of such different temperament, that this alone
is fuficient to conflitute a diftintion bctwcen their
inhabitants. In every part of the earth where man
exists, the power of climate operates, with decisive
influence, upon his condition and charaCter. In
thole countries which approach nearer to the
extremes of heat or cold, this influence is lb con-
Ipicuous as to ftrikc every eye. Whether we con-
lider man merely as an animal, or as a being en-
dowed with rational powers, which lit hiimi for
adivity and speculation, we fIall lind that lie has

uniformly

uniformly attained the greatefR perfeAtion of which B o O K
his nature is capable, in the temperate regions of iV.
the globe. There his constitution is most vigorous, ~
his organs most accute, and his form most beautiful.
There, too, he poffefies a superior extent of capa-
city, greater fertility of imagination, more enter-
prifing courage, and a feniibility of heart which
gives birth to paflions, not only ardent, but perie-
yering. In this favourite situation le has displayed
the utnofi efforts of his genius, in literature, in
policy, in commerce, in war, and in all the arts
which improve or ernbellifh life -.

THIS powerful operation of climate is felt mos
sensibly by rude nations, and produces greater es-
sects than in societies more highly polifled. The
talents of civilized men are continually exerted in
rendering their condition more comfortable; and
by. their ingenuity and inventions, they can, in a
great measure, supply the defecds, and guard
againift the inconveniencies of any climate. But
the improvident savage is affected by every circum-
fiance peculiar to his situation. He takes no pre-
caution either to mitigate or to improve it. Like
a plant or an animal, he is formed by the climate
under which he is placed, and feels the fuill force
of its influence.

IN surveying the rude nations of America, this
natural distinCtion between the inhabitants of the
temperate and torrid zones is very remarkable.
They may, accordingly, be divided into tvo great
clafls. The one comprehends all the North
Americans, from the river St. Laurence to the
Gulf of Mexico, together with the people of Chili,

and

* Dr. Ferguson's EffIy on the Hist. of Civil Society, part
1". a. i

B o OK and a few fmlall tribes towards the extremity of

IV. the southern continent. To the other.belong all

-' the inhabitants of the islands, and those fettled in

the various provinces which extend from the ifih-
mus of Darieii almost to the southern confines of
Brasil, along the east fide of the Andes. In the for-
mer, the human species appears manifestly to be
more perfect. The natives are more robust, more
acive, more intelligent, and more courageous.
They possess, in the most eminent degree, that
force of mind, and love of independence, which I
have pointed out as the chief virtues of man in his
savage ltate. i'hey have defended their liberty
with persevering fortitude against the Europeans
who subdued the other rude nations of America
with the greatest cafe. The natives of the tempe-
rate zone are the only people in the New World
who are indebted for their freedom to their own
valour. The North-Americans, though long encomn
passed by three formidable European powers, still
retain part of their original possessions, and continue
to exist as independent nations. The people of
Chili, though early invaded, fiill maintain a gal-
lant contelt with the Spaniards, and have let bounds
to their encroachments ; whereas, in the warmer
regions, men are more feeble in their frame, less
vigorous in the efforts of their mind, of a gentle
but dastardly spirit, more enslaved by pleasure and
funk in indolence. Accordingly, it is in the torrid
zone that the Europeans have Inoft completely
established their dominion over America; the nioft
fe:tile and desirable provinces in it are l'ubjeced to
their yoke; and if several tribes there flill ciijof
independence, it is either becaule they have novel
been attacked by an enemy already latiated witll
conquest, and pofl'efcd of larger territories thar
he was able to occupy, or bccaufe they have beec

lavcd

saved from oppression by their remote and inaccef- B o o K
fible ituation. IV.

CONSPICUOUS as this diftinftion may appear 'tr

between the inhabitants of those different regions,
it is not, however, universal. Moraland political
causes, as I have formerly observed, affeEt the dif-
position and charaaer of individuals as well as
nations, frill more powerfully than the influence of
climate. There are, accordingly, some tribes, in
various parts of the torrid zone, possessed of cou-
rage, high spirit, and the love of independence, in
a degree hardly inferior to the natives of more tem-
perate climates. We are too little acquainted with
the history of those people, to be able to trace the
several circumfiances in their progress and situation,
to which they are indebted for this remarkable pre-
eminence. The fadt, nevertheless, is certain. As
early as the first voyage of Columbus, he received
information that several of the illands were inhabit-
ed by the Caribbees, a fierce race of men, nowise
resembling their feeble and timid neighbours. In
his second expedition to the New World, he found
this information to be just, and washimfelf a witncfs
of their intrepid valour . The fame charaaer they
have maintained invariably in all subsequent contests
with the people of our continent f; and, even in our
own times, we have tlen them make a gallant stand
in defence of the last territory which the rapacity
of the Europeans had left in their poffeiion t.
Some nations in Brasil were no leds eminent for
vigour of mind, and bravery in war §. The people
of the iflhmus of Darien boldly met the Spaniards
in the field, and frequently repelled those formi-

Vo,. I. E e dable

* Life of Columbus, c. 47, 48. Sec NOTE XCIII.
1 R.ocllefort Hifl. des Antilles, 531. : See NOTE' XCIV.
§ Lcry ap de Bry, iii. 207, &c.

B O O Kdable invaders . Other instances might be pro,

Iv. duced. It is not by attending to any single cause

or principle, however powerful and extensive its
influence may appear, that we can explain the ac-
tions, or account for the character of men. Even
the law of climate, more universal, perhaps, in its
operation than any that affects the human species,
cannot be applied, in judging of their conduft,
without many exceptions.

* Herrera, dec. i. lib. x. c. IS, &c.; dec. 2. passim.
~i; ·Gi

NOTES

N O T E S

I LU TAND O S.
ILLUSTRATIONS.

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T E S

A N D
AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.

NOTE I. p. 7.

TY R E was situated at such a distance from the Arabian
Gulf or Red Sea, as made it impossible to convey commo-
dities from thence to that city by land-carriage. This in-
duced the Phenicians to render themselves masters of
Rhinocrura, or Rhinocolura, the nearest port in the Me-
diterranean to the Red Sea. They landed the cargoes
which they purchased in Arabia, Ethiopia, and India, at
Elath, the safest harbour in the Red Sea towards the north.
Thence they were carried by land to Rhinocolura, the dif-
tance not being very considerable; and being reihipped in
that port, were transported to Tyre, and difiributed over
the world. Strabon, Geogr. Edit. Cafaub. lib. xvi. p.
1128. Diodor. Sicul. Biblioth. Hiftor. Edit. Weflelingi,
lib. I. p. 70.

NOTE II. p. Io.

T HE Periplus Hannonis is the only authentic monu-
ment of the Carthaginian skill in naval affairs, and one of
the most curious fiagmcnts tranfinitted to us by antiquity.
The learned and indlultrious Mr. Dodwell, in a diflertation
prefixed to the Periplus of Hanno, in the edition of the
Minor Geographers published at Oxford, endeavours to
prove that this is a spurious work, the composition of some

E c 3 Greek,

Greek, who aflumed Hanno's name. But M. de Mon.
tefquieu, in his l'Efprit des Loix, liv. xxi. c. 8. and M. de
Bougainville, in a dissertation published, tom. xxvi. of the
Memoires de 1'Academie des Inscriptions, &c. have efta-
bliflfed its authenticity by arguments which to me appear
unanswerable. Ramufio has accompanied his translation of
this curious voyage with a dissertation tending to illuitrate
it. Racolte di Viaggi, vol. i. p. 1I2. M. de Bougain-
ville has, with great learning and abilityj treated the fame
fubjeds. It appears that Hanno, according to the mode
of ancient navigation, undertook this voyage in finall
vessels, so conftruaced that he could keep close in with the
coast. He failed from Gades to the island of Cerne in
twelve days. This is probably what is known to the
moderns by the name of the isle of Arguim. It became
the chief station of the Carthaginians on that coast; and
M. de Bougainville contends, that the cisterns found there
are monuments of the Carthaginian power and ingenuity.
Proceeding from Cerne, and still following the winding of
the coast, he arrived, in seventeen days, at a promontory
which he called The WOeft Horn, probably Cape Palmas.
From this he advanced to another promontory, which he
named The South Horn, and which is manifestly Cape de
Tres Puntas, about five degrees north of the line. All
the circumstances contained in the short abftraa of his
journal, which is handed down to us, concerning the ap-
pearance and state of the countries on the coast of Africa,
are confirmed and illufirated by a comparison with the
accounts of modern navigators. Even those circumstances,
which, from their teeming improbability, have been pro-
duced to invalidate the credibility of his relation, tend to
confirm it. He observes, that in the country to the south
of Cerne, a profound silence reigned through the day;
but during the night, innumerable fires were kindled along
the banks of the rivers, and the air resounded with the
noise of pipes and drums, and cries of joy. The fame
thing, as Ramufio observes, still takes place. The excef-
five heat obliges the negroes to take ihelter in the woods,
or in their houses, during the day. As soon as the fun
sets, they sally out, and by torch-light enjoy the pleasure
of music and dancing, in which they spend the night.
Ramus. i. 113, F. In another place, he mentions the fca
as burning with torrents of fire. What occurred to M.
Adanfon, on the fame coafi, may explain this. " As soon,"

fays

fays he, " as the fun dipped beneath the horizon, and
night overspread the earth with darkness, the sea lent us
its friendly light. While the prow of our veifel ploughed
the foaming surges, it seemed to set them all on fire. Thus
we failed in a luminous inclofure, which surrounded us like
a large circle of rays, from whence darted in the wake of
the ihip a long fiream of light." Voy. to Senegal, p. 176.

NOTE III. p. ii.

L ON G after the navigation of the Phenicians and of
Eudoxus round Africa, Polybius, the most intelligent and
best informed historian of antiquity, affirms, that it was not
known, in his time, whether Africa was a continued con-
tinent, firetching to the south, or whether it was encom-
passed by the sea. Polybii Hist. lib. iii. Pliny, the natu-
ralift, asserts, that there can be no communication between
the southern and northern temperate zones. Plinii Hiflt
Natur. Edit. in ufum Delph. 4to, lib. ii. c. 68. If they
had given full credit to the accounts of those voyages, the
former could not have entertained such a doubt, the latter
could not have delivered such an opinion. Strabo men-
tions the voyage of Eudoxus, but treats it as a fabulous
tale, lib. ii. p. i55; and, according to his account, no other
judgment can be formed with refpe& to it. Strabo seems
not to have known any thing with certainty concerning the
form and ltate of the southern parts of Africa. Geogr.
lib. xvii. p. I180. Ptolemy, the most inquisitive and learn-
ed of all the ancient geographers, was equally unacquainted
with any part of Africa situated a few degrees beyond the
equinoetial line; for he supposes that this great continent
was not surrounded by the sea, but that it itretched, with-
out interruption, towards the south pole: and he so far milt
takes its true figure, that he describes the continent as be-
coming broader and broader as it advanced towards the
south. Ptolemaei Geogr. lib. iv. c. 9. Brictii Parlallela
Gcogr. veteris et nove, p. 86.

NOTE

NOTE IV. p. x6.

A F A C T, recorded by Strabo, affords a very firong and
singular proof of the ignorance of the ancients with refpet
to the situation of the various parts of the earth. When
Alexander marched along the banks of the Hydafpes and
Acefine, two of the rivers which fall into the Indus, he
observed that there were many crocodiles in those rivers,
and that the country produced beans of the fame species
with those which were common in Egypt. From there cir-
cumftances, he concluded that he had discovered the source
of the Nile, and prepared a fleet to fail down the Hydafpes
to Egypt. Strab. Geogr. lib. xv. p. 1020. This amaz-
ing error did not arise from any ignorance of geography pe-
culiar to that monarch; for we are informed by Strabo,
that Alexander applied with particular attention in order to
acquire the knowledge of this science, and had accurate
maps or descriptions of the countries through which he
marched. Lib. ii. p. I20. But in his age, the knowledge
of the Greeks did not extend beyond the limits of the Me-
diterranean.

NOTE V. p. 17.

A s the flux and reflux of the sea is remarkably great .t
the mouth of the river Indus, this would render the phe-
nomenon more formidable to the Greeks. Varen. Geogr.
vol. i. p. 25I.

NOTE VI. p. 20.

IT is probable that they were seldom induced to advanlce
so far, either by motives of curiosity, or views of com-
mercial,;advantage. In contsquence of this, the idea of
the ancients concerning the position of thal great rier
was very erroneous. Ptolemy places that branch of the
Ganges, which he distinguishes by the name of the Great
Mouth, in the hundred and forty-fixth degree of longitude
from his sift meridian in the Fortunate Islands. But its
true longitude, computed from that meridian, is now dc-

tcrminecd

termined by aftronbmical observations to be only a hundred
and five degrees. A geographer so eminent muff have
been betrayed into an error of this magnitude by the imper-
fecion of the information which he had received concern-
ing those diffant regions; and this affords a striking proof
of the intercourse with them being extremely rare. With
refpeE to the countries of India beyond the Ganges, his
intelligence was itill more defeaive, and his errors more
enormous. I {hall have occasion to observe inr another
place, that he has placed the country of the Seres, or China,
no less than sixty degrees farther east than its true position.
M. d'Anville, one of the most learned and inquisitive of
the modern geographers, has set this matter in a clear light,
in two dissertations published in Mem. de l'Academ. des
Infcript. &c. tom. xxxii. p. 573, 604.

NOTE VII. p. So.

IT is remarkable, that the discoveries of the ancients
were made chiefly by land; those of the moderns are made
chiefly by sea. The progress of conquest led to the for-
mer, that of commerce to the latter. It is a judicious ob-
servation of Strabo, that the conquefrs of Alexander the
Great made known the East, those of the Romans opened
the Weft, and those of Mithridatcs, king of Pontus, the
North. Lib. i. p. 26. When discovery is carried on by
land alone, its progress muff be flow, and its operations
confined. When it is carried on only by sea, its fphcre
may be more extensive, and its advances more rapid; but
it labours under peculiar defects. Though it may make
known the position of different countries, and ascertain
their boundaries as far as these are determined by the ocean,
it leaves us in ignorance with refp)e to their interior slate.
Above two centuries and a half have elapsed since the Eu-
ropeans failed round the southern promontory of Africa,
and have traded in most of its ports; but, in a confider-
able part of that great continent, they have done little
more than survey its coafis, and mark its capes and har-
hours. Its interior regions are in a great measure un-
known. The ancients, who had a very imperfe& know-
ledge of its coafls, except where they are washed by the
Mediterranean or Red Sea, were accullomcd to penetrate

into

into its inland provinces, and, if we may rely on the tefti-
mony of Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus, had explored
many parts of it now altogether unknown. Unless both
modes of discovery be united, the geographical knowledge
of the earth muff remain incomplete and inaccurate.

NOTE VIII. p. 23.

T HE notion of the ancients concerning such an excef-
five degree of heat in the torrid zone, as rendered it unin-
habitable, and their perfiuting in this error long after they
began to have some commercial intercourse with several
parts of India lying within the tropics, muff appear so
singular and absurd, that it may not be unacceptable to
some of my readers to produce evidence of their holding
this opinion, and to account for the apparent inconsistence
of their theory with their experience. Cicero, who had
bestowed attention upon every part of philosophy known to
the ancients, seems to have believed that the torrid zone was
uninhabitable, and, of consequence, that there could be no
intercourse between the northern and southern temperate
zones. He introduces Africanus thus addrefling the young-
er Scipio: " You fee this earth encompassed and bound in
by certain girdles, of which, two, at the greatest distance
from each other, and sustaining the opposite poles of heaven,
are frozen with perpetual cold; the middle one, and the
largest of all, is burnt with the heat of the fun; two are
habitable, the people in the southern one are antipodes
to us, with whom we have no connection." Somnium
Scipionis, c. 6. Geminus, a Greek philosopher, contem-
porary with Cicero, delivers the fame doctrine, not in a
popular work, but in his ,Erayaywn us; ,oxvtfy,, a treatise
purely scientific. " When we speak," fays he, " of the
southern temperate zone, and its inhabitants, and concern-
ing those who arc called antipodes, it must be always un-
dcrflood, that we have no certain knowledge or informa-
tion concerning the southern temperate zone, whether it
be inhabited or not. But fiom the spherical figure of the
earth, and the course which the fun holds between the tro-
pics, we conclude that there is another zone, situated to
the south, which enjoys the fame degree of temperature
with the northern one which we inhabit." Cap. xiii. p.

31. ap.

3. ap. Petavii Opus de Dotr. Tempor. in quo Urarolo-
ium five Syftemata var. Au&orum. Ams. 1705. vol. iii.
he opinion of Pliny the naturaliff, with refpet to both
dhefe points, was the fame: cc There are five divisions of
the earth, which are called zones. All that portion which
lies near to the two opposite poles is oppressed with vehe-
ment cold, and eternal frofft There, unblest with the
afpe& of milder flars, perpetual darkness reigns, or at the
utmost a feeble light refle&ed from surrounding snows.
The middle of the earth, in which is the orbit of the fun,
is scorched and burnt up with flames and fiery vapour.
Between these torrid and frozen diftrit&s lie two other por-
tions of the earth, which are temperate; but, on account
of the burning region interposed, there can be no commu-
nication between them. Thus Heaven has deprived us of
three parts of the earth." Lib. ii. c. 68. Strabo delivers
his opinion to the fame effet, in terms no less explicit:
" The portion of the earth which lies near the equator, in
the torrid zone, is rendered uninhabitable by heat." Lib.
ii .

p. 54. To there I might add the authority of many

other respectable philosophers and historians of antiquity.

IN order to explain the sense in which this doctrine was
generally received, we may observe, that Parmenides, as
we are informed by Strabo, was the first who divided the
earth into five zones, and he extended the limits of the
zone, which he supposed to be uninhabitable on account of
heat, beyond the tropics. Aristotle, as we learn likewise
from Strabo, fixed the boundaries of the different zones in
the fame manner as they are defined by modern geographers.
But the progress of discovery having gradually demonftrat-
ed, that several regions of the earth which lay within the
tropics were not only habitable, but populous and fertile,
this induced later geographers to circumscribe the limits of
the torrid zone. It is not easy to ascertain with precision
the boundaries which they allotted to it. From a passage
in Strabo, who, as far as I know, is the only author of an-
tiquity from whom we receive any hint concerning this
fubjca, I should conjecure, that those who calculated ac-
cording to the mcafirlement of the earth by Eratosthenes,
supposed the torrid zone to comprehend ncar sixteen degrees,
about eight on each fide of the equator; whereas such as
followed the computation of Pofidonius allotted about
twenty-four degrees, or somewhat more than twelve de-

grees

grees on each fide of the equator to the torrid zone. Strabo
lib. ii. p. I51. According to the former opinion, abou
two-thirds of that portion of the earth which lies betweei
the tropics was confidered as habitable; according to th(
latter, about one-halfof it. With this refirition, the doc.
trine of the ancients concerning the torrid zone appears left
absurd; and we can conceive the reason of their asserting
this zone to be uninhabitable, even after they had openee
a communication with fcveral places within the tropics.
VWhen men of science spoke of the tortid zone, they confi-
dered it as it was limited by the definition of geographers
to fixtcen, or at the utmost to twenty-four degrees; and as
they knew almost nothing of the countries nearer to the
equator, they might fill fiuppofe them to be uninhabitable.
In loose and popular discourse, the name of the torrid zone
continued to be given to all that portion of the earth which
lies within the tropics. Cicero seems to have been unac-
quainted with the ideas of later geographers, and according
to the division of Parmenides, describes the torrid zone as
the largest of the five. Some of the ancients rejeded the
notion concerning the intolerable heat of the torrid zone
as a popular error. This, we are told by Plutarch, was
the sentiment of Pythagoras, and we learn from Strabo,
that Eratosthenes and Polybius had adopted the fame opi-
nion, lib. ii. I54. Ptolemy seems to have paid no regard
to the ancient doarine and opinions concerning the torridi
zone.

NOTE IX. p. 42.

-HE court of inquisition, which effctually checks a

lfirit of liberal inquiry, and of literary improvement, wher-
evcr it is eilaijifdled, was first introduced into Portugal by
John III. who begtlhis reign A. D. i521.

NOTE X. p. 49.

A N inflancc of this is related by Hackluyt, upon thlt
authority of the Portuguese historian Garcia de Rcfcndc.
Sonic Ei nIifh merchants having rcfolved to open a trade

with

with the coaff of Guinea, John II. of Portugal dispatched
ambassadors to Edward IV. in order to lay before him the
right which he had acquired by the Pope's bull to the do-
minion of that country, and to requeff of him to prohibit
his fubjeds to prosecute their intended voyage. Edward
was so much satisfied with the exclusive title of the Portu-
guefe, that he issued his orders in the terms which they de-
fired. Hackluyt, Navigations, Voyages, and Trafficks of
the English, vol. ii. part ii. p. 2.

NOTE XI. p.59.

T HE time of Columbus's birth may be nearly ascertained
by the following circumifances. It appears from the frag-
ment of a letter, addressed by him to Ferdinand and Isabella,
A. D. 51oJ, that he had, at that time, been engaged forty
years in the sea-faring life. In another letter, he informs
them, that he went to sea at the age of fourteen; from
those fats it follows, that he was born A. D. J447. Life
ofChrift. Columbus, by his son Don Ferdinand. Churchill's
Colletion of Voyages, vol. ii .
p. 484, 485.'

NOTE XII. p. 65.

THE spherical figure of the earth was known to the
incent geographers. They invented the method, still in
ife, of computing the longitude and 'atitude of different
places. According to their doctrine, the equator or ima-
inary line which encompasses the earth contained three
undred and sixty degrees ; these they divided into twenty-
four parts, or'hours, each equal to fifteen degrees. The
country of the Seres or Sineh being the farthest part of
India known to the ancients, was supposed, by Marinus
Tyrius, the most eminent of the ancient geopraphers before
Ptolemy, to be fifteen hours, or two hundred and twcnty-
five degrees to the east of the firit meridian, palingl througl}
the Fortunate Islands. Ptolernmi Geogr. lib. . c. ic. If
this filppofition was well-founded, the country of the Sers;,
or China, was only nine hours, or one hu"'lred and thirty-

five

five degrees weft from the Fortunate, or Canary Islands;
and the navigation, in that direcion, was much .shorter
than by the course which the Portugueze were pursuing,
Marco Polo, in his travels, had described countries, parti.
cularly the island of Cipango, or Zipangri, supposed to be
Japan, considerably to the east of any part of Asia, known
to the ancients. Marcus Paulus de Region. Oriental. lib.
ii. c. 70. lib. iii. c. 2. Of course, this country, as it ex.
tended further to the east, was flill nearer to the Canary
Islands. The conclusions of Columbus, though drawn
from inaccurate observations, were just If the fuppofi.
tions of Marinus had been well founded, and if the coun.
tries which Marco Polo visited, had been situated to the
east of those whose longitude Marinus had ascertained, the
proper and nearest course to the East Indies must have been
to steer directly weft, Herrera, dec, I. lib. i. c. 2. A
more extensive knowledge of the globe has now discovered
the great error of Marinus, in supposing China to be sis-
teen hours, or two hundred and twenty-five degrees east
from the Canary Islands, and that even Ptolemy was mif.
taken, when he reduced the longitude of China to twelve
hours, or one hundred and eighty degrees. The longitud
of the western frontier of that vast empire is seven hours
or one hundred and fifteen degrees from the meridian o
the Canary Islands. But Columbus followed the light which
his age afforded, and relied upon the authority of writers
who were, at that time, regarded as the inftrudors and
guides of mankind in the science of geography.

NOTE XIII. p. 86.

A s the Portuguese, in making their discoveries, did no
depart far from the coast of Africa, they concluded tha
birds, whose flight they observed with great attention, di
not venture to any considerable distance from land. In th
infancy of navigation, it was not known, that birds oftel
stretch their flight at an immcnfe distance from any land
In failing towards the Weft-India Islands, birds arc oftec
seen at the distance of two hundred leagues from any land
Sloane's Nat. Hist. of Jamaica, vol. i. p. 30. Catcfl)
saw an owl at sea, when the ship was fix hundred league

diitan

distant from land. Nat. Hist. of Carolina, pref. p. 7. Hist.
Naturelle de M. de Buffon, tom. xvi. p. 32. From which
it appears, that this indication of land, on which Columbus
seems to have relied with fope confidence, was extremely
uncertain.

NOTE XIV. p. 96.

IN a letter of the Admiral's to Ferdinand and Isabella,
he describes one of the harbours in Cuba with all the en-
thufiaftic admiration of a discoverer.-" I discovered a
river which a galley might easily enter; the beauty of it in-
duced me to found, and I found from five to eight fathoms
of water. Having proceeded a considerable way up the
river, every thing invited me to fettle there. The beauty
of the river, the clearness of the water, through which I
could fee the sandy bottom, the multitude of palm-trees of
different kinds, the tallest and finest I had seen, and an in-
finite number of other large and flourishing trees, the birds,
and the verdure of the plains, are so wonderfully beautiful,
that this country excels all others as far as the day fur-
passes the night in brightness and splendour, so that I often
said, that it would be in vain for me to attempt to give
your highnesses a full account of it, for neither my tongue
nor my pen could come up to the truth, and indeed I am so
much amazed at the fight of such beauty, that I know not
how to describe it." Life of Columbus, c. 30.

NOTE XV. p. Ioo.

T HE account which Columbus gives of the humanity
and orderly behaviour of the natives on this occasion is
very itriking. " The king (fays he, in a letter to Ferdi-
nand and Isabella) having been informed of our misfortune,
expressed great grief for our loss, and immediately Cent
aboard all the people in the place in many large canoes;
we soon unloaded the ship of every thing that was upon
deck, as the king gave us great assistance, he himself, with
his brothers and relations, took all possible cae that every

thing

thing Thould be properly done both aboard and on shore.-
And; from time to time, he sent some of his relations, weep-
ing, to beg of me not to be dejeced, for he would give
me all that he had. I can aflate your highnesses, that there
would not have been so much care taken in securing our
effeEts in any part of Spain, as all our property was put to-
gether in one place near his palace, until the houses which
he wanted to prepare for the custody of it were emptied.
He immediately placed a guard of armed men, who watch-
ed during the whole night, and those on thore lamented as
if they had been much interested in our loss. The people
are so affetionate, so tra&able, and so peaceable, that I
swear to your highnesses, that there is not a better race of
men, nor a better country in the world. They love their
neighbour as themselves; their conversation is the sweetest
and mildest in the world, cheerful, and always accompanied
with a finile. And although it is true that they go naked,
yet your highnesses may be allured, that they have many
very commendable cufloms; the king is served with great
slate, and his behaviour is so decent, that it is pleasant
to fee him, as it is likewise to observe the wonderful me-
mory which these people have, and their desire of know-
ing every thing, which leads them to inquire into its causes
and effeets." Life of Columbus, c. 32. It is probable
that the Spaniards were indebted for this officious attention
to the opinion wlich the Indians entertained of them as a
superior order of beings.

NOTE XVI, p. 106.

E-VERY monument of such a man as Columbus is
valuable. A letter which he wrote to Ferdinand and
Isabella, describing what passcd on this occasion, exhibits
a most firiking picture of his intrepidity, his humanity, his
prudence, his public spirit, and courtly address. " I would
have been less concerned for this misfortune, had I alone
been in danger, both because my life is a debt that I owe
to the Supreme Creator, and because I have at other
times been exposed to the most imminent hazard. But
what gave me infinite grief and vexation was, that after
it had pleased our Lord to give me faith to undertake

this

this enterprize, in which I had now been so fuccefsfill,
that my opponent would have been convinced, and the
glory of your highnefles, and the extent of your territory
increased by me; it should please the Divine Majesty to
flop all by my death. All this would have been more to-
lerable, had it not been attended with the loss of those men
whom I had carried with me, upon promise of the greatest
prosperity, who feeing themselves in such distress, curled
not only their coming along with me, but that fear and
awe for me, which prevented them from returning as they.
often had resolved to have done. But besides all this, my
sorrow was greatly encreafed, by recollecting that I had left
any two sons at school at Cotdova, destitute of friends, in
a foreign country, when it could not, in all probability,
be known that I had done such services as might induce your
highnesses to remember them. And though I comforted.
myself with the faith, that our Lord would not permit that.
which tended so much to the glory of his church, and
which I had brought about with so much trouble, to
remain imperfect, yet I confidered that, on account of my
fins, it was his will to deprive me of that glory which I
might have attained in this world. While in this confused
state, I thought on the good fortune which accompanies
your highnesses, and imagined, that although I should pe-
rifh, and the vessel be loft, it was poflible that you might
ibmehow come to the knowledge of my voyage, and the
success with which it was attended. For that reason I wrote
upon parchment, with the brevity which the situation re-
quired, that I had discovered the lands which I promised,
in how many days I had done it, and what course I had
followed. I mentioned the goodness of the country, the
charader of the inhabitants, and that your highnefles sub-
jels were left in poffeflion of all that I had discovered.
Having fealed this writing, I addressed it to your highnesses,
and pronifed a thousand ducats to any person who should
deliver it fealed, so that if any foreigners found it, the
promised reward might prevail on them not to give the
information to another. I then caused a great calk to be
brought to me, and wrapping up the parchment in an oiled
cloth, and afterwards in a cake of wax, I put it into the
cask, and having tfopt it well, I call it into the sea. All
the men believed that it was some ad of devotion. Imagin-
ing that this might never chance to be taken up, as the ships
approached nearer to Spain, I made another packet like the

Vol,. I. F f first,

rfirl, and placed it at the top of the poop, so that if the ship
funk, the caflc remaining above water might be committed
to the guidance of fortune."

NOTE XVII. p. IIO.

SOME Spanish authors, with the meanness of national
jealoufv, have endeavoured to detraóc from the glory of
Columbus, by insinuating, that he was led to the discovery
of the New World, not by his own inventive, or enter-
prizing genius, but by information which he had received.
According to their account, a vessel having been driven
from its course by easterly winds was carried before them
far to the weft, and landed on the coast of an unknown
country, from which it returned with difficulty; the pilot,
and three sailors, being the only persons of the crew that
survived the distresses which they suffered, from want of
provisions and fatigue in this long voyage. In a few days
after their arrival, all the four died; but the pilot having
been received into the house of Columbus, his intimate
friend, disclosed to him, before his death, the secret of the
discovery which he had accidentally made, and left him his
papers containing a journal of the voyage, which served as
a guide to Columbus in his undertaking. Gomara, as far
as I. know, is the firfr author who published this flory,
Hist. c. 13. Every circumftancc is destitute of evidence
to support it. Neither the name of the vessel nor its defti.
nation is known. Some pretend that it belonged to one of
the sea-port towns in Andalusia, and was failing either to
the Canaries, or to Madeira; others, that it was a Bis-
cayner in its way to England; others, a Portuguese ship
trading on the coast of Guinea. The name of the pilot is
alike unknown, as well as that of the port in which he
landed on his return. According to some, it was in Portu-
gal; according to others, in Madeira, or the Azores.-
The year in which this voyage was nmade is no leIs uncer-
tainl. Monfon's Nav. Tra6ts. Churchill, iii. 37r. No
mention is made of this pilot, or his (licovcries, by Antid
Bernaldcs, or Pet. Martyr, the contemporaries of Colum-
bus. I-Ierrera, with his usual judgment, p:iflcs over it in
filcnce. Oviedo takes notice of this report, but confiden;

. it

it as a tale fit only to amuse the vulgar. Hilft. lib. ii. c. 2.
As Columbus held his course directly weft from the Cana-
ries, and never varied it, some later authors have supposed,
that this uniformity is a proof of his being guided by some
previous information. But they do not recollect the prin-
ciples on which he founded all his hopes of success, that by
holding a wefferly course, he must certainly arrive at thoie
regions of the east described by the ancients. His firm be-
lief of his own fyffem led him to take that course, and to
pursue it without deviation.

OTHER nations, besides the Spaniards, have called in

question Columbus's claim to the honour of having dif-
covered America. Some German authors ascribe it to
Martin Behaim, whom they suppose to be their country-
man. But they mention neither the year in which he
made the discovery, nor the place from which he failed,
nor one circumstance of the voyage. Jo. Frid. Stuvenius,
in a Dissertation de vero Novi Orbis Inventore, published
at Francfort in the year I714, warmly aflerts the title of
Behaim, but without producing in confirmation of it, any
thing that has even the shadow of evidence. There was
indeed a Martin de Boemia, a noted cofinographer in the
fifteenth century, whom Herrera mentions as a friend to
Columbus, dec. i. lib. i. c. 2. but he assures us that he
was born a Portugueze, and born in the island of Fayal,
one of the Azores. Ibid. and dec. 2. lib. ii. c. 19. Goma-
ra informs us, that Magellan was possessed of a terrestrial
globe, made by this Martin de Boemia, on which he de-
monftrated the course he purposed to hold, in searching for
that strait which he afterwards discovered. Hilt. c. 19. It
seems probable, then, that the Germans have been induced,
merely by the name of this artist, to suppose him a native
of Bohemia, and on that 'uppofition, have raised their ima-
ginary pretensions.

THOSE of the Welfli seem not to reft on a foundation

much more solid. In the twelfth century, according to
Powell, a dispute having arisen anong the sons of Owen
Guynoth, king of North-Wales, concerning the fuccef-
sion to his crown, Madoc, one of their number, weary of
this contention, betook himself to sea in quest of a more
quiet fettlemcnt. He fleered due weft, leaving Ircland to
the north, and arrived in an unknown country, which ap-

F f 2 peaircl

peared to him so desirable, that he returned to Wales, and
carried thither several of his adherents and companions.
This is said to have happened about the year 1170, and
after that, he and his colony were heard of no more.
But it is to be observed, that Powell, on whose testimony
the authenticity of this flory refts, publiftred his hifiory
above four centuries from the date of the event which he
relates. Among a people so rude and so illiterate as the
Welsh, at that period, the memory of a tranfadtion so re-
mote must have been very imperfectly preserved, and would
require to be confirmed by some author of greater credit,
and nearer to the sera of Madoc's voyage than Powell.-
Later antiquaries have indeed appealed to the testimony
of Meredith ap Rhees, a Welsh bard, who died A.D. I477.
But he too lived at such a distance of time from the event,
that he cannot be confidered as a witness of much more
credit than Powell. Befidesj his verses published by Hak-
luyt, vol. iii. p. I. convey no information, but that Ma-
doc, dissatisfied with his domestic situation, employed him-
self in searching the ocean for new pofeflions. But even
if we admit the authenticity of Powell's story, it does not
follow that the unknown country which Madoc difcovcred
by fleering weftl in such a course as to leave Ireland to the
north, was any part of America. The skill of the Welih
in the twelfth century was hardly equal to such a voyage.
If he made any discovery at all, it more probably might be
Madeira, or rome other of the weltern isles. The affinity
of the Welsh language with some dialeas spoken in Ame-
rica, has been mentioned as a circumstance which confirms
the truth of Madoc's voyage. But that has been observed
in lo few inftanccs, and in some of these the affinity is so
obscure, or so fanciful, that no conclusion can be drawn
from the casual resemblance of a fiall number of words.
There is a bird, which as far as is yet known, is found
only on the coasts of South America, from Port Desire to
the Straits of Magellan. It is diftinguiflled by the name of
Penguin. This word in the Welfll language significs
JVhite-head. All the authors who favour the pretensions of
the Wclflh to the discovery of America, mention this as an
irrefragable proof of the affinity of the Welsh language with
that fpokon in that region of America. But Mr. Pennant,
who has givelr a scientific description of the Penguin, ob-
serves, that all the birds of that genus have black heads,
" o that we muff resign every hope (adds he) founded on

this

this hypothesis of retrieving the Cambrian race in the New
World." Philof. Tranfac. vol. lviii. p. 91, &c. Besides
this, if the Welsh, towards the close of the twelfth century,
had fettled in any part of America, some remains of the
christian doslrine and rites must have been found among
their descendants, when they were discovered about three
hundred years posterior to their migration, a period foflort,
that, in the course of it, we cannot well suppose that all
VEuropean ideas and arts would be totally forgotten.

THE pretensions of the Norwegians to the discovery of

America, seem to be better founded than those of the Ger-
mans or Welsh. The inhabitants of Scandinavia, were
remarkable in the middle ages for the boldness and extent
of their maritime excursions. In 874, the Norwegians dif-
covered and planted a colony in Iceland. In 982, they dif-
covered Greenland, and eftablifled settlements there. From
that, some of their navigators proceeded towards the weft,
and discovered a country more inviting than those horrid re-
gions with which they are acquainted. According to their
representation, this country was sandy on the coasts, but in
the interior parts level and covered with wood, on which
account they gave it the name of Helle-land, and Mark-
land, and having afterwards found some plants of the vine
which bore grapes, they called it Win-land. The credit of
this story refts, as far as I know, on the authority of the
saga, or chronicle of king Olaus, Fqmpofed by Snorro Stur-
lonides, or SturlufJns, published by Perinfkiold at Stock-
holm, A. D. 1697. As Snorro was born in the year 1179,
his chronicle might be compiled about two centuries after
the event which he relates. His account of the navigation
and discoveries of Biorn, and his companion Lief is a very
rude confuted tale, p. o04, 10o, 326. It is inlpoflible to
discover from him, what part of America it was in which
the Norwegians landed. According to his account of the
length of the days and nights, it mufl have been as far
north as the fifty-eighth degree of latitude, on some part of
the coast of Labradorc, approaching near to the entry of
Hudson's Straits. Grapes, certainly, arc not tile produc-
tion of that country, Torfcus supposes that there is an er-
ror in the text, by rectifying of which, the place where the
Norwegians landed may be supposed to be situated in lati-
tude 49°. But that is not the region of the vine in Ame-
rica, From perusing Snorro's tale, I Ihould think that the

fituatiorx

Pituation of Newfoundland corresponds best with that of the
country discovered by the Norwegians. But grapes are
not the production of that barren island. Other conjec-
tures are mentioned by M. Mallet, Introd. a 1'Hist. de
Dannem, 175, &c. I am not sufficiently acquainted with
the literature of the north, to examine them. It seems ma-
nifeft, that if the Norwegians did discover any part of
America at that period, their attempts to plant colonies,
proved unsuccessful, and all knowledge of it was soon loft,

NOTE XVIII. p. iII.

PETER MARTYR, ab Angleria, a Milanese gentle.
man, who resided at that time in the court of Spain, whose
letters contain an account of the transactions of that period,
in the order wherein they occurred, describes the sentiments
with which he himself and his learned correspondents were
affeced, in very striking terms. " Pre laetitia profiluiffe te,
vixque a lachrymis pre gaudio temperafle, quando literas
adfpcxifti meas quibus, de antipodum orbe latenti hactenus,
te ceiLiorem feci,'mi fuaviflime Pomponi, infinuafti. Ex
tuis ipfe litcris colligo, quid fenferis. Serfifti autem, tan-
tique rem fecifti, quanti virum summa dofrina infignitum
'decuit. Quis namque cibus fublimibus praftari protest in-

eniis, ifto fuavior ? quod condimentum gratius? A me
'facio c'njecuram. 'Beati fentio spiritus meos, quando ac-
citos alloquor prudentes aliquos ex his qui ab ea redcunt
provincia. I,. plicent animos pecuniarum cumulis augendis
miferi avari, libidinibus obfcoeni; noifras nos mentes, polt-
quarn Deo plcni aliquando fuerimus, contemplando, hujul-
cemodi reruin notitia demulciamus." Epift. I52. Potl-
ponio Laeto.

N O T E XIX. p. 122.

S O firmly were men of fcicnce, in that age, persuadcd that
the countries which Columbus had difcovcred were con-
nected with the Eaft-lndies, that Bernaldes, the curate o
Los Palacios, who fceims to have been no inconfidcrabli
' proficient in the knowledge of cofmogrnphy, contends that
Cuba was not an island, but a part of the continent, an

unitd

ynited to the dominions of the Great Khan. This he deli-
vered as his opinion to Columbus himself, who was his guest
for some time on his return from his second voyage; and he
supports it by several arguments, mostly founded on the au-
thority of Sir John Mandeville, M S. penes me. Antonio
Gallo, who was secretary to the magifiracy of Genoa to-
wards the close of the fifteenth century, published a short
account of the navigations and discoveries of his country-
man Columbus, annexed to his Opufcula Hiftorica de rebus
populi Genuenfis; in which he informs us, from letters of
Columbus which he himself had seen, that it was his opi-
nion, founded upon nautical observations, that one of the
islands he had discovered was distant only two hours, or
thirty degrees, from Cattigara, which, from the charts of
the geographers of that age, was laid down, upon the autho-
rity of Ptolemfy, lib. vii. c. 3. as the most easterly place in
Asia. From this he concluded, that if some unknown
continent did not obftru& the navigation, there must be a
Ofort and easy access, by holding a westerly course, to this
extreme region of the East. Muratori Scriptores Rer. ItaT
jlcarum, vol. xxiii. p. 304.

NOTE XX. p. 127.

BERNALDES, the curate de los Palacios, a contem-
porary writer, fays, that five hundred of these captives
were sent to Spain, and fold publickly in Seville as slaves;
but that, by the change of climate, and their inability to bear
the fatigue of labour, they all died in a fliort time. M S.
penes me,.

NOTE XXI. p. 139.

COLUMBUS seems to have formed some very singular
opinions concerning the countries which he had now disco-
vered. The violent fwcll and agitation of the waters on the
coast of Trinidad led him to conclude, that this was the
highest part of the terraqucous globe, and he imagined that
various circumstances concurred in proving, that the sea
was here visibly elevated. Having adopted this erroneous

priucipled

principle, the apparent beauty of the country induced him to
fall in with a notion of Sir John Mandeville, c. 102. that
the terrestrial paradise was the highest land in the earth;
and he believed that he had been so fortunate as to discover
this happy abode. Nor ought we to think it strange, that a
person of so much sagacity should be influenced by the opi-
nion or reports of such a fabulous author as Mandeville.
Columbus and the other discoverers were obliged to follow
such guides as they could find; and it appears from several
passages in the manuscript of Andr. Bernaldes, the friend
of Columbus, that no inconsiderable degree of credit was
given to the testimony of Mandeyille in that age. Bernaldes
frequently quotes him, and always with refped,

NOTE XXII. p. I50.

IT is remarkable, that neither Gomara or Oviedo, the
most ancient Spanish historians of America, nor Herrera,
confider Hojeda, or his companion Vespucci, as the first
discoverers of the continent of America. They uniformly
ascribe this honour to Columbus. Some have supposed that
national resentment against Vespucci, for deserting the ser-
vice of Spain, and entering into that of Portugal, may have
prompted these writers to conceal the actions which he per-
formed. But Martyr and Benzoni, both Italians, could not
be warped by the fame prejudice. Martyr was a contem-
porary author he resided in the court of Spain, and had
the belt opportunity to be exactly informed with refped to
all public tranfadtions; and yet, neither in his Decads, the
first general history published of the New World, nor in
his Epistles, which contain an account of all the remarkable
events of his time, does he ascribe to Vespucci the honour
of having first discovered the continent. Benzoni went as
an adventurer to America in the year 1541, and resided
there a considerable time. He appears to have been ani-
mated with a warm zeal for the honour of Italy, his na-
tive country, and yet does not mention the exploits and dif-
coveries of Vespucci. Herrera, who compiled his general
history of America from the most authentic records, not
only follows thofc early writers, but accuses Vespucci of
falsifying the dates of both the voyages which he made to

the

the New World, and of confounding the one with the
other, in order that he might arrogate to himself the glory
of having discovered the continent. Her. dec. I. lib. iv,
c. 2. He asserts, that in a judicial inquiry into this mat-
ter by the royal fiscal, it was proved by the testimony of
Hojeda himf.li; that he touched at Hiipaniola when return-
ing to Spain) froin his first voyage; whereas Vespucci gave
out that they returned direcly to Cadiz from the coast of
Paria, and touched at Hispaniola only in their second
voyage; and that he had finished the voyage in five months;
whereas, according to Vespucci's account, he had e!:ploy-
ed seventeen months in performing it. Viaggio primo de
Am. Vespucci, p. 36. Viag. fecundo, p. 45. Herrera
gives a more full account of this inquest in another part of
his book, and to the fame effe&. Her. dec. I. lib. vii. c. 5
Columbus was in Hispaniola when Hojeda arrived there,
and had by that time come to an agreement with Roldan,
who opposed Hojeda's attempt to excite a new infurrescion,
and, of consequence, his voyage mull have been posterior
to that of the Admiral. Life of Columbus, c. 84. Ac-
cording to Vespucci's account, he set out on his first voyage
May xoth, I497. Viag. primo, p. 6. At that time Co-
lumbus was in the court of Spain preparing for his voyage,
and seems to have enjoyed a considerable degree of favour.
The affairs of the New World were at this juncture under
the direction of Antonio Torres, a friend of Columbus. It
is not probable, that at that period a commiflion would be
granted to another person, to anticipate the Admiral, by un-
dertaking a voyage which he himself intended to perform,
Fonseca, who patronized Hojeda, and granted the licence
for his voyage, was not recalled to court, and reinflated in
the direction of Indian affairs, until the death of Prince
John, which happened September 1497, P. Martyr, Ep.
.182. several months posterior to the time at which Vefpuc-
ci pretends to have set out upon his voyage. A life of Vef-
pucci was published at Florence by the Abate Bandini,
A.D. 1745, 4to. It is a work of no merit, written with
little judgment, and less candour. He contends for his
countryman's title to the discovery of the continent with
all the blind zeal of national partiality, but produces no new
evidence to support it. We learn fiom him, that Vefpuc-
ci's account of his voyage was published as early as the
year 150o, and probably loner. Vita di Am. Velp. p. 5X.
At what time the name of AMERICA came to be firlt given
to the New World is not certain,

NOTE

NOTE XXIII. p. 192.

T HE form employed on this cccafion served as a model
to the Spaniards in all their subsequent conquests in Ame-
rica. It is so extraordinary in its nature, and gives us such
an idea of the proceedings of the Spaniards, and the prin-
ciples upon which they founded their right to the extensive
dominions which they acquired in the New World, that it
well merits the attention of the reader. c' I Alonfo de Ho-
jeda, servant of the moRs high and powerful kings of Castile
and Leon, the conquerors of barbarous nations, their mef-
fenger and captain, notify to you and declare, in as ample
form as I am capable, that God our Lord, who is one and
eternal, created the heaven and the earth, and one man and
one woman, of whom you and we, and all the men who
have been or shall be in the world, are descended. But as
it has come to pass, through the number of generations dur-
ing-more than five thousand years, that they have been dif-
perfed into different parts of the world, and are divided in-
to various kingdoms and provinces, because one country
was not able to contain them, nor could they have found in
one the means of subsistence and preservation; therefore
God our Lord gave-the charge of all those people to one
man, named St. Peter, whom he constituted the lord and
head of all the human race, that all men, in whatever place
they are born, or in whatever faith or place they are edu-
cated, might yield obedience unto him. He hath fubjeced
the whole world to his jurifdidion, and commanded him to
establish his residence in Rome, as the inoft proper place
for the government of the world. He likewise promised
and gave him power to establish his authority in every other
part of the world, and to judge and govern all Christians,
'Moors, Jews, Gentiles, and all other people, of whatever
fcóe or faith they may be. To him is given the name of
'Pope, which significs admirable, great father and guardianl
because he is the father and governor of all men. Thofl
'who lived in the time of this holy father obeyed and acknow-
ledged him as their lord and king, and the superior of the
univerfi'. The fame has been obfsrved with refpcd to
them who, since his time, have been chosen to the poltifi-
-cate. Thus it now continues, and will continue to the end
of the world.

# OML.v

-' ONE of these pontiffs, as lord of the world, hath made

a grant of these islands, and of the Terra Firma of'the ocean
sea, to the Catholic kings of Castile, Don Ferdinand and
Donna Isabella, of glorious memory, and their successors,
our sovereigns, with all they contain, as is more fully ex-
pressed in certain deeds passed upon that occasion, which
you may fee if you desire it. Thus his majesty is king and
lord of these islands, and of the Terra Firma, in virtue of
this donation; and, .as king and lord aforesaid, most of the
islands to which his title hath been notified, have recognized
his majesty, and now yield obedience and filbjeEion to him
as their lord, voluntarily and without resistance; and in-
ftantly, as soon as they received information, they obeyed
the religious men sent by the king to preach to them, and to
inftrut them in our holy faith; and all these, of their own
free-will, without any recompence or gratuity, became
'Christians, and continue to be so; and his majesty having
received them graciously under his protection, has corn-
manded that they should be treated in the fame manner as
his other fubjedts and vasSals. You are bound and obliged
to aft in the fame manner. Therefore I now entreat and
require you to confider attentively what I have declared to
you; and that you may more perfeEtly comprehend it, that
you take such time as is reasonable, in order that you may
acknowledge the Church as the superior and guide of the
universe, and likewise the holy father caled the Pope, in his
own right, and his majesty by his appointment, as king and
sovereign lord of these islands, and of the Terra Firma;
and that you consent that the aforesaid holy fathers shall de-
clare and preach to you the doctrines above-mentioned. If
you do this, you ad well, and perform that to which you
are bound and obliged; and his majesty, and I in his name,
will receive you with love and kindness, and-will leave you
your wives and children, free and exempt from servitude,
and in the enjoyment of all you poffecs, in the fame manner
as the inhabitants of the islands. Besides this, his majesty
will bestow upon you many privileges, exemptions, and re-
wards. But if you will not comply, or maliciously delay to
obey my injunction, then, with the help of God, I will
enter your country by force, I will carry on war agaillft
you with the utmost violence, I will subjet you to the yoke
of obedience to the church and the king, I will take your
wives and children, and will make them slaves, and fell or
ilifpofc of themn according to his majesty's pleafurc I will

fci;ic

seize your goods, and do you all the mischief in my power,
as rebellious fubjefts, who will not acknowledge or submit
to their lawful sovereign. And I protest, that all the blood-
ihed and calamities which shall follow are to'be imputed to
you, and not to his majefy, or to me, or the gentlemen
who serve under me; and as I have now made this declara-
tion and requisition unto you, I require the notary here pre-
sent to grant me a certificate of this, subscribed in proper
form." Herrera, dec. x. lib. vii. c. 14.

NOTE XXIV. p, 205.

BALBOA, in his letter to the king, observes, that of
the hundred and ninety men whom he took with him,
there were never above eighty fit for service at one time.
So much did they susser from hunger, fatigue, and sickness,
Tlerrera, dec. J. lib. x. c. I6. P. Mart. decad. p. 226.

NOTE XXV. p. 217.

FONSECA, bi(hop of Palencia, the principal direcor of
American affairs, had eight hundred Indians in property;
the commendator Lope de Conchillos, his chief aflciate in
that department, eleven hundred; and other favourites had
different numbers. They sent overseers to the islands, and
hired out those saves to the planters. Herr. dec. i. lib. ix.
C. 14. p. 325.

NOTE XXVI. p. 239.

HOUGH America is more plentifully fuipplied with

water than the other regions of the globe, there is no river
or fream of water in Yucatan. This peninsula projects
fiom the continent a hundred leagues, but, where broadest,
does not extend above twenty-five leagues. It is a flat plain,
without mountains. The inhabitants are lupplied with wa-

ter

ter from pits, and wherever they dig them, find it in abun.
dance. It is probable, from all those circumflances, that
this country was formerly covered by the sea. Herrerz
Defcriptio Indiae Occidentalis, p. 14. Hiftoire Naturelle,
par M. de Buffon, tom. x. p. 593.

NOTE XXVII. p. 249.

T H E height of the most elevated point in the Pyrenees
is, according to M. Cassini, fix thousand fix hundred and
forty-fix feet. The height of the mountain Gemmi, in the
canton of Berne, is ten thousand one hundred and ten feet.
The height of the Pike of Teneriffe, according to the mea-
furement of P. Feuille, is thirteen thousand one hundred
and feventy-eight feet. The height of Chimborazo, the
most elevated point of the Andes, is twenty thousand two
hundred and eighty feet. Voyage D. Juan Ulloa, Obfer-
vations Astron. et Phyfiq. tom. ii. p. 114. The height of
that part of Chimborazo which is covered perpetually with
faow, is two thousand four hundred feet. Prevot. HifR.
Gener. des Voyages, vol. xiii. p. 636.

NOTE XXVIII. p. 249.

A a particular description makes a flronger imprefflon
than general assertions, I shall give one of Rio de la Plata
by an eye-witness. P. Cattaneo, a Modcnefe jesuit, landed
at Buenos Ayres in 1749, and thus represents what he felt
when such new objets were first prcfented to his view.
" While I rcfided in Europe, and read in books of history
or geography that the mouth of the river De la Plata was
an hundred and fifty miles in breadth, I confidered it as an
exaggeration, because in this hemlifphere we have no ex-
ample of such vast rivers. When I approached its mouth,
I had the most vehement desire to ascertain the truth with
my own eyes, and I have found the matter to be exatly as
it was represented. This I deduce particularly fiom one
circumftancc: When we took our departure from Monte-

Video,

Video, a fort situated more than a hundred miles from the
mouth of the river, and where its breadth is considerably di-
minilhed, we failed a complete day before we discovered the
land on the opposite bank of the river; and when we were
in the middle of the channel, we could not discern land on
either fide, and saw nothing but the sky and water5 as if
we had been in some great ocean. Indeed, we should have
taken it to be Tea, if the fresh water of the river, which
vwas turbid like the Po, had not satisfied us that it was a
river. Moreover, at Buenos Ayres, another hundred miles
up the river, and where it is still much narrower, one can-
not discern the opposite coast, which is indeed very low and
flat; but one cannot perceive the houses or the tops of the
Reeples in the Portuguese settlement at Colonia on the other
fide of the river." Lettera prima, publified by Muratori,
I1 Chriftianefimo Felice, &c. i. p. 257.

NOTE XXIX. p. 252.

NEWFOUNDLAND, part of Nova Scotia and Ca-
nada, are the countries which lie in the fame parallel of la-
titude with the kingdom of France; and in all of them the
water of the rivers is frozen during winter to the thickness
of several feet; the earth is covered with snow as deep; al-
mol all the birds fly, during that season, from a climate
where they could not live. The country of the Efkimaux,
part of Labrador, and the countries on the south of Hud-
son's Bay, are in the fame parallel with Great Britain; and
yet in all these the cold is so intense, that even the industry
of Europeans has not attempted cultivation.

N T E XXX. p. 254.

A COSTA is the first philosopher, as far as I know, who
endeavoured to account for the different degrees of heat in
the old and new continents, by the agency of the winds
which blow in each. Hist. Moral. &c. lib. ii. & iii. M.
dc Buffon adopts this theory, and has not only improved it

by

by new obfervationsj but has employed his amazing pow.
ers of descriptive eloquence in embellishing and placing it
in the most firiking light. Some remarks may be added,
which tend to illustrate more fully a doctrine of much im-
portance in every inquiry concerning the. temperature of
various climates.

WHEN a cold wind blows over land it must in its

passage rob the surface of some of its heat. By means of
this, the coldness of the wind is abated. But if it conti-
nue to blow in the fame direction, it will come, by de-
grees, to pass over a surface already cooled, and will suser
no longer any abatement of its own keenness. Thus, as it
advances over a large tract of land, it brings on all the
severity of intense frost.

LET the fame wind blow over an extensive and deep sea;

the superficial water must be immediately cooled to -a certain
degree, and the wind proportionally warmed. But the fu-
perficial and colder water becoming specifically heavier than
the warmer water below it, descends; what is warmer sup-
ilies its place, which, as it comes to be cooled in its turn,
continues to warm the air which passes over it, or to dimi-
nifh its cold; This change of the superficial water, and
successive ascent of that which is warmer, and consequent
litcceffive abatement of coldness in the air, is aided by the
agitation caused in the sea by the mechanical action of the
wiind, and a.so by the motion of the tides. This will go on,
and the rigour of the wind will continue to diminish until
the whole water is so far cooled, that the water on the fur-
fice is no longer removed from the action of the wind, fait
enough to hinder it from being arrcfted by frost. When-
ever the surface freezes, the wind is no longer warmed
by the water from below, and it goes on with undiminished
cold.

FROM tliofe principles may be explained the severity of

winter frosts in cxtenfive continents; their mildness in ifnall
islands; and the fuiperior rigour of winter in those parts of
North America with which we arc best acquainted. In the
north-wefl parts of Europc, the severity of winter is miti-
gated by the weft winds, which iifltilly blow in the months
of November, Dcccmber, and part of January.

ON

Of the other hand, when a warm wind blows over land,

it heats the surface, which must therefore cease to abate the
fervour of the wind. But the fame wind blowing over wa-
ter, agitates it, brings up the colder water from below, and
thus is continually losing somewhat of its own heat.

BuT the great power of the Tea to mitigate the heat of the

wind or air pafling over it, proceeds from the following cir-
cumitance, that on account of the transparency of the sea, its
surface cannot be heated to a great degree by the fun's ray's;
whereas the ground, fubjeaed to their influence, very soon
acquires great heat. When therefore, the wind blows over
a torrid continent, it is soon raised to a heat almost intolera-
ble; but during its palfage over an extensive ocean, it is
gradually cooled; so that on it arrival at the farthest shore,
it is again fit for respiration.

THosE principles will account for the sultry heats of large

continents, in the torrid zone; for the mild climate of if-
lands in the fame latitude; and for the superior warmth in
summer which large continents, situated in temperate or
colder zones of the earth, enjoy, when compared with that
of islands. The heat of a climate depends not only upon the
immediate effea of the fun's rays, but on their continued
operation, on the effect which they have formerly produced,
and which remains for tome time in the ground. This is the
reason why the day is warmest about two in the afternoon,
the summer warmest about the middle of July, and the win-
ter coldest about the middle of January.

THE forests which cover America, and hinder the fuln-

*heams from heating the ground, are a great cause of the tem-
perate climate of the equatorial parts. The ground, not be-
ing heated, cannot heat the air; and the leaves, which re-
ceive the rays intercepted from the ground, have not a mass
of matter fiufficient to absorb heat enough for this purpose.
Besides, it is a known fat, that the vegetative power of a
plant occasions a perspiration from the leaves in proportion to
the heat to which they are exposed ; and, from the nature (o
evaporation, this perspiration produces a cold in the leaf pro-
portional to the perspiration. Thus the effec& of the leaf in
heating the air in contac with it, is prodigiouflydiminifhcd.
For those obfcrvations, which throw much additional light

on0

on this curious subjeL, I am indebted to my ingenious friend,
Mr. Robifon, professor of natural philosophy in the ulliverfity
of Edinburgh.

NOTE XXXI. p. 255.

T HE climate of Brasil has been described by two eminent
naturalists, Pifo and Margrave, who observed it with a phi-
lofophical accuracy, which, we desiderate in the accounts of
many other provinces in America. Both represent it as tem-
perate and mild, when compared with the climate of Africa.
They ascribe this chiefly to the refreshing wind which blows
continually from the tea. The air is not only cool, but
chilly through the night, in so much that the natives kindle
fires every evening in their huts. Pifo de Medicina Brafili-
enfi, lib. i. p. i, &c. Margravius Hiltor. Reru;n Natural
Brafilie, lib. viii. c. 3. p. 264. Nieuhoff, who resided long
in Brasil, confirms their description. Churchill's Collction,
vol. ii. p. 26. Gumilla, who resided many years in the
country, upon the river Orinoco, gives a similar description
of the temperature of the climate there. Hilt. de l'Oreno-
que, tom. i. p. 26. P. Acugna felt a very confderable de-
gree of cold in the countries on the banks of the river Ama-
zons. Relat. vol. ii. p. 56. M. Biet, who lived a confide-
rable time in Cayenne, gives a similar account of the tempe-
rature of that climate, and ascribes it to the fame cause.
Voyage de la France, Equinox, p. 330. Nothing can be
more different from these descriptions than that of the burn-
ing heat of the African coals given by M. Adanfon, Voyage
to Sencgal, paflim.

TH. most obvious and probable cause of this superior de-

gree of cold, towards the southern extremity of America,
seems to be the form of the continent there. Its breadth gra-
dually decreases as it itretches from St. Antonio southwards,
and from the bay of St. Julian to the Straits of Magellan its
dimensions are much contraced. On the east and weft fides,
it is washed by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. ' From its
southern point it is probable that an open l;ea firetches to the
Antartic pole. In which ever of these diretions the wind
blows, it is cooled before it approaches the Magcllanic re-
gions, by pafling over a vast body of water, nor is the land

VOL. I. G g there

there of such extent that it can recover any considerable de-
gree of heat in its progress over it. These circumstances
concur in rendering the temperature of the air in this diftria
of America, more similar to that of an insular5 than to that of
a continental climate, and hinder it from acquiring the fame
degree offummer heat, with places in Europe and Asia, in
a corresponding northern latitude. The north wind is the
only one that reaches this part of America, after blowing
over a great continent But from an attentive survey of its
position, this will be found to have a tendency, rather to di-
minifh than augment the degree of heat. The southern ex-
tremity of America is properly the termination of the im-
mense ridge of the Andes, which itretches nearly in a dire&c
line from north to south, through the whole extent of the
continent. The most sultry regions in South-America,
Guiana, Brasil, Paraguay, and Tucuman, lie many degrees
to the east of the Magellanic regions, The level country of
Peru, which enjoys the tropical heats, is situated confidera-
bly to the weft of them. The north wind then, though it
blows over land, does not bring to the southern extremity of
America, an increase of heat collected in its paflage over
torrid regions, but before it arrivesthere, it must have swept
along the summits of the Andes, and come impregnated with
the cold of that frozen region.

N 0 T E XXXII. p. 256

IWO French frigates were sent upon a voyage ofdifco-
very in the year. 1739. In latitude 44.° south, they began to
feel a considerable degree of cold. In latitude 48°, they met
with islands of floating ice. Hiftoire des Navigations aux
Terres Australes, tom. ii. 256, &c. Dr. Halley fell in with
ice in latitude 59°. Id. tom. i. p. 47. Commodore Byron,
when on the coast of Patagonia, latitude 50° 33' south, on
the fifteenth of December, which is midfunmmer in that part
of the globe, the twenty-firt of December being the longest
day there, compares the climate to that of England in the
middle of winter. Voyages by Hawkefworth, i. 25, Mr.
Banks having landed at Terra del Fuego in the Bay of Good
SuccesS, latitude 55°, on the fixtcenth of January, which
corrcfponds to the month of July in our hemisphere) two of

his

his attendants died in one night of extreme cold, and all the
party were in the most imminent danger of perishing. Id.
ii. 5 52. By the fourteenth of March, corresponding to
September in our hemisphere, winter was set in with rigour,
and the mountains were covered with snow. Ibid. 72.

NOTE XXXIII. p. 258.

M . CONDAMINE is one of the lateff and most
accurate observers of the interior state of South-America,
" After descending fiom the Andes (fays he) one beholds a
vast and uniform profpec of water and verdure, and nothing
more. One treads upon the earth, but does not fee it; as
it is so entirely covered with luxuriant plants, weeds, and
shrubs, that it would require a considerable degree of labour
to clear it, for the space of a foot. Relation abreg6 d'un
Voyage, &c. p. 48. One of the singularities in the forests
is a fort of osiers, or withs, called bejucos by the Spaniards,
and lianes by the French, and nibbees by the Indians, which
are usually employed as ropes in America. This plant twists
about the trees which it meets with, and rising above their
highest branches, its tendrils descend perpendicularly, itrike
intothe ground, take root, rife up around another tree, and
thus mount and descend alternately. Other tendrils are car-
ried obliquely by the wind, or tome accident, and form a
confusion of interwoven cordage, which resembles the rigging
of a ship. Bancroft, Nat. His. of Guiana, 99. These
withs are often as thick as the arm of a man. Ib. p. 75.
M. Bouguer's account of the forests in Peru perfectly re-
fembles this description. Voyage au Peru, p. i6. Oviedo
gives a similar description of the forefcs in other parts of
America. Hist. lib. ix. p. 144. D. The country of the
Moxos is so much overflowed, that they are obliged to re-
fide on the summit of some riing ground during some part
of the year, and have no communication with their country-
men at any distance. Lettres Edifiantes, tom. x. p. 187.
Garcia gives a full and just description of the rivers, lakes,
woods, and marfhcs in those countries of America which lie
between the tropics. Origen de los Indios, lib. ii. c. 5. §.
4, 5. The incredible hafllhips to which Gonzalez Pizarro
was exposed in attempting to march into the country to the east

Gg g of

of the Andes, gives a very itriking idea of that part of Ame-
rica in its original uncultivated slate. Garcil. de la Vega,
Royal. Comment. of Peru, part ii. book iii. c. 2-5.

NOTE XXXIV. p. 260.

T HE animals of America seem not always to have been of
a size inferior to those in other quarters of the globe. Near
the banks of the Ohio, a considerable number of bones of an
immense magnitude have been found. The place where this
discovery has been made lies about one hundred and ninety
miles below the junction of the river Scioto with the Ohio.
It is about four miles distant from the banks of the latter, on
the fide of the marlh called the Great Salt Lick. The bones
lie on vast quantities about five or fix feet under ground,
and the itratum is visible in the bank on the edge of the
Lick. Journal of Colonel George Craglan, MS. penes me.
This spot seems to be accurately laid down by Evans in his
map. These bones muff have belonged to animals of enor-
mous bulk, and naturalists being acquainted with no living
creature of such size, were at first inclined to think that they
were mineral substances. Upon receiving a greater number
of specimens from various parts of the earth, and after in-
fpefting them more narrowly, they are now allowed to be
the bones of an animal. As the elephant is the largefi known
quadruped, and the tusks which were found nearly resembled,
both in form and quality, the tusks of an elephant, it was con-
cluded that the carcases deposited on the Ohio were of
that fpccies. But Dr. Hunter, one of the persons of our age
best qualified to decide with respect to this point, having
accurately examined several parcels of tusks, and grinders,
and jaw-bones, sent from the Ohio to London, gives it as
his opinion, that they did not belong to an elephant, but
to some huge carnivorous animal of an unknown species.
Phil. Tranfa&. vol. Iviii. p. 34. Bones of the fame kind,
and as remarkable for their size, have been found near
the mouths of the great rivers, Oby, Jenifcia, and Lcna,
in Siberia. Stralhrenberg, DefJript. of north and etyl parts
of Europe and ..Ia, p. 402, &c. I he elephant seems to
be confined in his range to the torrid zone, and never
multiplies beyond it. In such cold regions as those bor-

dering

dering on the frozen tea, he could not live. The exif-
tence of such large animals in America might open a wide
field for conjecture. The more we contemplate the face
of nature, and confider the variety of her productions, the
more we muff be satisfied that astonishing changes have
been made in the terraqueous globe by convulsions and re-
volutions, of which no account is preserved in hiflory.

NOTE XXXV. p. 261.

T HIS degeneracy of the domestic European animals in
America ought to be imputed partly to each of these causes.
In the Spanish settlements, which are situated either with-
in the torrid zone, or in countries bordering upon it,
the increase of heat, and diversity of food, prevent sheep
and horned cattle from attaining the fame size as in
Europe. They seldom become so fat, and their flesh is
not so juicy, or of such delicate flavour. In North-Ame-
rica, where the climate is more favourable, and similar.
to that of Europe, the quality of the graffes which
spring up naturally in their pafture-grounds is not good.
Mitchell, p. 15i. Agriculture is still so much in its in-
fancy, that artificial food for cattle is not raised in any
quantity. During a winter, long in many provinces, and
rigorous in all, no proper care is taken of their cattle.
The general treatment of their horses and horned cattle
is injudicious and harsh in all the English colonies.
These circumstances contribute more, perhaps, than any
thing peculiar in the quality of the climate, to the dege-
neracy of breed in the horses, cows, and sheep, in most of
its provinces.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 26r.

IN the year 1518, the island of Hispaniola was affliEcd
with a dreadful visitation of those deftrudive infeds, the
particulars of which Herrera describes, and mentions a fin-
gular instan;ce of the superstition of the SpanifSl planters.

After

After trying various methods of exterminating the ants,
they resolved to implore protedion of the faints, but as the
calamity was new, they were at a loss to find out the faint
who could give them the most effetual aid. They cast
lots in order to discover the patron whom they should in-
voke. The lots decided in favour of St. Saturnius. They
celebrated his festival with great solemnity, and immediate-
ly, adds the historian, the calamity began to abate. Her-
rera, dec. 2. lib. iii. c. 15. p. 107.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 263.

THE author of Recherches Philofophiques fur les Ame-
ricans supposes this difference in heat to be equal to twelve
degrees, and that a place thirty degrees from the equator
in the old continent, is as warm as one situated eighteen
degrees from it in America, tom. i. p. i . Dr. Mitchell,
after observations carried on during thirty years, contends
that the difference is equal to fourteen or fifteen degrees of
latitude. Present State, &c. p. 257.

NOTE XXXVIII. p. 263.

JANUARY 3d, 1765, Mr. Bertram, near the head
of St. John's river in East Florida, observed a frost so in-
tense, that in one night, the ground was frozen an inch
thick upon the banks of the river. The limes, citrons,
and banana trees, at St. Augustine were destroyed. Ber-
tram's Journal, p. 20. Other instances of the extraordi-
nary operations of cold in the southern provinces of North-
America are collcted by Dr. Mitchell. Present State,
p. 206, &c. February 7th, 1747, the frost at Charles-
town was so intenie, that a person having carried two quart
bottles of hot water to bed, in the morning they were split
to pieces, and the water solid lumps of ice. In a kitchen
where there was a fire, the water in a jar, in which there
was a large live eel, was frozen to the bottom. Almoff all
the orange and olive trees were destroyed. Description of
South-Carolina, 8vo. Lond. 1761.

NOTE

NOTE XXXIX. p, 264,

A Remarkable inffance of this occurs in Dutch Guia,
na, a country every where level, and so low, that during
the rainy seasons it is usually covered with water near two
feet in height. This renders the foil so rich, that on the
surface, for twelve inches in depth, it is a stratum of per-
sea manure, and as such has heen transported to Barba-
does. On the banks of the Effeuuebo, thirty crops of
ratoon canes have been raised successively, whereas in
Weft-Indian islands more than two is never expected.
The expedients by which the planters endeavour to dimi-
niih this excessive fertility of foil are various. Bancroft,
Nat, Hist. of Guiana, p. xo, &c.

NOTE XL. p. 274.

M ULLER seems to have believed, without sufficient
evidence, that the Cape had been doubled, tom. i. p. xI,
&c. and the Imperial Academy of St. Peterfburgh give
some countenace to it, by the manner in which Tfchukot-
Jfoi-nofs is laid down in their charts. But I am assured,
from undoubted authority, that no Ruffian vessel has ever
failed round that cape, and as the country of fichutki is not
fubje& to the Ruffian empire, it is very imperfctly known.

NOTE XLI. p. 276.

W E RE this the place for entering into a long and in-
tricate geographical disquisition, many curious observations
might arise from comparing the accounts of the two Ruf-
fian voyages, and the charts of their refpetive navigations.
One remark is applicable to both. We cannot rely with
ablblute certainty on the position which they assign to fe-
veral of the places which they visited. The weather was
so extremely foggy, that they seldom saw the fun or

stars,

fEars, and the position of the islands and supposed con-
tinents was commonly determined by reckoning, not by
observation. Beering and Tfchirikow proceeded much
farther towards the east than Krenitzin. The land disco-
vered by Beering, which he imagined to be part of the
American continent, is in the 236th degree of longitude
from the first meridian in the isle of Ferro, and in 580 28"
of latitude. Tfchirikow came upon the fame coast in lon-
git. 241°, lat. 560. Muller, i. 248, 249. The former
must have advanced 60 degrees from the port of Petro-
pawlowfka, from which he took his departure, and the
latter 65 degrees. But from the chart of Krenitzin's voy-
age, it appears that he did not fail farther towards the east
than the 280th degree, and only 32 degrees from Petro-
pawlowfka. In 1741, Beering and Tfchirikow, both in
going and returning, held a course which was mostly to the
south of that chain of islands which they discovered, and
observing the mountainous and rugged aspec of the head-
lands which they described towards the north, they fuppof-
ed them to be promontories belonging to some part of the
American continent, which, as they fancied, stretched as
far south as the latitude 56. In this manner they are laid
down in the chart published by Muller, and likewise in
a manuscript chart drawn by a mate of Beering's ship,
communicated to me by Mr. Professor Robifon. But in
1769, Krenitzin, after wintering in the island Alaxa,
flood so far towards the north in his return, that his
course lay through the middle of what they had supposed
to be a contineint, which he found to he an open sea,
and that they had riftaken rocky iflis for the head-lands of
a continent. It is probable, that the countries discovered in
1741, towards the eafr, do not belong to the American
continent, but are only a contination of the chain of if-
lands. From the extreme furnmcr cold of all those isles,
one is led to conjecture that no large continent lies very
near to them. The number of volcanos in this region of
the globe is remarkable. There are several in Kamfchat-
ka, and not one of the islands, great or finall, as far as the
Rtuffian navigation extends, is without them. Many are
actually burning, and the mountains in all bear marks of
having been once in a slate of eruption. Were I disposed
to admit such conjectures as have found place in other in-
quiries concerning the peopling of America, I might sup-
pofc that this part of the earth, having fufferred vio-

lent

lent convulsions from earthquakes and volcanos, an iRth.
mus, which may have formerly united Asia to America,
has been broken, and formed into a cluster of islands by the
shock.

IT is singular, that at the very time the Ruffian naviga-

tors were attempting to make discoveries in the north-west
of America, the Spaniards were prosecuting the fame de-
sign from another quarter. In 1769, two finall vessels
failed from Loretto in California to explore the coasts of the
country to the north of that peninsula. They advanced no
farther than the port of Monte-Rey in latitude 36. But,
in several successive expeditions fitted out from the port of
St. Bias in New Galicia, the Spaniards have advanced as
far as the latitude 58. Gazeta de Madrid, March I9, and
May 15, 1776. But as the journals of those voyages
have not yet been published, I cannot compare their pro-
grefs with that of the Ruffians, or shew how near the na-
vigators of the two nations have approached to each other.
It is to be hoped, that the enlightended minister, who has
now the direction of American affairs in Spain, will not
withhold this information from the public.

N OTE XLII. p. 290.

FEW travellers have had such opportunity of observing
the natives of America, in its various diftrits, as Don
Antonio Ulloa. In a work lately published by him, he
thus describes the charateriflical features of the race: " a
very finall forehead, covered with hair towards its extremi-
ties, as far as the middle of the eye-brows; little eyes;
a thin nose, small and bending towards the upper lip; the
countenance broad; the ears large; the hair very black,
lank, and coarse; the limbs well turned; the feet small,
the body of just proportion; and altogether finooth and free
from hair, until old age, when they acquire rome beard,
but never on the cheeks." Noticias Americanas, &c. p.
307. M. le Chevalier Pinto, who resided several years
in a part of America which Ulloa never visited, gives a
sketch of the general aspe&t of the Indians there. " They
are all of a copper colour, with fomc diversity of ihadc,

no;

not in proportion to their diflance from the equator, but
according to the degree of elevation of the territory which
they inhabit. Those who live in a high country are fairer
than those in the marshy lowlands on the coast. Their face
is round, farther removed, perhaps, than that of any peo-
ple from an oval shape. Their forehead is small, 'the ex-
tremity of their ears far from the face, their lips thick, their
nose flat, their eyes black, or of a chefnut colour, small, but
capable of discerning objects at a great distance. Their
hair is always thick and sleek, and without any tendency to
curl. They have no hair on any part of their body but the
head. At the first aspe&c, a southern American appears to
be mild and innocent, but on a more attentive view one dif-
covers in his countenance something wild, diffruftful, and
fullen." MS. penes me. The two portraits, drawn by
hands very different from those of common travellers, have
a near resemblance.

NOTE XLIII. p. 290.

AMAZING accounts are given of the persevering speed
of the Americans. Adair relates the adventures of a Chik-
kafah warrior, who run through woods and over mountains,
three hundred computed miles in a day and a half and two
nights. Hist, of Amer. Ind. $96.

NO T E XLIV. p. 294.

M . GODIN LE JEUNE, who resided fifteen years among
the Indians of Peru and Quito, and twenty years in the
French colony of Cayenne, in which there is a confiant in-
tcrcourfe with the Galibis, and other tribes on the Orinoco,
obfcrves, that the vigour of constitution among the Ameri-
cans is exacly in proportion to their habits of labour. The
Indians, in warm climates, such as those on the coasts of the
South Sea, on the river of Amazons, and the river Orinoco,
are not to be compared for Strength with those in cold coun-
tries ; and yet, fays he, boats daily fct out from Para, a

Portugucf?

Portuguese settlement on the river Amazons, to ascend that
river against the rapidity of the fiream, and with the fame
crew they proceed to San Pablo, which is eight hundred
leagues distant. No crew of white people, or even of ne-
groes, would be found equal to a talk offuch persevering fa-
tigue, as the Portuguese have experienced, and yet the In-
dians being accustomed to this labour from their infancy,
perform it. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLV. p. 300.

D N ANTON A IO ULLOA, who visited a great part of
Peru and Chili, the kingdom of New Granada, and several
of the provinces bordering on the Mexican Gulph, while
erpployed in the fame service with the French mathemati-
cians during the space of ten years, and who afterwards
had an opportunity of viewing the North-Americans, as-
ferts, " that if we have seen one American, we may be said
to have seen them all, their colour and make are so nearly
the fame." Notic. Americanas, p. 308. A more early
observer, Pedro de Cieca de Leon, one of the conquerors
of Peru, who had likewise traversed many provinces of
America, affirms, that the people, men and women, al-
though there is such a multitude of tribes or nations as to
be alioft innumerable, and such diversity of climates, ap-
pear nevertheless like the children of one father and mother.
Chronica del' Peru, parte i. c. 19. There is, no doubt, a
certain combination of features, and peculiarity of aspel,
which forms what may be called a European or Asiatic
countenance. There muff likewise be one that may be de-
nominated American, common to the whole race. This
may be supposed to strike the traveller at first fight, while
the various shades which diftinguiihed people, of different re-
gions, escape his observation. But when persons who had
resided so long among the Americans concur in bearing
teflimony to the similarity of their appearance in every
climate, we may conclude that it is more remarkable than
that of any other race. See likewise Garcia Origen de los
Indies, p. 54, 242. Torquemada Monarch. Indiana, ii,
571.

N O T 1;

NOTE XLVI. p. 301.

M . LE CHEVALIER DE PINTO observes, that in the
interior parts of Brasil, he had been informed that some per-
sons resembling the white people of Darien have been found;
but that the breed did not continue, and their children be-
came like other Americans. This race, however, is but
very imperfectly known. MS. penes me.

NOTE XLVII. p. 304.

T HE testimonies of different travellers, concerning the
Patagonians, have been collected and flated with a confider-
able degree of accuracy by the author of Recherches Philo-
fophiques, &c. tom. i. 281, &c. iii. I81, &c. Since the
publication of his work, several navigators have visited the
Magellanic regions, and, like their predecessors, differ very
widely in their accounts of its inhabitants. By Commodore
Byron and his crew, who failed through the Straits in 1764,
the common size of the Patagonians was estimated to be
eight feet, and many of them much taller. Phil. TranfaEt.
vol. Ivii. p. 78. By Captains Wallis and Carteret, who
actually measured them in 1766, they were found to be from
fix feet to fix feet five and seven inches in height. Phil.
Tranf, vol. Ix. p. 22. These seem to have been the very
people whose size had been so much over-rated in the year
1764; for several of them had beads and red baize of the
fame kind with what had been put aboard Captain Wallis's
fllip, and le naturally concluded that they had got these from
4Mr. Byron. Hawkefw. i. In 1767 they were again mea-
fured by M. Bougainville, whose account agrees nearly with
that of Captain Wallis. Voy. 129. To these I shall add a
teftfmony of great weight. In the year 1762, Don Bernardo
Ibagnez de Echavarri accompanied the Marquis de Valdeli-
rios to Buenos Ayres, and resided there several years. He is
a very intelligent author, and his reputation for veracity un-
impeached among his countrymen. In fpcaking of the coun-
try towards the southern extremity of America, " By what

Indians,"

Indians," fays he, " is it possessed ? Not certainly by the
fabulous Patagonians, who are supposed to occupy this dif-
trit. I have from many eye-witnesses, who have lived
among those Indians, and traded much with them, a true
and accurate description of their persons. They are of the
fame fature with Spaniards. I never saw one who rose in
height two varas and two or three inches," i. e. about 80
or 8I. 332 inches English, if Echavarri makes his compu-
tation according to the vara of Madrid. This agrees near-
ly with the measurement of Captain Wallis. Reyno Jesu-
itico, 238. Mr. Falkner, who resided as a missionary forty
ears in the southern parts of America, fays, that " the Pa-
agonians, or Puelches, are a large-bodied people; but I
ever heard of that gigantic race which others have menti-
oned, though I have seen persons of all the different tribes
of southern Indians." Introd. p. 26.

NO T E XLVIII. p. 308.

X NTONIO SANCHEZ RIBEIRO, a learned and ingenious

ylician, published a dissertation in the year 1765, in which
endeavours to prove, that this disease was not introduced
om America, but took its rife in Europe, and was brought
n by an epidemical and malignant disorder. Did I chufe to
lter into a disquisition on this subjet, which I should not
ve mentioned, if it had not been intimately connected
ith this part of my inquiries, it woutld not be difficult to
int out some mistakes with rcfped to the facts upon which
founds, as well as some errors in the consequences which
draws from them. The rapid communication of this
ifeaf from Spain over Europe, seems to resemble the pro-
refs of an epidemic, rather than that of' a difea/i tralfinit-
dby infection. The first mention of it is in the year
93, and before the year 1497 it had made its appearance
nmot countries of Europe, with such alarming ltymptoms
rendered it ncccCfry for the civil magistrate to intcrpofi,
order to check its career.

NO T E

NOTE XLIX. p. 3II.

T HE people of Otaheite have no denomination for an
number above two hundred, which is sufficient for thei
tranfadions. Voyages, by Hawkefworth, ii. 228.

NOTE L. p. 317.

As the view which I have given of rude nations is el
tremnely different from that exhibited by very refpe&able at
thors, it may be proper to produce some of the many author
ties on which I found my description. The manners of ti
iavage tribes in America have never been viewed by perfoi
more capable of observing them with discernment, th;
the philosophers employed by France and Spain, in tl
year 1735, to determine the figure of the earth. M. Bo
guer d'Antonio Ulloa, and D. George Juan, resided loi
among the natives of the least civilized provinces in Per
M. de la Condamine had not only this opportunity for obfz
vation, but, in his voyage down the Maragnoh, he had a
cess to infpet the state of the various nations feated on
banks, in its vait course across the continent of South-Air
ricn. There is a wonderful resemblance in their reprefeni
tion of the characer of the Americans. " They are all e
tremely indolent," fays M. Bouguer, " they are stupid, th
pass whole days fitting in the fame place, without movir
or speaking a tingle word. It is not easy to describe the (
gree of their indifference for wealth, and all its advantag
One does not well know what motive to propose to the
when one would persuade them to perform any service. I
vain to offer them money; they answer, that they are i
hungry." Voyage au Pcrou, p. 102. If one consid
them as men, the narrowness of their underflanding leC
to be incompatible with the excellence of the foul. TIh
imbecility is so vifbli, that one can hardly form an idea
them different from what one has of the brutes. Noth
difturhs the tranquillity of their fouls, equally infenflibl
disasters and to prosperity. Though half-naked, they

as contented as a monarch in his most splendid array. Riches
do not attract them in the finalleft degree, and the authority
or dignities to which they may aspire, are so little the objects
of their ambition, that an Indian will receive with the fame
indifference the office of a judge (Alcalde) or that of a hang-
man, if deprived of the former and appointed to the latter.
Nothing can move or change them. Interest has no power
over them, and they often refuse to perform a small service,
though certain of a great recompence. Feat makes no im-
preflion upon them, and refpe& as little. Their disposition
is so singular, that there is no method of influencing them,
no means of rouzing them from that indifference, which is
proof againfi all the endeavours of the wisest persons; no
expedient that can induce them to abandon that gross igno-
rance, or lay aside that careless negligence, which disconcert
the prudence and disappoint the care of such as are attentive
to their welfare. Voyage de Ulloa, tom. i. 335, 3i6-
Of those singular qualities he produces many extraordinary
instances, p. 336-347. " Insensibility," fays M. de la
Condamine, "is the basis of the American character. I
leave others to determine, whether this should be dignified
with the name of apathy, or disgraced with that of tfupi-
dity. It arises, without doubts from the small number
of their ideas, which do not extend beyond their wants.
Gluttons even to voracity, when they have wherewithal
to fatisfie their appetite. Temperate) when neccflity oblig-
es them, to such a degree that they can endure want with-
out seeming to desire any thing. Pusillanimous and cow-
ardly to excels, unless when they are rendered desperate by
drunkenness. Averse to labour, indifferent to every motive
f glory, honour, or gratitude; occupied entirely by the ob-
eft that is F.efelt, and always determined by it alone,
without any solicitude about futurity; incapable of foresight
or of reflection; abandoning themrelves, when under no
eltr.int, to a puerile joy, which they express by fiifking
but, and immoderate fits of laughter; without objctl or
efign, they pars their life without thinking, and grow old
without advancing beyond childhood, of which they re-
ain all the defecLs. If this description were applicable only
othe Indians in some provinces of Peru, who are flavcs
n every refpct but the name, one might believe, that
tisdegree of degeneracy was occasioned by the servile de-
ndcence to which they ar2 reduced; the example of the
Odern Greeks being proof how fir tervitude may degrade

the human species. But the Indians in the miflions of the
Jesuits, and the savages who itill enjoy unimpaired liberty,
being as limited in their faculties, not to fay as itupid as
the other, one cannot observe, without humiliation, that
man, when abandoned to simple nature, and deprived of
the advantages resulting from education and society, dif-
sers but little from the brute creation." Voyage de la
Riv. de Amaz. 52, 53. M. de Chanvalon, an intelli-
gent and philosophical observer, who vilited Martinico in
175I, and resided there fix years, gives the following
description of the Caraibs. " It is not the red colour
of their complexion, it is not the singularity of their sea-
tures, which constitutes the chief difference between
them and us. It is their exceflive simplicity; it is the
limited degree of their faculties. Their reason is not more
enlightened or more provident than the inftingt of brutes.
The reason of the most gross peasants, that of the negroes
brought up in the parts of Africa most remote from inter-
course with Europeans, is such that we discover apper-
ances of intelligence, which, though unfolded, is capable
of increase. But of this the underfanding of Caraibs
seems to be hardly susceptible. If found philolophy and reli-
gion did not afford us their light, if we were to decide ac-
cording to the firit impression which the view of that people
makes upon the mind, we should be disposed to believe that
they do not belong to the fame species with us. Their ituj
pid eyes are the true mirrour of their fouls; it appears to b
without fun&ions. Their indolence is extreme; they hav
never the least solicitude about tihe moment which is to sue
ceed that which is present." Voyage a la Martinique,
44, 45, 5I. M. de la Borde, Tertre, and Rochefort, con
firm this description. " The chara&eriftics of the Califor
nians," fays P. Vcnegas, " as well as of all the other Indian;
are tfupidity and insensibility; want of knowledge and re
flcEtion; inconltancy, impetuosity, and blindness of appe
petite; and exceflive sloth, and abhorrence of all labour an
fatigue; an exceflive love of pleasure and amusement ofevcr
kind, however trifling or brutal; pusillanimity; and, in fin
a most wretched want of every thing which conftitutc( tl
real man, and renders him rational, inventive, tratibl
and useful to himfi:lf and society. It is not cafy for 1tur
peans, who never were out of their own country, to co
c:ive an adequate idea of those people; for, even in t

lea

least frequented corners of the globe, there is not a nation
so tupid, of such contraEted ideas, and so weak both in body
and mind, as the unhappy Californians. Their underfiand-
ing comprehends little more than what they fee; abftradt
ideas, and much less a chain of reasoning, being far beyond
their power; so that they scarce ever improve their first
ideas, and these are in general false, or at least inadequate.
It is in vain to represent to them any future advantages
which will result to them from doing or abstaining from
this or that particular immediately present; the relation,
means and ends being beyond the firetch of their faculties.
Nor have they the leaf notion of pursuing such intentions
as will procure themselves some future good, or guard them
against future evils. Their will is proportional to their fa-
culties, and all their passions move in a very narrow sphere.
Ambition they have none, and are more desirous of being
accounted strong than valiant. The objets of ambition
with us, honour, fame, reputation, titles, pofls, and dif-
tin&ions of superiority, are unknown among them; so that
this powerful spring of acion, the cause of bo much seeming
good and real evil in the world, has no power here. This
disposition of mind, as it gives them up to an amazing lan-
guor and lassitude, their lives fleeting away in a perpetual in-
adtivity and detestation of labour, so it likewise induces them
to be attraaed by the firfi object which their own fancy, or
the persuasion of another, places before them; and at the
fame time renders them as prone to alter their resolutions
with the fame facility. They look with indifference upon
any kindness done them ; nor is even the bare remembrance
of it to be expected from them. In a word, the unhappy
mortals may be compared to children, in whom the deve-
lopement of reason is not completed. They may indeed be
called a nation who never arrive at manhood." Hist. of Ca-
liforn. Eng. Tranfl. i. 64, 67. Mr. Ellis gives a similar
account of the want of foresight and inconsiderate disposition
of the people adjacent to Hudson's Bay. Voyage, p. I94,
195.

THE incapacity of the Americans is so remarkable,

that negroes from all the diifercnt provinces of Africa
are obfcrvcd to be more capable of improving by inftruc-
tion. They acquire the knowledge of fevcral particulars
which the Americans cannot comprehend. Hence the

VOL. I. H h negroes,

negroes, though slaves, value themselves as a superior order
of beings, and look down upon the Americans with con-
tempt, as void of capacity and of rational discernment.
Ulloa Notic. Americ. 322, 323.

NOTE LI. p. 322

I HAVE observed, p. 297. that, for the fame reason,
they never attempt to rear children who are feeble, dif-
torted, or defective in their make. So deeply were both
there ideas imprinted in the minds of the Americans, that
the Peruvians, a civilized people, when compared with
the barbarous tribes whose manners I am describing, retained
them; and even their intercourse with the Spaniards has
not been able to root them out. When twins are born
in any family, it is still confidered as an ominous event,
and the parents have recourse to rigorous aas of mortifi-
cation, in order to avert the calamities with which they are
threatened. When a child is born with any deformity, they
will not, if they can possibly avoid it, bring it to be baptiz-
ed, and it is with difficulty they can be brought to rear it.
Arriaga Extirpac. de la Idolat. del Peru, p. 32, 33.

NOTE LII. p. 325.

HE number of the fifi in the rivers of South Ame-

rica is so extraordinary, as to merit particular notice.
" In the Maragnon," fiys P. Acugna, " fish are so plen-
tiful, that, without any art, they may take them with their
hands." p. I38. "lIn the Orinoco," fays P. Gumilla,
" besides an infinite variety of other fiflh, tortoifcs or turtle
abound in such numbers, that I cannot find words to ex-
press it. I doubt not but that such as read my account
will accuse me of exaggeration: but I can affirm, that it
is as diricult to count them, as to count the sands on the
banks of that river. One may judge of their number by
the amazing consumption of them ; for all the nations con-
tiguous to the river, and even many who arc at a distance,

flock,
A-

fock thither at the season of breeding, and not only find sus-
tenance during that time, but carry off vast quantities both
of the turtles and of their eggs, &c." Hist. de P'Oreno-
que, ii. c. 22. p. 59. M. de la Condamine confirms their
accounts, p. I59.

NOTE LIII. p. 326.

PIS O describes two of these plants, the Cururuape,
and the Guajana-limbo. It is remarkable, that though
they have this fatal effect upon fishes, they are so far
from being noxious to the human species, they are used
in medicine with success. Pifo, lib. iv. c. 88. Bancroft
mentions another, the Hiarree, a finall quantity of which
is sufficient to inebriate all the fish to a considerable dif-
tance, so that in a few minutes they float motionless on
the surface of the water, and are taken with ease. Nat.
Hist. of Guiana, p. io6.

NOTE LIV. p. 328.

REMARKABLE instances occur of the calamities
which rude nations susser by famine, Alvar Nugnez
Cabeca de Vaca, one of the most gallant and virtuous
of the Spanish adventurers, resided almost nine years among
the savages of Florida. They were unacquainted with
every species of agriculture. Their subsistence was poor
and precarious. " They live chiefly," fays he, " upon
roots of different plants, which they procure with great
difficulty, wandering from place to place in search of
them. Sometimes they kill tome game, sometimes they
catch fish, but in such small quantities, that their hunger
is so extreme as compels them to cat spiders, the eggs of
ants, worms, lizards, serpents, a kind of uncluous cartll,
and I am persuaded, that if in this country there were
any (Iones, they would swallow these. They preserve
the bones of fiihes and ferpLents, which they grind into
powder, and eat. The only feafln when they do not ful-
ser much from famine, is when a certain fruit, which he

H h 2 calls

calls Tunas, is ripe. They are sometimes obliged to travel
far from their usual place of residence, in order to find
them." Naufragias, c. xviii. p. 20, 21, 22. In another
place, he observes that they are frequently reduced to pass
two or three days without food. c. xxiv. p. 27.

NOTE LV. p. 330.

M . FIRMIN has given an accurate description of
the two species of manioc, with an account of its culture,
to which he has added some experiments, in order to afcer-
tain the poisonous qualities of the juice extra&ed from that
species which he calls the bitter cassava. Among the Spa-
niards it is known by the name of ruca brava. Defcr. de
Surin. tom. i. p. 66.

NOTE LVI. p. 330.

T HE plantain is found in Asia and Africa, as well as
in America. Oviedo contends, that it is not an indigenous
plant of the New Worlds but was introduced into the if-
land of Hispaniola, in the year 1516, by father Thomas de
Berlanga, and that he transplanted it from the Canary if-
lands, whither the original flips had been brought from the
East Indies. Oviedo, lib. viii. c. i. But the opinion of
Acofta and other naturalifis, who reckon it an American
Plant, seems to be better founded. Acofta Hist. Nat. lib.
iv. 21. It was cultivated by rude tribes in America,
who had little intercourse with the Spaniards, and who were
deflitute of that ingenuity which disposes men to borrow
what is useful from foreign nations. Gumil. iii. 186.
Wafer's Voyage, p. 87.

N O tE LVII. p. 331.

4

IT is remarkable, that Acofta, one of the mos accurate
and belt informed wriers concerning the Weft Indies,

affirms,

affirms, that maize, though cultivated in the continent,
was not known in the islands, the inhabitants of which had
none but caffada bread. Hist. Nat. lib. iv. c. I6. But
P. Martyr, in the first book of his firfi Decad, which was
written in the year 1493, upon the return of Columbus
from his firfl voyage, expressly mentions maize as a plant
which the islanders cultivated, and of which they made
bread, p. 7. Gomara likewise aflerts, that they were ac-
quainted with the culture of maize. Hiftor. Gener. cap.
28. Oviedo describes maize without any intimation of
its being a plant that was not natural to Hispaniola. Lib,
vii. c. I.

NOTE LVIII. p. 337.

NEW HOLLAND, a country which formerly was lit-
tle known, has lately been visited by intelligent observers.
It lies in a region of the globe where it must enjoy a
very favourable climate, as it stretches from the ioth to
the 38th degree of northern latitude. It is of great ex-
tent, and from its square form must be much more than
equal to all Europe. The people who inhabit the vari-
ous parts of it appear to be of one race. They are evi-
dently ruder than most of the Americans, and have made
still less progress in improvement and the arts of life.
There is not the least appearance of cultivation in any
part of this vast region. The inhabitants are extremely
few, so that the country appears almost desolate. Their
tribes arc itill more inconsiderable than those of America.
They depend for subsistence, almost entirely, on fishing.
They do not fettle in one place, but roam about in quest
of food. Both fcxes go ftark-naked. Their habitations,
utensils, &c. are more simple and rude than those of the
Americans. Voyages, by Hawkefworth, iii. 622, &c.
This, perhaps, is the country where man has been disco-
vered in the carlieft stage of his progress, and it exhibits a
miserable specimen of his condition and powers in that un-
cultivated state. If this country shall be more fully ex-
plored by future navigators, the comparison of the manners
of its inhabitants with those of the Americans will prove an
inftrueivc article in the history of the human species.

NOTE

NOTE LIX. p. 337.

P. GABRIEL MAREST, who travelled from his Ration
among the Illinois to Machillimakinac, thus describes the
face of the country: " IWe have marched twelve days
without meeting a tingle human creature. Sometimes we
found ourselves in vast meadows, of which we could not
fee the boundaries, through which there flowed many
brooks and rivers, but without any path to conduct us.
Sometimes we were obliged to open a pailage across thick
foreifs, through bufles, and underwood filled with briars
and thorns. Sometimes we had to pass through deep
marshes, in which we funk up to the middle. After being
fatigued through the day, we had the earth for our bed,
or a few leaves, exposed to the wind, the rain, and all
the injuries of the air." Lettr. Edifiantes, ii. 360. Dr.
Brickell, in an excursion from North Carelina towards
the mountains, A. D. I730, travelled fifteen days without
meeting with a human creature. Nat. Hist. of North Ca-
rolina, 389. Diego de Ordas, in attempting to make a
settlement in South America, A. D. 1532, inarched fifty
days through a country without meeting one inhabitant,
Herrera, dec. 5. lib. i. c. lI.

NOTE LX. p. 338.

I STRONGLY filfpe& that a community of goods, and an
undivided flore, are known only among the rudefl tribes
of hunters; and that as soon as any species of agricul-
ture or regular induflry is known, the idea of an exclu-
fivc right of property to the fruits of them is introduced.
I am confirmed in this opinion by accounts which I have
received concerning the itate of Property among the Indi-
ans in very different regions of America. " 'lhe idea
of the natives of Brasil concerning property is, that if
any person cultivate a field, he alone ought to enjoy the
produce of it, and no other has a title to pretend to it.
If an individual or a family go a-hunting or filhing, what

is

is caught belongs to the individual or to the family, and
they communicate no part of it to any but to their ca.
zique, or to such of their kindred as happen to be indif-
posed. If any person in the village come to their hut, he
may fit down freely, and eat without asking liberty. But
this is the consequence of their general principle of hofpi-
tality; for I never observed any partition of the increase
of their fields, or the produce of the chace, which I could
confider as the result of any idea concerning a community
of goods. On the contrary, they are so much attached to
what they deem to be their property, that it would be ex-
tremely dangerous to encroach upon it. As far as I have
seen, or can learn, there is not one tribe of Indians in
South America, among whom that community of goods
which has been so highly extolled is known. The circum-
fiance in the government of the Jesuits, most irksome to
the Indians of Paraguay, was the community of goods
which they introduced. This was repugnant to their ori-
ginal ideas. They were acquainted with the rights of pri-
vate exclusive property, and they submitted with impa-
tience to regulations which destroyed them." M. le Che-
val. de Pinto, MS. penes me. Actual possession (fays a
missionary who resided several years among the Indians of
the Five Nations) gives a right to the foil, but whenever
a possessor fees fit to quit it, another has as good right
to take it as he who left it. This law, or custom, re-
fpeAs not only the particular spot on which he erects his
house, but also his planting ground. If a man has pre-
pared a particular spot of ground, on which he designs in
future to build or plant, no man has a right to incom-
mode him, much leis to the fruit of his labours, until it
appears that he voluntary gives up his views. But I ne-
ver heard of any formal conveyance from one Indian to
another in their natural -tate. The limits of every canton
is circumscribcd; that is, they are allowed to hunt as far
as such a river on this hand, and such a mountain on the
other. This area is occupied and improved by individuals
and their families. Individuals, not the community, have
the use and profit of their own labours, or success in hunt-
ing. MS. of Mr. Gideon Hawley, penes me.

N 0T' E

NOTE LXI. p. 339.

T HIS difference of temper between the Americans
and negroes is so remarkable, that it is a proverbial faying
in the French islands, " Regarder un fauvage de travers,
c'eft le battre; le battre, c'eft le tuer; battre un negre,
c'eft le nourrir." Tertre ii. 490.

NOTE LXII. p. 340.

T HE description of the political fiate of the people of
Cinaloa, perfectly resembles that of the inhabitants of
North America, " They have neither laws nor kings (fays
a mifionary who resided long among them) to punish any
crime. Nor is there among them, any species of autho-
rity, or political government, to restrain them in any part
of their condu&. It is true, that they acknowledge cer-
tain Caziques, who are heads of their families or villages,
but their authority appears chiefly in war, and the expedi-
tions againfi their enemies. This authority the Caziques
obtain not by hereditary right, but by their valour in war, or
by the power and number of their families and relations.
Sometimes they owe their pre-eminence to their eloquence
in displaying their own exploits." Ribas Hiftor. de las
Triumph. &c. p. xI. The fate of the Chiquitos, in
South America, is nearly the fame. " They have no re-
gular form of government, or civil life, but in matters of
public concern they liften to the advice of their old men,
and usually follow it. Tlhe dignity of Cazique is not here-
ditary, but conferred according to merit, as the reward of
valour in war. The union among them is imperfet.
Their society resembles a republic without any head, in
which every man is mafier of himself, and, upon the least
difguit, separates from those with whom he seemed to be
conneted." Relacion Historical de las Missiones de los
Chiquitos, por P. Juan Patr. Fernandez, p. 32, 33.
Thus, under very different climates, when nations are in a

similar

similar hate of society, their institutions and civil governm
ment assume the fame form.

NOTE LXIII. p. 352.

" I HAVE known the Indians (fays a person well acquaint-
ed with their mode of life) to go a thousand miles for the
purpose of revenge, in pathless woods, over hills and moun-
tains, through huge cane swamps exposed to the extre-
mities of heat and cold, the vicissitude of seasons, to hun-
ger and thirIt. Such is their overboiling revengeful tem-
per, that they utterly contemn all those things as imagi-
nary trifles, if they are so happy as to get the scalp of the
murderer, or enemy, to satisfy the craving ghosts of their
deceased relations." Adair's Hist. of Amer. Indians, p,
150.

NOTE LXIV. p. 353.

IN the account of the great war between the Algonquins
and Iroquois, the atchievements of Pilkaret, a famous chief
of the Algonquins, performed mostly by himself alone, or
with one or two companions, make a capital figure. De la
Potherie, i. 297, &c. Colden's Hilt. of Five Nations,
125, &c.

NOTE LXV. p. 355.

THE life of an unfortunate leader is often in danger, and
he is always degraded from the rank which he had acquired
by his former exploits. Adair, p. 388.

NOTE

NOTE LXVI. p. 355.

A S the ideas of the North Americans with refpecd to the
mode of carrying on war, are generally known; I have
founded my observations chiefly upon the testimony of the
authors who describe them. But the fame maxims took place
among other nations. A judicious missionary has given a
view of the military operations of the people in Gran Cha-
co, in South America, perfectly similar to those of the Iro-
quois. " They are much addicted to war (fays he) which
they carry on frequently among themselves, but perpetually
against the Spaniards. But they may rather be called thieves
than soldiers, for they never make head against the Spaniards,
unless when they can assault them by stealth, or have guarded
against any mischance by spies, who may be called indefati-
gable; they will watch the settlements of the Spaniards for
one, two, or three years, observing by night every thing
that passes with the utmost solicitude, whether they may
expe&t resistance or not, and until theyare perfectly secure
of the event, they will not venture upon an attack; so that
when they do give the aflault, they are certain of success,
and free from all danger. These spies, in order that they
may not be observed, will creep on all-fours like cats in the
night; but if they are discovered, make their efeape with
much dexterity. But, although they never chufe to face the
Spaniards, if they be surrounded in any place, whence they
cannot escape, they will fight with desperate valour,, and fell
their lives very dear. Lozano Defcrip. del Gran Chaco,
p. 78.

N Q T E LXVI1. p. 356.

LERY, who was an eyc-wvitefs of the proceedings of the

obriprriniahs, a 13rafilian tribe, in a war agaiiift a powerful
nation of their enemies, defrcibcs their courage and ferocity
in very Ptriking terms. Ego cum Gallo altero, paulo curio-
lius, Imag-no noltro periculo (li enim ab hoftibus capti aut
Ilii fiifll'ilus, devorationi fuilclmus devoti) barbaros noftrs
in militiamn cuntes conmitari volui. Hi, inumero 4000 c,-
Pit, cum lho tibus ad littus ldccclarunt, tanta fcrocitatc, ut

vc;l

vel rabidos & furiosos quofque fuperarent. Cum primum
hostes confpexere, in magnos atque editos ulutatus perrupe-
runt. Hec gens adeo sera eft & truculenta, ut tantifper
dum virium vel tantillum reftat, continuo dimicent, fugam-
que nunquam capefiant. Quod a natura illis inditum effe
reor. Teflor interea me, qui non femel, turn pediturn tum
equitum copias ingentes, in aciem inirtriEtas hic confpexi,
tanta nunquam voluptate videndis peditum legionibus armis
fulgentibus, quanta tum pugnantibus iftis percuffum suisse.
Lery Hist. Navigat. in Brasil. ap. de Bry, iii. 207, 208,
209.

NO T E LXVIII. p. 357.

T HE Americans, like other fierce nations, originally cut
off the heads of the enemies whom they flew in war, and
carried them away as trophies. But, as they found these
cumbersome in their retreat, which they always make very
rapidly, and often through a vast extent of country, they be-
came satisfied with tearing off their scalps. This custom,
though most prevalent in North America, was not unknown
among the southern tribes. Lazano, p. 79.

NOTE LXIX. p. 36i.

T HE terms of the war-fong seem to be dictated by the
fame fierce spirit of revenge. " I go to wlr to revenge the
death of my brothers; I shall kill; I shall exterminate; I
shall burn my enemies; I nlall bring away slaves; I shall
devour their heart, dry their flesh, drink their blood; I flall
tear off their s(calps, and make cups of thcir fkiills." Boflu's
Travels through Louiliana, vol. i. p. 102. I am informed,
by persons on whose tcltimnny I can rely, tl:lt as the number
of people in the Indian tribes has decre;llt(d so much, almofl
none of their prilboiers are put to death. It is confidered as
better policy to spare and to adopt them. Those drcadful
scenes which I have dfccribcd occur now lb rarely, that mif-
fiofiarics and traders who have resided long among the In-
dians, never were witnesses to them.

NOTE

NOTE LXX. p. 36i.

A LL the travellers who have visited the mol uncivilized
of the American tribes, agree in this. It is confirmed by
two remarkable circumstances, which occurred in the con-
quest of different provinces. In the expedition of Narvaez
into Florida in the year 1528, the Spaniards were reduced
to such extreme distress by famine, that in order to preserve
their own lives, they eat such of their companions as hap-
pened to die. This appeared so hocking to the natives,
who were accustomed to devour their prisoners, that it filled
them with horror and indignation against the Spaniards.
Torquemada Monarch. Ind. ii. p. 584. Naufragios de
Alv. Nugnez Cabeca de Vaca, c. xiv. p. 15. During the
siege of Mexico, though the Mexicans devoured with gree-
diness the Spaniards and Tlafcalans, whom they took pri-
foners, the utmofi rigour of the famine which they suffered
could not induce them to touch the dead bodies of their own
countrymen. Bern. Diaz, del Castillo Conque.t, de la N,
Efpagna, p. 156,

NOTE LXXI, p, 363.

M ANY singular circumstances concerning the treatment
of prisoners among the people of Brasil, are contained in the
narrative of Stadius, a German Officer, in the service of
the Portuguese, publifled in the year I556. He was taken
prisoner by the Toupinambos, and remained in captivity nine
years. He was often present at those horrid festivals which
he describes, and was destined himself to the fame cruel fate
with other prisoners. But he saved his life by extraordinary
effets of courage and address. De Bry, iii. p. 34, &c.
M. de Lery, who accompanied M. de Villegagnon in his
expedition to Brasil, in the year i556, and who resided a
good time in that country, agrees with Stadius in every cir-
cumftance of importance. He was frequently an eye-wit-
ness of the manner in which the Brafilians treated their pri-
(oners. Dc Bry, iii. 210. Several firiking particulars

omitted

omitted by them, are mentioned by a Portuguese author.
Parch. Pilgr. iv. 1294, &c.

NOTE LXXII. p. 366.

THOUGH I have followed that opinion concerning the
apathy of the Americans, which appeared to me most ra-
tional, and supported by the authority of the most refpe&able
authors, other theories have been formed with regard to it,
by writers of great eminence. D. Ant. Ulloa, in a late
work, contends, that the texture of the (kin and bodily habit
of the Americans is such, that they are less sensible of pain
than the reft of mankind. He produces several proofs of
this, from the manner in which they endure the most cruel
chirurgical operations, &c. Noticias Americanas, p. 313,
314. The fame observation has been made by surgeons in
Brafi!. An Indian, they fay, never complains under pain,
and will bear the amputation of a leg or arm without uttering
single groan. MS. penes me.

NO T E LXXIII. p. 367.

HIS is an idea natural to all rude nations. Among the
omans, in the early periods of their commonwealth, it was
maxim that a prisoner, " turn decefliffe videtur cum captus
It." Digest. lib. xlix. tit. 15. c. 18. and afterwards when
e progress of refinement rendered them more indulgent
ith refpet to this article, they were obliged to employ two
stions of law to secure the property, and permit the return
f a captive, the one by the Lex Cornelia, and the other by
he Jus Poffliminii, Heinec. Elem. Jur. Civ. sec. ord.
Pand. ii. p. 294. Among the negroes the fame ideas pre-
rail. No ransom was ever accepted for a prisoner. As soon
s one is taken in war, he is reputed to be dead; and he is
i in effet to his country and his family. Voy. du Cheval.
is Marchais, i. p. 369.

NOTE'

NOTE LXXIV. p. 368.

THE people of Chili, the most gallant and high-fpiritcd
of all the Americans, are the only exception to this obferva-
tion. They attack their enemies in the open field; their
troops are ranged in regular order; their battalions advance
to the charge not only with courage, but with discipline.
The North Americans, though many of them have fiubfii-
tuted the European fire-arms in place of their own bows and
arrows, Rill adhere to their ancient maxims of war, and
carry it on according to their own peculiar system. But the
Chilefe nearly resemble the warlike nations of Europe and
Asia in their military operations. 'Ovalle's Relation of Chi-
li. Church's Coll. iii. p. 7I. Lozano's Hist. Parag. i
144, 145,

NOTE LXXV. p. 371.

H ERRERA gives a remarkable proof of this. In
Yucutan, the men are so solicitous about their dress, that
they carry about with them mirrors, probably made ot
stone, like those of the Mexicans. Dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. in
which they delight to view themselves, but the women
never use these. Dec. iv. lib. x. c. 3. He takes notice,
that among the fierce tribe of the Panches, in the new king-
dom of Granada, none but distinguished warriors were pcr-
mitted either to pierce their lips, and to wear green flones
in them, or to adorn their heads with plumes of feathers.
Dec. vii. lib. ix. c. 4. In some provinces of Peru, though
that empire had made conliderable progress in civilization,
the slate of women was little improved. All the toil ot
cultivation and domestic work was devolved upon them,
and they were not permitted to wear bracelets, or other
ornaments, with which the men were fond of decking
themselves. Zarate Hist. de Peru, i. p. 15, 16.

NOTE

NOTE LXXVI. p. 371.

I HAVE ventured to call this mode of anointing and
painting their bodies, the dress of the Americans. This
is agreeable to their own idiom. As they never fir abroad
if they are not completely anointed; they excuse them-
selves when in this situation, by faying, that they can-
not appear because they are naked. Gumilla Hist. de
l'Orenoque, i. I91.

NOTE LXXVII. p. 372.

SOME tribes in the provinces of Cinaloa, on the gulf
of California, seem to be among the rudest people of
America united in the social state. They neither culti-
vate nor sow; they have no houses in which they reside.
Those in the inland country subsist by hunting; those on
the sea-coast chiefly by fishing. Both depend upon the fpon-
taneous produtions of the earth, fruits, plants, and roots
of various kinds. In the rainy season, as they have no ha-
bitations to afford them shelter, they gather bundles of
reeds, or strong grass, and binding them together at one
end, they open them at the other, and fitting them to their
heads, they are covered as with a large cap, which like a
pent-house throws off the rain, and will keep them dry
for several hours. During the warm leafon, they form a
shed with the branches of trees, which protects them from
the sultry rays of the fun. When cxpofcd to cold they
make large fires, round which they flep in the open air.
Hiftoria de los triumfos de nuftlra lilnta Ife entre gentes
las mas barbaras, &c. por P. And. Perez de Ribas, p. 7. &c.

NOTE LXXVIII. p. 373.

T HESE houses refemblc barns. We have nicafured
fomc which were a hundred an:l fifty paces long, and twen-

ty

ty paces broad. Above a hundred persons reside in tome of
them. Wilson's account of Guiana. Purch. Pilgr. vol. iv.
p. 1263. Ibid. 129I. The Indian houses, fays M. Barrere,
have a most wretched appearance, and are a striking image
of the rudeness of early times. Their huts are commonly
built on Come rising ground, or on the banks of a river,
huddled sometimes together, sometimes straggling, and al-
ways without any order. Their asped is melancholy and
disagreeable. One fees nothing but what is hideous and fa-
vage. The uncultivated fields have no gaiety. The silence
which reigns there, unless when interrupted by the difa-
greeable notes of birds, or cries of wild beasts, is extremely
dismal. Relat. de la France Equin. p. I46.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 375.

S O ME tribes in South America can fend their arrows
to a great distance, and with considerable force, without
the aid of the bow. The make use of a hollow reed,
about nine feet long, and an inch thick, which is called a
Sarbacane. In it they lodge a small arrow, with some unfpun
cotton wound about its great end; this confines the air, so
that they can blow it with astonishing rapidity, and a sure
aim, to the distance of above a hundred paces. These
small arrows are always poisoned. Fermin. Defcr. de Su-
rin. i. 55. Bancroft's Hilt. of Guiana, p. 281, &c. The
The Sarbacane is much used by the Ea{t Indians.

NOTE LXXX. p. 375.

Might produce many initances of this, but shall satisfy

niyfelf with one, taken from the Efkimaux. " Their grcat-
eft ingenuity (fays Mr. Ellis) is flhwn in the ftruclurc of
their bows, made commonly of three pieces of wood, each
making part of the fame arch, very nicely and exalcly
joined together. They are co:nmonly of fir or larch; and
as this wants strength and elaiticity, they supply both by
bracing the back of the bow, with a kind of thread, or
line, made of the sinews of their deer, and the bow-fring

of

of the fame materials. To make them draw more stiffly,
they dip them into water) which causes both the back of
the bow and the string to contra6r, and consequently gives
it the greater force, and as they pradtife from their youth,
they shoot with very great dexterity," Voyage to Hudson's
Bay. p. 138.

NOTE LXXXI. p. 376.

N ECESSITY is the great prompter and guide of mnan-
kind in their inventions. There is, however, such ine-
quality in some parts of their progress, and some nations
get so far the start of others in circumitances nearly fimi-
lar, that we must ascribe this to some events in their story,
or to some peculiarity in their situation with which we are
unacquainted, The people in the island of Otaheite, lately
discovered in'the South Sea, far excel most of the Ameri-
cans in the knowledge and practice of the arts of ingenuity,
and yet they had not invented any method of boiling wa-
ter, and having no vessel that would bear the fire, they
had no more idea that water could be made hot, than that
it could be made solid. Voyages by Hawefworth, i. 466,
484.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 376.

ONE of these boats, which could carry nine men,
weighed only sixty pounds. Gofnol Relat. des Voy. a la
Virgin Rec, de Voy. au Nord. tom. v. p. 403.

NOTE LXXXII. p. 378.

A Remarkable proof of this is produced by Ulloa. In
weaving hammocks, coverlets, and the other coarse cloaths,.
which they are accustomcd to manufacture, their induitry
has discovered no more expeditious method, than to take up
thread after thread, and after counting and forting them
each time, to pass the woof between them, so that in finii-

VOL. I, I i m

ing a small piece of these fluffs, they frequently spend more
than two years. Voyage, i. 336. Bancroft gives the fame
description of the Indians of Guiana, p. 255. According
to Adair, the ingenuity and dispatch of the North Ameri-
can Indians are not greater, p. 422. From one of the en-
gravings of the Mexican paintings in Purchas, vol. iii. p.
x to6. I think it probable that the people of Mexico were
unacquainted with any better or more expeditious mode of
weaking. A loomt was an invention beyond the ingenuity
of the most improved Americans. In all their works they
advance so slowly, that one of their artists is two months
at a tobacco-pipe with his knife, before he finiihes it. Ibid.
p. 423.

N^OTE LXXXIV. p. 380.

-THE article of religion in P. Lafitau's Moeurs des
Sauvages, extends to 347 tedious pages in quarto.

NOTE LXXXV. p. 381.

I HAVE referred the reader to several of the authors who
describe the most uncivilized nations in America. Their
testimony is uniform. That of P. Ribas concerning the
people of Cinaloa, coincides with the reft. " I was ex-
tremely attentive (fays he), during the years I resided
among thenl, to ascertain whether they were to be confi-
dered as idolators; and it may be affirmed with the'mofi per.
fecd exadnefs, that though among some of them there may
be traces of idolatry, yet others have not the least know-
ledge of God, or even of any false deity, nor pay any for-
mal adoration to the Supreme Being, who exercises domi-
nion over the world; nor have they any conception of the
providence of a creator or governor, from whom they ex-
pect in the next life the reward of the good, or the punilh-
inent of their evil deeds. Neither do they publicly join in
any at of divine worlhip." Ribas Triumphos, &c. p. 16.

NOTE

NOTE LXXXVI. p. 382.

T HE people of Brasil were so much affrightened by thun-
der, which is frequent and dreadful in their country, as well
as iri other parts of the torrid zone, that it was not only the
objec of religious reverence; but the most expreflive name
in their language for the Deity, was Toupan, the fame by
which they dilfinguifhed thunder. Pifo de Medec. Brasil,
p. 8. Nieuhoff. Church-Coil. ii. p. 132.

NOTE LXXXVII. p. 389.

BY the account which M. Dumont, an eye-witness gives
of the funeral of the great chief of the Natchez, it appears,
that the feelings of the persons who suffered on that occasion
were very different. Some solicited the honour with eager-
ness; others laboured to avoid their doom, and several save4
their lives by flying to the woods. As the Indian Bramins
give an intoxicating draught to the women, who are to be
burnt together with the bodies of their husbands, which ren-
der them insensible of their approaching fate, the Natchez
obliged their viAims to swallow several large pills of tobacco,
which produce a similar effect. Mem. de Lous. i. 227.

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 395.

ON some occasions, particularly in dances inflituted for
the recovery of persons who are indisposed, they are ex-
tremely licentious and indecent. De la Potherie Hist. &c.
ii. p. 42. Charlev. N, Fr. iii. p. 319. But the nature
of their dances is commonly such as 1 have described.

1 2 NOTE

NOTE LXXXIX. p. 397.

T HE Othomacoas, a tribe feated on the banks of the Ori-
noco, employ for the fame purpose a conpofition, which
they call 'upa. It is formed of the feeds of an unknown
plant, reduced to powder, and certain shells burnt and pul-
verized. The effe&ts of this when drawn up into the nof-
trils are so violent, that they resemble madness rather than
intoxication, Gumilla, i. 286.

NQTE XC. p. 399.

TLHOUGH this observation holds true among the greater
part of the southern tribes, there are some in which the in-
temperance of the women is as exceflive as that of men.
Bancroft's Nat. Hist. of Guiana, p. 275.

NOTE XCI. p. 404.

EVEN in the most intelligent writers concerning the
manners of the Americans, one meets with inconliftent
and inexplicable circumstances. P. Charlevoix, who, in
consequence ci the controversy between his order and that
of the Franciscans, with respect to the talents and abilities
of the North Americans, is disposed to represent both their
intellectual and moral qualities in the most favourable light,
afMerts, that they are engaged in continual negociations
with their neighbours, and conduct these with the most
refined address. At the fame time, he adds, " that it
becomes their envoys or plenipotentiaries' to exert their
abilities and eloquence, for if the terms which they offer
are not accepted of, they had need to sand on their
guard. It frequently h.ippens, that a blow with a hatchet
is the only return given to their prcpofitions. He is not
out Qs danger even if he is so fortunate as to avoid the

ftrokc,

firoke, he may expe& to be pursued, and if taken, to
be burnt." Hjit. N.. Fr. iii. 25I. Men capable of ifch
ads of violence, feenm to. be unacquainted with. the firt
principles upon which the intercourse between, nations. is
founded; and infiead of the perpetual negociations which.
Charlevoiy mentions, it seems iipoffible that there. fiould'
be any correlpoQdence w hatever among them.

NOTE XCII. p. 405.

IT is a remark of Tacitus concerning the Germans,
"Gaudent muneribus, fed nec data imputant, nec acceptis
obligantur." C. 21. An author who had a good opportu-
nity of observing the principle which leads savages neither
to express gratitude for favours which they had received, nor
to expea any return for such as they bellowed.; thus ex-.
plains their ideas: " If, fay they, you give me this, it is
because you have no need of it yourself; and as for me, I
never part with that which I think necessary to me." Me-
moir fur les Galibis; Hist, des plantes de la Guiane Fran.
poise par M. Aublet, tom, ii. p, Iio,.

NOTE XCIII. p. 417.

A ND. BERNALDES, the contemporary and friend of
Columbus, hath preserved. ome circumfiances concerning
the bravery of the Caribbees, which are, not mentioned by.
Don Ferdinand, Columbus, or the other, historians of that
period, whose works have been published. A Carribbean
canoe, with four men, two women, and a boy, fell in un-
expetr dly with the fleet of Columbus in his second voyage,
as it was ifeering through their islands. At first, they were
firuck alnoft stupid with afioniihment at such a. frange
fpcaacle, and hardly moved from the spot for, above an hour.
A Spanifi bark, with twenty-five men, advanced towards-
them, and the fleet gradually surrounded them, so as to cut
off their communication with the shore. '4 When they saw
that it was impoflible to cfcape (fays the hiflorian), they

fcized

seized. their arms with undaunted resolution, and began the
attack. I use the expression, with undaunted reilution, for
they were few, and beheld a vast number ready to assault
them. They wounded several of the Spaniards, although
they had targets, as well as other defensive armour; and
even after their canoe was overset, it was with no little dif-
ficulty and danger, that part of them were taken, as they
continued to defend themselves, and to use their bows with
great dexterity while swimming in the sea." Hist. de D.
Fern. y D. Yfab. MSS. c. Ii9.

NOTE XCIV. p. 417.

A Probable conljedure may be formed with refpet to the
cause of the diftinftion in character between the Caribbees
and the inhabitants of the larger islands. The former ap-
pear manifestly to be a separate race. Their language is
totally different from that of their neighbours in the large
islands, They themselves have a tradition, that their an-
ceftors came originally from some part of the continent, and
having conquered and exterminated the antient inhabitants,
took pofleffion of their lands, and of their women. Roche-
fort 384. Tertre, 360. Hence they call themselves Ba-
naree, which signifies a man come from beyond sea. Labat.
vi. 131. Accordingly, the Caribbes still use two diftind
languages, one peculiar to the men, and the other to the wo-
men. Tertre, 36i. The language of the men has nothing
common with that spoken in the large islands. The dialed
of the women considerably resembles it. Labat. 129. This
flrongly confirms the tradition which I have mentioned.
The Caribbes themselves imagine, that they were a colony
from the Galibis, a powerful nation of Guiana, in South
America. Tertre, 361. Rochefort, 348. But as their
fierce manners approach nearer to those of the people in the
northern continent, than to thofo of the natives of South
America; and as their language has likewise some affinity to
that spoken in Florida, their origin should be deduced rather
from the former than from the latter. Labat. 128, &c. Hcr-
rera, Dec. i. lib. ix. c. 4. In their wars, they fill observe
their ancient pratice of destroying all the males, and pre-
serving the women either for servitude or for breeding.

END OF THE >T VOLUME.
